SVNT MELIORA MIHI
RICHARDVS HOOKER Exoniensis scholaris sociusque Collegij Corp. Chrisli Oxon^:
deinde Londi: Templi interioris in sacris magister Rectorque huius Ecelesiae*
scripsit octo libros Politiae Ecclesiasticae Angelicanae, quorum tres
desiderantur: Obijt; An^: Do^: M.DC. III. AEtat: suae L.



OF THE LAWS of ECCLESIASTICAL Polity.

Eight Books By RICHARD HOOKER.

LONDON Printed for Andrew Crook at ye green Dragon in S Paul's Churchyard.
1666.



THE WORKS OF Mr. Richard Hooker, (That Learned and Judicious Divine) IN EIGHT
BOOKS OF Ecclesiastical Polity, Completed out of his own Manuscrips; Never
before Published.

With an account of his LIFE and DEATH.

Dedicated to the Kings most Excellency Majesty, CHARLES IId. By whose ROYAL
FATHER (near His Martyrdom) the former Five Books (then only extant) were
commended to His Dear Children, as an excellent means to satisfy Private
Scruples, and settle the Public Peace of this Church and Kingdom.

JAM. 3. 17. The Wisdom from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good works, without partiality and
hypocrisy.

(...)

Plat. Multitadio investiganda verilalis ad proximos divertunt errores.

Min. Fell. LONDON: Printed by Thomas Newcomb for Andrew Crook, at the
Green-Dragon in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1666.

To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY CHARLES IId, By the Grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
ALthough I know how little leisure Great Kings have to read large Books, or
indeed any, save only Gods, (the study, belief and obedience of which, is
precisely commanded, even to Kings, Deuteronomy. 17.18,19. And from which, whatever
wholly diverts them, will hazard to damn them; there being no affairs of so
great importance, as their serving God, and saving their own Souls; nor any
Precepts so wise, just, holy, and safe, as those of the Divine Oracles; nor any
Empire so glorious, as that by which Kings being subject to Gods Law, have
dominion over themselves, and so best deserve and exercise it over their
Subjects.)

Yet having lived to see the wonderful and happy Restoration of Your Majesty
to Your Rightful Kingdoms, and of this Reformed Church to its just Rights,
Primitive Order, and Pristine Constitution, by Your Majesty's prudent care, and
imparallel'd bounty, I know not what to present more worthy of Your Majesty's
acceptance, and my duty, then these Elaborate and Seasonable Works of the
Famous and Prudent Mr. Richard Hooker, now augmented, and I hope completed
with the Three last Books, so much desired, and so long concealed.

The publishing of which Volume so entire, and thus presenting it to Your
Majesty, seems to be a blessing and honor reserved by Gods Providence, to add a
further lusture to Your Majesty's glorious Name, and happy Reign, whose
transcendent favor, justice, merit, and munificence to the long afflicted
Church of England, is a subject no less worthy of admirasion then gratitude to
all Posterity. And of all things (next Gods grace) not to be abused or turned
into wantonness by any of Your Majesty's Clergy, who are highly obliged beyond
all other Subjects to Piety, Loyalty, and Industry.

I shall need nothing more to ingratiate this incomparable Piece to Your
Majesty's acceptance, and all the English Worlds, then those high commendations
it has ever had, as from all prudent, peaceable, and impartial Readers, so
especially from Your Majesty's Royal Father, who a few days before he was
Crowned with Martyrdom, commended to His dearest Children, the diligent Reading
of Mr. Hookers Ecclesiastical Polity, even next the Bible; as an excellent
means to settle them in the Truth of Religion, and in the Peace of this Church,
as much Christian, and as well Reformed as any under Heaven: As if God had
reserved this signal Honor to be done by the best of Kings, and greatest
Sufferers for this Church, to Him who was one of the best Writers, and ablest
Defenders of it.

To this Completed Edition, is added such particular accounts as could be got
of the Authors Person, Education, Temper, Manners, Fortunes, Life, and Death,
which is now done with much exactness and proportion: That hereby Your Majesty,
and all the World, may see what sort of Men are fittest for Church-work (which
like the Building of Solomon's Temple, is best carried on with most evenness of
Judgment, and least noise of Passion.) Also what manner of Man he was, to whom
we all ow this Noble Work, and durable Defense.

Which is indeed at once (as the Tongues of Eloquent Princes are to themselves,
and their Subjects) both a Treasury and an Armory, to enrich their friends, and
defend them against the Enemies of the Church of England: Arare composition of
unpassionate Reason, and unpartial Religion; the mature product of a Indicious
Scholar, a Loyal Subject, an Humble Preacher, and a most Eloquent Writer: The
very abstract and quintessence of Laws Humane and Divine; a Summary of the
Grounds, Rules, and Proportions of true Polity in Church and State: Upon which
clear, solid and safe Foundations, the good Order, Peace, and Government of
this Church was anciently settled, and on which, while it stands firm, it will
be flourishing. All other popular and specious pretensions being found by late
sad experiences, to be as novel and unfit, so factious and fallacious, yea,
dangerous and destructive to the Peace and Prosperity of this Church and
Kingdom, whose inseparable happiness and interests are bound up in Monarchy and
Episcopacy.

The Politic and Visible managing of both which, God has now graciously
restored and committed to Your Majesty's Sovereign Wisdom and Authority, after
the many and long Tragedies suffered from those Club Masters and Tub-Ministers,
who sought not fairly to obtain Reformation of what might seem amiss, but
violently and wholly to overthrow the ancient and goodly Fabric of this Church
and Kingdom. For finding themselves not able in many years to Answer this one
Book, long ago written in defense of the Truth, Order, Government, Authority,
and Liberty (in things indifferent) of this Reformed Church, agreeable to Right
Reason, and True Religion (which makes this well tempered Piece, a File capable
to break the Teeth of any that venture to bite it;) they conspired at last to
betake themselves to Arms, to kindle those horrid fires of Civil Wars, which
this wise Author foresaw, and foretold in his admirable Preface, would follow
those sparks, and that smoke which he saw rise in his days: So that from
impertinent Disputes (seconded with scurrilous Pamphlets) they fled to Tumults,
Sedition, Rebellion, Sacrilege, Parricide, yea, Regicide; Counsels Weapons,
and Practices, certainly, no way becoming the hearts and hands of Christian
Subjects, nor ever sanctified by Christ for his Service, or his Churches good.

What now remains, but Your Majesty's perfecting and preserving that (in this
Church) which you have with much prudence and tenderness, so happily begun and
prosecuted, with more zeal then the establishment of Your own Throne. The still
crazy Church of England, together with this Book (its great and impregnable
Shield) do further need, and humbly implore Your Majesty's Royal Protection
under God: Nor can Your Majesty by any generous instance and perseverance (most
worthy of a Christian King) more express that pious and grateful sense which
God and all good Men expect from Your Majesty, as some retribution for his many
miraculous mercies to Your Self, then in a wise, speedy, and happy settling of
our Religious peace, with the least grievance, and most satisfaction to all
Your good Subjects; Sacred Order and Uniformity being the center and
circumference of our Civil Tranquillity: Sedition naturally rising out of
Schism, and Rebellion out of Faction; The only cure and antidote against both,
are good Laws and Canons, first wisely made, with all Christian Moderation, and
Seasonable Charity; next, duly executed with Justice and Impartiality; which
sober Severity, is indeed the greatest Charity to the Public. Whose Verity,
Unity, Sanctity and Solemnity in Religious Concernments, being once duly
established, must not be shaken or sacrificed to any private varieties and
extravagancies. Where the internals of Doctrines, Morality, Mysteries, and
Evangelical Duties, being (as they are in the Church of England) sound and
sacred, the externals of decent Forms, Circumstances, Rites and Ceremonies,
being subordinate and servient to the main, cannot be either evil or unsafe,
neither offensive to God nor good Christians.

For the attaining of which blessed ends of Piety and Peace, that the sacred
Sun and Shield of the Divine Grace and Power directing and protecting, may ever
shine upon Your Majesty's Person and Family, Counsels and Power, is the humble
Prayer of

Your Sacred Majesty's most Loyal Subject, and devoted Servant, IOH. EXON.


TO THE READER.
I Think it necessary to inform my Reader that Doctor Gauden (the late Bishop
of Worcester) has also lately wrote and published the Life of Master Hooker;
and though this be not writ by design to oppose what he has truly written;
yet, I am put upon a neccessity to say, That in it there be many Material
Mistakes, and more Omissions. I conceive some of his Mistakes did proceed from
a Belief in Master Thomas Fuller, who had too hastily published what be has
since most ingenuously retracted. And for the Bishops Omissions, I suppose his
more weighty Business and Want of Time, made him pass over many things without
that due Examination, which my better Leisure, my Diligence, and my accidental
Advantages, have made known unto me.

And now for my self, I can say, I hope, or rather know, there are no Material
Mistakes in what I here present to you, that shall become my Reader. Little
things that I have received by Tradition (to which there may be too much and
too little Faith given) I will not at this distance of Time undertake to
justify; for, though I have used great Diligence, and compared Relations and
Circumstances, and probable Results and Expressions: yet, I shall not impose my
Belief upon my Reader; I shall rather leave him at liberty: But, if there shall
appear any Material Ommission, I desire every Lover of truth and the Memory of
Master Hooker, that it may be made known unto me. And, to incline him to it, I
here promise to acknowledge and rectify any such Mistake in a second
Impression, which the Printer says he hopes for; and by this means my weak (but
faithful) Endeavors may become a better Monument, and in some degree more
worthy the Memory of this Venerable Man.

I confess, that when I consider the great Learning and Virtue of Master
Hooker, and what satisfaction and Advantages many Eminent Scholars and Admirers
of him have had by his Labors: I do not a little wonder that in Sixty years no
man did undertake to tell Posterity of the Excellencies of his Life and
Learning, and the Accidents of both; and sometimes wonder more at my self, that
I have been persuaded to it; and indeed I do not easily pronounce my own
Pardon, nor expect that my Reader shall, unless my Introduction shall prove my
Apology, to which I refer him.

The Copy of a Letter writ to Mr. Walton, by Dr. King, Lord Bishop of
Chichester.
Honest ISAAC,
THough a Familiarity of Forty years continuance, and the constant experience
of your Love, even in the worst times, be sufficient to indear our Friendship:
yet, I must confess my affection much improved, not only by evidences of
private respect to those very many that know and love you, but by your new
demonstration of a Public Spirit, testified in a diligent, true, and useful
Collection of so many Material Passages as you have now afforded me in the Life
of Venerable Mr. Hooker; Of which, since desired by such a Friend as yourself,
I shall not deny to give the Testimony of what I know concerning him and his
learned Books; but shall first here take a fair occasion to tell you, that you
have been happy in choosing to write the Lives of three such Persons, as
Posterity has just cause to honor; which they will do the more for the true
Relation of them by your happy Pen: of all which I shall give you my unfeigned
Censure.

I shall begin with my most dear and incomparable Friend Dr. Done, late Dean
of St. Paul's Church, who not only trusted me as his Executor, but three days
before his death delivered into my hands those excellent Sermons of his which
are now made public: professing before Dr. Winniff, Dr. Montford, and I think
your self then present at his bedside, that it was by my restless importunity
that he had prepared them for the Press; together with which (as his best
Legacy) he gave me all his Sermon-Notes, and his other Papers, containing an
Extract of near Fifteen hundred Authors. How these were got out of my hands,
you, who were the Messenger for them, and how lost both to me and your self, is
not now seasonable to complain: but, since they did miscarry, I am glad that
the general Demonstration of his Worth was so fairly preserved, and represented
to the World by your Pen in the History of his Life; indeed so well, that
beside others, the best Critic of our later time (Mr. John Hales of Eaton
College) affirmed to me, He had not seen a Life written with more advantage to
the Subject, or more reputation to the Writer, than that of Dr. Donnes.

After the performance of this task for Dr. Done, you undertook the like
office for our Friend Sir Henry Wolton, betwixt which two there was a
Friendship begun in Oxford, continued in their various Travels, and more
confirmed in the religious Friendship of Age: and doubtless this excellent
Person had writ the Life of Dr. Done, if Death had not prevented him; by which
means, his and your Pre-collections for that Work, fell to the happy manage of
your Pen: A Work, which you would have declined, if imperious persuasions had
not been stronger then your modest resolutions against it. And I am thus far
glad, that the first Life was so imposed upon you, because it gave an
unadvoidable cause of writing the second; If not, it is too probable we had
wanted both, which had been a prejudice to all lovers of Honor and ingenuous
Learning. And let me not leave my Friend Sir Henry without this Testimony added
to yours, That he was a Man of as florid a Wit, and elegant a Pen, as any
former, or ours, which in that kind is a most excellent Age, has ever
produced.

And now having made this voluntary observation of our two deceased Friends, I
proceed to satisfy your desire concerning what I know and believe of the
ever-memorable Mr. Hooker, who was Schismaticorum Malleius, so great a Champion
for the Church of Englands Rights, against the Factious Torrent of Separatists
that then ran high against Church Discipline, and in his unanswerable Books
continues still to be so against the unquiet Disciples of their Schism, which
now under other names carry on their design; and who (as the proper Heirs of
their Irrational Zeal) would again rake into the scarce-closed Wounds of a
newly bleeding State and Church.

And first, though I dare not say I knew Mr. Hooker; yet, as our Ecclesiastical
History reports to the honor of Igna^ius, That he lived in the time of St.
John, and had seen him in his childhood; so I also joy, that in my minority I
have often seen Mr. Hooker with my Father, then Lord Bishop of London, from
whom, and others at that time, I have heard most of the material passages which
you relate in the History of his Life; and, from my Father received such a
Character of his Learning, Humility, and other Virtues, that like Jewels of
unvaluable price, they still cast such a luster as Envy or the Rust of Time
shall never darken. From my Father I have also heard all the circumstances of
the Plot to defame him; and how Sir Edwin Sandys outwitted his Accusers, and
gained their confession; and could give an account of each particular of that
Plot, by that I judge it fitter to be forgotten, and rot in the same Grave with
the malicious Authors. I may not omit to declare, That my Fathers knowledge of
Mr. Hooker was occasioned by the Learned Dr. John Spencer, who after the death
of Mr. Hooker, was so careful to preserve his unvaluable Sixth, Seventh, and
Eighth Books of ECCLESIASTICAL POLITT, and his other Writings, that he procured
Henry Iackson, then of Corpus-Christi College, to transcribe for him all Mr.
Hookers remaining written Papers, many of which were imperfect; for his Study
had been rifled or worse used by Mr. Clark, and another of principles too like
his: But as these Papers were, they were endeavored to be completed by his
dear Friend Dr. Spencer, who bequeathed them as a precious Legacy to my Father;
after whose death they rested in my hand, till Dr. Abbot, then Archbishop of
Canterbury, commanded them out of my custody, authorizing Dr. John Barkham,
(his Lordships Chaplain) to require and bring them to him to Lambeth: At which
time I have heard they were put into the Bishops Library, and that they
remained there till the Martyrdom of Archbishop Laud, and were then by the
Brethren of that Faction given with the Library to Hugh Peter's, as a reward for
his remarkable service in those sad times of the Churches confusion: And though
they could hardly fall into a fouler hand, yet there wanted not other endeavors
to corrupt and make them speak that Language, for which the Faction then
fought; which was, To subject the Sovereign Power to the People. I need not
strive to vindicate Mr. Hooker in this particular; his known Loyalty to his
Prince whilst he lived, the sorrow expressed by King James for his death; the
value our late Sovereign (of ever-blessed Memory) put upon his Works, and now
the singular Character of his worth given by you in the passages of his life,
(especially in your Appendix to it) do sufficiently clear him from that
imputation: And I am glad you mention how much value Robert Stapleton, Pope
Clement the Eighth, and other eminent Men of the Romish persuasion, have put
upon his Books, having been told the same in my youth by persons of worth that
have traveled Italy. Lastly, I must again congratulate this undertaking of
yours, as now more proper to you then any other person, by reason of your long
knowledge and alliance to the worthy family of the Cranmers (my old friends
also) who have been men of noted wisdom, especially Mr. George Cranmer, whose
prudence added to that of Sir Edwin Sandys, proved very useful in the
completing of Mr. Hookers matchless Books; one of their Letters I herewith
send you to make use of, if you think fit. And let me say further, you merit
much from many of Mr. Hookers best friends then living; namely, from the
ever-renowned Archb. Whitgist, of whose imcomparable worth, with the Character
of the times, you have given us a more short and significant account then I
have received from any other Pen. You have done much for Sir Henry Savile, his
contemporary and familiar friend; amongst the surviving Monuments of whose
Learning (give me leave to tell you so) two are omitted; his Edition of Euclid,
but especially his Translation of King James his Apology for the Oath of
Allegiance, into elegant Latin: Which flying in that dress as far as Rome, was
by the Pope and Conclave sent unto Franciscus Snarez to Salamanca (he then
residing there as President of that College) with a command to answer it. When
he had perfected the work (which he calls Defensio Fidei Catholica,) it was
transmitted to Rome for a view of the Inquisitors; who according to their
custom blotted out what they pleased, and (as Mr. Hooker has been used since
his death) added whatsoever might advance the Popes Supremacy, or carry on
their own interest, commonly coupling together Dep^nere and Occidere, the
deposing and killing of Princes: Which cruel and unchristian Language Mr. John
Salikell (his Amanuensis, when he wrote at Salamanca, but since a Convert,
living long in my Fathers-house) often professed, the good old man (whose Piety
and Charity Mr. Salikell magnified much) not only disavowed, but detested. Not
to trouble you further, your Reader (if according to your desire my approbation
of your work carries any weight) will find many just Reasons to thank you for
it; and for this circumstance here mentioned (not known to many) may happily
apprehend one to thank him, who is,

Chichester November. 13. 15.

Sir, Your ever-faithful and affectionate Old Friend, Henry Chichester.

THE LIFE OF Mr. Richard Hooker.
THE INTRODUCTION.
I Have been persuaded by a Friend, that I ought to obey, to write, The Life of
RICHARD HOOKER, the happy Author of Five (if not more) of the Eight Learned
Books of The Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity. and though I have undertaken it,
yet it has been with some unwillingness, foreseeing that it must prove to me,
and especially at this time of my Age, a Work of much labor to enquire,
consider, research, and determine what a needful to be known concerning him.
For I knew him not in his Life, and must therefore not only look back to his
Death, (now Sixty four years past) but almost Fifty years beyond that, even to
his Childhood and Youth, and gather thence such Observations and Prognostics,
as may at least adorn, if not prove necessary for the completing of what I
have undertaken.

This trouble I foresee, and foresee also; that it is impossible to escape
Censures; against which I will not hope my well-meaning and diligence can
protect me, (for I consider the Age in which I live) and shall therefore but
entreat of my Reader a suspension of them, till I have made known unto him some
Reasons, which I my self would now fain believe, do make me in some measure fit
for this undertaking: And if these Reasons shall not acquit me from all
Censures, they may at least abate of their severity; and this is all I can
probably hope for.

My Reasons follow.

About Forty years past (for I am now in the Seventieth of my age) I began a
happy affinity with William Cranmer, (now with God) Grand Nephew unto the Great
Archbishop of that name; a family of noted prudence and resolution; with him
and two of his sisters I had an entire and free friendship: One of them was the
Wife of Dr. Spencer, a Bosom-friend, and sometime Compupil with Mr. Hooker in
Corpus-Christi College in Oxford, and after President of the same. I name them
here, for that I shall have occasion to mention them in this following
Discourse; as also George Cranmer their Brother, of whose useful abilities my
Reader may have a more authentic testimony then my Pen can purchase for him,
by that of our Learned Cambden and others.

This William Cranmer and his two forenamed Sisters, had some affinity, and a
most familiar friendship with Mr. Hooker, and had had some part of their
Education with him in his House, when he was Parson of Bishops-Born near
Cantebury; in which City their good Father then lived. They had (I say) a great
part of their Education with him, as my self since that time, a happy
Cohabitation with them; and having some years before read part of Mr. Hookers
Works with great liking and satisfaction, my affection on to them, made me a
diligent Inquisitor into many things that concerned him; as namely, of his
Person, his Nature, the management of his Time, his Wife, his Family, and the
Fortune of him and his. Which inquiry has given me much advantage in the
knowledge of what is now under my consideration and intended for the
satisfaction of my Reader.

I had also a friendship with the Reverend Dr. Usher, the late Learned
Archbishop of Armagh; and with Dr. Morton, the late Learned and Charitable
Bishop of Durham; as also with the Learned John Hales of Eaton College; and
with them also (who loved the very name of Mr. Hooker) I have had many
discourses concerning him; and from them, and many others that have now put off
Mortality, I might have had more Informations, if I could then have admitted a
thought of any fitness for what by persuasion I have now undertaken. But,
though that full Harvest be irrecoverably lost, yet my Memory has preserved
some Gleanings, and my diligence made such Additions to them, as I hope will
prove useful to the completing of what I intend. In the discovery of which I
shall be faithful, and with this assurance put a period to my Introduction.

THE LIFE
IT is not to be doubted, but that Richard Hooker was born within the
Precincts, or in the City of Exeter. A City which may justly boast that it was
the Birthplace of him and Sir Thomas Bodley; as indeed the County may in which
it stands, that it has furnished this Nation with Bishop Jewel, Sir Francis
Drake, Sir Walter Raleigh, and many others memorable for their Valor and
Learning. He was born about the Year of our Redemption One thousand five
hundred fifty and three; and of Parents, that were not so remarkable for their
Extraction or Riches, as for their Virtue and Industry, and Gods Blessing upon
both: By which they were enabled to educate their Children in some degree of
Learning, of which, our Richard Hooker may appear to be one fair Testimony: And
that Nature is not so partial, as always to give the great Blessings of Wisdom
and Learning, and with them the greater Blessings of Virtue and Government, to
those only that are of a more high and honorable Birth.

His Complexion (if we may guess by him at the Age of Forty) was Sanguine, with
a mixture of Choler; and yet his Motion was slow even in his Youth, and so was
his Speech, never expressing an Earnestness in either of them, but a Gravity
suitable to the Aged. And it is observe (so far as Inquiry is able to look back
at this distance of Time) that at his being a Schoolboy, he was an early
Questionist, quietly inquisitive, Why this was, and that was not, to be
remembered? Why this was granted, and that denied? This being mixed with a
remarkable Modesty, and a sweet serene Quietness of Nature; and with them a
quick Apprehension of many perplexed parts of Learning, imposed then upon him as
a Scholar, made his Master and others to believe him to have an inward Blessed
Divine Light, and therefore to consider him to a little wonder. For in that,
Children were less pregnant, less confident, and more malleable, then in this
wiser, but not better Age.

This Meekness and conjuncture of Knowledge, with Modesty in his Conversation,
being observed by his Schoolmaster, caused him to persuade his Parents (who
intended him for an Apprentice) to continue him at School till he could find
out some means, by persuading his rich Uncle, or some other charitable Person,
to ease them of a part of their Care and Charge: Assuring them, that their Son
was so enriched with the Blessings of Nature and Grace, that God seemed to
single him out as a special Instrument of his Glory. And the good Man told them
also, that he would double his diligence in instructing him, and would neither
expect not receive any other Reward, then the content of so hopeful and happy
an employment.

This was not unwelcome news, and especially to this Mother, to whom he was a
dutiful and dear Child; and all Parties were so pleased with this Proposal,
that it was resolved So it should be. And in the mean time his Parents and
Master laid a Foundation for his future Happiness, by instilling into his Soul
the Seeds of Piety. those Conscientious principles of Loving and fearing God;
of an early belief, that he knows the very secrets of our Souls; that he
punishes our Vices, and rewards our Innocence; that we should be free from
Hypocrisy, and appear to Man, what we are to God, because first or last the
crafty man is caught in his own snare. These Seeds of Piety were so seasonably
planted, and so continually watered with the daily dew of Gods Blessed Spirit,
that his Infant-vertues grew into such holy Habits, as did make him grow daily
into more and more favor, both with God and Man; which with the great Learning
that he did attain to, has made Richard Hooker honored in this, and will
continue him to be so to succeeding Generations.

This good Schoolmaster, whose name I am not able to recover, (and am sorry,
for that I would have given him a better Memorial in this humble Monument,
dedicated to the memory of his Scholar) was very sollicitous with John Hooker,
then Chamberlain of Exeter, and Uncle to our Richard, to take his Nephew into
his care, and to maintain him for one year in the University, and in the mean
time to use his Endeavors to procure an Admission for him into some College;
still urging and assuring him that his Charge would not continue long; for the
Lads Learning and Manners were both so remarkable, that they must of necessity
be taken notice of; and that God would provide him some second Patron, that
would free him and his Parents from their future care and charge.

These Reasons, with the affectionate Rhetoric of his good Master, and Gods
blessing upon both, procured from his Uncle a faithful promise that he would
take him into his care and charge before the expiration of the year following,
which was performed.

This Promise was made about the Fourth year of the Reign of Queen Mary; and
the Learned John Jewel (after Bishop of Salisbury) having been in the first of
this Queens Reign expelled out of Corpus-Christi College in Oxford, (of which
he was a Fellow) for adhering to the truth of those Principles of Religion, to
which he had assented in the days of Her Brother and Predecessor, Edward the
Sixth; and he having now a just cause to fear a more heavy punishment then
expulsion, was forced by forsaking this, to seek safety in another Nation, and
with that safety the enjoyment of that Doctrine and Worship for which he
suffered.

But the Cloud of that Persecution and Fear ending with the Life of Queen Mary,
the Affairs of the Church and State did then look more clear and comfortable;
so that he, and many others of the same judgment, made a happy return into
England about the first of Queen Elizabeth; in which year, this John Jewel was
sent a Commissioner or Visitor of the Churches of the Western parts of this
Kingdom, and especially of those in Devonshire, in which County he was born;
and then, and there he contracted a friendship with John Hooker, the Uncle of
our Richard.

In the Third year of Her Reign, this John Jewel was made Bishop of Salisbury;
and there being always observed in him a willingness to do good and oblige his
Friends, and now a power added to it: John Hooker gave him a visit in
Salisbury, and besought him for Charities sake to look favorably upon a poor
Nephew of his, whom Nature had fitted for a Scholar; but the estate of his
Parents was so narrow, that they were unable to give him the advantage of
Learning; and that the Bishop would therefore become his Patron, and prevent
him from being a Tradesman; for he was a Boy of remarkable hopes. And though
the Bishop knew Men do not usually look with an indifferent eye upon their own
children and Relations, yet he assented so far to John Hooker, that he
appointed the Boy and his Schoolmaster should attend him about Easter next
following at that place; which was done accordingly: And then after some
Questions and Observations of the Boys Learning, and Gravity, and Behavior, the
Bishop gave his Schoolmaster a Reward, and took order for an Annual Pension
for the Boys Parents, promising also to take him into his care for a future
preferment; which was performed. For, about the Fourteenth year of his age,
which was Anno 1567. he was by the Bishop appointed to remove to Oxford, and
there to attend Dr. Cole, then President of Corpus-Christi College: Which he
did, and Dr. Cole had (according to a promise made to the Bishop) provided for
him both a Tutor (which was said to be the Learned Dr. John Reynolds) and a
Clerks place in that College: Which place, though it were not a full
maintenance, yet with the contribution of his Uncle, and the continued Pension
of his Patron, the good Bishop, gave him a comfortable subsistence. And in this
condition he continued unto the Eighteenth year of his age, still increasing in
Learning and Prudence, and so much in Humility and Piety, that he seemed to be
filled with the Holy Ghost, and even like St. John Baptist, to be sanctified
from his Mothers Womb, who did often bless the day in which she bare him.

About this time of his age, he fell into a dangerous Sickness, which lasted
two Months: All which time, his Mother having notice of it, did in her hourly
Prayers as earnestly beg his life of God, as the Mother of St. Augustine did,
that he might become a true Christian: And their Prayers were both so heard, as
to be granted. Which Mr. Hooker would often mention with much joy, and pray
that he might never live to occasion any sorrow to so good and Mother, whom he
would often say, he loved so dearly, that he would endeavor to be good, even as
much for her sake, as for his own.

As soon as he was perfectly recovered from this Sickness, he took a journey
from Oxford to Exeter, to satisfy and see his good Mother, being accompanied
with a Countreyman and Companion of his own College, and both on foot; which
was then either more in fashion, or want of Money, or their Humility made it
so: But on foot they went, and took Salisbury in their way, purposely to see
the good Bishop, who made Mr. Hooker and his Companion dine with him at his own
Table; which Mr. Hooker boasted of with much joy and gratitude when he saw his
Mother and Friends: And at the Bishops parting with him, the Bishop gave him
good Counsel, and his Benediction, but forgot to give him Money; which when the
Bishop had considered, he sent a Servant in all hasle to call Richard back to
him: And at Richards return, the Bishop said to him, Richard, I sent for you
back to lend you a Horse which has carried me many and mile, and I thank God
with much ease. And presently delivered into his hand a Walking-staff, with
which he professed he had traveled through many parts of Germany. And he said,
Richard, I do not give, but lend you my Horse; be sure you be honest, and bring
my Horse back to me at your return this way to Oxford. And I do now give you
Ten Groats to bear your charges to Exeter; and here is Ten Groats more, which I
charge you to deliver to your Mother, and tell her, I send her a Bishops
Benediction with it, and beg the continuance of her Prayers for me. And if you
bring my Horse back to me, I will give you Ten Groats more to carry you on foot
to the College: And so God bless you, good Richard.

And this, you may believe, was performed by both parties. But alas! the next
news that followed Mr. Hooker to Oxford was, That his Learned and Charitable
Patron had changed this for a better life. Which may be believed, for that as
he lived, so he died, in devout Meditation and Prayer; and in both so
zealously, that it became a Religious question, Whether his last Ejaculations,
or his Soul, did first enter into Heaven?

And now Mr. Hooker became a Man of Sorrow and Fear: Of sorrow, for the loss of
so dear and comfortable a Patron; and of Fear, for his future subsistence. But
Dr. Cole raised his spirits from this dejection, by bidding him go cheerfully
to his Studies, and assuring him he should neither want Food not Raiment,
(which was the utmost of his hopes) for he would become his Patron.

And so he was for about Nine Months, or not much longer; for about that time
this following accident did befall Mr. Hooker.

Edwin Sandys (then Bishop of London, and after Archbishop of York) had also
been in the days of Queen Mary forced, by forsaking this, to seek safety in
another Nation; where for many years, Bishop Jewel and he were Companions at
Bed and Board in Germany; and, where in this their Exile, they did often eat
the Bread of Sorrow, and by that means they there began such a friendship, as
time did not blot out, but lasted till the death of Bishop Jewel, which was One
thousand five hundred seventy and one. A little before which time the two
Bishops meeting, Jewel began a story of his Richard Hooker, and in it gave such
a Character of his Learning and Manners, that though Bishop Sandys was educated
in Cambridge, where he had obliged, and had many Friends: Yet his resolution
was, that his Son Edwin should be sent to Corpus-Christi College in Oxford,
and by all means be Pupil to Mr. Hooker, though his Son Edwin was then almost
of the same age: For the Bishop said, I will have a Tutor for my Son, that
shall teach him Learning by Instruction, and Virtue by Example; and my greatest
care shall be of the last, and (God willing) this Richard Hooker shall be the
Man, into whose hands I will commit my Edwin. And the Bishop did so about
Twelve Months after this resolution.

And doubtless, as to these two, a better choice could not be made: For, Mr.
Hooker was now in the Nineteenth year of his age; had spent five in the
University, and had by a constant unwearied diligence, attained unto a
Perfection in all the Learned Languages: By the help of which, as excellent
Tutor, and his unintermitted Study, he had made the subtilty of all the Arts
easy and familiar to himself, and useful for the discovery of such Learning as
lay hid from common Searchers. So that by these added to his great Reason, and
his Industry added to both, He did not only know more of Causes and Effects;
but what he knew, he knew better then other men. And with this Knowledge he had
a most blessed and clear Method of Demonstrating what he knew, to the great
advantage of all his Pupils, (which in time were many) but especially to his
two first, his dear Edwin Sandys, and his as dear George Cranmer, of which
there will be a fair Testimony in the ensuing Relation.

This for his Learning. And for his Behavior, amongst other Testimonies, this
still remains of him, That in four years he was but twice absent from the
Chapel prayers; and that his Behavior there was such as showed an awful
reverence of that God which he then worshipped and prayed to; giving all
outward Testimonies that his Affections were set on Heavenly things. This was
his Behavior toward God; and for that to Man, it is observable, That he was
never known to be angry, or passionate, or extreme in any of his desires; never
heard to repine or dispute with Providence, but by a quiet gentle submission
and resignation of his will to the Wisdom of his Creator bore the burden of
the day with patience; never heard to utter to an uncomly word: And by this and
a grave Behavior, which is a Divine Charm, hebegot an early Reverence unto his
Person, even from those that at other rimes, and in other companies, took a
liberty to cast off that strictness of Behavior and Discourse that is required
in a Collegiate Life. And when he took any liberty to be pleasant, his Wit was
never blemished with scoffing, or the utterance of any conceit that bordered
upon, or might beget a thought of looseness in his hearers. Thus innocent and
exemplary was his Behavior in his College; and thus this good man continued
till his Death; still increasing in Learning, in Patience, and Piety.

In this Nineteenth year of his Age, he was chosen, December 24. 1573. to be
one of the Twenty Scholars of the Foundation; being elected and admitted as
born in Devonshire, (out of which County a certain number are to be elected in
Vacancies by the Founders Statutes.) and now he was much encouraged; for now he
was perfectly incorporated into this beloved College, which was then noted for
an eminent Library, strict Students, and remarkable Scholars. And indeed it
may glory, that it had Bishop Jewel, Doctor John Reynolds, and Doctor Thomas
Iackson, of that Foundation. The first, famous by his Learned Apology for the
Church of England, and his Defense of it against Harding. The second, for the
learned and wise Menage of a public Dispute with John Heart, of the Roman
persuasion, about the Head and Faith of the Church, then Printed by consent of
both parties. And the third, for his most excellent Exposition of the Creed,
and for his other Treatises; all such as have given greatest satisfaction to
men of the greatest Learning. Nor was this man more eminent for his Learning,
then for his strict and pious Life, testified by his abundant Love and Charity
to all Men.

In the year 1576. February 23. Mr. Hookers Grace was given him for Inceptor of
Arts; Doctor Herbert Westphaling, a Man of noted Learning, being then
Vice Chancellor, and the Act following he was completed Master, which was Anno
1577. His Patron Doctor Cole being that year Vice Chancellor, and his dear
Friend Henry Savil of Merton College, then one of the Proctors. It was that
Henry Savil, that was after Sir Henry Savil, Warden of Merton College, and
Provost of Eaton: He which founded in Oxford two famous Lectures, and endowed
them with liberal maintenance. It was that Sir Henry Savil that translated and
enlightened the History of Cornelim Tacitus, with a most excellent Comment; and,
enriched the World by his laborious and chargeable collecting the scattered
pieces of St. Chrysostom, and the Publication of them in one entire Body in
Greek; in which Language he was a most judicious Critic. It was this Sir Henry
Savil that had the happiness to be a Contemporary, and a most familiar Friend
to our Richard Hooker, and let Posterity know it.

And in this year of 1577. he was chosen Fellow of the College: Happy also in
being the Contemporary and Friend of Dr. John Reynolds, of whom I have lately
spoken, and of Dr. Spencer; both which were after, and successively, made
Presidents of his College: Men of great Learning and Merit, and famous in
their Generations.

Nor was Mr. Hooker more happy in his Contemporaries of his Time and College,
then in the Pupillage and Friendship of his Edwin Sandys and George Cranmer, of
whom my Reader may note, That this Edwin Sandys was after Sir Edwin Sandys. and
as famous for his Speculum Europe, as his Brother George for making Posterity
beholden to his Pen by a Learned Relation and Comment on his dangerous and
remarkable Travels; and for his harmonious Translation of the Psalms of David,
the Book of Job, and other Poetical parts of Holy Writ, into most high and
elegant Verse. And for Cranmer, his other Pupil, I shall refer my Reader to the
Printed Testimonies of our Learned Master Cambden, the Lord Tottenes, Fines,
Morison, and others.

This Cranmer, whose Christen name was George, was a Gentleman of singular
hopes, the eldest Son of Thomas Cranmer, Son of Edward Cranmer, the Archbishops
Brother: He spent much of his Youth in Corpus-Christi College in Oxford, where
he continued Master of Arts for many years before he removed, and then betook
himself to Travel, accompanying that worthy Gentleman Sir Edwin Sandys into
France, Germany, and Italy, for the space of three years; and, after their
happy return, he betook himself to an employment under Secretary Davison: After
whose fall, he wen: in place of Secretary with Sir Henry Killigrew in his
Embassage into France; and after his death, he was sought after by the most
Noble Lord Mount-Joy, with whom he went into Ireland, where he remained, until
in a Battle against the Rebels near Carlingford, an unfortunate wound put an
end both to his life, and the great hopes that were conceived of him.

Betwixt Mr. Hooker, and these his two Pupils, there was a Sacred Friendship; a
Friendship made up of Religious Principles, which increased daily by a
similitude of Inclinations to the same Recreations and Studies; a Friendship
elemented in Youth, and in an University, free from self ends, which the
Friendships of Age, usually are not. In this sweet, this blessed, this
Spiritual Amity they went on for many years: And, as the Holy Prophet says, so
they took sweet counsel together, and walked in the House of God as Friends. By
which means they improved it to such a degree of Amity, as bordered upon
Heaven; a Friendship so sacred, that when it ended in this World, it began in
the next, where it shall have no end.

And, though this World cannot give any degree of pleasure equal to such a
Friendship; yet obedience to Parents, and a desire to know the Affairs, and
Manners, and Laws, and Learning of other Nations, that they might thereby
become the more serviceable unto their own, made them put off their Gowns and
leave Mr. Hooker to his College: Where he was daily more assiduous in his
Studies, still enriching his quiet and capacious Soul with the precious
Learning of the Philosophers, Casuists, and Schoolmen; and with them the
Foundation and Reason of all Laws, both Sacred and Civil; and with such other
Learning as lay most remote from the Track of Common Studies. And as he was
diligent in these; so, he seemed restless in searching the scope and intention
of Gods Spirit revealed to mankind in the Sacred Scripture: For the
Understanding of which, he seemed to be assisted by the same Spirit with which
they were written: He that regards truth in the inward parts, making him to
understand Wisdom secretly. And the good man would often say, The Scripture was
not writ to beget Pride and Disputations, and Opposition to Government; but
Moderation, and Charity, and Humility, and Obedience, and Peace, and Piety in
Mankind; of which, no good man did ever repent himself upon his Deathbed. And
that this was really his Judgment, did appear in his future Writings, and in
all the Actions of his Life. Nor was this excellent man a stranger to the more
light and aerie parts of Learning, as Music and Poetry; all which he had
digested, and made useful: And of all which, the Reader will have a fair
Testimony in what follows.

Thus he continued his Studies in all quietness for the space of Three or more
years; about which time he entered into Sacred Orders, and was made both Deacon
and Priest; and not long after, in obedience to the College Statutes, he was
to Preach either at St. Peter's, Oxford, or at St. Paul's Cross, London, and the
last fell to his Allotment.

In order to which Sermon, to London he came, and immediately to the Shunamites
House; which is a House so called, for that: Besides the stipend paid the
Preacher, there is Provision made also for his Lodging and Diet two days
before, and one day after his Sermon. This House was then kept by John
Churchman, sometimes a Draper of good note in Watling street, upon whom, after
many years of Plenty, Poverty had at last come like an armed man, and brought
him into a necessitous condition: Which, though it be a Punishment, is not
always an Argument of Gods disfavor, for he was a virtuous man: I shall not yet
give the like testimony of his Wife, but leave the Reader to judge by what
follows. But to this House Mr. Hooker came so wet, so weary, and
weather-beaten, That he was never known to express more Passion, then against a
Friend that dissuaded him from Footing it to London, and for hiring him no
easier an Horse, (supposing the Horse trotted when he did not;) and at this
time also, such a faintness and fear possessed him, that he would not be
persuaded two days quietness, or any other means could be used to make him able
to Preach his Sundays S^rmon; but a warm Bed, and Rest, and Drink proper for a
Cold given him by Mistress Churchman, and her diligent attendance added unto
it, enabled him to perform the Office of the day, which was in or about the
year One thousand five hundred eighty and one.

And in this first public appearance to the World, he was not so happy as to
be free from Exceptions against a point of Doctrine delivered in his Sermon,
which was, That in God there were two Wills; an Antecedent, and a Consequent
Will: His first Will, That all mankind should be saved; but his second Will
was, That those only should be saved, that did live answerable to that degree
of Grace which he had offered or afforded them. This seemed to cross a late
opinion of Mr.: alvins, and then taken for granted by many that had not a
capacity to examine it, as it had been by him, and has been since by Dr.
Iackson, Dr. Hammond, and others of great Learning, who believe that a contrary
opinion trenches upon the Honor and Justice of our Merciful God. How he
justified this, I will not undertake to declare; but it was not excepted
against (as Mr. Hooker declares in an Occasional Answer to Mr. Travers) by John
Elmer, then Bishop of London; at this time one of his Auditors, and at last one
of his Advocates too, when Mr. Hooker was accused for it.

But the justifying of this Doctrine did not prove of so bad consequence, as
the kindness of Mistress Churchmans curing him of his late distemper and cold;
for that was so gratefully apprehended by Mr. Hooker, that he thought himself
bound in conscience to belive all that she said: So that the good man came to
be persuaded by her, That he was a man of a tender constitution; and, that it
was best for him to have a Wife, that might prove a Nurse to him; such an one
as might both prolong his life, and make it more comfortable; and such a one,
she could and would provide for him, if he thought fit to marry. And he not
considering, that the Children of this World are wiser in their Generation then
the Children of Light: But, like a true Nathaniel, fearing no guile, because he
meant none; did give her such a power as Eleazar was trusted with, when he was
sent to choose a wife for Isaac; for even so he trusted her to choose for him:
Promising upon a fair Summons to return to London, and accept of her choice;
and he did so in that, or the year following. Now, the Wife provided for him
was her Daughter Joan, who brought him neither Beauty nor Portion; and, for her
Conditions, they were too like that Wife's, which is by Solomon compared to a
Dripping House: So that he had no reason to rejoice in the Wife of his Youth,
but rather to say with the Holy Prophet, W^ is me that I am constrained to have
my habitation in the Tents of Kedar!

This choice of Mr. Hookers (if it were his choice) may be wondered at; but let
us consider that the Prophet Ezekiel says, There is a Wheel within a Wheel; a
secret Sacred Wheel of Providence (especially in Marriages) guided by his hand
that allows not the Race to the swift, nor Bread to the wise, not good Wives to
good Men: And he that can bring good out of evil, (for Mortals are blind to
such Reasons) only knows why this Blessing was denied to patient Job, and (as
some think) to meek Moses, and to our as meek and patient Mr. Hooker. But so it
was; and let the Reader cease to wonder, for Affliction is a Divine Diet; which
though it be not pleasing to mankind, yet Almighty God has often, very often,
imposed it as good, though bitter Physic to those Children whose Souls are
dearest to him.

And by this means the good man was drawn from the tranquillity of his
College: From that Garden of Piety, of Pleasure, of Peace, and a sweet
Conversation, into the Thorny Wilderness of a busy World; into those corroding
cares that attend a Married Priest, and a Countrey-Parsonage; which was Draiton
Beauchamp in Buckinghamshire, (not far from Alesbury, and in the Diocese of
Lincoln;) to which he was presented by John Cheny Esquire (then Patron of it)
the Nineth of December, 1584. where he behaved himself so, as to give no
occasion of evil, but (as St. Paul advises a Minister of God) in much
patience, in afflictions, in anguishes, in necessities, in poverty, and no
doubt in long-suffering; yet troubling no man with his discontents and wants.

And in this condition he continued about a year; in which time his two Pupils,
Edwin Sandys, and George Cranmer, were returned from Travel, and took a journey
to Draiton to see their Tutor; where they found him with a Book in his hand (it
was the Odes of Horace) he being then tending his small allotment of Sheep in a
common Field; which he told his Pupils he was forced to do, for that his
Servant was then gone home to Dine, and assist his Wife to do some necessary
household business. When his Servant returned and released him, his two Pupils
attended him unto his House, where their best entertainment was his quiet
company, which was presently denied them, for, Richard was called to rock the
Cradle; and the rest of their welcome was so like this, that they staid but
till next morning, which was time enough to discover and pity their Tutors
condition: And having in that time remembered and paraphrased on many of the
innocent Recreations of their younger days, and by other such like diversions,
given him as much present pleasure as their acceptable company and discourse
could afford him, they were forced to leave him to the company of his Wife, and
seek themselves a quieter Lodging. But at their parting from him, Mr. Cranmer
said, Good Tutor, I am sorry your lot is fallen in no better Ground, as to your
Parsonage: And more sorry your Wife proves not a more comfortable Companion
after you have wearied your thoughts in your restless Studies. To whom the good
man replied, My dear George, if Saints have usually a double share in the
miseries of this life, I that am none, ought not to repine at what my Wise
Creator has appointed for me; but labor, as indeed I do daily, to submit to
his Will, and possess my Soul in Patience and Peace.

At their return to London, Edwin Sandys acquaints his Father, then Bishop of
London, and after Archbishop of York, with his Tutors sad condition, and
sollicites for his removal to some Benefice that might give him a more
comfortable subsistence: Which his Father did most willingly grant him, when it
should next fall into his power. And not long after this time, which was in the
year One thousand five hundred eighty and five, Mr. Alvy (Master of the Temple)
died, who was a man of a strict Life, of great Learning, and of so venerable
Behavior, as to gain such a degree of love and reverence from all men that knew
him, that he was generally known by the name of Father Alvy. At the Temple
Reading, next after the death of this Father Alvy, the Archbishop of York being
then at Dinner with the Judges; the Reader and Benchers of that Society, he met
there with a Condolement for the Death of Father Alvy, an high commendation of
his Saint-like Life, and of his great Merit both to God and Man: and as they
bewailed his Death, so they wished for a like Pattern of Virtue and Learning to
succeed him. And here came in a fair occasion for the Bishop to commend Mr.
Hooker to Father Alvies Place, which he did with so effectual an earnestness,
and that seconded with so many other Testimonies of his worth, that Mr. Hooker
was sent for from Draiton Beauchamp to London, and there the Mastership of the
Temple proposed unto him by the Bishop, as a greater freedom from his Country
Cares, the advantage of a better Society, and a more liberal Pension than his
Parsonage did afford him. But these Reasons were not powerful enough to incline
him to a willing acceptance of it: his wish was rather to gain a better Country
Living, where he might be free from Noise, (so he expressed the desire of his
Heart) and eat that bread which he might more properly call his own, in privacy
and quietness. But, notwithstanding this aversness, he was at last persuaded to
accept of the Bishops Proposal; and was by This you may find in the Temple
Reconds. Will. Ermstead was Master of the Temple at the Dissolution of the
Priory, and di^d 2. Eliz. Richard Alvey Bat. l. ivinity. pa^. 13. Fe^. 2 Eliz.
Magister sive Cujtos Demu^s and Ecclestae nevi Templle died 27 Bez. Richard
Hooker Succeeded that year by Patent in termini^ as Alvy had ^^ and he left it
32 Eliz. Tint year Dr. Belgey succeeded Richard Hooker.
Patent for Life made Master of the Temple the 17th of March, 1585. He being
then in the 34th year of his Age.

And here I shall make a stop; and, that the Reader may the better judge of
what follows, give him a Character of the Times, and Temper of the people of
this Nation, when Mr. Hooker had his Admission into this Place. A Place which
he accepted, rather than desired; and yet here he promised himself a virtuous
quietness: that blessed Tranquillity which he always prayed and labored for;
that so he might in Peace bring forth the Fruits of Peace, and glorify God by
uninterrupted Prayers and praises: for this he always thirsted; and yet this
was denied him. For his Admission into this Place was the very beginning of
those Oppositions and Anxieties, which till then this Good man was a stranger
to, and of which the Reader may guess by what follows.

In this Character of the Times, I shall, by the Readers favor, and for his
information, look so far back as to the beginning of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth; a time in which the many pretended Titles to the Crown, the frequent
Treasons, the Doubts of her Successor, the late Civil War, and the sharp
Persecution that had raged to the effusion of so much Blood in the Reign of
Queen Mary, were fresh in the memory of all men; and these begot fears in the
most Pious and Wisest of this Nation, least the like days should return again
to them or their present Posterity. The apprehension of which Dangers begot an
earnest desire of a Settlement in the Church and State; believing there was no
other probable way left to make them sit quietly under their own Vines and
Fig Trees, and enjoy the desired Fruit of their Labors. But Time, and Peace,
and Plenty, begot Self Ends; and those begot Animosities, Envy, Opposition, and
Unthankfulness for those blessings for which they lately thirsted: being then
the very utmost of their Desires, and even beyond their Hopes.

This was the temper of the Times in the beginning of her Reign; and thus it
continued too long: For those very people that had enjoyed the desires of their
hearts in a Reformation from the Church of Rome, became at last so like the
Grave, as never to be satisfied; but were still thirsting for more and more:
neglecting to pay that Obedience to Government, and perform those Vows to God,
which they made in their days of Adversities and Fear: so that in short time
theree appeared three several Interests, each of them fearless and restless in
the prosecution of their Designs; they may for distinction be called, The
active Romanists, The restless Non-conformists (of which there were many sorts)
and The passive peaceable Protestant, The Counsels of the first considered and
resolved on in Rome: the second in Scotland, in Geneva, and in diverse selected,
secret, dangerous Conventicles, both there, and within the bosom of our own
Nation: the third pleaded and defended their Cause by Established Laws, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil; and if they were active, it was to prevent the other
two from destroying what was by those known Laws happily established to them and
their Posterity.

I shall forbear to mention the very many and as Dangerous Plots of the
Romanists against the Church and State: because, what is principally intended
in this Digression, is an account of the Opinions and Activity of the
Non-conformists; against whose judgment and practice, Mr. Hooker became at
last, but most unwillingly, to be engaged in a Book-war; a War which he
maintained not as against an Enemy, but with the spirit of Meekness and Reason.

In which number of Non-conformists, though some might be sincere and
well-meaning men, whose indiscreet zeal might be so like Charity, as thereby to
cover a multitude of Errors, yet of this Party there were many that were
possessed with an high degree of Spiritual wickedness; I mean with an innate
restles radical Pride and Malice; I mean not those lesser sins that are more
visible and more properly Carnal, and sins against a man's self, as Gluttony,
and Drunkenness, and the like, (from which good Lord deliver us;) but sins of
an higher nature; because more unlike to the nature of God, which is Love, and
Mercy, and Peace; and more like the Devil: (who is not a glutton nor can be
drunk; and yet, is a Devil:) those wickednesses of Malice, and Revenge, and
Opposition, and a Complacence in working and beholding Confusion) which are
more properly his work, who is the Enemy and disturber of mankind, and greater
sins, though many will not believe it) Men whom a furious Zeal and Prejudice
had blinded, and made incapable of hearing Reason, or adhearing to the ways of
Peace; Men whom Pride and Self-conceit had made to overvalue their own Wisdom,
and become pertinacious, and to hold foolish and unmannerly disputes against
those Men which they ought to Reverence, and those Laws which they ought to
obey; Men that labored and joyed to speak evil of Government, and then to be
the Authors of Confusion (of Confusion as it is Confusion:) whom Company, and
Conversation, and Custom had blinded, and made insensible that these were
Errors: and at last became so restless, and so hardened in their opinions,
that like those which perished in the gainsaying of Core, so these dyed without
repenting these spiritual wickednesses, of which Coppinger and Hacket, and
their adherents are too sad testimonies.

And in these times which tended thus to Confusion, there were also many others
that pretended a Tenderness of Conscience, refusing to submit to Ceremonies, or
to take an Oath before a lawful Magistrate: and yet these very M^n did in their
secret Conventicles, Covenant and Swear to each other, to be assiduous and
faithful in using their best endeavors to set up a Church Government that they
had not agreed on. To which end, there was many Select parties that wandered up
and down, and were active in sowing Discontents and Sedition, by venomous and
secret Murmurings, and a Dispersion of scurrilous Pamphlets and Libels against
the Church and State; but especially against the Bishops: by which means,
together with very bold, and as indiscreet Sermons, the Common people became so
Phanatick, as St. Peter observed, there were in his time, some that wrested the
Scripture to their own destruction: so by these men, and this means many came
to believe the Bishops to be Antichrist, and the only Obstructers of Gods
Discipline; and many of them were at last given over to such desperate
delusions, as to find out a Text in the Revelation of St. John, that Antichrist
was to be overcome by the sword, which they were very ready to take into their
hands. So that those very men, that began with tender meek Petitions, proceeded
to print public Admonitions; and then to Satirical Remonstrances; and at last,
(having like David numbered who was not, and who was, for their Cause,) they got
a supposed Certainty of so great a Party, that they durst threaten first the
Bishops, and not long after, both the Queen and Parliament; to all which they
were secretly encouraged by the Earl of Leicester, then in great favor with
her Majesty, and the reputed Cherisher and Patron-general of these Pretenders
to Tenderness of Conscience; whom he used as a sacreligious snare to further
his Design, which was by their means to bring such an odium upon the Bishops,
as to procure an Alienation of their Lands, and a large proportion of them for
himself: which Avaritious desire had at last so blinded his Reason, that his
ambitious and greedy Hopes had almost flattered him into present possession of
Lambeth-house.

And to thse strange and dangerous Undertakings, the Non-conformists of this
Nation were much encouraged and heightened by a Correspondence and Confederacy
with that Brotherhood in Scotland; so that here they became so bold, that one
told the Queen openly in a Mr. Dering.
Sermon, She was like an untamed Heyfer, that would not be ruled by Gods
people, but obstructed his Discipline. And in Scotland they were more
confident, for there See Bishop Spotswoods History of the Church of Scotland.
they declared Her an Atheist, and grew to such an height, as not to be
accountable for any thing spoken against Her; No nor for Treason against their
own King, if spoken in the Pulpit: Showing at last such a disobedience even to
Him, that His Mother being in England, and then in distress, and in prison, and
in danger of Death, the Church denied the King their Prayers for Her; and at
another time, when he had appointed a day of Feasting, their Church declared
for a general Fast, in opposition to his Authority.

To this height they were grown in both Nations, and by these means there was
distilled into the minds of the common people such other venomous and
turbulent Principles, as were inconsistent with the safety of the Church and
State: And these, vented so daringly, that beside the loss of Life and Limbs,
the Church and State were both forced to use such other severities as will not
admit of an excuse, if it had not been to prevent Confusion, and the perilous
consequences of it; which without such prevention, would in short time have
brought unavoidable ruin and misery to this numerous Nation.

These Errors and Animosities were so remarkable, that they begot wonder in an
ingenious Italian, who being about this time come newly into this Nation, writ
scoffingly to a Friend in his own Country; That the common people of England
were wiser then the wisest of his Nation; for here the very Women and
Shopkeepers were able to judge of Predestination, and determine what Laws were
fit to be made concerning Church Government; then, what were fit to be obeyed
or abolished. That they were more able (or at least thought so) to raise and
determine perplexed Cases of Conscience, then the most Learned Colleges in
Italy. That Men of the slightest Learning, and the most ignorant of the common
people, were mad for a new, or Super- or Re-Reformation of Religion; and that
in this they appeared like that man, who would never cease to whet, and whet
his Knife, till there was no Steel left to make it useful. And he concluded his
Letter with this observation, That those very Men that were most busy in
Oppositions, and Disputations, and Controversies, and finding out the faults of
their Governors, had usually the least of Humility and Mortification, or of the
Power of Godliness.

And to heighten all these discontents and dangers, there was also sprung up a
Generation of Godless-men; Men that had so long given way to their own Lusts
and Delusions; and, had so often, and so highly opposed the Blessed Motions of
his Blessed Spirit, and the inward Light of their own Consciences, that they
had thereby sinned themselves to a belief of what they would, but were not able
to believe: Into a belief, which is repugnant even to Humane nature (for the
Heathens believe there are many gods;) but these had sinned themselves into a
belief, that there is no God: And so finding nothing in themselves, but what is
worse then nothing, began to wish what they were not able to hope for, That
they should be like the Beasts that perish; and, in wicked company (which is
the Atheists Sanctuary) were so bold as to say so: Though the worst of
mankind, when he is left alone at midnight, may wish, but cannot then think
it. Into this wretched, this reprobate condition, many had then sinned
themselves.

And now! When the Church was pestered with them, and with all these other
Irregularities; when her Lands were in danger of Alienation, her Power at least
neglected, and her Peace torn to pieces by several Schisms, and such Heresies
as do usually attend that sin: When the common people seemed ambitious of doing
those very things which were attended with most dangers, that thereby they
might be punished, and then applauded and pitied: When they called the Spirit
of Opposition a Tender Conscience, and complained of Persecution, because they
wanted power to persecute others: When the giddy multitude raged, and became
restless to find out misery for themselves and others; and the r^^ble would
herd themselves together, and endeavor to govern and act in spite of
Authority. In this extremity, fear, and danger of the Church and State, when to
suppress the growing evils of both, they needed a Man of Prudence and Pi^ty,
and of an high and fearless Fortitude; they were blessed in all by John Whitgift,
his being made Archbishop of Canterbury; of whom ingenious Sir Henry Wot^on
(that knew him well) has left this true Character, That he was a Man of a
Reverend and Sacred Memory; and of the Premitive temper: A Man of such a
temper, as when the Church by lowliness of Spirit did flourish in highest
examples of Virtue.

And though I dare not undertake to add to his Character, yet I shall neither
do right to this Discourse, nor to my Reader, if I forbear to give him a
further and short account of the life and manners of this excellent Man; and it
shall be short, for I long to end this digression, that I may lead my Reader
back to Mr. Hooker, where we left him at the Temple.

John Whitgift was born in the County of Lincoln, of a Family that was ancient,
and noted to be prudent and affable, and gentile by nature: He was educated in
Cambridge; much of his Learning was acquired in Pembroke-Hall (where Mr.
Bradford the Martyr was his Tutor:) From thence he was removed to Peter-house;
from thence to be Master of Pembroke-Hall; and from thence to the Mastership of
Trinity College. About which time the Queen made him her Chaplain; and not
long after Prebend of Ely, and then Dean of Lincoln; and having for many years
past looked upon him with much reverence and favor, gave him a fair testimony
of both, by giving him the Bishopric of Worcester, and (which was not a usual
favor) forgiving him his First Fruits; then by constituting him Vice President
of the Principality of Wales. And having for several years experimented his
Wisdom, his Justice, and Moderation in the menage of Her affairs, in both these
places, She in the Twenty sixth of Her Reign, made him Archbishop of
Canterbury; and not long after, of Her Privy Council; and trusted him to menage
all Her Ecclesiastical Affairs and Preferments. In all which Removes, he was
like the Ark, which left a Blessing upon the place where it rested, and in all
his Employments, was like Iehoida, that did good unto Israel.

These were the steps of this Bishops Ascension to this place of Dignity and
Cares; in which place (to speak Mr. Cambdens very words in his Annals) He
devoutly consecrated both his whole life to God, and bit painful labors to the
good of his Church. And yet in this place he met with many oppositions in the
regulation of Church Affairs, which were much disordered at his entrance, by
reason of the age and remisness of Bishop Grindal (his immediate Predecessor)
the activity of the Non-conformists, and their chief assistant, the Earl of
Leicester; and indeed, by too many others of the like Sacrilegious Principles.
With these he was to encounter; and though he wanted neither courage nor a good
cause, yet he foresaw, that without a great measure of the Queens favor, it was
impossible to stand in the Breach that was made into the Lands and Immunities
of the Church, or to maintain the remaining Rights of it. And therefore by
justifiable Sacred Insinuations, such as St. Paul to Agrippa, (Agrippa
believe thou? I know thou believe) he wrought himself into so great a
degree of favor with Her, as by his pious use of it, has got both of them a
greater degree of Fame in this World, and of Glory in that, into which they are
now entered.

His merits to the Queen, and Her Favors to him were such, that she called him
Her little black Husband, and called his Servants Her Servants: And She saw so
visible and blessed a sincerity shine in all his cares and endeavors for the
Churches, and for Her good, that She was supposed to trust him with the very
secrets of Her Soul, and to make him Her Confessor: Of which She gave many Fair
testimonies; and of which, one was, That She would never eat flesh in Lent
without obtaining a License from Her little black Husband: And would often say,
She pio^^ed him, because She trusted him, and had eased Her-self by laying the
burden of all Her Clergy-cares upon his shoulders, which She was certain he
managed with Prudence and Piety.

I shall not keep my self within the promised Rules of Brevity in this account
of his Interest with Her Majesty, and his care of the Churches Rights, if in
this digression I should enlarge to particulars^ and therefore my desire is,
that one example may serve for a testimony of both. And that the Reader may the
better understand it, he may take notice, that not many years before his being
made Archbishop, there passed an Act or Acts of Parliament intending the better
preservation of Church Lands, by recalling a Power which was vested in others
to Sell or Lease them, by lodging and trusting the future care and protection
of them only in the Crown: And amongst many that made a bad use of this Power
or Trust of the Queens, the Earl of Leicester was one; and the good Bishop
having by his Interest with Her Majesty put a stop to the Earls Sacrilegious
designs, they two fell to an open Opposition before her; after which they both
quitted the Room, nor Friends in appearance. But the Bishop made a sudden and a
seasonable return to Her Majesty, (for he found her alone) and spoke to her
with great Humility and Reverence, and to this purpose.

I beseech your Majesty to hear me with patience, and to believe that yours and
the Churches Safety are dearer to me than my Life, but my Conscience dearer
than both: and therefore give me leave to do my Duty, and tell you that Princes
are deputed Nursing Fathers of the Church, and owe it a Protection; and
therefore God forbid that you should be so much as Passive in her Ruins, when
you may prevent it; or that I should-behold it without horror and detestation;
or should forbear to tell your Majesty of the Sin and Danger. And though you
and my self are born in an Age of Frailties, when the Primitive Piety and Care
of the Churches Lands and Immunities are much decayed; yes (Madam) let me beg
that you will but first consider, and then you will believe there are such sins
at Profaneness and Sacrilege; for if there were not? they could not have
Names in Holy Writ: and particularly in the New Testament. And I beseech you to
consider, that though our Savior said, He judged no man; and to testify it,
would not judge nor divide the Inheritance betwixt the two Brethren, nor would
judge the Woman taken in Adultery; yet, in this point of the Churches Rights,
he was so zealous, that he made himself both the Accuser, and the Judge, and
the Executioner to punish these sins; witnessed, in that he himself made the
Whip to drive the Prophaners out of the Temple; overthrew the Tables of the
Money Changers, and drove them out of it. And consider that it was S. Paul that
said to those Christians of his time that were offended with Idolatry, yet Thou
that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? Supposing I think Sacrilege
to be the greater sin. This may occasion your Majesty to consider that there is
such a sin as Sacrilege; and to incline you to prevent the Curse that will
follow it; I beseech you also, to consider that Constantine the first Christian
Emperor, and Helena his Mother; that King Edgar, and Edward the Confessor, and
indeed many others of your Predecessors, and many private Christians, have also
given to God and to his Church, much Land, and many Immunities, which they
might have given to those of their own Families, and did not; but gave them as
an absolute Right and Sacrifice to God: And with these Immunities and Lands
they have entailed a Curse upon the Alienators of them; God prevent your
Majesty from being liable to that Curse.

And, to make you that are trusted with their Preservation, the better to
understand the danger of it; I beseech you forget not, that, besides these
Curses, the Churches Land and Power have been also endeavored to be preserved,
as far as Humane Reason and the Law of this Nation have been able to preserve
them, by an immediate and most sacred Obligation on the Consciences of the
Princes of this Realm. For they that consult Magna Charta shall find, that as
all your Predecessors were at their Coronation, so you also were sworn before
all the Nobility and Bishops then present, and in the presence of God, and in
his stead to him that anointed you, to maintain the Church Lands, and the
rights belonging to it; and this testified openly at the holy Altar, by laying
your Hands on the Bible then lying upon it. And not only Magna Charta, but many
Modern Statutes have denounced a Curse upon those that break Magna Charta. And
now what account can be given for the breach of this Oath at the last Great
Day, either by your Majesty, or by me, if it be wilfully, or but negligently
violated, I know not.

And therefore, good Madam, let not the late Lords Exceptions against the
failings of some few Clergymen, prevail with you to punish Posterity, for the
Errors of this present Age; let particular Men suffer for their particular
Errors, but let God and his Church have their right; And though I pretend not
to prophesy, yet I big Posterity to take notice of what is already become
visible in many Families; That Church-land added to an ancient Inheritance,
has proved like a Moth fretting a Garment, and secretly consumed both: Or like
the Eagle that stole a Coal from the Altar, and thereby set her Nest on fire,
which consumed both her young Eagles, and her self that stole it. And, though I
shall forbear to speak reproachfully of your Father: yet, I beg you to take
notice, that a part of the Churches Rights, added to the vast Treasure left him
by his Father, has been conceived to bring an unavoidable Consumption upon
both, notwithstanding all his diligence to preserve it.

And consider, that after the violation of those Laws, to which he had sworn in
Magna Charta, God did so far deny him his Restraining Grace, that be fell into
greater sins then I am willing to mention. Madam, Religion is the Foundation
and Cement of Humane Societies: And, when they that serve at Gods Altar shall
be exposed to Poverty? then Religion it self will be exposed to scorn, and
become contemptible; as you may already observe in too many poor Vicaridges in
this Nation. And therefore, as you are by a late Act or Acts entrusted with a
great Power to preserve or waste the Churches Lands; yet, dispose of them for
Jesus sake as the Donors intended: Let neither falsehood nor flattery beguile
you to do otherwise, and put a stop (I beseech you) to the approaching ruins
of Gods Church, as you expect comfort at the last great day; For Kings must be
judged. Pardon this affectionate plainness, my most dear Sovereign, and let me
beg to be still continued in your Favor; and the Lord still continue you in his.

The Queens patient hearing this affectionate Speech; and Her future care to
preserve the Churches Rights, which till then had been neglected, may appear a
fair Testimony, that he made Hers and the Churches good, the chiefest of his
cares, and that She also thought so. And of this, there were such daily
Testimonies given, as begot betwixt them so mutual a joy and confidence, that
they seemed born to believe and do good to each other: She not doubting his
Piety to be more then all his opposers, which were many, and those powerful
too; nor his Prudence equal to the chiefest of Her Council, who were then as
remarkable for active Wisdom, as those dangerous times did require, or this
Nation did everenjoy. And in this condition he continued Twenty years; in which
time he saw some flowings, but many more ebbings of Her Favor toward all men
that opposed him, especially the Earl of Leicester: So that God seemed still to
keep him in Her Favor, that he might preserve the remaining Church Lands and
Immunities from Sacrilegious Alienations. And this good man deserved all the
honor and power with which She trusted him; for he was a pious man, and
naturally of Noble and Grateful Principles: He eased Her of all Her Church
cares by his wise menage of them; he gave Her faithful and prudent Counsels in
all the extremities and dangers of Her Temporal Affairs, which were very many;
he lived to be the chief comfort of Her life in Her declining age; to be then
most frequently with Her, and Her assistant at Her private Devotions; to be the
greatest comfort of Her Soul upon Her Deathbed; to be present at the
expiration of Her last breath; and to behold the closing of those eyes that had
long looked upon him with reverence and affection. And let this also be added,
That he was the chief Mourner at Her sad Funeral; nor let this be forgotten,
that within a few hours after Her death, he was the happy Proclaimer that King
James (Her Peaceful Successor) was Heir to the Crown.

Let me beg of my Reader, that he allow me to say a little, and but a little
more of this good Bishop, and I shall then presently lead him back to Mr.
Hooker; and, because I would hasten, I will mention but one part of the Bishops
Charity and Humility; but this of both. He built a large Almshouse near to his
own Palace at Croydon in Surrey, and endowed it with maintenance for a Master
and Twenty eight poor Men and Women; which he visited so often, that he knew
their names and dispositions; and was so truly humble, that he called them
Brothers and Sisters: And whenever the Queen descended to that lowliness to
dine with him at his Palace in Lambeth, (which was very often) he would usually
the next day show the like lowliness to his poor Brothers and Sisters at
Croydon, and dine with them at his Hospital; at which time, you may believe
there was joy at the Table.

And at this place he built also a fair Free School, with a good accommodation
and maintenance for the Master and Scholars. Which gave just occasion for Boyse
Sisi, then Ambassador for the French King, and Resident here, at the Bishops
death, to say, The Bishop had published many Learned Books, but a Free School
to train up Youth, and an Hospital to lodge and maintain aged and poor People;
were the best evidences of Christian Learning that a Bishop could leave to
Posterity. This good Bishop lived to see King James settled in Peace, and then
fell sick at Lambeth; of which, the King having notice, went to visit him, and
found him in his Bed in a declining condition, and very weak; and after some
short discourse, the King assured him, He had a great affection for him, and
high value for his Prudence and Virtues, which were so useful for the Church,
that he would earnestly beg his life of God. To which he replied, Pro Ecclesi^
Dei, Pro Ecclesia Dei: Which were the last words he ever spoke; therein
testifying, That as in his Life, so at his Death, his chiefest care was of Gods
Church.

This John Whitgift was made Archbishop in the Year One thousand five hundred
eighty and three. In which busy place, he continued Twenty years and some
months, and in which time, you may believe he had many Trials of his Courage
and Patience; but his Motto was, Vincit, qui Patitur: And he made it good. Many
of his many Trials were occasioned by the then powerful Earl of Leicester, who
did still (but secretly) raise and cherish a Faction of Non-conformists to
oppose him; especially one Thomas Cartwright, a Man of noted Learning; sometime
Contemporary with the Bishop in Cambridge, and of the same College, of which
the Bishop had been Master: In which place there began some Emulations, (the
particulars I forbear) and at last open and high oppositions betwixt them; and,
in which you may believe Mr. Cartwright was most faulty, if his Expulsion out
of the University can incline you to it.

And in this discontent, after the Earls death (which was One thousand five
hundred eighty and eight) Mr. Cartwright appeared a chief Cherisher of a Party
that were for the Geneva Church Government; and to effect it, he ran himself
into many dangers, both of Liberty and Life; appearing at last to justify
himself and his Party in many Remonstrances, which he caused to be Printed; and
to which, the Bishop made a first Answer, and Cartwright Replied upon him; and
then the Bishop having rejoyned to his Reply, Mr. Cartwright either was, or was
persuaded to be satisfied; for, he wrote no more, but left the Reader to be
judge which had maintained their Cause with most Charity and Reason.

After some silence, Mr. Cartwright received from the Bishop many Personal
Favors, and retired himself to a more Private Living, which was at Warwick,
where he was made Master of an Hospital, and lived quietly, and grew rich; and,
where the Bishop gave him a License to Preach, upon promise not to meddle with
Controversies, but incline his hearers to Piety and Moderation: And this
promise he kept during his life, which ended One thousand six hundred and two,
the Bishop surviving him but one year, each ending his days in perfect charity
with the other.

And now after this long digression made for the information of my Reader
concerning what follows, I bring him back to venerable Mr. Hooker, where we
left him in the Temple, and where we shall find him as deeply engaged in a
Controversy with Walter Travers, a Friend and Favorite of Mr. Cartwrights, as
the Bishop had ever been with Mr. Cartwright himself; and of which, I shall
proceed to give this following account.

And first this; That though the Pens of Mr. Cartwright and the Bishop were now
at rest, yet there was sprung up a new Generation of restless Men, that by
Company and Clamors became possessed of a Faith which they ought to have kept to
themselves, but could not: Men that were become positive in asserting, That a
Papist cannot be saved: Insomuch, that about this time, at the Execution of the
Queen of Scots, the Bishop that Preached Her Funeral Sermon (which was Dr.
Howland, then Bishop of Peterborough) was reviled for not being positive for
Her Damnation. And beside this boldness of their becoming Gods, so far as to
set limits to his Mercies; there was not only Martin Mar-Prelate, but other
venomous Books daily Printed and dispersed: Books that were so absurd and
scurrilous, that the Graver Divines disdained them an Answer. And yet these
were grown into high esteem with the common people, till Tom Nash appeared
against them all, who was a man of a sharp wit, and the master of a scoffing
Satirical merry Pen, which he employed to discover the absurdities of those
blind malicious senseless Pamphlets, and Sermons as senseless as they. Nash his
Answers being like his Books, which bore these Titles, An Almond for Parro^. A
Fig for my God-son. Come crack me this Nut, and the like: So that his merry Wit
made such a discovery of their absurdities, as (which is strange) he put a
greater stop to these malicious Pamphlets, then a much wiser-man had been able.

And now the Reader is to take notice, That at the Death of Father Alay, who
was Master of the Temple, this Walter Travers was Lecturer there for the
Evening Sermons, which he Preached with great approbation, especially of the
younger Gentlemen of that Society; and for the most part approved by Mr. Hooker
himself, in the midst of their oppositions. For he continued Lecturer a part of
his time; Mr. Travers being indeed a Man of competent Learning, of a winning
Behavior, and of a blameless Life. But he had taken Orders by the Presbytery in
Antwerp, and if in any thing he was transported, it was in an extreme desire to
set up that Government in this Nation: For the promoting of which, he had a
correspondence with Theodore Beza at Geneva, and others in Scotland; and was
one of the chiefest assistants to Mr. Cartwright in that design.

Mr. Travers had also a particular hope to set up this Government in the
Temple, and to that end, used his endeavors to be Master of it; and his being
disappointed by Mr. Hookers admittance, proved some occasion of opposition
betwixt them in their Sermons. Many of which were concerning the Doctrine,
Discipline, and Ceremonies of this Church; insomuch, that as St. Paul withstood
St. Peter to his face, so did they. For as one has pleasantly expressed it, The
Forenoon Sermon spoke Canterbury; and the Afternoons, Geneva.

In these Sermons there was little of Bitterness, but each party brought all
the Reasons he was able, to prove his Adversaries Opinion erroneous. And thus
it continued a long time, till the oppositions became so high, and the
consequences so dangerous, especially in that place, That the prudent
Archbishop put a stop to Mr. Travers his Preaching, by a positive Prohibition;
against which Mr. Travers appealed and petitioned Her Majesty and Her Privy
Council to have it recalled, where he met with many assisting powerful Friends;
but they were not able to prevail with or against the Archbishop, whom the
Queen had entrusted with all Church Power; and he had received so fair a
Testimony of Mr. Hookers Principles and of his Learning and Moderation, that he
withstood all Solicitations. But the denying this Petition of Mr. Travers was
unpleasant to diverse of his party, and the reasonableness of it became at last
to be so magnified by them and many others, as never to be answered: So that
intending the Bishops and Mr. Hookers disgrace, they procured it to be
privately Printed and scattered abroad; and then Mr. Hooker was forced to
appear as publicly, and Print an Answer to it, which he did, and dedicated it
to the Archbishop; and it proved so full an Answer, to have in it so much of
clear Reason, and writ with so much Meekness and Majesty of style, that the
Bishop began to wonder at the Man, to rejoice that he had appeared in his
Cause, and disdained not earnestly to beg his Friendship; even a familiar
Friendship with a Man of so much quiet Learnning and Humility.

To enumerate the many particular Points, in which Mr. Hooker and Mr. Travers
dissented (all or most of which I have seen written) would prove at least
tedious; and therefore I shall impose upon my Reason no more then two, which
shall immediately follow; and by which, he may judge of the rest.

Mr. Travers excepted against Mr. Hooker, for that in one of his Sermons be
declared, That the assurance of what we believe by the Word of God, is not to
us so certain as that which we perceive by Sense. And Mr. Hooker confesses he
said so, and endeavors to justify it by the Reasons following.

First, I taught, That the things which God promises in his Word, are surer to
us then what we touch, handle, or see: But are we so sure and certain of them?
If we be, Why does God so often prove his Promises to us as he does, by
Arguments drawn from our sensible experience? For we must be surer of the
proof, then of the things proved; otherwise it is no proof. For example, How is
it that many men looking on the Moon at the sametime, every one knows it to
be the Moon as certainly as the other does? But many believing one and the same
Promise, have not all one and the same fullness of Perswassion. For how falls
it out, that men being assured of any thing by Sense, can be no surer of it
then they are; when at the strongest in Faith that lives upon the Earth, has
always need to labor, strive, and pray, that his assurance concerning Heavenly
and Spiritual things, may grow, increase, and be augmented?

The Sermon that gave him the cause of this his Justification, makes the case
more plain, by declaring, That there is besides this certainly of Evidence, a
certainty of Adherence. In which, having most excellently demonstrated what the
Certainty of Adherence is, he makes this comfortable use of it: Comfortable (he
says) as to weak Believers, who suppose themselves to be faithless, not to
believe, when notwithstanding they have their Adherence; the Holy Spirit has
his private operations, and works secretly in them, and effectually too,
though they want the inward Testimony of it.

Tell this to a Man that has a mind too much dejected by a sad sense of his
sin; to one that by a too severe judging of himself, concludes that he wants
Faith, because he wants the comfortable Assurance of it; and his Answer will
be, Do not persuade me against my knowledge, against what I find and feel in
my self: I do not, I know I do not believe. (Mr. Hookers own words follow) Well
then, to favor such men a little in their weakness, let that be granted which
they do imagine; be it, that they adhere not to Gods promises, but are
faithless, and without belief: But are they not grieved for their unbelief?
They confess they are; Do they not wish it might, and also strive that it may
be otherways? We know they do. Whence comes this, but from a secret love and
liking, that they have of those things believed? For, no man can love those
things which in his own opinion are not; And, if they think those things to be,
which they show they love, when they desire to believe them; then must it be,
that by desiring to believe, they prove themselves true Believers: For, without
Faith no man thinks that things believed are: Which Argument all the
Subtilties of Infernal Powers will never be able to dissolve. This is an
Abridgment of part of the Reasons he gives for his Justification of this his
opinion, for which he was excepted against by Mr. Travers.

Mr. Hooker was also accused by Mr. Travers, for that he in one of his Sermons
had declared, That he doubted not but that God was merciful to save many of our
Forefathers living heretofore in Popish Superstition, for as much as they
sinned ignorantly: And Mr. Hooker in his Answer professes it to be his
judgment, and declares his Reasons for this charitable opinion to be as
follows.

But first he states the Question about Justification and Works, and how the
Foundation of Faith is overthrown; and then he proceeds to discover that way
which Natural Men and some others have mistaken to be the way by which they
hope to attain true and everlasting Happiness: And having discovered the
mistaken, he proceeds to direct to that true way, by which, and no other,
Everlasting Life and Blessedness is attainable. And, these two ways he
demonstrates thus, (they be his own words that follow) That, the way of Nature;
This, the way of Grace; the end of that way, Salvation merited, presupposing
the Righteousness of Men's works: Their Righteousness, a natural ability to do
them; that ability, the goodness of God which created them in such perfection.
But the end of this way, Salvation bestowed upon men as a gift: Presupposing
not their Righteousness, but the forgiveness of their Unrighteousness,
Justification; their Justification, not their natural ability to do good, but
their hearty sorrow for not doing; and unfeigned belief in him, for whose sake
not doers are accepted, which is their Vocation; their Vocation, the Election
of God, taking them out of the number of lost Children; their Election, a
Mediator in whom to be elect: This Mediation inexplicable Mercy, this Mercy,
supposing their misery for whom be vouchsafed to die, and make himself a
Mediator.

And he also declares, There is no meritorious cause for our Justification,
but Christ; no effectual, but his Mercy; and says also, We deny the Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, we abuse, disannul, and annihilate the benefit of his
Passion, if by a proud imagination we believe we can merit everlasting life, or
can be worthy of it. This Belief (he declares) is to destroy the very Essence
of our Justification, and he makes all opinions that border upon this, to be
very dangerous. Tet nevertheless, (and for this he was accused) considering how
many virtuous and just Men, how many Saints and Martyrs have had their
dangerous opinions, amongst which this was one, That they hoped to make God
some part of amends, by voluntary punishments which they laid upon themselves:
Because by this, or the like erroneous opinions which do by consequene
overthrow the Merits of Christ, shall Man be so bold as to write on their
Graves, Such men are damned, there is for them no Salvation! St. Austin says,
Errare possum, Hareticus esse nolo, And except we put a difference betwixt them
that err ignorantly, and them that obstinately persist in it, how is it
possible that any Man should hope to be saved? Give me a Pope or a Cardinal,
whom great afflictions have made to know himself, whose heart God has touched
with true sorrow for all his sins, and filled with a love of Christ and his
Gospel; whose Eyes are willingly open to see the Truth, and his Mouth ready to
renounce all Error, this one opinion of Merit excepted, which he thinks God
will require at his hands; and because he wants, trembles, and is
discouraged, and yet can say, Lord, cleanse me from all my secret sins! Shall I
think because of this, or a like Error, such men touch not so much as the Hem
of Christ's Garment? If they do, wherefore should I doubt, but that Virtue may
proceed from Christ to save them? No, I will not be afraid to say to such a
one, You err in your opinion, but be of good comfort, you have to do with a
Merciful God, who will make the best of that little which you hold well, and
not with a captions Sophister, who gathers the worst out of every thing in
which you are mistaken.

But it will be said, The admittance of Merit in any degree, overthrows the
Foundation, excladeth from the hope of Mercy, from all possibility of
Salvation. (And now Mr. Hookers own words follow.)

What though they hold the truth sincerely in all other parts of Christian
Faith? Although they have in some measure all the Virtues and Graces of the
Spirit? Although they have all other Tokens of Gods Children in them? Although
they be far from having any proud opinion, that they shall be saved by the
worthiness of their Deeds? Although the only thing that troubles and
molesteth them, be a little too much dejection, somewhat too great a fire
arising from an erroneous conceit. That God will require a worthiness in them,
which they are grieved to find wanting in themselves? Although they be not
obstinate in this Opinion? Although they be willing, and would be glad to
forsake it, if any one Reason were brought sufficient to disprove it? Although
the only cause why they do not forsake it ere they die, be their ignorance of
that means by which it might be disproved? Although the cause why the ignorance
in this point is not removed, be the want of knowledge in such as should be
able, and are not to remove it? Let me die (says Mr. Hooker) if it be ever
proved, That simply an Error does exclude a Pope or Cardinal in such a case
utterly from hope of life. Surely I must confess. That if it be an Error to
think that God may be merciful to save men, even when they err; my greatest
comfort is, my error: Were it not for the love I bear to this Error, I would
never wish to speak or to live.

I was willing to take notice of these two points, as supposing them to be very
material; and that as they are thus contracted, they may prove useful to my
Reader; as also for that the Answers be Arguments of Mr. Hookers great and
clear Reason, and equal Charity. Other Exceptions were also made against him,
as, That he prayed before, and not after his Sermons; that in his Prayers be
named Bishops, that be kneeled, both when he prayed, and he when he received
the Sacrament; and (says Mr. Hooker in his Defense) other Exceptions so like
these, as but to name, I should have thought a greater fault then to commit
them.

And it is not unworthy the noting, that in the menage of so great a
Controversy, a sharper reproof then this, and one like it, did never fall from
the happy Pen of this humble Man. That like it, was upon a like occasion of
Exceptious, to which his Answer was, Your next Argument consists of Railing and
of Reasons; to your Railing I say nothing, to your Reasons I say what follows.
And I am glad of this fair occasion, to testify the Dove-like temper of this
meek, this matchless Man; and doubtless, it Almighty God had blessed the
Dissenters from the Ceremonies and Discipline of this Church, with a like
measure of Wisdom and Humility, instead of their pertinacious Zeal, then
Obedience and Truth had kissed each other, then Peace and Piety had flourished
in our Nation, and this Church and State had been blessed like Jerusalem, that is
at unity with it self; but that can never be expected, till God shall bless the
common people with a belief, That Schism is a sin, and that there may be
offenses taken which are not given; and that Laws are not made for private men
to dispute, but to obey.

And this also maybe worthy of noting, That these Exceptions of Mr. Travers
against Mr. Hooker, were the cause of his transcribing several of his Sermons,
which we now see Printed with his Books; of his Answer to Mr. Travers his
Supplication; and of his most learned and useful Discourse of Justification, of
Faith, and Works; and by their Transcription, they fell into the hands of
others, that have preserved them from being lost, as too many of his other
matchless Writings have been; and from these I have gathered many observations
in this Discourse of his Life.

After the publication of his Answer to the Petition of Mr. Travers, Mr. Hooker
grew daily into greater repute with the most Learned and Wise of the Nation;
but it had a contrary effect in very many of the Temple that were zealous for
Mr. Travers, and for his Church Discipline; insomuch, that though Mr. Travers
left the place, yet the Seeds of Discontent could not be rooted out of that
Society, by the great Reason, and as great Meekness of this humble Man: For
though the Chief Benchers gave him much Reverence and Encouragement, yet he
there met with many neglects and oppositions-by-those of Mr. Travers judgment;
insomuch, that it turned to his extreme grief: And that he might unbeguile and
win them, he designed to write a deliberate sober Treatise of the Churches
power to make Cannons for the use of Ceremonies, and by Law to impose an
obedience to them, as upon Her Children; and this he proposed to do in Eight
Books of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity; intending therein to show such
Arguments, as should force an assent from all Men, if Reason, delivered in
sweet Language, and void of any provocation, were able to do it: And that he
might prevent all prejudice, he wrote before it a large Preface or Epistle to
the Dissenting Brethren, wherein there were such Bowels of Love, and such a
Commixture of that Love with Reason, as was never exceeded but in Holy Writ;
and particularly, by that of St. Paul to his dear Brother and Fellow-Laborer
Philemon: Then which, none ever was more like this Epistle of Mr. Hookers. So
that his dear Friend and Companion in his Studies, Doctor Spencer, might after
his Death justly say, What admirable height of Learning, and depth of Judgment,
dwelt in the lowly mind of this truly humble Man, great in all wise men's eyes
except his own: With what gravity and majesty of Speech his Tongue and Pen
uttered Heavenly Mysteries; whose eyes in the Humility of his Heart, were
always cast down to the ground: How all things that proceeded from him, were
breathed as from the Spirit of Love; as, if he, like the Bird of the Holy
Ghost, the Dove, had wanted Gall: Let those that knew him not in his Person,
judge by these living Images of his Soul, his Writings.

The Foundation of these Books was laid in the Temple; but he found it no fit
place to finish what he had there designed; and therefore solicited the
Archbishop for a remove, to whom he spoke to this purpose; My Lord, When I lost
the freedom of my Cell, which was my College; yet, I found some degree of it
in my quiet Country Personage: But I am weary of the noise and oppositions of
this place; and indeed, God and Nature did not intend me for Contentions, but
for Study and Quietness. And, My Lord, my particular Contests here with Mr.
Travers, have proved the more unpleasant to me, because I believe him to be a
good Man; and that belief has occasioned me to examine mine own Conscience
concerning his opinions; and, to satisfy that, I have consulted the holy
Scripture, and other Laws, both Humane and Divine, Whether the the Conscience
of him, and others of his Judgment, ought to be so far complied with us, as to
alter our Frame of Church Government, our manner of Gods worship, our praising
and praying to him, and, our establishe Ceremonies, as often as their tender
Consciences shall require us. And, in this Examination, I have not only
satisfied my self; but have begun a Treatise, in which I intend the
satisfaction of others, by a demonstration of the reasonableness of our Laws of
Ecclesiastical Policy; and therein laid a hopeful foundation for the Churches
Peace; and, so as not to provoke your Adversary Mr. Cartwright, nor Mr.
Travers, whom I take to be mine (but not my enemy) God knows this to be my
meaning. To which end, I have searched many Books, and spent many thoughtful
hours; and I hope not in vain; for I write to reasonable men. But, My Lord, I
shall never be able to finish what I have begun, unless I be removed into some
quiet Country Parsenage, where I may see Gods Blessings Spring out of my
Mother Earth, and eat mine own Bread in peace and privaty. A place where I may
without disturbance, Meditate my approaching Mortality, and that great account,
which all flesh must at the great day, give to the God of all Spirits. this is
my design; and, as these are the desires of my heart, so they shall by Gods
assistance be the constant indevors of the uncertain remainder of my life. And
therefore if your Grace can think me and my poor labors, worthy such a favor?
Let me beg it, that I may perfect what I have begun: which is a blessing I
cannot hope for in this place.

About the time of this request to the Bishop, the Parsonage or Rectory of
Boscom, in the Diocese of Sarum, and six miles from that City, became void. The
Bishop of Sarum is Patron of it, but in the vacancy of that See (which was
three years betwixt the death of Bishop Pierce, and Bishop Caldwells admission
into it) the disposal of that and all Benefices belonging to it, during the
time of this said vacancy, came to be disposed of by the Archbishop of
Canterbury; and he presented Richard Hooker to it in the year 1591. And Richard
Hooker was also in this said year Instituted, ( July 17.) to be a minor Prebend
of Salisbury, the Corpse to it being nether-Havin, about ten miles from that
City; which Prebend was of no great value, but intended chiefly to make him
capable of a better preferment in that Church. In this Boscum he continued till
he had finished four of his eight proposed Books of the Laws of Ecclesiastical
Polity, and these were entered into the Register Book in Stationers' Hall the
9th of March 1592. but not printed till the year 1594. and then with the
beforementioned large and affectionate Preface, which he directs to them that
seek (as they term it) the Reformation of the laws and orders Ecclesiastical in
the Church of England; of which Books I shall yet say nothing more, but that he
continued his laborious diligence to finish the remaining four during his life
(of all which more properly hereafter) but at Boscum he finished and published
but only the first four, being then in the 39 year of his Age.

He left Boscum in the year 1595. by a surrender of it into the hands of Bishop
Caldwell, and he presented Benjamin Russel, who was Instituted into it, 23 of
June, in the same year.

The Parsonage of Bishops Borne in Kent, three miles from Canterbury, is in
that Archbishops gift, but in the latter end of the year 1594. Doctor William
Redman the Rector of it was made Bishop of Norwich, by which means the power of
presenting to it was pro ca vice in the Queen; and she presented Richard
Hooker, whom she loved well, to this good living of Borne the 7 of July 1595.
in which Living he continued till his Death, without any addition of Dignity or
Profit.

And now having brought our Richard Hooker from his Birthplace, to this where
he found a Grave, I shall only give some account of his Books, and of his
behavior in this Parsonage of Borne, and then give a rest both to my self and
my Reader.

His first four Books and large Epistle have been declared to be printed at his
being at Boscum, Anno 1594. Next I am to tell that at the end of these four
Books there is printed this Advertisement to the Reader; I have for some causes
thought it at this time more fit to let go these first four Books by
themselves, than to stay both them and the rest, till the whole might together
be published. Such generalities of the cause in question as are here handled,
it will be perhaps not amiss to consider apart, by way of Introduction unto the
Books that are to follow concerning particulars; in the mean time the Reader is
requested to mend the Printers errors, as noted underneath.

And I am next to declare that his fifth Book (which is larger than his first
four) was first also printed by it self Anno 1597. and dedicated to his Patron
(for till them he chose none) the Archbishop. These Books were read with an
admiration of their excellency in This, and their just same spread it self into
forain Nations. And I have been told more than forty years past, that Cardinal
Alen, or learned Doctor Stapleton (both English men, and in Italy when Mr.
Hookers four Books were first printed) meeting with this general fame of them,
were desirous to read an Author, that both the Reformed and the Learned of
their own Church did so much magnify, and therefore caused them to be sent
for; and, after reading them, boasted to the Pope (which then was Clement the
eighth) that though he had lately said he never met with an English Book whose
Writer deserved the name of an Author; yet there now appeared a wonder to them,
and it would be so to his Holiness, if it were in Latin; for a poor obscure
English Priest had writ four such Books of Laws, and church Polity, and in a
Style that expressed so Grave and such Humble Majesty with clear demonstration of
Reason, that in all their readings they had not met with any that exceeded him;
and this begot in the Pope an earnest desire that Doctor Stapleton should bring
the said four Books, and looking on the English; read a part of them to him in
Latin, which Doctor Stapleton did, to the end of the first Book; at the
conclusion of which, the Pope spoke to this purpose; There is no Learning that
this man has not searched into, nothing too hard for his understanding: This
man indeed deserves the name of an Author; his Books will get Reverence by Age,
for there is in them such seeds of Eternity, that if the rest be like this,
they shall last till the last Fire shall consume all Learning.

Not was this high, the only testimony and commendations given to his Books;
for at the first coming of King James into this Kingdom, he inquired of the
Archbishop Whi^gift for his friend Mr. Hooker that writ the Books of Church
Polity; to which the answer was, that he dyed a year before Queen Elizabeth,
who received the sad news of his Death with very much Sorrow; to which the King
replied, and I receive it with no less, that I shall want the desired happiness
of seeing and discoursing with that Man, from whose Books I have received such
satisfaction: Indeed my Lord, I have received more satisfaction in reading a
Leaf, or Paragraph in Mr. Hooker, thought it were but about the fashion of
Churches, or Church Music, or the like, but especially of the Sacraments, then
I have had in the reading particular large Treatises written but of one of
those subjects by others, though very Learned Men; and, I observe there is in
Mr. Hooker no affected Language; but a grave comprehensive, clear manifestation
of Reason; and that backed with the Authority of the Scripture, the Fathers and
Schoolmen, and with all Law both Sacred and Civil. And, though many others
write well, yet in the next Age they will be forgotten; but doubtless there is
in every page of Mr. Hookers Book, the Picture of a Divine Soul, such Pictures
of Truth and Reason, and drawn in so sacred colors, that they shall never
fade, but give an immortal memory to the Author. And it is so truly true, that
the King thought what he spoke; that, as the most Learned of the Nation have
and still do mention Mr. Hooker with Reverence: so he also, did never mention
him but with the Epithet of Learned, or Judicious, or Reverend, or Venerable
Mr. Hooker.

Nor did his Son our late King Charles the first, ever mention him but with the
same Reverence, enjoining his Son our now gracious King, to be studious in M.
Hookers Books. And our learned Antiquary Mr. Cambden In his Annals of El^^ 1599.
mentioning the Death, the Modesty, and other Virtues of Mr. Hooker, and
magnifying his Books, wished, that for the honor of this, and benefit of other
Nations, they were turned into the Universal Language. Which work though
undertaken by many, yet they have been weary and forsaken it; but the Reader
may now expect it, having been long since begun, and lately finished, by the
happy pen of Doctor Earl, now Lord Bishop of Salisbury, of whom I may justly
say (and let it not offend him, because it is such a truth as ought not to be
concealed from Posterity, or those that now live and yet know him not) that
since Mr. Hooker died, none have lived whom God has blessed with more innocent
Wisdom; more sanctified Learning, or a more pious, peaceable, primitive Temper:
so that this excellent person seems to be only like himself and our venerable
Richard Hooker; and only fit to make the learned of all Nations happy in
knowing what has been too long confined to the language of our little Island.

There might be many more and just occasions taken to speak of his Books, which
none ever did or can commend too much; but I decline them, and hasten to an
account of his Christian behavior and Death at Borne, in which place he
continued his customary rules of Mortification and Self-denial; was much in
Fasting, frequent in Meditation and Prayers, enjoying those blessed Returns,
which only Men of strict lives feel and know; and of which Men of loose and
Godless lives cannot be made sensible; for spiritual things are spiritually
discerned.

At his entrance into this place, his Friendship was much sought for by Doctor
Hadrian Saravia, then one of the Prebends of Canterbury, a German by birth, and
sometimes a Pastor both in Flanders and Holland, where he had studied and well
considered the controverted points concerning Episcopacy and Sacrilege, and in
England had a just occasion to declare his Judgment concerning both, unto his
Brethren Ministers of the Low Countries, which was excepted against by Theodor
Beza and others; against whose exceptions he rejoyned, and thereby became the
happy Author of many Learned Tracts, writ in Latin, especially of three; one of
the Degrees of Ministers, and of the Bishops Superiority above the Presbytery;
a second against Sacrilege; and a third of Christian obedience to Princes; the
last being occasioned by Gretzerus the Jesuit. And it is observable, that when
in a time of Church tumults, Beza gave his reasons to the Chancellor of
Scotland, for the abrogation of Episcopacy in that Nation, partly by Letters,
and more fully in a Treatise of a threefold Episcopacy (which he calls Divine,
Humane, and Satanical) this Doctor Saravia had by the help of Bishop Whitgift
made such an early discovery of their intentions, that he had almost as soon
answered that Treatise as it became public; and therein discovered how Beza's
opinion did contradict that of Calvin's, and his adherents; leaving them to
interfere with themselves in point of Episcopacy; but of these Tracts it will
not concern me to say more, than that they were most of them dedicated to his
and the Church of Englands watchful Patron John Whitgift the Archbishop; and
printed about the year in which Mr. Hooker also appeared first to the world in
the Publication of his four Books of Ecclesiastical Polity.

This friendship being sought for by this Learned Doctor, you may believe was
not denied by Mr. Hooker, who was by fortune so like him as to be engaged
against Mr. Travers, Mr. Cartwright, and others of their Judgment in a
controversy too like Doctor Saravia's; So that in this year of 1595. and in
this place of Borne, these two excellent persons began a Holy Friendship,
increasing daily to so high and mutual affections, that their two wills seemed
to be but one and the same, and designs both for the glory of God, and peace of
the Church; still assisting and improving each others virtues, and the desired
comforts of a peaceable Piety; which I have willingly mentioned, because it
gives a foundation to some things that follow.

This Parsonage of Borne, is from Canterbury three miles, and near to the
common Road that leads from that City to Dover; in which Parsonage Mr. Hooker
had not been twelve months, but his Books, and the Innocence and Sanctity of
his Life became so remarkable, that many turned out of the road, and others
(Scholars especially) went purposely to see the Man, whose Life and Learning
were so much admired; and alas, as our Savior said of St. John Baptist, what
went they out to see! a Man Clothed in Purple and fine Linen? no indeed; but
an obscure harmless Man; a Man in poor Clothes, his Loins usually girt in a
course Gown or Canonical Coat; of a mean Stature, and stooping, and yet more
lowly in the thoughts of his Soul; his body worn out, not with Age, but Study
and Holy Mortifications; his face full of Heat-Pimples, begot by his unactivity
and sedentary life. And to this true Character of his Person, let me add this
of his Disposition and behavior; God and Nature blessed him with so blessed a
hashfulness, that as in his younger days, his Pupils might easily look him out
of countenance; so neither then, nor in his Age, did he ever willingly look any
Man in the face: and was of so mild and humble a Nature, that his poor Parish
Clark and he did never talk but with both their Hats on, or both off at the
same time; and to this may be added, that though he was not purblind; yet, he
was short or weak-sighted; and where be fixed his eyes at the beginning of his
Sermon, there they continued till it was ended; and the Reader has a Liberty to
believe that his Modesty and Dim sight were some of the reasons why he trusted
Mistress Churchman to choose a Wife for him.

This Parish Clark lived till the third or fourth year of the late long
Parliament; betwixt which time and Mr. Hookers Death, there had come many to
see the place of his Burial, and the Monument dedicated to his memory by Sir
William Cooper, (who still lives) and the poor Clark had many rewards for
showing Mr. Hookers Grave-place, and his said Monument, and did always hear Mr.
Hooker mentioned with Commendations and Reverence; to all which he added his
own knowledge and observations of his Humility and Holiness: in all which
Discourses, the poor man was still more confirmed in his opinion of Mr. Hookers
Virtues and Learning; but it so fell out, that about the said third or fourth
year of the long Parliament, the present Parson of Borne was Sequestered (you
may guess why) and a Genevian Minister put into his good living. This, and
other like Sequestrations, made the Clerk express himself in a wonder, and say,
They had Sequestered so many good Men, that he doubted if his good Master Mr.
Hooker had lived till now, they would have Sequestered him too.

It was not long before this intruding Minister had made a party in and about
the said Parish, that were desirous to receive the Sacrament as in Geneva; to
which end, the day was appointed for a Select Company, and Forms and Stools set
about the Altar or Communion Table for them to sit and eat and drink; but when
they went about this work, there was a want of some Joynd-stools, which the
Minister sent the Clerk to fetch, and then to fetch Cushions. When the Clerk
saw them begin to sit down, he began to wonder; but the Minister bade him cease
wondering, and lock the Church door: To whom he replied, Pray take you the Keys
and lock me out, I will never come more into this Church; for all men will say
my Master Hooker was a good Man, and a good Scholar, and I am sure it was not
used to be thus in his days: And report says, The old man went presently home,
and died; I do not say died immediately, but within a few days after.

But let us leave this grateful Clerk in his quiet Grave, and return to Mr.
Hooker himself, continuing our observations of his Christian behavior in this
place, where he gave a holy Valediction to all the pleasures and allurements of
Earth; possessing his Soul in a virtuous quietness, which he maintained by
constant Study, Prayers, and Meditations: His use was to Preach once every
Sunday, and he or his Curate to Catechize after the Second Lesson in the
Evening Prayer: His Sermons were neither long nor earnest, but uttered with a
grave Zeal, and an humble Voice: His Eyes always fixed on one place, to prevent
his imagination from wandering; insomuch, that he seemed to Study as he spoke;
the design of his Sermons (as indeed of all his Discourses) was to show Reasons
for what he spoke: And with these Reasons such a kind of Rhetoric, as did
rather convince and persuade, then frighten men into Piety. Studying not so
much for matter (which he never wanted) as for apt illustrations to inform and
teach his unlearned hearers by familiar examples, and then make them better by
convincing Applications; never laboring by hard words, and then by needless
distinctions and subdistinctions to amuse his hearers, and get glory to
himself: But glory only to God. Which intention he would often say, was as
discernable in a Preacher, as an Artificial from a Natural Beauty.

He never failed the Sunday before every Ember week, to give notice of it to
his Parishioners, persuading them both to fast, and then to double their
Devotions for a Learned and Pious Clergy, but especially for the last; saying
often, That the life of a pious Clergyman was visible Rhetoric, and so
convincing, That the most godless men (though they would not deny themselves
the enjoyment of their present Lusts) did get secretly wish themselves like
those of the strictest lives. And to what he persuaded others, he added his own
example of Fasting and Prayer; and did usually every Ember week, take from the
Parish Clerk the Key of the Church door; into which place he retired every day,
and locked himself up for many hours; and did the like most Fridays, and other
days of Fasting.

He would by no means omit the customary time of Procession, persuading all,
both rich and poor, if they desired the preservation of Love, and their Parish
Rights and Liberties, to accompany him in his Perambulation, and most did so:
In which Perambulation, he would usually express more pleasant discourse then
at other times, and would then always drop some loving and facetious
observations to be remembered against the next year, especially by the boys and
young people; still inclining them, and all his present Parishioners, to
meekness and mutual kindnesses and love; because Love thinks not evil, but
covers a multitude of infirmities.

He was diligent to enquire who of his Parish were sick, or any way distressed,
and would often visit them unsent for; supposing, that the fittest time to
discover those Errors, to which health and prosperity had blinded them: And
having by pious Reasons and Prayers, molded them into holy Resolutions for the
time to come, he would incline them to Confession, and bewailing their sins,
with purpose to forsake them, and then to receive the Communion, both as a
strengthening of those holy Resolutions; and as a Seal betwixt God and them of
his mercies to their Souls, in case that present sickness did put a period to
their lives.

And as he was thus watchful and charitable to the sick, so he was as diligent
to prevent Law-sutes, still urging his Parishioners and Neighbors, to bear with
each others infirmities, and live in love, because (as St. John says) He that
lives in love, lives in God, for God is Love. And to maintain this holy Fire of
Love, constantly burning on the Altar, of a pure Heart, his advice was to watch
and pray, and always keep themselves fit to receive the Communion, and then to
receive it often; for it was both a confirming, and a strengthening of their
Graces. This was his advice; and at his entrance or departure out of any house,
he would usually speak to the whole Family, and bless them by name; insomuch,
that as he seemed in his youth to be taught of God, so he seemed in this place
to teach his Precepts, as Enoch did by walking with him, in all Holiness and
Humility, making each day a step toward a blessed Eternity. And though in this
weak and declining age of the World, such examples are become barren, and
almost incredible; yet let his memory be blessed with this true Recordation,
because, he that praises Richard Hooker, praises God, who has given such gifts
to men; and let this humble and affectionate Relation of him, become such a
pattern as may invite Posterity to imitate his Virtues.

This was his constant behavior at Borne; thus as Enoch, so he walked with God;
thus did he tread in the footsteps of Primitive Piety; and yet, as that great
example of meekness and purity, even our Blessed Jesus was not free from false
accusations, no more was this Disciple of his. This most humble, most innocent
holy Man; his was a slander parallel to that of chaste Susannaes by the wicked
Elders; or that against St. Athanasius, as it is Recorded in his life (for that
holy Man had Heretical enemies) and which this age calls Trepanning. The
particulars need not a repetition, and that it was false, needs no other
Testimony then the public punishment of his accusers, and their open
confession of his innocence: 'Twas said, that the accusation was contrived by a
Dissenting Brother, one that endured not Church Ceremonies, hating him for his
Books sake, which he was not able to Answer; and his name has been told me:
But I have not so much confidence in the Relation, as to make my Pen fix a
scandal on him to Posterity; I shall rather leave it doubtful till the great
day of Revelation. But this is certain, that he lay under the great charge, and
the anxiety of this accusation, and kept it secret to himself for many months:
And, being a helpless man, had lain longer under this heavy burden, but that
the Protector of the innocent gave such an accidental occasion as forced him to
make it known to his two dear Friends, Edwin Sandys and George Cranmer, who
were so sensible of their Tutors sufferings, that they gave themselves no rest,
till by their disquisitions and diligence they had found out the Fraud, and
brought him the welcome news, that his accusers did confess they had wronged
him, and begged his pardon: To which the good man's reply was to this purpose,
The Lord forgive them; and, The Lord bless you for this comfortable news. Now I
have a just occasion to say with Solomon, Friends are born for the days of
Adversity, and such you have proved to me: And to my God I say, as did the
Mother of St. John Baptist, Thus has the Lord dealt with me, in the day
wherein he looked upon me, to take away my reproach among men. And, O my God,
neither my life, nor my reputation, are safe in mine own keeping, but in thine,
who did take care of me, when I yet hanged upon my Mothers Breast. Blessed are
they that put their trust in thee, O Lord; for, when false witnesses were risen
up against me; when shame was ready to cover my face; when I was bowed down
with an horrible dread, and went mourning all the day long; when my nights were
restless, and my sleeps broken with a fear worse then death; when my Soul
thirsted for a deliverance, as the Heart pants after the Rivers of Waters:
Then, thou Lord, did bear my complaints, pity my condition, and art new
become my Deliverer; and as long as I live I will hold up my hands in this
manner, and magnify thy Mercies, who did not give me over as a prey to mine
enemies. O blessed are they that put their trust in thee; and no prosperity
shall make me forget those days of sorrow, or to perform those vows that I have
made to thee in the days of my fears and affliction; for with such sacrifices,
thou, O God, art well pleased; and I will pay them.

Thus did the joy and gratitude of this good Man's heart break forth; and it is
observable, that as the invitation to this slander was his meek behavior and
Dove like simplicity, for which he was remarkable; so his Christian Charity
ought to be imitated: For, though the Spirit of Revenge is so pleasing to
mankind, that it is never conquered but by a Supernatural Grace, being indeed
so deeply rooted in Humane Nature, that to prevent the excesses of it (for men
would not know Moderation) Almighty God allows not any degree of it to any man,
but says, Vengeance is mine. And, though this be said by God himself, yet this
revenge is so pleasing, that man is hardly persuaded to submit the menage of it
to the Time, and Justice, and Wisdom of his Creator, but would hasten to be his
own executioner of it. And yet nevertheless, if any man ever did wholly
decline, and leave this pleasing Passion to the time and measure of God alone,
it was this Richard Hooker of whom I write: For when his slanderers were to
suffer, he labored to procure their Pardon; and, when that was denied him, his
Reply was, That however he would fast and pray, that God would give them
Repentance and Patience to undergo their Punishment. And his Prayers were so
for returned into his own bosom, that the first was granted, if we may believe
a Penitent Behavior, and an open Confession. And it is observable, that after
this time he would often say to Dr. Saravia, O with what quietness, did I enjoy
my Soul after I was free from the fears of my slander! And how much more after
a conflict and victory ever my desires of Revenge!

In the Year One thousand six hundred, and of his Age Forty six, he fell into a
long and sharp sickness, occasioned by a Cold taken in his Passage betwixt
London and Gravesend, from the malignity of which, he was never recovered; for,
till his death he was not free from thoughtful days, and restless nights; but a
submission to his Will that makes the sick man's bed easy, by giving rest to
his Soul, made his very languishment comfortable: And yet all this time he was
solicitous in his Study, and said often to Dr. Saravia, (who saw him daily, and
was the cheif^ comfort of his life) That he did not beg a long life of God for
any other reason, but to live to finish his three remaining Books of POLITY;
and then, Lord, let thy Servant depart in peace, which was his usual
expression. And God heard his Prayers, though he denied the Church the benefit
of them as completed by himself; and it is thought he hastened his own death, by
hastening to give life to his Books. But this is certain, that the nearer he was
to his death, the more he grew in Humility, in holy Thoughts and Resolutions.

About a month before his death, this good man, that never knew, or at least,
never considered the pleasures of the Palate, became first to lose his
Appetite, then to have an aversness to all Food; insomuch, that he seemed to
live some intermitted weeks by the smell of meat only; and yet still studied
and writ. And now his Guardian Angel seemed to foretell him, that his years were
past away as a shadow, bidding him prepare to follow the Generation of his
Fathers, for the day of his dissolution drew near; for which his vigorous Soul
appeared to thirst.

In this time of his sickness, and not many days before his death, his House
was robbed; of which, he having notice, his Question was, Are my Books and
Written Papers safe? And being answered, That they were. His Reply was, Then it
matters not, for no other loss can trouble me.

About one day before his death, Dr. Saravia, who knew the very secrets of his
Soul (for they were supposed to be Confessors to each other) came to him, and
after a Conference of the Benefit, the Necessity, and Safety of the Churches
Absolution, it was resolved the Doctor should give him both that and the
Sacrament the day following. To which end the Doctor came, and after a short
retirement and privacy, they returned to the company; and then the Doctor gave
him and some of those friends that were with him, the Blessed Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of our Jesus. Which being performed, the Doctor thought he saw a
reverend gaity and joy in his face; but it lasted not long; for his bodily
infirmities did return suddenly, and became more visible, insomuch, that the
Doctor apprehended Death ready to seize him: Yet, after some amendment, left
him at night, with a promise to return early the day following, which he did,
and then found him better in appearance, deep in contemplation, and not
inclinable to discourse; which gave the Doctor occasion to require his present
thoughts: To which he replied, That he was meditating the number and nature of
Angels, and their blessed Obedience and Order, without which, Peace could not
be in Heaven; and oh that it might be so on Earth. After which words, he said,
I have lived to see this World is made up of perturbations, and I have been
long preparing to leave it, and gathering comfort for the dreadful hour of
making my account with God, which I now apprehend to be near: And though I have
by his Grace loved him in my youth, and feared him in mine age, and labored to
have a Conscience void of offense to him, and to all men; yet, if thou, O Lord,
be extreme to mark what I have done amiss, who can abide it? And therefore,
where I have failed, Lord show mercy to me; for I plead not my Righteousness,
but the forgiveness of my unrighteousness, for his Merits who died to purchase
a pardon for penitent sinners. And since I ow thee a death, Lord let it not be
terrible, and then take thine own time, I submit to it: Let not mine, O Lord,
but let thy Will be done. With which expression he fell into a dangerous
slumber, dangerous as to his recovery; yet recover he did, but it was to speak
only these few words, Good Doctor, God has heard my daily Petitions; for I am
at peace with all men, and he is at peace with me; and from which blessed
assurance I feel that inward joy, which this World can neither give nor take
from me. More he would have spoken, but his spirits failed him; and, after a
short conflict betwixt Nature and Death, a quiet sigh put a period to his last
breath, and so he fell asleep.

And here I draw his Curtain, till with the most glorious Company of the
Patriarks and Apostles; the most noble Army of Martyrs and Confessors, this
most Learned, most Humble, holy Man, shall also awake to receive an Eternal
Tranquillity, and with it a greater degree of Glory then common Christians
shall be made partakers of; In the mean time, Bless, O Lord, Lord bless his
Brethren, the Clergy of this Nation with ardent desires, and effectual
endeavors to attain, if not to his great Learning, yet to his remarkable
meekness, his godly simplicity, and his Christian moderation: For these are
praiseworthy; these bring peace at the last: And let the Labors of his life,
his most excellent Writings be bless with what he designed when he undertook
them: Which was Glory to thee, O God on high, Peace in thy Church, and good
will to mankind.

Amen, Amen.
AN APPENDIX To the LIFE of Mr. Richard Hooker.
ANd now having by a long and Laborious search satisfied my self, and I hope my
Reader by imparting to him the true Relation of Mr. Hookers Life: I am desirous
also to acquaint him with some Observations that relate to it; and, which could
not properly fall to be spoken till after his Death, of which my Reader may
expect a brief and true account in the following Appendix.

And first it is not to be doubted but that he died in the forty-seventh, if
not in the forty-sixth year of his Age; which I mention, because many have
believed him to be more aged; but I have so examined it, as to be confident, I
mistake not; and for the year of his death, Mr. Cambden, who in his Annals of
Queen Elizabeth 1599. mentions him with a high commendation of his Life and
Learning, declares him to die in the year 1599. and yet in that Inscription of
his Monument set up at the charge of Sir William Cooper in Borne Church, where
Mr. Hooker was buried, his Death is said to be in Anno 1603. but doubtless both
mistaken; for I have it attested under the hand of William Somner the
Archbishops Register for the Province of Canterbury, that Richard Hookers Will
bears date October the 26. in Anno 1600. and that it was proved the third of
December following. And this attested also that at his Death he left four
Daughters, Alice, Cicily, Jane, and Margaret, that he gave to each of them a
hundred pound, that he left Ione his Wife his sole Executrix, and that by his
Inventory his Estate (a great part of it being in Books) came to 1092l. 91. 2d.
which was much more than he thought himself worth; and, which was not got by
his Care, much less by the good Huswifery of his Wife, but saved by his trusty
Servant Thomas Lane, that was wiser than his Master in getting Money for him,
and more frugal than his Mistress in keeping it; of which Will I shall say no
more, but that his dear Friend Thomas, the Father of George Cranmer, of whom I
have spoken, and shall have occasion to say more, was one of the Witnesses to
it.

One of his elder Daughters was married to one Chalinor, sometime a
Schoolmaster in Chichester, and both dead long since, Margaret his youngest
Daughter was married unto Ezekiel Chark, Bachelor in Divinity, and Rector of
S. Nicholas in Harbledown near Canterbury, who^ died about 16 years past, and
had a Son Ezekiel, now living, and in Sacred Orders, being at this time Rector
of Waldron in Sussex, she left also a Daughter, with both whom I have spoken
not many months past, and find her to be a widow in a condition that wants not,
but far from abounding; and these two attested unto me, that Richard Hooker
their Grandfather had a Sister, by name Elizabeth Harvey, that lived to the Age
of 121, years, and died in the month of September, 1663.

For his other two Daughters I can learn little certainty, but have heard they
both died before they were Marriageable; and for his Wife, she was so unlike
Iepthaes Daughter, that she staid not a comely time to bewail her Widdow-hood;
nor lived long enough to repent her second Marriage, for which doubtless she
would have found cause, if there had been but four months betwixt Mr. Hookers
and her death. But she is dead, and let her other infirmities be buried with
her.

Thus much briefly for his Age, the year of his Death, his Estate, his Wife,
and his Children. I am next to speak of his Books, concerning which I shall
have a necessity of being longer, or shall neither do right to my self of my
Reader, which is chiefly intended in this Appendix.

I have declared in his Life, that he proposed eight Books, and that his first
four were Printed Anno 1594. and his fifth Book first printed, and alone, Anno
1597. and that he lived to finish the remaining three of the proposed eight;
but, whether we have the last three as finished by himself, is a just and
Material Question; concerning which I do declare, That I have been told almost
forty years past, by one that very well knew Mr. Hooker, and the affairs of
his Family, that about a month after the death of Mr. Hooker, Bishop Whitgist,
then Archbishop of Canterbury, sent one of his Chaplains to enquire of Mrs.
Hooker, for the three remaining Books of Polity, writ by her Husband; of which,
she would not, or could not give any account; and I have been told that about
three months after the Bishop procured her to be sent for to London, and then
by his procurement she was to be examined, by some of her Majesty's Council,
concerning the disposal of those Books: but by way of preparation for the next
days examination, the Bishop invited her to Lambeth, and, after some friendly
questions, she confessed to him, that one Mr. Charke and another Minister that
dwelt near Canterbury, came to her, and desired that they might go into her
Husbands Study, and look upon some of his Writings; and that there they two
burnt and tore many of them, assuring her that they were writings not fit to be
seen, and that she knew nothing more concerning them. Her lodging was then in
Kingstreet in Westminster, where she was sound next morning dead in her Bed,
and her new Husband suspected and questioned for it; but was declared innocent
of her Death.

And I declare also, that Doctor John Spencer (mentioned in the Life of Mr.
Hooker) who was of Mr. Hookers College, and of his time there, and betwixt
whom there was so friendly a friendship, that they continually advised together
in all their Studies, and particularly in what concerned these Books of Polity:
this Doctor Spencer, the three perfect Books being lost, had delivered into his
hands (I think by Bishop Whitgift) the imperfect Books, or first rough draughts
of them, to be made as perfect as they might be, by him, who both knew Mr.
Hookers handwriting, and was best acquainted with his intentions. And a fair
Testimony of this may appear by an Epistle first and usually printed before Mr.
Hookers five Books (but omitted, I know not why, in the last impression of the
eight Printed together in Anno 1662. in which the Publishers seem to impose the
three doubtful, as the undoubted Books of Mr. Hooker) with these two Letters
I.S. at the end of the said Epistle, which was meant for this John Spencer; in
which Epistle the Reader may find these very words, which may give some
Authority to what I have here written.

And though Mr. Hooker hastened his own Death by hastening to give Life to his
Books, yet he held out with his eyes to behold these Benjamins, these Sons of
his right Hand, though to him they proved Benonics, Sons of pain and sorrow:
But, some evil disposed minds, whether of Malice, or Covetousness, or wicked
blind Zeal, it is uncertain, as soon as they were born and their Fathers dead,
smothered them, and, by conveying the perfect Copies, left unto us nothing but
the old imperfect mangled droughts dismembered into pieces; no favor, no grace,
not the shadow of themselves remaining in them; had the Father lived to behold
them thus defaced, he might rightly have named them Benonies, the Sons of
Sorrow; but being the learned will not suffer them to die and be buried, it is
intended the world shall see them as they are: the learned will find in them
some shadows and resemblances of their Fathers face. God grant, that as they
were with their Brethren dedicated to the Church for messengers of Peace; so,
in the strength of the little breath of Life that remains in them, they may
prosper in their work, and that by satisfying the Doubts of such as are willing
to learn, they may help to give an end to the calamities of these our Civil
Wars.

I. S.

And next the Reader may note, that this Epistle of Doctor Spencers was writ,
and first Printed within four years after the death of Mr. Hooker, in which
time, all diligent search had been made for the perfect Copies; and then
granted not recoverable, and therefore endeavored to be completed out of Mr.
Hookers rough draughts, as is expressed by the said Doctor Spencer, since whose
death it is now fifty years.

And I do profess by the Faith of a Christian, that Doctor Spencers Wife (who
was my Aunt, and Sister to George Cranmer of whom I have spoken) told me forty
years since, in these, or in words to this purpose, that her Husband had made
up or finished Mr. Hookers last three Books; and that upon her Husbands
Deathbed, or in his last sickness, he gave them into her hand, with a charge
they should not be seen by any Man, but be by her delivered into the hands of
the then Archbishop of Canterbury, which was Doctor Abbot, or unto Doctor King,
Bishop of London, and that she did as he enjoined her.

I do conceive, that from Doctor Spencers and no other Copy, there have been
diverse Transcripts, and wereto be found in several places, as namely in Sir
Thomas Bodlies Library, in that of Doctor Andrews late Bishop of Winton, in the
late Lord Conwayes, in the Archbishop of Canterburies, and in the Bishop of
Armaghs, and in many others, and most of these pretended to be the Authors own
hand, but much disagreeing, being indeed altered and diminisht as Men have
thought fittest to make Mr. Hookers Judgment suit with their Fancies; or give
authority to their corrupt designs; and for proof of a part of this, take these
following testimonies.

Doctor Barnard, sometime Chaplain to Doctor Usher late Lord Archbishop of
Armagh, has declared in a late Book called Clavi Trabales, Printed by Richard
Hodgkinson, Anno 1661. that in his search and examination of the said Bishops
Manuscripts, he there found the three written Books, which were the supposed
sixth, seventh, and eighth of Mr. Hookers Books of Ecclesiastical Polity; and,
that in the said three Books (now printed as Mr. Hookers) there are so many
Omissions that they amount to many Paragraphs; and, which cause many
incoherencies; the Omissions are by him set down at large in the said Printed
Book, to which I refer the Reader for the whole; but think fit in this place to
insert this following short part of them.

First, as there could be in Natural Bodies no Motion of any thing, unless
there were some first which moved all things, and continued Unmovable; even so
in Politic Societies, there must be some unpunishable, or else no Man shall
suffer punishment; for, since punishments proceed always from Superiors to whom
the administration of Justice belongs, which administration must have
necessarily a Fountain that deriveth it to all others, and receives not from
any, (because otherwise the course of Justice should go infinitely in a Circle,
every Superior having his Superior without end, which cannot be;) therefore,
a well spring, it follows, there is, a Supreme head of Justice whereunto all
are subject, but it self in subjection to none. Which kind of Preheminency if
some ought to have in a Kingdom, who but the King shall have it? Kings
therefore, or no man can have lawful power to Judge.

If Private men offend, there is the Magistrate over them which Judges; if
Magistrates, they have their Prince; if Princes, there is Heaven a Tribunal,
before which they shall appear: on Earth they are not accomptable to any. Here
says the Doctor, it breaks off abruptly.

And I have these words also attested under the hand of Mr. Fabian Phillips a
man of note for his useful Books. I will make Oath if I shall be required, that
Doctor Sanderson the late Bishop of Lincoln did a little before his Death
affirm to me he had seen a Manuscript, affirmed to him to be the handwriting
of Mr. Richard Hooker, in which there was no mention made of the King or
Supreme Governors being accomptable to the People; this I will make Oath that
that good Man attested to me.

Fabian Phillips.

So that there appears to be both Omissions and Additions in the said last
three printed Books; and this may probably be one Reason why Doctor Sanderson,
the said Learned Bishop (whose writings are so highly and justly valued) gave a
strict charge near the time of his Death, or in his last Will, that nothing of
his that was not already Printed, should be Printed after his Death.

It is well known how high a value our Learned King James put upon the Books
writ by Mr. Hooker, as also that our late King Charles (the Martyr for the
Church) valued them the second of all Books, testified by his commending them
to the reading of his Son Charles that now is our Gracious King; and you may
suppose that this Charles the First was not a stranger to the pretended three
Books, because in a discourse with the Lord Say, when the said Lord required
the King to grant the truth of his Argument, because it was the Judgment of
Mr. Hooker, (quoting him in one of the three written Books,) the King replied,
they were not allowed to be Mr, Hookers Books; but, however he would allow them
to be Mr. Hookers, and consent to what his Lordship proposed to prove out of
those doubtful Books if he would but consent to the Judgment of Mr. Hooker in
the other five that were the undoubted Books of Mr. Hooker.

In this Relation concerning these three doubtful Books of Mr. Hookers, my
purpose was to enquire, then set down what I observed and know, which I have
done, not as an engaged Person, but indifferently, and now leave my Reader to
give Sentence, for their Legitimation, as to himself, but so, as to leave
others the same Liberty of believing, or disbelieving them to be Mr. Hookers;
and it is observable, that as Mr. Hooker advised with Doctor Spencer, in the
design and manage of these Books, so also, and chiefly with this dear Pupil
George Cranmer (whose Sister was the Wife of Doctor Spencer) of which this
following Letter may be a Testimony; and does also give authority to some
things mentioned both in this Appendix, and in the Life of Mr. Hooker; and, is
therefore added.

GEORGE CRANMERS LETTER UNTO Mr. RICHARD HOOKER. February 1598.
WHat Posterity is likely to judge of these matters concerning Church
Discipline, we may the better conjecture, if we call to mind what our own Age,
within few years, upon better Experience, has already judged concerning the
same. It may be remembered, that at first the greatest part of the Learned in
the Land were either eagerly affected, or favorably inclined that way. The
Books then written for the most part savoured of the Disciplinary Style: it
sounded everywhere in Pulpits, and in common phrase of men's speech: the
contrary part began to fear they had taken a wrong course; many which impugned
the Discipline, yet so impugned it, not as not being the better form of
Government, but as not being so convenient for our State, in regard of
dangerous Innovations thereby like to grow; John Whitgift, the Archbishop.
one man alone there was, to speak of, (whom let no suspicion of flattery
deprive of his deserved Commendation,) w^o in the defiance of the one part, and
courage of the other, stood in the gap, and gave others respite to prepare
themselves to the defense, which by the sudden eagerness and violence of their
Adversaries had otherwise been prevented; wherein God has made good unto him
his own Impress, Vincit qui patitur; for what contumelious indignities he has
at their hands sustained, the world is witness, and what reward of Honor above
his Adversaries God has bestowed upon him, themselves (though nothing glad
thereof) must needs confess. Now of late years the heat of men toward the
Discipline is greatly decayed, their Judgments begin to sway on the other
side: the Learned have weighed it, and found it light; wise men conceive some
fear, left it prove not only not the best kind of Government, but the very bane
and destruction of all Government. The cause of this Change in Men's Opinions
may be drawn from the general nature of Error, disguised and clothed with the
name of Truth; which is mightily and violently to possess men at first, but
afterward, the weakness thereof being by time discovered, to lose that
reputation, which before it had gained; as by the outside of an House the
passers by are oftentimes deceived, till they see the conveniencie of the Rooms
within: so by the very name of Discipline and Reformation, Men were drawn at
first to cast a fancy toward it, but now they have not contented themselves
only to pass by and behold afar off the forefront of this reformed house; they
have entered in, even at the special request of Master-workmen and chief
Builders thereof; they have perused the Rooms, the Lights, the Conveniences,
they find them not answerable to that report which was made of them. nor to
that opinion which upon report they had conceived: So as now the Discipline
which at first triumphed over all, being unmasked, begins to droop and hang
down her head.

This cause of change in opinion concerning the Discipline, is proper to the
Learned, or to such as by them have been instructed; another cause there is
more open, and more apparent to the view of all, namely, the course of
Practice, which the Reformers have had with us from the beginning; the first
degree was only some small difference about Cap and Surplice, but not such as
either bred division in the Church, or tended to the ruin of the Government
established. This was peaceable; the next degree more stirring. Admonitions
were directed to the Parliament in peremptory sort against our whole Form of
Regiment; in defense of them, Volumes were published in English, and in Latin;
yet this was no more than writing, Devices were set on foot to erect the
Practice of the Discipline without Authority: yet herein some regard of
Modesty, some moderation was used; Behold, at length it brake forth into open
outrage, first in writing by Martin, in whose kind of dealing these things may
be observed; first that whereas T. C. and others his great Masters had always
before set out the Discipline as a Queen, and as the Daughter of God; He
contrariwise, to make her more acceptable to the people, brought her forth as a
Vice upon the Stage. 2: This conceit of his was grounded (as may be supposed)
upon this rare Polity, that seeing the Discipline was by writing refuted, in
Parliament rejected, in secret corners hunted out and decried, it was imagined
that by open railing (which to the vulgar is commonly most plausible) the State
Ecclesiastical might have been drawn into such contempt and hatred, as the
overthrow thereof should have been most grateful to all Men, and in manner
desired of the common people. 3. It may be noted (and this I know my self to be
true) how some of them, although they could not for shame approve so lewd an
Action, yet were content to lay hold on it to the advancement of their cause,
acknowledging therein the secret judgments of God against the Bishops, and
hoping that some good might be wrought thereby for his Church, as indeed there
was, though not according to their construction. For 4. Contrary to their
expectation, that railing Spirit did not only not further, but extremely
disgrace and prejudice their Cause, when it was once perceived from how low
degrees of contradiction, at first, to what outrage of Contumely and Slander
they were at length proceeded; and were also likely further to proceed.

A further degree of outrage was in Fact; Certain H^^e^ and Cappergot.
Prophets did arise, who deeming it not possible that God should suffer that to
be undone, which they did so fiercely desire to have done, Namely, that his
holy Saints, the favorers and Fathers of the Discipline, should be enlarged,
and delivered from persecution; and seeing no means of deliverance Ordinary,
were fain to persuade themselves that God must needs raise some extraordinary
means; and being persuaded of none so well as of themselves, they forthwith
must need she the instruments of this great work. Hereupon they framed unto
themselves an assured hope that upon their Preaching out of a Pease Cart, all
the multitude would have presently joined unto them, and in amazement of mind
have asked them, Viri sratres, quid agimus? whereunto it is likely they would
have returned an answer far unlike to that of St. Peter, Such and such are Men
unworthy to govern, pluck them down; Such and such are the Dear Children of
God, let them be advanced. Of two of these Men, it is meet to speak with all
Commiseration, yet so that others by their example may receive instruction, and
withal some light may appear, what stirring affections the Discipline is like
to inspire, if it light upon apt and prepared minds.

Now if any Man doubt of what Society they were, or if the Reformers disclaim
them, pretending that by them they were condemned, let these points be
considered. 1. Whose associates were they before they entered into this
frantic Passion; whose Sermons did they frequent? whom did they admire? 2.
Even when they were entering into it, whose advice did they require? and when
they were in, whose approbation? whom advertised they of their purpose? whose
assistance by Prayers did they request? But we deal injuriously with them to
lay this to their charge; for they reproved and condemned it. How? did they
disclose it to the Magistrate, that it might be suppressed? or were they not
rather content to stand aloof off, and see the end of it, and loath to quench
the Spirit? No doubt these mad practitioners were of their society with whom
before, and in the practice of their madness they had most affinity. Hereof,
read Doctor Bancrofts Book.

A third inducement may be to dislike of the Discipline, if we consider not
only how far the Reformers themselves have proceeded, but what others upon
their Foundations have built. Here come the Brownists in the first rank, their
lineal descendants, who have seized upon a number of strange opinions; whereof,
although their Ancestors, the Reformers, were never actually possessed, yet by
right and interest from them derived, the Brownists and Barrowists have taken
possession of them: For if the Positions of the Reformers be true, I cannot see
how the main and general Conclusions of Brownism should be false; for upon
these two points, as I conceive, they stand.

1. That because we have no Church, they are to sever themselves from us.

2. That without Civil Authority, they are to erect a Church of their own.

And if the former of these be true, the latter, I suppose, will follow: For if
above all things, Men be to regard their Salvation; and if out of the Church,
there be no Salvation; it follows, That if we have no Church, we have no
means of Salvation: And therefore Separation from us, in that respect, is both
lawful and necessary. As also, That men so separated from the false and
counterfeit Church, are to associate themselves unto some Church; not to ours;
to the Popish much less; therefore to one of their own making. Now the ground
of all these Inferences being this, [ That in our Church, there is no means of
Salvation] is out of the Reformers Principles most clearly to be proved. For
wheresoever any Matter of Faith unto Salvation necessary is denied, there can
be no means of Salvation: But in the Church of England, the Discipline by them
accounted a Matter of Faith, and necessary to Salvation, is not only denied,
but impugned, and the Professors thereof oppressed. Ergo.

Again, (but this Reason perhaps is weak) Every true Church of Christ
acknowledges the whole Gospel of Christ: the Discipline, in their opinion, is
a part of the Gospel, and yet by our Church resisted. Ergo.

Again, The Discipline is essentially united to the Church: By which term
Essentially, they must mean either an essential part, or an essential property.
Both which ways it must needs be, That where that Essential Discipline is not,
neither is there any Church. If therefore between them, and the Brownists,
there should be appointed a Solemn Disputation, whereof with us they have been
oftentimes so earnest challengers: It does not yet appear what other answer
they could possibly frame to these and the like Arguments, wherewith they might
be pressed, but fairly to deny the Conclusion (for all Premises are their own)
or rather ingenuously to reverse their own Principles before laid, whereon so
soul absurdities have been so firmly built.

What further proofs you can bring out of their high words, magnifying the
Discipline, I leave to your better remembrance: But above all points, I am
desirous this one should be strongly enforced against them, because it wringeth
them most of all, and is of all others (for ought I see) the most unanswerable;
you may notwithstanding say, That you would be heartily glad these their
Positions might so be salved, as the Brownists might not appear to have issued
out of their Loins; but until that be done, they must give us leave to think
that they have cast the Seed whereout these Tares are grown.

Another sort of Men there are, which have been content to run on with the
Reformers for a time, and to make them poor instruments of their own designs.
These are a sort of Godless Politics, who perceiving the Plot of Discipline to
consist of these two parts, The overthrow of Episcopal, and erection of
Presbyterial Authority; and that this latter can take no place till the former
be removed, are content to join with them in the Destructive part of
Discipline, bearing them in hand, that in the other also, they shall find them
as ready. But when time shall come, it may be they would be as loath to be
yoaked with that kind of Regiment, as now they are willing to be released from
this. These Men's ends in all their actions; is Distraction; their pretense and
color, Reformation. Those things which under this color they have effected to
their own good, are, 1. By maintaining a contrary Faction, they have kept the
Clergy always in aw; and thereby made them more pliable and willing to buy
their Peace. 2. By maintaining an opinion of Equality among Ministers, they
have made way to their own purposes for devouring Cathedral Churches, and
Bishops Livings. 3. By exclaiming against abuses in the Church, they have
carried their own corrupt dealings in the Civil State more covertly; for such
is the nature of the multitude, they are not able to apprehend many things at
once, so as being possessed with a dislike or liking of any one thing, many
other, in the meantime, may escape them, without being perceived. 4. They have
sought to disgrace the Clergy, in entertaining a conceit in men's minds, and
confirming it by continual practice, that Men of Learning, and specially of the
Clergy, which are employed in the chiefest kind of Learning, are not to be
admitted, of sparingly admitted to Matters of State; contrary to the practice
of all well-governed Commonwealths, and of our own, till these late years.

A third sort of Men there are, though not descended from the Reformers, yet in
part raised and greatly strengthened by them, namely, the cursed crew of
Atheists. This also is one of those Points which I am desirous you should
handle most effectually, and strain your self therein to all points of motion
and affection, as in that of the Brownists, to all strength and sinews of
Reason. This is a sort most damnable, and yet by the general suspicion of the
World at this day most common. The causes of it, which are in the parties
themselves, although you handle in the beginning of the Fifth Book, yet here
again they may be touched; but the occasions of help and furtherance, which by
the Reformers have been yielded unto them, are, as I conceive, two, Senseless
Preaching, and disgracing of the Ministry: For how should not men dare to
impugn that, which neither by force of Reason, nor by Authority of Persons is
maintained? But in the parties themselves, these two causes. I conceive of
Atheism, 1. More abundance of Wit then Judgment, and of Witty then Judicious
Learning, whereby they are more inclined to contradict any thing, then willing
to be informed of the truth. They are not therefore Men of sound Learning for
the most part, but Smatterers; neither is their kind of Dispute so much by
force Argument, as by Scoffing: Which humor of Scoffing, and turning Matters
most serious into merriment, is now become so common, as we are not to marvel
what the Prophet means by the ^eat of Scorners, nor what the Apostles by
foretelling of Scorners to come; our own Age has verified their speech unto
us; which also may be an Argument against these Scoffers and Atheists
themselves, seeing it has been so many Ages ago foretold, That such Men the
latter days of the World should afford, which could not be done by any other
Spirit, save that whereunto things future and present are alike. And even for
the main question of the Resurrection, whereat they stick so mightily, was it
not plainly foretold, that men should in the latter times say, Where is the
promise of his coming? Against the Creation, the Ark, and diverse other Points,
exceptions are said to be taken; the ground whereof is superfluity of Wit,
without ground of Learning and Judgment.

A second cause of Atheism, is Sensuality; which makes men desirous to remove
all stops and impediments of their wicked life; amongst which, because Religion
is the chiefest, so as neither in this life without shame they can persist
therein, nor (if that be true) without Torment in the life to come; they whet
their Wits to annihilate the Joys of Heaven, wherein they see (if any such be)
they can have no part; and likewise the pains of Hell, wherein their portion
must needs be very great. They labor therefore, not that they may not deserve
those pains, but that deserving them, there may be no such pains to seize upon
them: But what conceit can be imagined more base, then that man should strive
to persuade himself, even against the secret instinct (no doubt) of his own
Mind, that his Soul is as the Soul of a Beast, Mortal and corruptible with the
Body? Against which barbarous Opinion, their own Atheism is a very strong
Argument; For were not the Soul a Nature separable from the Body, how could it
enter into discourse of things merely Spiritual, and nothing at all pertaining
to the Body? Surely, the Soul were not able to conceive any thing of Heaven, no
nor so much as to dispute against Heaven, and against God, if there were nor in
it somewhat Heavenly, and derived from God.

The last which have received strength and encouragement from the Reformers,
are Papists; against whom, although they are most bitter enemies, yet
unwittingly they have given them great advantage. For what can any enemy rather
desire, then the breach and dissension of those which are Confederates against
him? Wherein they are to remember, That if our Communion with Papists in some
few Ceremonies do so much strengthen them, as is pretended, How much more does
this Division and Rent among our selves, especially seeing it is maintained to
be, not in light Matters only, but even in Matter of Faith and Salvation?
Which overreaching Speech of theirs, because it is so open to advantage for
the Barrowist and the Papist, we are to wish and hope for, that they will
acknowledge it to have been spoken rather in heat of affection, then with
soundness of judgment; and that through their exceeding love that Creature of
Discipline which themselves have bred, nourished, and maintained, their mouth
in commendation of her, did soon overflow.

From hence you may proceed (but the means of connection I leave to your self)
to another Discourse, which I think very meet to be handled, either here or else
where at large; the parts whereof may be these.

1. That in this cause between them and us, Men are to sever the proper and
essential Points in Controversy, from those which are accidental. The most
essential and proper are these two; Overthrow of Episcopal, Erection of
Presbyterial Authority. But in these two Points whosoever joyneth with them, is
a counted of their number; whosoever in all other Points agrees with them, yet
thinks the Authority of Bishops not unlawful, and of Elders not necessary,
may justly be severed from their retinue. Those things therefore which either
in the Persons, or in the Laws and Orders themselves are faulty, may be
complained on, acknowledged, and amended; yet they no whit the nearer their
main purpose: For what if all Errors by them supposed in our Liturgy were
amended, even according to their own hearts desire; if Non-Residence,
Pluralities, and the like, were utterly taken away; are their Lay Elders
therefore presently authorized, or their Sovereign Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
established?

But even in their complaining against the outward and accidental Matters in
Church Government, they are many ways faulty. 1. In their end which they
propose to themselves. For in declaiming against abuses, their meaning is not
to have them redressed, but by disgracing the present State to make way for
their own Discipline. As therefore in Venice, if any Senator should discourse
against the Power of their Senate, as being either too Sovereign or too weak in
Government, with purpose to draw their Authority to a Moderation, it might well
be suffered; but not so, if it should appear he spoke with purpose to induce
another State by depraving the present: So in all Causes belonging either to
Church or Commonwealth, we are to have regard, what mind the Complaining part
does bear, whether of Amendment or Innovation, and accordingly, either to
suffer or suppress it. Their Objection therefore is frivolous, Why may not Men
speak against Abuses? Yes; but with desire to cure the Part affected, not to
destroy the Whole. 2. A second fault is in their manner of Complaining, not
only because it is for the most part in bitter and reproachful terms, but also
it is to the common people, Who are Judges incompetent and insufficient, both
to determine any thing amiss; and for want of skill and authority, to amend it.
Which also discovers their intent and purpose to be rather destructive then
corrective. 3. Thirdly, Those very Exceptions which they take, are frivolous
and impertinent. Some things indeed they accuse as impious, which if they may
appear to be such, God forbid they should be maintained.

Against the rest it is only alleged, That they are idle Ceremonies without
use, and that better and more profitable might be devised; wherein they are
doubly deceived: For neither is it a sufficient Plea to say, This must give
place, because a better may be devised; because in our judgments of better and
worse, we oftentimes conceive amiss, when we compare those things which are in
device, with those which are in practice: For the Imperfections of the one are
hid, till by time and trial they be discovered; the others are already manifest
and open to all. But last of all, (which is a Point in my Opinion of great
regard, and which I am desirous to have enlarged) they do not see that for the
most part when they strike at the State Ecclesiastical, they secretly wound the
Civil State: For Personal Faults, What can be said against the Church, which
may not also agree to the Commonwealth? In both Statesmen have always been, and
will be always, Men, sometimes blinded with Error, most commonly perverted by
Passions: Many unworthy have been and are advanced in both, many worthy not
regarded. And as for abuses which they pretend to be in the Laws themselves,
when they inveigh against Non-Residence, do they take it a matter lawful or
expedient in the Civil State, for a Man to have a great and gainful Office in
the North, himself continually remaining in the South? He that has an Office,
let him attend his Office. When they condemn Plurality of Livings Spiritual to
the Pit of Hell; what think they of Infinite of Temporal Promotions? By the
Great Philosopher, Pol. lib. 2. cap. 9. it is forbidden as a thing most
dangerous to Commonwealths, that by the same Man many great Offices should be
exercised. When they deride our Ceremonies as vain and frivolous, were it hard
to apply their Exceptions, even to those Civil Ceremonies which at the
Coronation, in Parliament, and all Courts of Justice are used? Were it hard to
argue, even against Circumcision, the Ordinance of God, as being a cruel
Ceremony? Against the Passover, as being ridiculous, should be gi^t, a staff in
their hand, to eat a Lamb?

To conclude: You may exhort the Clergy, (or, what if you direct your
Conclusion not to the Clergy in general, but only to the Learned in or of both
Universities?) You may exhort them to a due consideration of all things, and to
a right esteem and valuing of each thing in that degree wherein it ought to
stand: For it oftentimes falls out, that what Men have either devised
themselves, or greatly delighted in; the price and the excellency thereof, they
do admire above desert. The chiefest labor of a Christian should be know; of a
Minister, to Preach Christ crucified: In regard whereof, not only worldly
things, but things otherwise precious, even the Discipline it self, is vile and
base. Whereas now, by the heat of Contention and violence of Affection, the
Zeal of Men toward the one, has greatly decayed their love to the other.
Hereunto therefore they are to be exhorted, to Preach Christ crucified, the
Mortification of the Flesh, the Renewing of the Spirit; not those things which
in time of Strife seem precious, but (Passions being allayed) are vain and
childish.

GEO. CRANMER.

This Epitaph was long since presented to the World in Memory of Mr. Hooker, by
Sir William Cooper, who also built him a fair Monument in Borne-Church, and
acknowledges him to have been his Spiritual Father.

THough nothing can be spoke worthy his Fame,
Or the Remembrance of that precious Name,
Judicious Hooker; though this cost be spent
On him, that has a Lasting Monument
In his own Books; yet, ought we to express,
If not his Worth, yet oue Respectfulness.
Church Ceremonies he maintaiu'd: Then Why
Without all Ceremony should he die.
Was it because his Life and Death should be
Both equal Patterns of Humility;
Or, that perhaps this only glorious one
Was above all, to ask, Why had he none:
Yet he that lay so long obscurely low,
Does now preferred to greater Honors go.
Ambitious men, Learn hence to be more wise;
Humility is the true way to rise:
And God in me this Lesson did Inspire,
To bid this humble Man, Friend sit up higher.
TO THE Most Reverend Father in GOD, my very good Lord, the Lord Archbishop of
CANTERBURY his Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all ENGLAND.
MOst Reverend in Christ, the long continued, The cause of Writing this General
Discourse.
and more then ordinary favor, which hither to your Grace has been pleased to
show toward me, may justly claim at my hands some thankful acknowledgment
thereof. In which consideration, as also for that I embrace willingly the
ancient received course, and convenience of that Discipline, which teaches
inferior Degrees and Orders in the Church of God, to submit their Writings to
the same Authority, from which their allowable dealings whatsoever, in such
affairs, must receive approbation, I nothing fear but that your accustomed
clemency will take in good worth, the offer of these my simple and mean Labors,
bestowed for the necessary justification of Laws heretofore made questionable,
because, as I take it, they were not perfectly understood: For surely, I cannot
find any great cause of just complaint, that good Laws have so much been
wanting unto us, as we to them. To seek Reformation of evil Laws, is a
commendable endeavor; but for us the more necessary, is a speedy redress of our
selves. We have on all sides lost much of our first fervency toward God; and
therefore concerning our own degenerated ways, we have reason to exhort with
St. Gregory, (...), Let us return again unto that which we sometime were; Greg.
Not.
but touching the exchange of Laws in Practice, with Laws in Device, which,
they say, are better for the State of the Church, if they might take place, the
farther we examine them, the greater cause we find to conclude (...), although
we continue the same we are, the harm is not great. These fervent Reprehenders
of things established by Public Authority, are always confident and bold
spirited men. But their confidence for the most part rises from too much
credit given to their own wits, for which cause they are seldom free from
Error. The Errors which we seek to reform in this kind of men, are such as
both received at your own hands their first wound, and from that time to this
present, have been proceeded in with that Moderation, which uses by Patience
to suppress boldness, and to make them conquer that suffer. Wherein considering
the nature and kind of these Controversies, the dangerous sequels whereunto
they were likely to grow, and how many ways we have been thereby taught Wisdom,
I may boldly aver concerning the first, that as the weightiest conflicts the
Church has had, were those which touched the Head, the Person of our Savior
Christ; and the next of importance, those questions which are at this day
between us and the Church of Rome, about the Actions of the Body of the Church
of God; so these which have lastly sprung up from Complements, Rites, and
Ceremonies of Church Actions, are in truth, for the greatest part, such silly
things, that very easiness does make them hard to be disputed of in serious
manner. Which also may seem to be the cause, why diverse of the Reverend
Prelacy, and other most judicious men, have especially bestowed their pains
about the Matter of Jurisdiction. Notwithstanding, led by your Graces example,
my self have thought it convenient to wade through the whole Cause, following
that method which searches the Truth by the causes of Truth. Now if any
marvel, how a thing in it self so weak, could import any great danger, they
must consider not so much how small the spark is that flies up, as how apt
things about it, are to take fire. Bodies Politic being subject as much as
Natural, to dissolution, by diverse means; there are undoubtedly more estates
overthrown through diseases, bred within themselves, then through violence from
abroad; because our manner is always to cast a doubtful and a more suspicious
eye toward that; over which we know we have least power: And therefore, the
fear of External dangers, causes forces at home to be the more united. It is
to all sorts a kind of Bridle, it makes virtuous Minds watchful, it holds
contrary Dispositions in suspense, and it sets those Wits on work in better
things, which could be else employed in worse; whereas on the other side,
domestical Evils, for that we think we can master them at all times, are often
permitted to run on forward, till it be too late to recall them. In the mean
while, the Commonwealth is not only through unsoundness so far impaired, as
those evils chance to prevail; but farther also, through opposition arising
between the unsound parts and the sound, where each endeavoreth to draw
evermore contrary ways, till destruction in the end, bring the whole to ruin.

To reckon up how many Causes there are, by force whereof Divisions may grow in
a Commonwealth, is not here necessary. Such as rise from variety in Matter of
Religion, are not only the farthest spread, because in Religion all men presume
themselves interessed alike, but they are also for the most part, hotlier
prosecuted and pursued then other strifes; for as much as coldness, which in
other Contentions, may be thought to proceed from Moderation, is not in these
so favorably construed. The part which in this present quarrel, striveth
against the Current and Stream of Laws, was a long while nothing feared, the
wisest contented not to call to mind how Errors have their effect, many times
not proportioned to that little appearance of Reason, whereupon they would seem
built, but rather to the vehement affection or fancy which is cast toward
them, and proceeds from other Causes. For there are diverse Motives drawing
men to favor mightily those Opinions, wherein their Persuasions are but weakly
settled; and if the Passions of the Mind be strong, they easily sophisticate
the Understanding, they make it apt to believe upon very slender warrant, and
to imagine infallible Truth, where scarce any probable show appears.

Thus were those poor seduced Creatures, Hacquet and his other two adherents,
whom I can neither speak nor think of, but with much commisseration and pity.
Thus were they trained by fair ways first, accompting their own extraordinary
love to his Discipline, a token of Gods more then ordinary love toward them.
From hence they grew to a strong conceit, that God which had moved them to love
his Discipline, more then the common sort of men did, might have a purpose by
their means to bring a wonderful work to pass, beyond all men's expectation; for
the advancement of the Throne of Discipline by some Tragical Execution, with
the particularities, whereof it was not safe for their Friends to be made
acquainted; of whom, they did therefore but covertly demand, what they thought
of extraordinary Motions of the Spirit in these days; and withal request to be
commended unto God by their Prayers, whatsoever should be undertaken by Men of
God, in mere Zeal to his Glory, and the good of his distressed Church. With
this unusual and strange course they went on forward, till God, in whose
heaviest worldly Judgments, I nothing doubt, but that there may lie hidden
Mercy, gave them over their own Inventions, and left them made, in the end, an
example for Headstrong and Inconsiderate Zeal, no less fearful then
Achitophel, for Proud and Irreligious Wisdom. If a spark of Error have thus far
prevailed, falling even where the Wood was green, and farthest off, to all men's
thinking, from any inclination unto furious Attempts, must not the peril
thereof, be greater in men whose minds are of themselves as dry sewel, apt
beforehand unto Tumults, Seditions, and Broyls? But by this we see in a Cause
of Religion, to how desperate adventures, men will strain themselves for relief
of their own part, having Law and Authority against them.

Furthermore, Let not any man think, that in such Divisions, either part can
free it self from inconveniences, sustained not only through a kind of
Truce; which Virtue on both sides, does make with Vice, during War between
Truth and Error; but also, in that there are hereby so fit occasions ministered
for men to purchase to themselves welwillers by the color, under which they
oftentimes prosecute quarrels of Envy or Inveterate Malice, and especially,
because Contentions were as yet never able to prevent two Evils: The one a
mutual exchange of unseemly and unjust disgraces, offered by men, whose Tongues
and Passions are out of rule; the other, a common hazard of both, to be made a
prey by such as study how to work upon all Occurents, with most advantage in
private. I deny not therefore, but that our Antagonists in these Controversies,
may peradventure have met with some, not unlike to Ithacius, Sulp. Seve^^.
Epist. Hist. Eccles.
who mightily bending himself by all means against the Heresy of Priscillian,
(the hatred of which one Evil, was all the Virtue he had) became so wise in the
end, That every man, careful of Virtuous Conversations, studious of Scripture,
and given unto any abstinence in Diet, was set down in his Calendar of
suspected Priscillianists, for whom it should be expedient to approve their
soundness of Faith, by a more licencious and loose behavior. Such Proctors and
Patrons the Truth might spare: Yet is not their grossness so intolerable, as on
the contrary side, the scurrilous and more then Satirical immodesty of
Martinism; the first published Schedules whereof, being brought to the hands of
a grave and a very Honorable Knight, with signification given, that the Book
would refresh his spirits, he took it, saw what the Title was, read over an
unsavory sentence or two, and delivered back the Libel with this Answer. I am
sorry you are of the mind to be solaced with these sports, and sorrier you
have herein thought mine affection to be like your own. But as these sores on
all hands lie open, so the deepest wounds of the Church of God, have been more
softly and closely given. It being perceived, that the Plot of Discipline did
not only bend it self to reform Ceremonies, but seek farther to erect a
popular authority of Elders, and to take away Episcopal Jurisdiction, together
with all other Ornaments and means, whereby any difference or inequality is
upheld in the Ecclesiastical Order; toward this destructive part, they have
found many helping hands, diverse although peradventure not willing to be yoked
with Elderships, yet contented (for what intent God does know) to uphold
opposition against Bishops, not without greater hurt to the course of their
whole proceedings in the business of God and Her Majesty's service, then
otherwise much more weighty Adversaries had been able by their own power to
have brought to pass. Men are naturally better contented to have their
commendable actions suppressed, then the contrary much divulged. And because the
Wits of the multitude are such, that many things they cannot lay hold on at
once, but being possessed with some notable either dislike or liking of any one
thing whatsoever, sundry other in the mean time may escape them unperceived:
Therefore if men desirous to have their Virtues noted, do in this respect
grieve at the same of others, whose glory obscureth and darkness theirs, it
cannot be chosen, but that when the ears of the people are thus continually
beaten with exclamations against abuses in the Church; these tunes come always
most acceptable to them, whose odious and corrupt dealings in secular affairs,
both pass by that mean the more covertly; and whatsoever happen, do also the
least feel that scourge of vulgar imputation, which notwithstanding they most
deserve. All this considered, as behooves, the sequel of duty on our part, is
only that which our Lord and Savior requires, harmless Discretion, the
wisdom of Serpents tempered with the innocent meekness of Doves: For this World
will teach them wisdom, that have capacity to apprehend it. Our wisdom in this
case must be such, as does not propose to it self (...) our own particular, the
partial and immoderate desire whereof, poysoneth wheresoever it takes place:
But the scope and mark which we are to aim at, is (...) the public and common
good of all; for the easier procurement whereof, our diligence must search out
all helps and furtherances of direction, which Scriptures, Counsels, Fathers,
Histories, the Laws and Practices of all Churches, the mutual Conference of all
Men's Collections and Observations may afford: Our industry must even anatomize
every Particle of that Body, which we are to uphold sound; and because, be it
never so true which we teach the World to believe, yet if once their affections
begin to be alienated, a small thing persuades them to change their opinions,
it behooves, that we vigilantly note and prevent by all means those evils,
whereby the hearts of men are lost; which evils for the most part being
personal, do arm in such sort the Adversaries of God and his Church against us,
that if through our too much neglect and security the same should run on, soon
might we feel our estate brought to those lamentable terms, whereof this hard
and heavy sentence was by one of the Ancients uttered upon like occasions.
Dolens dico, gemens denuncio, sacerdotium quod apud nos intus cecidit, foris
diu stare non poterit. Leg. Carol. Mag. fol.421.
But the gracious providence of Almighty God has, I trust, put these Thorns of
Contradiction in our sides, lest that should steal upon the Church in a
slumber, which now, I doubt not, but through his assistance, may be turned away
from us, bending thereunto our selves with constancy, constancy in labor to do
all men good, constancy in Prayer unto God for all men; Her especially, whose
sacred power matched with incomparable goodness of Nature, has hitherto been
Gods most happy instrument, by him miraculously kept for works of so miraculous
preservation and safety unto others; that as, By the Sword of God and Gedeon,
was sometime the cry of the people of Israel, so it might deservedly be at this
day the joyful Song of innumerable multitudes, yea, the Emblem of some Estates
and Dominions in the world, and (which must be eternally confessed even with
tears of thankfulness) the true Inscription, Style, or Title of all Churches as
yet standing within this Realm, By the goodness of Almighty God, Judge. 7.80.
and his servant Elizabeth, we are^ That God, who is able to make Mortality
immortal, give her such future continuance as may be no less glorious unto all
Posterity, then the days of Her Regiment past have been happy unto our selves;
and for his most dear Anointeds sake, grant them all prosperity, whose Labors,
Cares, and Counsels, unfeignedly are referred to Her endless welfare, through
his unspeakable mercy, unto whom we all owe everlasting praise. In which desire
I will here rest, humbly beseeching your Grace, to pardon my great boldness,
and God to multiply his Blessings upon them that fear his Name.

Your Graces in all duty, RICHARD HOOKER.

A PREFACE To them that seek (as they term it) The Reformation of Laws and
Orders Ecclesiastical, IN THE Church of England.
THough for no other cause, yet for this, The Cause and occasion of handling
these things; and what might be wished in them, for whose sakes so much pains
is taken.
That Posterity may know we have not loosly through silence, permitted things
to pass away as in a Dream, there shall be for Men's information extant thus
much concerning the present state of the Church of God, established amongst us,
and their careful endeavor which would have uphold the same. At your hands,
beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (for in him the love which we
bear unto all that would but seem to be born of him, it is not the Sea of your
Gall and Bitterness that shall ever drown) I have no great cause to look for
other, then the self-same portion and lot, which your manner has been hitherto
to lay on them that concur not in Opinion and Sentence with you. But our hope
it, that the God of Peace shall (notwithstanding man's nature; too impatical of
contumelious malediction) enable us quietly, and even gladly to suffer all
things for that work sake, which we covet to perform. The wonderful seal and
fervor wherewith ye have with stood the received Orders of this Church, was the
first thing which caused me to enter into consideration, Whether (as all your
published Books and Writings peremptorily maintain) every Christian man fearing
God, stand bound to join with you for the furtherance of that which ye term The
Lords Discipline. Wherein I must plainly confess unto you, that before I
examined your sundry Declarations in that behalf, it could not settle in my
head to think, but that undoubtedly such numbers of otherwise right
well-affected and most religiously inclined minds, had some mavelous
reasonable enducements which led them with so great earnestness that way, But
when once, as near as my slender ability would serve, I had with travel and
care performed that part of the Apostles advice and counsel in such cases,
whereby be wills to try all things, and was come at the length so far, that
there remained only the other clause to be satisfied, wherein he concludes,
that what good is, must be held: There was in my poor understanding no remedy,
but to set down this as my final resolute persuasion. Surely, the present Form
of Church Government, which the Laws of this Land have established, is such, as
no Law of God, nor Reason of Man has hitherto been alleged of force,
sufficient to prove they do ill, who to the uttermost of their power, withstand
the alteration thereof. Contrariwise, The other, which instead of it, we are
required to accept, is only by Error and misconceipt, named the Ordinance of
Jesus Christ, no one Proof as yet brought forth, whereby it may clearly appear
to be so in very deed. The Explication of which two things, I have here thought
good to offer into your own hands; Heartily beseeching you, even by the
Meekness of Jesus Christ, whom I trust ye love, That, as ye tender the Peace
and Quietness of this Church, if there be in you that gracious Humility which
has ever been the Crown and Glory of a Christianly disposed mind: If your own
souls, hearts, and consciences, (the sound integrity whereof can but hardly
stand with the refusal of Truth in personal respects) be, as I doubt not, but
they are things most dear and precious unto you: Let not the Faith which ye
have in our Lord Jesus Christ, Jam. 2. 1.
be blemished with partialities, regard not who it is which speaks, but weigh
only what is spoken. Think not that ye read the words of one who bends
himself as an Adversary against the Truth, which ye have already embraced, but
the words of one, who desires even to embrace together with you the self same
Truth, if it be the Truth; and for that cause (for no other, God he knows)
has undertaken the burthensom labor of this painful kind of Conference. For
the plainer access whereunto, let it be lawful for me to rip up the very
bottom, how, and by whom your Discipline was planted, at such time as this age
we live in, began to make first trial thereof.

The first Establishment of new Discipline by Mr. Calvin's industry, in the
Church of Geneva; and the beginning of strife about in amongst ourselves.
2. A Founder it had, whom, for mine own part, I think incomparably the wisest
man that ever the French Church did enjoy, since the hour it enjoyed him, His
bringing up was in the study of the Civil Law. Divine knowledge he gathered not
by hearing or reading so much, as by teaching others. For though thousands were
debtors to him, as touching knowledge in that kind, yet be to none but only
to God, the Author of that most blessed Fountain The Book of Life, and of the
admirable dexterity of Wit, together with the helps of other learning which
were his Guides; till being occasioned to leave France, he sell at the length
upon Geneva. Which City, the Bishop and Clergy thereof, had a little before (as
some affirm) forsaken, being of likelihood frighted with the peoples sudden
attempt for abolishment of Popish Religion; the event of which enterprise, they
thought it not safe for themselves to wait for in that place. At the coming of
Calvin thither, the form of their Civil Regiment was popular, as it continues
at this day: Neither King, nor Duke, nor Nobleman of any authority or power
over them, but Officers chosen by the people out of themselves, to order all
things with public consent. For Spiritual Government, they had no Laws at all
agreed upon, but did what the Pastors of their Souls, by persuasion, could win
them unto. Calvin being admitted one of their Preachers and a Divinity-Reader
amongst them, considered how dangerous it was, that the whole estate of that
Church should hang still on so slender a thread, as the liking of an ignorant
multitude is, if it have power to change whatsoever it self lists. Wherefore
taking unto him two of the other Ministers, for more countenance of the action
(albeit the rest were all against it) they moved, and in the end persuaded,
with much ado, the people to bind themselves by solemn Oath, first, Never to
admit the Papecy amongst them again; and secondly, To live in obedience unto
such Orders concerning the Exercise of their Religion, and the Form of their
Ecclesiastical Government, as those their true and faithful Ministers of Gods
Word had agreeably to Scripture set down for that end and purpose. When these
things began to be put in ure, the people also (what causes moving them
thereunto, themselves best know) began to repent them of that they had done,
and irefully to champ upon the Bit they had taken into their Mouths, the
rather, for that they grew by means of this Innovation into dislike with some
Churches near about them, the benefit of whose good friendship, their State
could not well lack. It was the manner of those times, (whether through men's
desire, to enjoy alone the glory of their own enterprises, or else, because the
quickness of their occasions required present dispatch;) so it was, that every
particular Church did that within it self, which some few of their own thought
good, by whom the rest were all directed. Such number of Churches then being,
though free within themselves, yet small common Conference beforehand might
have eased them of much after trouble. But a great inconvenience it bred, That
every later endeavored to be certain degrees more removed from Conformity with
the Church of Rome, then the rest before had been; whereupon grew mavelous
great dissimilitudes, and by reason thereof, jealousies, heart-burnings, jars,
and discords amongst them. Which notwithstanding might have easily been
prevented, if the Orders which each Church did think fit and convenient for it
self, had not so peremptorily been established under that high commanding Form,
which rendered them unto the people, as things everlastingly required by the Law
of the Lord of Lords, against whose Statutes there is no exception to be taken.
For by this mean it came to pass, that one Church could not but accuse and
condemn another of disobedience to the Will of Christ, in those things where
manifest difference was between them; whereas the self-same Orders allowed, but
yet established in more wary and suspense manner, as bring to stand in force
till God should give the opportunity of some General Conference, what might be
best for every of them afterward to do: This, I say, had both prevented all
occasion of just dislike which others might take, and reserved a greater
liberty unto the Authors themselves, of entering into farther Consultation
afterward. Which though never so necessary, they could not easily now admit,
without some fear of derogation from their credit: And therefore that which
once they had done; they became for ever after resolute to maintain. Calvin
therefore, and the other two his Associates, stiffly refusing to administer the
Holy Communion to such as would not quietly, without contradiction and murmur,
submit themselves unto the Orders which their Solemn Oath had bound them to
obey, were in that quarrel, banished the Town, A few years after (such was the
levity of that people) the places of one or two of their Ministers being fallen
void, they were not before so willing to be rid of their Learned Pastor, as now
importunate to obtain him again from them who had given him entertainment, and
which were loath to part with him, had not unresistable earnestness been used.
One of the Town-Ministers that saw in what manner the people were bent for the
Revocation of Calvin, gave him notice of their affection in this sort. Epist.
Call. 24.
The Senate of Two hundred being assembled, they all crave Calvin. The next day
a General Convocation, they cry in like sort again all: We will have Calvin,
that good and Learned Man, Christ's Minister. This, says he, when I understood,
I could not choose but praise God; nor was I able to judge otherwise, then that
this was the Lords doing, and that it was mavelous in our eyes; and that the
Stone which the Builders refused, Luke 20. 19.
was now made the Head of the Corner. The other two whom they had thrown out
(together with Calvin) they were content should enjoy their exile. Many causes
might lead them to be more desirous of him. First, It is yielding unto them in
one thing, might happily put them in hope, that time would breed the like
easiness of condescending further unto them: For in his absence be had
persuaded them, with whom he was able to prevail; that albeit, himself did
better like of Common Bread to be used in the Eucharist, yet the other they
rather should accept, then cause any trouble in the Church about it. Again,
they saw that the name of Calvin waxed every day greater abroad, and that
together with his fame, their infamy was spread, who had so rashly and
childishly ejected him. Besides, it was not unlikely, but that his credit in
the World, might many ways stand the poor Town in great stead: As the truth is,
their Ministers Foreign estimation hitherto has been the best stake in their
Hedge. But whatsoever secret respects were likely to move them, for contenting
of their minds, Calvin returned (as it had been another Tully) to his old
Home. He ripely considered how gross a thing it were for men of his quality,
wise and grave men, to live with such a multitude, and to be Tenants at will
under them; as their Ministers, both himself and others had been. For the
remedy of which inconvenience, he gave them plainly to understand, That if he
did become their Teacher again, they must be content to admit a complete Form
of Discipline, which both they and also their Pastors, should now be solemnly
sworn to observe for ever after: Of which Discipline, the Main and Principal
parts were these. A standing Ecclesiastical Court to be established: Perpetual
Judges in that Court to be their Ministers; others of the people annually
chosen (twice so many in number as they) to be Judges together with them in the
same Court. These two sorts, to have the care of all Men's manners, power of
determining of all kind of Ecclesiastical Causes, and authority to Convent, to
Control, to Punish, as far as with Excommunication, whom soever they should
think worthy, none either small or great excepted. This device, I see not, how
the wisest at that time living, could have bettered, if we duly consider what
the present State of Geneva did then require: For their Bishop and his Clergy
being (as it is said) departed from them by Moonlight; or howsoever, being
departed, to choose in his room any other Bishop, had been a thing altogether
impossible: And for their Ministers to seek, that themselves alone might have
coercive power over the whole Church, would perhaps have been hardly construed
at that time. But when so frank an offer was made; that for every one Minister,
there should be two of the people to sit and give voice in the Ecclesiastical
Consistory, what inconvenience could they easily find which themselves might
not be able always to remedy? Howbeit (as ever more the simpler sort are, even
when they see no apparent cause, jealous, notwithstanding, over the secret
intents and purposes of wiser men) this Proposition of his did somewhat trouble
them. Of the Ministers, themselves which had staid behind in the City when
Calvin was gone, some, upon knowledge of the peoples earnest intent to recall
him to his place again, had beforehand written their Letters of Submission, and
assured him of their alle^giance for ever after, if it should like him to
hearken unto that Public Suit: But yet misdoubting what might happen, if this
Discipline did go forward, they objected against it, the example of other
Reformed Churches, living quietly and orderly without it. Some of the chiefest
place and countenance amongst the Laity, professed with greater stomach their
judgments, that such a Discipline was little better then Popish Tyranny,
disguised and tendered unto them under a new Form. This sort, it may be, had
some fear that the filling up of the Seats in the Consistory with so great a
member of Laymen; was but to please the minds of the people, to the end, they
might think their own sway somewhat, but when things came to trial of practice,
their Pastors learning, would be at all times of force to over-perswade simple
men, who knowing the time of their own Presidentship to be but short, would
always stand in fear of their Ministers perpetual authority. And among the
Ministers themselves, one being so far in estimation above the rest, the voices
of the rest were likely to be given for the most part respectively with a kind
of secret dependency and aw: So that in show, a mavelous indifferently
composed Senate, Ecclesiastical was to govern; but in effect one only man
should, as the Spirit and Soul of the residue, do all in all. But what did
these vain surmises boot? Brought they were now to so strait an issue, that of
two things, they must choose one: Namely, Whether they would to their endless
disgrace, with ridiculous lightness dismiss him, whose restitution they had in
so impotent manner desired, or else condescend unto that demand, wherein he was
resolute, either to have it, or to leave them. They thought it better to be
somewhat hardly yoked at home, then for ever abroad discredited. Wherefore, in
the end, those Orders were on all sides assented unto, with no less alacrity of
mind, then Cities unable to hold out longer, An. Dom. 1541.
are wont to show when they take conditions, such as likes him to offer them,
which has them in the narrow streights of advantage. Not many years were over
passed, before these twice-sworn men adventured to give their last and hottest
assault to the Fortress of the same Discipline, childishly granting by common
consent of their whole Senate, and that under their Town-Seal, a Relaxation to
one Bertelier, whom the Eldership had Excommunicated: Further also decreeing,
with strange absurdity, that to the same Senate, it should belong to give final
judgment in Matter of Excommunication, and to absolve whom it pleased them;
clean contrary to their own former Deeds and Oaths. The report of which Decree,
being fortwith brought unto Calvin; Before (says he) this Decree take place,
either my Blood or Banishment shall sign it. Again, two days before the
Communion should be celebrated, this speech was publicly to like effect. Kill
me, if ever this hand do teach forth the things that are holy, to them whom the
Church has judged despisers. Whereupon, for fear of tumult, the forenamed
Bertelier was by his friends advised for that time, not to use the liberty
granted him by the Senate, nor to present himself in the Church, till they saw
somewhat further what would ensue. After the Communion quietly ministered, and
some likelihood of peaceable ending of these troubles, without any more a^^;
that very day in the afternoon, besides all men's expectation, concluding his
ordinary Sermon, he tells them, That because he neither had learned nor
taught to strive with such as are in Authority; therefore (says he) the case
so standing, as now it does, let me use these words of the Apostle unto you. I
commend you unto God, and the Word of his Grace; and so bad them heartily
Adieu. It sometimes comes to pass, that the readiest way which a wise man has
to conquer, is to fly. This voluntary and unexpected mention of sudden
departure, caused presently the Senate (for according to their wonted manner,
they still continued only constant in unconstancy) to gather themselves
together, and for a time to suspend their own Decree, leaving things to proceed
as before, till they had heard the judgment of Four Helvetian Cities,
concerning the matter which was in strife. This to have done at the first,
before they gave assent unto any order, had showed some wit and discretion in
them; but now to do it, was as much as to say in effect, That they would play
their parts on a stage. Calvin therefore dispatcheth with all expedition his
Letters unto some Principal Pastor in every of those Cities, craving earnestly
at their hands, to respect this Cause as a thing whereupon the whole State of
Religion and Piety in that Church did so much depend: That God and all good
men, were now inevitably certain to be trampled under foot, unless those Four
Cities by their good means, might be brought to give sentence with the
Ministers of Geneva, when the Cause should be brought before them; yea, so to
give it, that two things it might effectually contain: The one an Absolute
Approbation of the Discipline of Geneva, as consonant unto the Word of God,
without any cautions, qualifications, ifs, or ands; the other, an earnest
Admonition not to innovate or charge the same. His vehement request herein, as
touching both points, was satisfied. For albeit, the said Helvetian Churches
did never as yet observe that Discipline, nevertheless the Senate of Geneva
having required their judgment concerning, these three Questions: First, After
what manner, by Gods Commandment, Epist. 166:
according to the Scripture, and unspotted Religion, Excommunication is to be
exercised: Secondly, Whether it may not be exercised some other way, then by
the Consistory? Thirdly, What the use of their Churches was to do in this case?
Answer was returned from the said Churches, That they had heard already of
those Consistorial Laws, and did acknowledge them to be godly Ordinances,
drawing toward the prescript of the Word of God; for which cause that they did
not think it good for the Church of Geneva, by innovation to change the same,
but rather to keep them as they were, Which answer, although not answering unto
the former demands, but respecting what Mr. Calvin had judged requisite for
them to answer, was notwithstanding accepted without any further Reply; in as
much as they plainly saw, that when stomach does strive with wit, the match is
not equal; and so the heat of their former contentions began to slake. The
present inhabitants of Geneva, I hope, will not take it in evil part, that the
faultiness of their people heretofore, is by us so far forth laid open, as
their own Learned Guides and Pastors have thought necessary to discover it unto
the World. For out of their Books and Writings it is, that I have collected
this whole Narration, to the end, it might thereby appear in what sort amongst
them, that Discipline was planted, for which so much contention is raised
amongst our selves. The Reasons which moved Calvin herein to be so earnest,
was, as Beza himself testifies: Quod came Urbem videret omnino his fro^nis
indigere.
For that he saw how needful these Bridles were to be put in the Jaws of that
City. That which by Wisdom he saw to be requisite for that people, was by as
great wisdom compassed: But wise men are men, and the truth is truth. That
which Calvin did for establishment of his Discipline, seems more commendable
then that which he taught for the countenancing of it established. Nature
works in us all, a love to our own Counsels: The contradiction of others is a
fan to inflame that love. Our love set on fire to maintain that which once we
have done, sharpneth the wit to dispute, to argue, and by all means to reason
for it. Wherefore a marvel it were, if a man of so great capacity, having such
incitements to make him desirous of all kind of furtherances unto his cause,
could epsy in the whole Scripture of God, nothing which might breed at the
least a probable opinion of likelihood, that Divine Authority it self was the
same way somewhat inclinable. And all which the wit even of Calvin was able
from thence to draw, by sifting the very utmost sentence and syllable; is no
more then, that certain speeches there are, which to him did seem to intimate;
that all Christian Churches ought to have their Elderships endued with power of
Excommunication; and that a part of those Elderships every where, should be
chosen out from amongst the Laity, after that Form which himself had framed
Geneva unto. But what Argument are ye able to show, whereby it was ever proved
by Calvin, that any one sentence of Scripture does necessarily enforce these
things, or the rest wherein your opinion concurreth with his against the Orders
of your own Church? We should be injurious unto Virtue it self, if we did
derogate from them whom their industry has made great. Two things of principal
moment there are, which have deservedly procured him honor throughout the
World: The one his exceeding pains in composing the Institution of Christian
Religion; the other, his no less industrious travels for Exposition of holy
Scripture, according unto the same Institutions. In which two things, whosoever
they were that after him bestowed their labor, he gained the advantage of
prejudice against them, if they gainsaid, and of glory above them, if they
consented. His Writings, published after the question about that Discipline,
was once begun, omit not any the least occasion of extolling the use, and
singular necessity thereof. Of what account the Master of Sentences was in the
Church of Rome, the same and more amongst the Preachers of Reformed Churches,
Calvin had purchased: So that the perfectest Divines were judged they, which
were skilfullest in Calvin's Writings. His Books almost the very Canon to judge
both Doctrine and Discipline by: French Churches, both under others abroad, and
at home in their own Country, all cast according unto that mold which Calvin
had made. The Church of Scotland in erecting the Fabric of their Reformation,
took the self-same pattern; till at lenght the Discipline which was at the
first so weak, that without the staff of their approbation, who were not
subject unto it themselves, it had not brought others under subjection, began
now to challenge Universal Obedience, and to enter into open conflict with
those very Churches, which in desperate extremity had been relievers of it. To
one of those Churches which lived in most peaceable sort, and abounded as well
with men for their learning in other Professions singular, as also with
Divines, whose equals were not elsewhere to be found, a Church ordered by
Gualters Discipline, and not by that which Geneva adoreth. Unto this Church of
Heidelburgh, there comes one who craving leave to dispute publicly, defends
with open disdain of their Government; that to a Minister, with his Eldership,
power is given by the Law of God to Excommunicate whomsoever, yea, even Kings
and Princes themselves. Here were the seeds sown of that controversy which
sprang up between Beza and Erastus, about the Matter of Excommunication,
Whether there ought to be in all Churches an Eldership, having power to
Excommunicate, and a part of that Eldership to be of necessity certain, chosen
out from amongst the Laity for that purpose. In which Disputation they have, as
to me it seems, divided very equally the Truth between them: Beza most truly
maintaining the necessity of Excommunication; Erastus as truly, the
non-necessity of Lay Elders to be Ministers thereof. Amongst our selves, there
was in King Edwards days some question moved, by reason of a few men's
scrupulosity, touching certain things. And beyond Seas, of them which fled in
the days of Queen Mary; some contenting themselves abroad, with the use of
their own Service Book, at home authorized before their departure out of the
Realm; others liking better the Common Prayer Book of the Church of Geneva
translated: Those smaller Contentions before begun, were by this me an somewhat
increased. Under the happy Reign of Her Majesty, which now is, the greatest
matter a while contended for, was the wearing of the Cap and Surpless, till
there came Admonitions directed unto the High Court of Parliament, by men who
concealing their names, thought it glory enough to discover their minds and
affections, which now were universally bent even against all the Orders and
Laws, wherein this Church is found uncomformable to the Platform of Geneva.
Concerning the Defender of which Admonitions, all that I mean to say, is but
this. There will come a time, when three words uttered with Charity and
Meekness, shall receive a far more blessed Reward, then three thousand Volumns
written with disdainful sharpness of Wit. But the manner of Men's Writings must
not alienate our hearts from the Truth, if it appear they have the Truth, as
the Followers of the same Defender do think he has; and in that persuasion
they follow him, no otherwise then himself does Calvin, Beza, and others; with
the like persuasion that they in this cause had the Truth. We being as fully
persuaded otherwise, it rests, that some kind of trial be used to find out
which part is in error.

By what means so many of the people are trained into the liking of that
Discipline.
3. The first mean whereby Nature teaches men to judge good from evil, as well
in Laws, as in other things, is the force of their own discretion: Hereunto
therefore St. Paul refers oftentimes his own speech, to be considered of by
them that heard him. I speak as to them which have understanding, Judge ye what
I say. Again afterward, Judge in your selves, is it comely that a woman pray
uncovered? 1 Cor. 10. 13. and 11. 13. Luke 12 56, 57.
The exercise of this kind of judgment, our Savior requires in the Jews. In
them of Berea the Scripture commends it. Finally, Whatsoever we do, if our
own secret judgment consent not unto it as fit and good to be done, the doing
of it to us is sin, although the thing it self be allowable. St. Paul's rule
therefore generally is, Let every man in his own mind be fully persuaded of
that thing which he either allows or does. Acts 17. 11. Romans 14. 5.
Some things are so familiar and plain, that Truth from Falsehood, and Good from
Evil, is most easily discerned in them, even by men of no deep capacity. And of
that nature, for the most part, are things absolutely unto all Men's salvation
necessary, either to he held or denied, either to be done or avoided. For which
cause St. Augustine acknowledges, that they are not only set down, but also
plainly set down in Scripture: So that he which hears or reads, may without
any great difficulty understand. Other things also there are belonging (though
in a lower degree of importance) unto the offices of Christian men. Which
because they are more obscure, more intricate and hard to be judged of,
therefore God has appointed some to spend their whole time principally in the
study of things Divine, to the end, that in these more doubtful cases, their
understanding might be a light to direct others. If the understanding power or
faculty of the Soul, Galen de open. docen. genesis
be (says the Grand Physician) like unto bodily sight, not of equal sharpness
in all: What can be more convenient then that; even as the dark-sighted man is
directed by the clear about things visible; so likewise in matters of deeper
discourse, the wise in heart do show the simple where his way lies? In our
doubtful Cases of Law, what man is there, who sees not how requisite it is,
that Professors of skill in that Faculty, be our Directors? so it is in all
other kinds of knowledge. And even in this kind likewise, the Lord has
himself appointed, Mal. 2. 7.
That the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and that other men should
seek the truth at his mouth, because he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts.
Gregory Nazianzen, offended at the peoples too great presumption in controlling
the judgment of them, to whom in such cases they should have rather submitted
their own, seeks by earnest entreaty to stay them within their bounds. Greg.
Nazian. Orat. qua se excusat.
Presume not ye that are Sheep, to make your selves Guides of them that should
guide you; neither seek ye to overslip the fold which they about you have
pitched. It suffices for your part, if ye can well frame your selves to be
ordered. Take not upon you to judge your selves, nor to make them subject to
your Laws, who should be a Law to you; for God is not a God of Sedition and
Confusion, but of Order and of Peace. Matthew. 10. 14.
But ye will say, that if the Guides of the people be blind, the common sort
of men must not close up their own eyes, and be led by the conduct of such: If
the Priest be partial in the Law, the flock must not therefore depart from the
ways of sincere Truth, and in simplicity yield to be followers of him for his
place sake and office over them. Mal. 2. 9.
Which thing, though in it self most true, is in your defense notwithstanding
weak; because the matter wherein ye think that ye see and imagine that your
ways are sincere, is of far deeper consideration then any one amongst Five
hundred of you conceives. Let the vulgar sort among you know, that there is
not the least branch of the Cause, wherein they are so resolute, but to the
trial of it, a great deal more appertains, then their conceit does reach
unto. I write not this in disgrace of the simplest that way given, but I would
gladly they knew the nature of that cause wherein they think themselves
thoroughly instructed, and are not; by means whereof they daily run themselves,
without feeling their own hazard, Jude v. 10. 2 Pet. 2. 12.
upon the dint of the Apostles sentence against evil speakers, as touching
things wherein they are ignorant. If it be granted a thing unlawful for private
men, not called unto Public Consultation, to dispute which is the best State
of Civil Policy (with a desire of bringing in some other kind, Calvin. Instit.
lib. 4 cap. 20. sect. 8.
them that under which they already live, for of such Disputes, I take it, his
meaning was.) If it be a thing confessed, that of such Questions they cannot
determine without rashness, in as much as a great part of them consists in
special Circumstances, and for one kind as many Reasons may be brought as for
another: Is there any reason in the World, why they should better judge what
kind of Regiment Ecclesiastical is the fittest? For in the Civil State more
insight, and in those affairs more experience, a great deal, must needs be
granted them, then in this they can possibly have. When they which write in
defense of your Discipline, and commend it unto the Highest, not in the least
cunning manner, are forced notwithstanding to acknowledge, That with whom the
Truth is, they know not; they are not certain, what certainly or knowledge can
the multitude have thereof. The Author of the Petition directed to Her Majesty,
page 3.
Weigh what does move the common sort so much to favor this Innovation, and it
shall soon appear unto you, that the force of particular Reasons, which for
your several Opinions are alleged, is a thing whereof the multitude never did,
nor could so consider as to be therewith wholly carried; but certain general
Inducements are used to make saleable your Cause in gross: And when once men
have cast a fancy toward it, any slight Declaration of Specialties will serve
to lead forward men's inclineable and prepared minds. The method of winning the
peoples affection unto a general liking of the Cause (for so ye term it) has
been this. First, in the hearing of the multitude, the faults especially of
higher Callings are ripped up with mavelous exceeding severity and sharpness
of Reproof; which being oftentimes don't, begets a great good opinion of
Integrity, zeal and Holiness, to such constant reprovers of sin, as by
likelihood would never be so much offended at that which is evil, unless
themselves were singularly good. The next thing hereunto is, to impute all
Faults and Corruptions, wherewith the World abounds, unto the kind of
Ecclesiastical Government established. Wherein, as before by reproving Faults,
they purchased unto themselves, with the multitude, a name to be virtuous; so
by finding out this kind of Cause, they obtain to be judged wise above others,
whereas in truth unto the Form even of Jewish Government, which the Lord
himself (they all confess) did establish, with like show of Reason they might
impute those Faults which the Prophets condemn in the Governors of that
Commonwealth; as to the English kind of Regiment Ecclesiastical (whereof also
God himself, though in another sort, is Author,) the stains and blemishes found
in our State; which springing from the Root of Humane Frailty and Corruption,
not only are, but have been always more or less, yea, and (for any thing we
know to the contrary) will be till the Worlds end complained of, what Form of
Government soever take place. Having gotten thus much sway in the hearts of
men, a third step is to propose their own Form of Church Government, as the
only sovereign remedy of all Evils; and to adorn it with all the glorious
Titles that may be. And the Nature, as of men that have sick bodies, so
likewise of the people in the crazedness of their Minds, possessed with dislike
and coffeehouse at things present, is to imagine, that any thing (the virtue
whereof they hear commended) would help them; but that most, which they least
have tried. The fourth degree of Inducements, is by fashioning the very notions
and conceits of men's minds in such sort, that when they read the Scripture,
they may think that every thing sounds toward the advancement of that
Discipline, and to the utter disgrace of the contrary. Pythagoras, by bringing
up his Scholars in speculative knowledge of numbers, made their conceits
therein so strong, that when they came to the contemplation of things natural,
they imagined that in every particular thing, they even beheld, as it were,
with their eyes, how the Elements of Number gave Essence and Being to the Works
of Nature: A thing in reason impossible, which notwithstanding through their
misfashioned preconceit, appeared unto them no less certain, then if Nature had
written it in the very Foreheads of all the Creatures of God. When they of the
Family of Love have it once in their heads, that Christ does not signify any
one Person, but a Quality whereof many are partakers; that to be raised, is
nothing else but to be regenerated, or endued with the said quality; and that
when Separation of them, which have if from them, which have it not, is here
made, this is judgment: How plainly do they imagine, that the Scripture every
where speaks in the favor of that Sect? And assuredly, the very cause which
makes the simple and ignorant to think, they even see how the Word of God
runs currantly on your side, is, That their minds are forestalled, and
their conceits perverted beforehand, by being taught, that an Elder does
signify a Layman, admitted only to the Office of Rule or Government in the
Church; a Doctor, one which may only Teach, and neither Preach nor Administer
the Sacraments; a Deacon, one which has charge of the Alms-box, and of nothing
else: That the Scepter, the Rod, the Throne and Kingdom of Christ, art a Form
of Regiment, only by Pastors, Elders, Doctors, and Deacons; that by Mystical
Resemblance, Mount Sion and Jerusalem are the Churches which admit; Samaria and
Babylon, the Churches which oppugn the said Form of Regiment. And in like
sort, they are taught to apply all things spoken of repairing the Walls and
decayed parts of the City and Temple of God, by Esdras, Nehemias, and the rest:
As if purposely the Holy Ghost had therein meant to fore-signifie, what the
Authors of Admonitions to the Parliament, of Supplications to the Council, of
Petitions to Her Majesty, and of such other-like Writs, should either do or
suffer in behalf of this their Cause. From hence they proceed to an higher
point, which is the persuading of men credulous and over-capable of such
pleasing Errors, That it is the special illumination of the Holy Ghost, whereby
they discern those things in the Word, which others reading, yet discern them
not. Dearly Beloved, says St. John, ^ Joh. 4. 1.
Give not credit unto every spirit. There are but two ways whereby the Spirit
leads men into all Truth; the one extraordinary, the other common; the one
belonging but unto some few, the other extending it self unto all that are of
God; the one, that which we call by a special divine excellency, Revelation;
the other, Reason. If the Spirit by such Revelation, have discovered unto them
the secrets of that Discipline out of Scripture, they must profess themselves
to be all (even Men, Women, and Children,) Prophets: Or if Reason be the hand
which the Spirit has led them by; for as much as Persuasions grounded upon
Reason, are either weaker or stronger, according to the force of those Reasons,
whereupon the same are grounded, they must every of them, from the greatest to
the least, be able for every several Article, to show some special Reason, as
strong as their Persuasion therein is earnest: Otherwise how can it be, but
that some other sinews there are, from which that everplus of strength in
Persuasion does arise? Most sure it is, That when Men's Affections do frame
their Opinions, they are in defense of Error more earnest a great deal, then
(for the most part) sound Believers in the maintenance of Truth, apprehended
according to the nature of that evidence which Scripture yields: Which being
in some things plain, as in the Principles of Christian Doctrine; in some
things, as in these Matters of Discipline, more dark and doubtful, frames
correspondently that inward assent which Gods most gracious Spirit works by
it, as by his Effectual Instrument. It is not therefore the servent earnestness
of their persuasion, but the soundness of those Reasons, whereupon the same is
built, which must declare their Opinions in these things, to have been wrought
by the Holy Ghost, and not by the Fraud of that evil spirit which is even in
his illusions strong. ^ These. 2. 11.
After that the fancy of the common sort has once thoroughly apprehended the
Spirit to be Author of their Persuasions, concerning Discipline, then is
instilled into their hearts; that the same Spirit, leading men into this
opinion, does thereby seal them to be Gods Children; and that as the state of
the times now stands, the most special taken to know them that are Gods own
from others, is an earnest affection that way. This has bred high terms of
Separation between such, and the rest of the World; whereby the one sort are
named The Brethren, the Godly, and so forth; the other, Worldlings,
Time-servers, Pleasers of Men, not of God, with such like. From hence, they are
easily drawn on to think it exceeding necessary; for fear of quenching that
good Spirit, to use all means whereby the same may be both strengthened in
themselves; and made manifest unto others. This makes them diligent bearers of
such as are known that way to incline; this makes them eager to take and seek
all occasions of secret Conference with such; this makes them glad to use such
as Counselors and Directors in all their dealings, which are of weight, as
Contracts, Testaments, and the like; this makes them, through an unweariable
desire of receiving instruction from the Masters of that Company, to cast off
the care of those very affairs which do most concern their estate, and to think
that then they are like unto Mary, commendable for making choice of the better
part. Finally, This is it which makes them willing to charge, yea, oftentimes
even to over-charge themselves, for such Men's sustenance and relief, least
their zeal to the Cause should any way be unwitnessed. For what is it, which
poor beguiled souls, will not do through so powerful incitements? In which
respect it is also noted, that most labor has been bestowed to win, and retain
toward this Cause, them whose judgments are commonly weakest by reason of
their sex. And although not Women laden with sins, 1 Timothy 3. 6.
as the Apostle St. Paul speaks, but (as we verily esteem of them for the
most part) Women propense and inclinable to holiness, be otherwise edified in
good things, rather then carried away as captives into any kind of sin and
evil, by such as enter into their houses with purpose to plant there a zeal,
and a love toward this kind of Discipline; yet some occasion is hereby
ministered for Men, to think, that if the Cause which is thus furthered, did
gain by the soundness of proof, whereupon it does build it self, it would not
most busily endeavor to prevail, where least ability of judgment is: And
therefore that this so eminent industry in making Proselytes, more of that sex
then of the other; grows for that they are deemed apter to serve as
instruments and helps in the Cause. Apter they are through the eagerness of
their affection, that makes them which way soever they take, diligent in
drawing their Husbands, Children, Servants, Friends and Allies, the same way:
Apter through that natural inclination unto pity, which breeds in them a
greater readiness then in men, to be bountiful toward their Preachers, who
suffer want: Apter through sundry opportunities, which they especially have, to
procure encouragements for their Brethren. Finally, Apter through a singular
delight which they take, in giving very large and particular intelligence, how
all near about them stand affected, as concerning the same Cause. But be they
Women, or be they Men, if once they have tasted of that Cup, let any man of
contrary opinion, open his mouth to persuade them, they close up their ears;
his Reasons they weigh not, all is answered with rehearsal of the words of
John, 1 John 4. 6.
We are of God; he that knows God, hears us. As for the rest, Ye are of the
World; for this Worlds pomp and vanity it is that ye speak, and the World whose
ye are, hears you. Which cloak sits no less fit o^ the lack of their
Cause, then of the Anabaptists; when the Dignity, Authority and Honor of Gods
Magistrates is upheld against them. Show these eagerly-affected men their
inability to judge of such matters; their answer is, God has chosen the
simple. 1 Cor. 1. 17.
Convince them of Folly, and that so plainly, that very children upbraid them
with it; they have their bucklers of like defense. Christ's own Apostle was
accounted mad: Acts 26. 24. ^ap. 5. 4. We Yools thought his life madness. Marc.
Tris. ad Asc^lap. (...) Vide Lactaut. de Justi^. lib. 5. cap. 16. August.
Epist. 50.
The best men evermore by the sentence of the World, have been judged to be out
of their right minds. When instruction does them no good, let them feel but
the least degree of most mercifully tempered Severity, they fasten on the head
of the Lords Vicegerents here on Earth, whatsoever they any where find uttered
against the cruelty of Blood-thirsty men; and to themselves they draw all the
Sentences which Scripture has in the favor of Innocence persecuted for the
Truth; yea, they are of their due and deserved sufferings, no less proud then
those ancient disturbers, to whom St. Augustine writes, saying. Martyrs,
rightly so named, are they not which suffer for their disorder, and for the
ungodly breach they have made of Christian Unity; but which, for Righteousness
sake are persecuted: For Agar also suffered persecution at the hands of Sara;
wherein, she which did impose, was holy, and she unrighteous which did bear the
burden. In like sort, with the Thieves was the Lord himself crucified, but
they who were matched in the pain which they suffered, were in the cause of
their sufferings dis-joyned. If that must needs be the true Church which does
endure persecution, and not that which persecuteth, let them ask of the
Apostle, what Church Sara did represent, when she held her Maid in affliction:
For even our Mother which is free, the Heavenly Jerusalem; that is to say, The
true Church of God, was, as he does affirm, prefigured in that very Woman, by
whom the Bond-maid was so sharply handled. Although, if all things be thoroughly
skanned, she did in truth more persecute Sara by proud resistance, then Sara
her, by severity of punishment. These are the paths wherein ye have walked,
that are of the ordinary sort of men; these are the very steps ye have trodden,
and the manifest degrees whereby ye are of your Guides and Directors trained up
in that School: A custom of inuring your ears with reproof of faults,
especially in your Governors; and use to attribute those faults to the kind of
Spiritual Regiment, under which ye live; boldness in warranting the force of
their Discipline, for the cure of all such evils; a slight of framing your
conceits, to imagine, that Scripture every where favoreth that Discipline;
persuasion that the cause, why ye find it in Scripture, is the illumination of
the Spirit; that the same Spirit is a Seal unto you of your nearness unto God;
that ye are by all means to nourish and witness it in your selves, and to
strengthen on every side your minds against whatsoever might be of force to
withdraw you from it.

What has caused so many of the Learneder so^t, to approve the same Discipline.
4. Wherefore to come unto you, whose judgment is a Lanthorn of Direction for
all the rest, you that frame thus the peoples hearts, not altogether (as I
willingly persuade my self) of a politic intent or purpose, but your selves
being first over-borne with the weight of greater men's judgments; on your
shoulders is laid the burden of upholding the cause by Argument. For which
purpose, Sentences out of the Word of God, ye allege diverse; but so, that when
the same are aiscust, thus it always in a manner falls out, That what things
by virtue thereof ye urge upon us, as altogether necessary, are found to be
thence collected only by poor and mavelous slight conjectures. I need not
give instance in any one sentence so alleged, for that I think the instance in
any alleged, otherwise a thing not easy to be given. A very strange thing,
sure it were, that such a Discipline as ye speak of, should be taught by Christ
and his Apostles in the Word of God, and no Church ever have found it out, nor
received it till this present time: Contrariwise, the Government against which
ye bend your selves, be observed every where throughout all generations and
ages of the Christian World, no Church ever perceiving the Word of God to be
against it. We require you to find out but one Church upon the face of the
whole Earth, that has been ordered by your Discipline, or has not been
ordered by ours, that is to say, By Episcopal Regiment, sithence the time that
the Blessed Apostles were here conversant. Many things out of Antiquity ye
bring, as if the purest times of the Church had observed the self-same Orders
which you require; and as though your desire were, that the Churches of old
should be patterns for us to follow, and even Glasses, wherein we might see the
practice of that, which by you is gathered out of Scripture. But the truth is,
ye mean nothing less. All this is done for fashion sake only; for ye complain
of in as of an injury, T. C. lib. 1. p. 97.
that men should be willed to seek for examples and patterns of Government in
any of those times that have been before, Ye plainly hold, that from the very
Apostles times till this present age wherein your selves imagine ye have sound
out aright pattern of sound Discipline, there never was any time safe to be
followed; which thing ye thus endeavor to prove. Eusebius. 3. l 32.
Out of Egesippus, ye say, that Eusebius writes, How although as long as the
Apostles lived, the Church did remain a pure Virgin; yet after the death of the
Apostles, and after they were once gone, whom God vouchsafed to make Hearers of
the Divine Wisdom with their own ears, Lib. Stram. Somewhat after the
beginning. Lib. 7. cap. 11.
the placing of wicked Errors began to come into the Church. Clement also in a
certain place, to confirm, That there was corruption of Doctrine immediately
after the Apostles times, alleges the Proverb, That there are few Sons like
their Fathers, Socrates says of the Church of Rome and Alexandria, the most
famous Churches in the Apostles times, that about the year 430. the Roman and
Alexandrian Bishops leaving the Sacred Function, were degenerate to a Secular
Rule or Dominion. Hereupon ye conclude, that it is not safe to fetch our
Government from any other then the Apostles times. Wherein by the way it may be
noted, that in proposing the Apostles times as a pattern for the Church to
follow, though the desire of you all be one, the drift and purpose of you all
is not one. The chiefest thing which Lay-Reformers yawn for, is, that the
Clergy may through Conformity in State and Condition, be Apostolical, poor as
the Apostles of Christ were poor. In which one circumstance, if they imagine so
great perfection, they must think that Church which has such store of
Mendicant Friars, a Church in that respect most happy. Were it for the glory of
God, and the good of his Church indeed, that the Clergy should be left even as
bare as the Apostles; when they had neither staff nor scrip; that God, which
should lay upon them the condition of his Apostles; would I hope, endue them
with the self-same affection which was in that holy Apostle, whose words
concerning his own right-vertuous contentment of heart, Phil. 4. 12.
As well how to want, as how to abound, are a most fit Episcopal emprese. The
Church of Christ is a Body Mystical. A Body cannot stand, unless the parts
thereof be proportionable: Let it therefore be required on both parts, at the
hands of the Clergy, to be in meanness of state like the Apostles; at the hands
of the Laity, to be as they were who lived under the Apostles. And in this
Reformation there will be, though little Wisdom, yet some Indifferency: But
your Reformation, which are of the Clergy (if yet it displease you not, that I
should say ye are of the Clergy) seems to aim at a broader mark. Te think,
that he which will perfectly reform, must bring the Form of Church Discipline
unto the State which then it was at. A thing neither possible, nor certain, nor
absolutely convenient. Concerning the first, what was used in the Apostles
times, the Scripture fully declares not; so that making their times the Rule
and Canon of Church Polity, ye make a Rule, which being not possible to be
fully known, is as impossible to be kept. Again, Since the later, even of the
Apostles own times, had that which in the former, was not thought upon; in this
general proposing of the Apostles times, there is no certainty which should be
followed, especially seeing that ye give us great cause to doubt how far ye
allow those times. For albeit, the lover of Antichristian building were not, ye
say, as then set up, yet the Foundations thereof were secretly, and under the
ground, laid in the Apostles times: So that all other times, ye plainly reject;
and the Apostles own times, ye approve with mavelous great suspicion, leaving
it intricate and doubtful, wherein we are to keep our selves unto the pattern
of their times. Thirdly, Whereas it is the error of the common multitude, to
consider only what has been of old, and if the same were well, to see whether
still it continue; if not, to condemn that presently, which is, and never to
search upon what ground or consideration the Change might grow. Such rudeness
cannot be in you so well born with, whom Learning and Judgment has enabled
much more soundly to discern how far the times of the Church, and the Orders
thereof, may alter without offense. True it is, the ancienter Antiquitas
ceremoniis arque fanis tantum sanctitatis tribuere consue vir, quan^um
adstruxerit verustatis. A^^. p. 746.
, the better Ceremonies of Religion, are: Howbeit, not absolutely true, and
without exception; but true, only so far forth as those different ages do
agree in the state of those things, for which, at the first those Rites,
Orders, and Ceremonies, were instituted. In the Apostl^s times, that was
harmless, which being now revived, would be scandalous; as their Oscula Sancta.
Romans 16. 16. 2 Cor. 13. 12. 1 These. 9. 25. 1 Pet. 5. 14. In their meetings to
serve God, their manner was, in the end to salute one another with a kiss;
using these words, Peace be with you. For which cause, Tertullian does call it,
Signaculum Orationis, The Seal of Prayer, lib. de Orat.
Those Feasts of Charity, which being instituted by the Apostles, were retained
in the Church long after, are not now thought any where needful. What man is
there of understanding, unto whom it is not manifest, how the way of providing
for the Clergy by Tithes, the device of Almshouses for the Poor, the sorting
out of the people into their several Pariso^s; together with sunury other
things which the Apostles times could not have, (being now established) are
much more convenient and fit for the Church of Christ, then if the same should
be taken away for Conformities sake, with the antientest and first times? The
Orders therefore which were observed in the Apostles times, are not to be urged
as a Rule universally, either sufficient or necessary. If they be, nevertheless
on your part, it still remains to be better proved. That the Form of
Discipline, which ye entitle Apostolical, was in the Apostles time exercised:
For of this very thing ye fail, even touching that which ye make most account
of, as being Matter of Substance in Discipline, I mean, the Power of your
Lay Elders, and the difference of your Doctors from the Pastors in all
Churches. So that in faith, we may be bold to conclude, That besides these last
times, which for insolency, pride, and egregious contempt of all good order,
are the worst; there are none wherein ye can truly affirm, that the complete
Form of your Discipline, or the Substance thereof was practiced. Epist. Jud.
verse. 12. Concerning which Feasts Saint Chrysostom says, Statis diebus men^a^
facieba^t communes, and peracta synaxi post Sacromentorum Communionem inibant
convivium divitibus quidem cibos afferentibus, pauperibus aurera and qui nihil
habebant enam vocatis, in 1 Cor. 11. Romans 27. Of the same Feasts is like sort,
Tertullian. C^^. in no^ re de num^ne rationem sui (...). Vocatur enim (...), id
quod est pene^ Gracol dilectio. Q^an^isconque sumptibus constet, lucru^^ est
ple^ath nomli^ better (...) April cap. 35.
The evidence therefore of Antiquity failing you, ye fly to the judgments of
such Learned men, as seem by their Writings, to be of opinion, that all
Christian Churches should receive your Discipline, and abandon ours. Wherein,
as ye heap up the names of a number of men, not unworthy to be had in honor; so
there are a number, whom when ye mention, although it serve ye to purpose, with
the ignorant and vulgar sort, who measure by tale, and not by weight; yet
surely, they who know what quality and value the men are of, will think ye draw
very near the dregs. But were they all of as great account as the best and
chiefest amongst them, with us notwithstanding neither are they, neither ought
they to be of such reckoning, that their opinion or conjecture, should cause
the Laws of the Church of England to give place; much less when they neither do
all agree in that opinion, and of them which are at agreement, the most part
through a courteous enducement, have followed one man as their Guide; finally,
that one therein not unlikely to have swerved. If any chance to say, it is
probable that in the Apostles times there were Lay Elders, or not to mislike
the continuance of them in the Church; or to affirm, that Bishops at the first
were a name, but not a power distinct from Presbyters; or to speak any thing in
praise of those Churches which are without Episcopal Regiment; or to reprove
the fault of such as abuse that Calling. All these ye Register for Men,
persuaded as you are, that every Christian Church stands bound by the Law of
God to put down Bishops, and in their rooms to erect an Eldership so authorized
as you would have it for the Government of each Parish. Deceived greatly they
are therefore, who think that all they whose names are cited amongst the
Favorers of this Cause, are on any such verdict agreed. Yet touching some
material points of your Discipline, a kind of agreement we grant there is
amongst many Divines of Reformed Churches abroad. For first, To do as the
Church of Geneva did, the Learned in some other Churches must needs be the more
willing, who having used in like manner, not the slow and tedious help of
proceeding by public Authority; but the peoples more quick endeavor for
alteration, in such an exigent I see not well, how they could have staid to
deliberate about any other Regiment, then that which already was devised to
their hands; that which in like case had been taken, that which was easiest to
be established without delay, that which was likeliest to content the people by
reason of some kind of sway which it gives them. When therefore the example
of one Church, was thus at the first almost through a kind of constraint or
necessity followed by many, their concurrence in persuasion about some material
points belonging to the same polity is not strange. For we are not to marvel
greatly, if they which have all done the same thing, do easily embrace the same
opinion as concerning their own doings: Besides, mark I beseech you, that which
Galen in matter of Philosophy notes; Galen. Clas. 2. lib. De cujusque anim.
peccat. notitia arque medela.
for the like falls out, even in Questions of higher knowledge. It fares
many times with men's opinions, as with rumors and reports. That which a
credible person tells, is easily thought probable by such as are well
persuaded of him: But if two, or three, or four, agree all in the same tale,
they judge it then to be out of Controversy, and so are many times overtaken
for want of due consideration, either some common cause leading them all into
error, or one man's oversight, deceiving many through their too much credulity
and easiness of belief. Though ten persons be brought to give testimony in any
cause, yet if the knowledge they have of the thing whereunto they come as
witnesses, appear to have grown from some one amongst them, and to have spread
it self from hand to hand, they all are in force but as one testimony; nor is
it otherwise here, where the Daughter Churches do speak their Mothers Dialect;
here, where so many sing one Song, by reason that he is the Guide of the Quire,
concerning whose deserved authority, amongst even the gravest Divines, Petition
to the Q. Mary, page 14.
we have already spoken at large. Will ye ask what should move those many
Learned, to be followers of one Man's judgment; no necessity of Argument forcing
them thereunto? Your demand is answered by your selves. Loath ye are to think
that they whom ye judge to have attained, as sound knowledge in all points of
Doctrine, as any since the Apostles time, should mistake in Discipline. Such is
naturally our affection, that whom in great things we mightily admire; in them,
we are not persuaded willingly that any thing should be amiss. The reason
whereof is, Eccles. 10. 1.
for that as dead Flies putrify the ointment of the Apothecary, so a little
Folly him that is in estimation for wisdom. This in every profession, has too
much authorized the judgment of a few: This with Germans has caused Luther,
and with many other Churches, Calvin, to prevail in all things. Yet are we not
able to define, whether the Wisdom of that God (who sets before us in holy
Scripture, so many admirable patterns of Virtue, and no one of them, without
somewhat noted, wherein they were culpable; to the end, that to him alone it
might always be acknowledged, Thou only art holy, thou only art just) might
not permit those worthy Vessels of his Glory, to be in some things blemished
with the stain of humane frailty; even for this cause, lest we should esteem of
any man above that which behooves.

Their calling for Trial by Disputation.
5. Notwithstanding, as though ye were able to say a great deal more then
hitherto your Books have revealed to the World, earnest Challengers ye are of
trial by some public Disputation; wherein, if the thing ye crave, be no more
then only leave to dispute openly about those Matters that are inquestion, the
Schools in Universities (for any thing I know) are open unto you: They have
their yearly Acts and Commencements, besides other Disputations, both ordinary
and upon occasion, wherein the several parts of our own Ecclesiastical
Discipline are oftentimes offered unto that kind of Examination; the learned
of you have been of late years, noted seldom or never absent from thence, at
the time of those great Assemblies; and the favor of proposing there in
convenient sort whatsoever ye can object (which thing, my self have known them
to grant of Scholastical courtesy unto Strangers) neither has (as I think)
nor ever will (I presume) be denied you. If your Suit be to have some great
extraordinary confluence, in expectation whereof, the Laws that already are,
should sleep and have no power over you; till in the hearing of thousands, ye
all did acknowledge your error, and renounce the further prosecution of your
cause: Happily, they whose authority is required unto the satisfying of your
demand, do think it both dangerous to admit such concourse of divided minds,
and unmeet that Laws, which being once solemnly established, are to exact
obedience of all men, and to constrain thereunto; should so far stoop, as to
hold themselves in suspense from taking any effect upon you, till some disputer
can persuade you to be obedient. A Law is the Deed of the whole Body Politic,
whereof if ye judge your selves to be any part, then is the Law even your Deed
also. And were it reason, in things of this quality, to give men audience,
pleading for the overthrow of that which their own very deed has ratified?
Laws that have been approved, may be (no man doubts) again repealed, and to
that end also disputed against, by the Authors thereof themselves: But this is
when the whole does deliberate what Laws each part shall observe, and not when
a part refuses the Laws which the whole has orderly agreed upon.
Notwithstanding, for as much as the cause we maintain, is (God be thanked) such
as needs not to shun any trial, might it please them on whose approbation the
matter depends; to condescend so far unto you in this behalf, I wish heartily
that proof were made even by solemn conference in orderly and quiet sort;
whether you would your selves be satisfied, or else could by satisfying others,
draw them to your party. Provided always, first, In as much as ye go about to
destroy a thing which is in force, and to draw in that which has not as yet
been received; to impose on us that which we think not our selves bound unto,
and to overthrow those things whereof we are possessed; that therefore ye are
not to claim in any conference, other then the Plaintiffs or Opponents part,
which must consist altogether in proof and confirmation of two things: The one,
that our Orders by you condemned, we ought to abolish; the other, that yours,
we are bound to accept in the stead thereof. Secondly, Because the Questions in
Controversy between us, are many, if once we descend into particulars: That
for the easier and more orderly proceeding therein, the most general be first
discussed; nor any Question left off, nor in each Question the prosecution of
any one Argument given over, and another taken in hand, till the issue
whereunto, by Replies and Answers, both parts are come, be collected, read, and
acknowledged, as well on the one side as on the other, to be the plain
conclusion which they are grown unto. Thirdly, For avoiding of the manifold
inconveniences whereunto ordinary and extemporal Disputes are subject, as also
because, if ye should singly dispute one by one, as every man's own wit did best
serve, it might be conceived by the rest, that happily some other would have done
more; the chiefest of you do all agree in this action, that when ye shall then
choose your speaker, by him that which is publicly brought into Disputation, be
acknowledged by all your consents, not to be his allegation, but yours; such as
ye all are agreed upon, and have required him to deliver in all your names: The
true Copy whereof being taken by a Notary, that a reasonable time be allowed
for return of Answer unto you in the like form. Fourthly, Whereas a number of
Conferences have been had in other causes with the less effectual success, by
reason of partial and untrue reports, published afterward unto the World: That
to prevent this evil, there be at the first a Solemn Declaration; made on both
parts of their Agreement, to have that very Book and no other, set abroad,
wherein their present authorized Notaries do write those things fully and
only; which being written, and there read, are by their own open testimony,
acknowledged to be their own. Other circumstances hereunto belonging, whether
for the choice of time, place, and language, or for prevention of impertinent
and needless speech, or to any end and purpose else, they may be thought on
when occasion serves. In this sort, to broach my private conceit for the
ordering of a public action, I should be loath, (albeit, I do it not otherwise
then under correction of them, whose gravity and wisdom ought in such cases to
overruled) but that so venturous boldness, I see is a thing now general, and am
thereby of good hope, that where all men are licenced to offend, no man will
show himself a sharp Accuser.

6. What success God may give unto any such kind of Conference or Disputation,
No end of Contention, without submission of both parts, unto some Definitive
Sentence.
we cannot tell: But of this we are right sure, that Nature, Scripture, and
Experience it self, have all taught the World to seek for the ending of
Contentions, by submitting itself into some judicial and definitive Sentence,
whereunto neither part that contendeth may under any pretense or color refuse
to stand: This must needs be effectual and strong; as for other means without
this, they seldom prevail; I would therefore know, whether for the ending of
these irksome strifes, wherein you and your Followers do stand thus formally
divided against the authorized Guides of this Church, and the rest of the
people subject unto their Charge; whether, I say, ye be content to refer your
Cause to any other higher judgment then your own, or else intend to persist,
and proceed as ye have begun, till your selves can be persuaded to condemn your
selves? If your Determination be this, we can be but sorry that ye should
deserve to be reckoned with such, Romans 3. 17.
of whom God himself pronounces, The way of Peace they have not known. Ways of
peaceable Conclusion, there are but these two certain; the one a sentence of
Judicial Decision given by authority thereto appointed within our selves; the
other, the like kind of sentence given by a more Universal authority. The
former of which two ways, God himself in the Law prescribes, and his Spirit it
was which directed the very first Christian Churches in the World to use the
Latter. The Ordinance of God in the Law, was this. Deuteronomy. 17. 8.
If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between blood and
blood, between plea, etc. then shall thou arise, and go up unto the place which
the Lord thy God shall choose; and thou shall come unto the Priests of the
Levites, and unto the Judge that shall be in those days, and ask, and they
shall show thee the sentence of Judgment; and thou shall do according to that
thing which they of that place which the Lord has chosen, show thee; and thou
shall observe to do according to all that they inform thee: According to the
Law which they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they shall
tell thee, shall thou do; thou shall not decline from the thing which they
shall show thee, to the right hand, nor to the left. And that man that will do
presumptuously, not harkening unto the Priest (that stands before the Lord
thy God to manister there) or unto the Judge, that man shall die, and thou
shall take away evil from Israel. Acts 19.
When there grew in the Church of Christ, a question, Whether the Genti'es
believing might be saved, although they were not circumcised after the manner
of Moses, nor did observe the rest of those Legal Rites and Ceremonies
whereunto the Jews were bound. After great Dissension and Disputation about it,
their conclusion in the end was, to have it determined by sentence at
Jerusalem; which was accordingly done in a Council there assem^led for the same
purpose. Are ye able to allege any just and sufficient cause, wherefore
absolutely ye should not condescend in this Controversy, to have your
judgments overruled by some such Definitive Sentence; Whether it fall out to
be given with, or against you, that so these redious contentions may cease? Te
will perhaps make answer, That being persuaded already, as touching the truth
of your Cause, ye are not to hearken unto any sentence, no not, though Angels
should define otherwise, as the blessed Apostles own example teaches. Again,
That Men, yea, Councils, may err, and that unless the judgment given, do
satisfy your minds, unless it be such as ye can, by no further argument
oppugn; in a word, unless you perceive and acknowledge it your selves consonant
with Gods Word, to stand unto it, not allowing it, were to sin against your own
consciences. But consider, I beseech you, first, As touching the Apostle, how
that wherein be was so resolute and peremptory, our Lord Jesus Christ made
manifest unto him, even by Intuitive Revelation, wherein there was no
possibility of error: That which you are persuaded of, ye have it no otherwise
then by your own only probable collection; and therefore such bold
asseverations as in him were admirable, should in your months but argue
rashness. God was not ignorant, that the Priests and Judges, whose sentence in
Matters of Controversy he ordained should stand, both might and oftentimes
would be deceived in their judgment. Howbeit, better it was in the eye of his
understanding, that sometime an erroneous sentence Definitive should prevail,
till the same authority perceiving such oversight, might afterward correct or
reverse it, then that strifes should have respite to grow, and not come
speedily unto some end: Neither wish we, that men should do any thing which in
their hearts they are persuaded they ought not to do; but this persuasion ought
(we say) to be fully settled in their hearts, that in litigious and controversed
causes of such quality, the Will of God is to have them to do whatsoever the
sentence of judicial and final Decision shall determine, yea, though it seem in
their private opinion to swarve utterly from that which is right; as no doubt,
many times the sentence amongst the Jews, did seem unto one part or other
contending: And yet in this case, God did then allow them to do that which in
their private judgment it seemed (yea, and perhaps truly seemed) that the Law
did disallow. For if God be not the Author of confusion, but of peace, then can
he not be the Author of our refusal, but of our contentment, to stand unto some
Definitive Sentence; without which, almost impossible it is, that either we
should avoid confusion, or ever hope to attain peace. To small purpose, had the
Council of Jerusalem been assembled, if one: their determination being set
down, men might afterward have defended their former opinions. When therefore
they had given their Definitive Sentence, all Controverso^ was at an end:
Things were disputed before they came to be determined; Men afterward were not
to dispute any longer, but to obey. The Sentence of Judgment finished their
strife, which their disputes before judgment, could not do. This was ground
sufficient for any reasonable Man's conscience to build the duty of Obedience
upon, whatsoever his own opinion were as touching the matter before in
question. So full of wilfulness and self-liking, is our nature, that without
some Definitive Sentence, which being given, may stand, and a necessity of
silence on both sides afterward imposed; small hope there is, that strifes thus
for prosecuted, will in short time quietly end. Now it were in vain to ask you,
Whether ye could be content that the Sentence of any Court already erected,
should be so far authorized, as that among the Jews established by God himself,
for the determining of all Controversies. That man which will do
presumptuously, not harkening unto the Priest that stands before the Lord to
minister there; nor unto the Judge, let him die. Ye have given us already to
understand what your opinion is in part, concerning Her sacred Majesty's Court
of High Commission: the nature whereof is, the same with that amongst the Jews,
albeit the power be not so great. Pref. Tract. de Excom. Presbyt.
The other way, happily may like you better, because Master Beza in his last
Book, save one, written about these Matters, professes himself to be now weary
of such Combats and Encounters, whether by word or writing, in as much as he
finds that Controversies thereby are made but Brawls: And therefore wishes
that in some common lawful Assembly of Churches, all these strifes may at once
be decided. Shall there be then in the mean while no doings? Matthew. 23.23.
Yes, There are the weightier Matters of the Law, Judgment, and Mercy and
Fidelity. These things we ought to do; and these things, while we contend about
less, we leave undone. Happier are they, whom the Lord, when he comes, shall
find doing in these things, then disputing about Doctors, Elders, and Deacons:
Or if there be no remedy, but somewhat needs ye must do, which may tend to the
setting forward of your Discipline; do that which wisemen, who think some
Statute of the Realm more fit to be repealed then to stand in force, are
accustomed to do, before they come to Parliament, where the place of enacting
is; that is to say, spend the time in re-examining more duly your cause, and in
more thoroughly considering of that which ye labor to overthrow: As for the
Orders which are established, since Equity and Reason, the Law of Nature, God
and Man, do all favor that which is in Being; till orderly Judgment of Decision
be given against it, it is but Justice to exact of you, and perverseness in you,
it should be to deny thereunto your willing obedience. Not that I judge it a
thing allowable for men to observe those Laws, which its their hearts, they are
stredfastly persuaded to be against the Law of God: But your persuasion in this
case; ye are all bound for the time to suspend, and in otherwise doing, ye
offend against God, by troubling his Church without any just or necessary
cause. Be it that there are some reasons inducing you to think hardly of our
Laws: Are those reasons demonstrative, are they necessary, or but mere
probabilities only? An Argument necessary and demonstrative is such, as being
proposed unto any man, and understood; she mind cannot chase, but invardly
assent; Any one such reason discharges, I grant the Gonscience, and sets it
at full liberty. For the public approbation given by the Body of this whole
Church, unto those things which are established, does make it but probable,
that they are good; And therefore unto a necessary proof that they are not
good, it must give place: But if the skilfullest amongst you can show, that all
the Books ye have hitherto written, be able to afford any one argument of this
nature, let the instance be given. As for probabilities, What thing was there
ever set down so agreeable with sound reason, but some probable show against it
might be made? It is meet, that when publicly things are received, and have
taken place; General Obedience thereunto should cease to be exacted, in case,
this or that private person, led with some probable conceit, should make open
Protostation, T. C lib. 3. p. 191.
Peter or John disallow them, and pronounce them naught. In which case your
answer will be, That concerning the Laws of our Church; they are not only
condemned in the opinion of a private man, but of thousands, year and even of
those amongst which diverse are in public charge and authority. At though when
public consent of the whole has established any thing, every man's judgment
being thereunto compared, were not private, howsoever his calling be to some
kind of public charge. So that of Peace and Quietness, there is not any way
possible, unless the probable voice of every entire Society or Body Politic,
overruled all private of like nature in the same Body: Which thing effectually
proves, That God being Author of Peace; and not of Confusion in the Church;
must needs be Author of those men's peaceable resolutions, who concerning these
things, have determined with themselves, to think and do as the Church, they
are of decrees, till they see necessary cause enforcing them to the contrary.

The Matter contrained in these Eight Books.
7. Nor is mine own intent, any other in these several Books of discourse, then
to make it appear unto you; that for the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Land, we
are led by great reason to observe them, and ye by no necessity bound to
impugn them. It is no part of my secret meaning, to draw you hereby into
hatred, or to set upon the face of this cause any fairer gloss, then the naked
truth does afford; but my whole endeavor is to resolve the Conscience, and to
show, as near as I can, what in this Controversy, the Heart is to think, if it
will follow the light of sound and sincere judgment, without either cloud of
prejudice, or mist of passionate affection. Wherefore, seeing that Laws and
Ordinances in particular, whether such as we observe, or such as your selves
would have established; when the mind does sift and examine them, it must
needs have often recourse to a number of doubts and questions, about the
nature, kinds, and qualities of Laws in general; whereof, unless it be
thoroughly informed, there will appear no certainty to stay our persuasion upon:
I have for that cause set down in the first place, an Introduction on both
sides needful to be considered; declaring therein, what Law is, how different
kinds of Laws there are, and what force they are of, according unto each
kind. This done, because ye suppose the Laws, for which ye strive, are found
in Scripture; but those not, against which we strive: And upon this surmise,
are drawn to hold it, as the very main Pillar of your whole cause, That
Scripture ought to be the only rule of all our actions; and consequently, that
the Church Orders which we observe, being not commanded in Scripture, are
offensive and displeasant unto God. I have spent the second Book in sifting of
this point, which stands with you for the first and chiefest principle
whereon ye build. Whereunto the next in degree is, That as God will have always
a Church upon Earth, while the World does continue, and that Church stand in
need of Government; of which Government, it behooves himself to be, both the
Author and Teacher: So it cannot stand with duty, That man should ever presume
in any wise to change and alter the same; and therefore. That in Scripture
there must of necessity be found some particular Form of Ecclesiastical Polity,
the Laws whereof, admit not any kind of alteration. The first three Books
being thus ended, the fourth proceeds from the general Grounds and
Foundations of your cause, unto your general Accusations against us, as having
in the orders of our Church (for so you pretend) Corrupted the right Form of
Church Polity with manifold Popish Rites and Ceremonies, which certain Reformed
Churches have banished from amongst them, and have thereby given us such
example as (you think) we ought to follow. This your Assertion has herein
drawn us to make search, whether these be just Exceptions against the Customs
of our Church, when ye plead, that they are the same which the Church of Rome
has, or that they are not the same which some other Reformed Churches have
devised. Of those four Books which remain, and are bestowed about the
Specialties of that Cause which little in Controversy, the first examineth the
causes by you alleged; wherefore the public duties of Christian Religion, as
our Prayers, our Sacraments, and the rest, should not be ordered in such sort,
as with us they are; nor that power whereby the persons of men are consecrated
unto the Ministry, be disposed of in such manner as the Laws of this Church do
allow. The second and third, are concerning the power of Jurisdiction; the one,
Whether Laymen, such as your Governing Elders are, ought in all Congregations
for ever, to be invested with that power? The other, Whether Bishops may have
that power over other Pastors, and therewithal, that honor which with us they
have? And because, besides the Power of Order, which all consecrated persons
have, and the Power of Jurisdiction, which neither they all, nor they only
have: There is a third power, a Power of Ecclesiastical Dominion, communicable,
as we think, unto persons not Ecclesiastical, and most fit to be restrained
unto the Prince our Sovereign Commander over the whole Body Politic. The
eighth Book we have allotted unto this Question, and have sifted therein your
Objections against those preeminences Royal which thereunto appertain. Thus
have I laid before you the Brief of these my Travels; and presented under your
view, the Limbs of that Cause litigious between us; the whole entire Body
whereof, being thus compact, it shall be no troublesome thing for any man to
find each particular Controversies resting place, and the coherance it has
with those things, either, on which it depends, or which depend on it.

8. The case so standing therefore, How just cause there is to fear the
manifold dangerous events, likely is ensue upon this intended Reformation, if
it did take place.
my Brethren, as it does, the wisdom of Governors ye must not blame, in that
they further also forecasting the manifold strange and dangerous innovations,
which are more then likely to follow, if your Discipline should take place,
have for that cause thought it hitherto a part of their duty to withstand your
endeavors that way: The rather, for that they have seen already some small
beginnings of the fruits thereof, in them, who concurring with you in judgment
about the necessity of that Discipline, have adventured without more ado, to
separate themselves from the rest of the Church, and to put your speculations
in execution. These men's hastiness, the warier sort of you does not commend; ye
wish they had held themselves longer in, and not so dangerously flown abroad
before the feathers of the Cause had been grown; their Error with merciful
terms ye reprove, naming them in great commiseration of minds 1 Pet. 2. 2.
your poor Brethren. They on the contrary side, more bitterly accuse you as
their false Brethren, and against you they plead, saying, From your Breasts it
is, that we have sucked those things, which when ye delivered unto us, ye
termed that heavenly, Psalm. 55. 13:
sincere, and wholesome Milk of Gods Word; howsoever ye now abhor as poison,
that which the virtue thereof has wrought and brought forth in us. Ye sometime
our Companions, Guides, and Familiars, with whom we have had most sweet
Consultations, are now become our professed Adversaries, because we think the
Statute-Congregation in England, to be no true Christian Churches; because we
have severed our selves from them, and because without their leave or license,
that are in Civil Authority, we have secretly framed our own Churches according
to the Platform of the Word of God: For of that point between you and us, there
is no Controversy. Also, what would ye have us to do? At such time as ye were
content to accept us in the number of your own, your Teaching we heard, weread
your Writings: And though we would, yet able we are not to forget, with what
zeal ye have ever professed, That in the English Congregations (for so many of
them as be ordered according unto their own Laws,) the very Public Service of
God is fraught, as touching Matter, with heaps of intolerable Pollutions, and
as concerning Form, borrowed from the Shop of Antichrist; hateful both ways in
the eyes of the most Holy; the kind of their Government, by Bishops and
Archbishops, Pref. against Dr. Baner.
Antichristian; that Discipline which Christ has essentially tied, that is to
say, so united unto his Church, that we cannot account it really to be his
Church which has not in it the same Discipline, that very Discipline no less
there despised, then in the highest Throne of Antichrist. All such parts of the
Word of God, as do any way concern that Discipline, no less unsoundly taught
and interpreted by all authorized English Pastors, then by Antichrists Factors
themselves: At Baptism, Crossing; at the Supper of the Lord. Kneeling; at both,
a number of other the most notorious Badges of Antichristian Recognisance,
usual. Being moved with these and the like, your effectual discourses,
whereunto we gave most attentive ear, till they entered even into our souls, and
were as fire within our bosoms; We thought we might hereof be bold to conclude,
That since no such Antichristian Synagogue may be accounted a true Church of
Christ, ye by accusing all Congregations ordered according to the Laws of
England as Antichristian, did mean to condemn those Congregations, as not being
any of them worthy the name of a true Christian Church. Ye tell us now, it is
not your meaning: But what meant your often threatenings of them, who professing
themselves the inhabitants of Mount Sion, were too loath to depart wholly as
they should out of Babylon? Whereat, our hearts being fearfully troubled, we
durst not, we durst not continue longer so near her confines, lest her plagues
might suddenly overtake us, before we did cease to be partakers with her sins;
for so we could not choose, but acknowledge with grief, that we were, when they
doing evil, we by our presence in their Assemblies, seemed to like thereof; or
at leastwise, not so earnestly to dislike, as became men heartily zealous of
Gods glory. For adventuring to erect the Discipline of Christ, without the
leave of the Christian Magistrate, happily ye may condemn us as fools, in that we
hazard thereby our estates and persons, further then you which are that way
more wise think necessary: But of any offense or sin therein committed against
God, with what conscience can you accuse us, when your own positions are, That
the things we observe, should every of them be dearer unto us, then ten
thousand lives; that they are the peremptory Commandments of God; that no
mortal man can dispense with them; and that the Magistrate grievously sins,
in not constraining thereunto? Will ye blame any man for doing that of his own
accord, which all men should be compelled to do that are not willing of
themselves? When God commands, shall we answer, that we will obey, if so be
Caesar will grant us leave? Is Discipline an Ecclesiastical Matter, or a Civil?
If an Ecclesiastical, is must of necessity belong to the duty of the Minister;
and the Minister (ye say) holds all his Authority of doing whatsoever
belongs unto the Spiritual Charge of the House of God, even immediately from
God himself, without dependency upon any Magistrate. Whereupon it follows, as
we suppose, that the hearts of the people being willing to be under the Scepter
of Christ, the Minister of God, into whose hands the Lord himself has put that
Scepter, is without all excuse, if thereby he guide them not. Nor do we find,
that hitherto greatly ye have disliked those Churches abroad, where the people
with direction of their godly Ministers, have even against the will of the
Magistrate, brought in either the Doctrine or Discipline of Jesus Christ: For
which cause, we must now think the very same thing of you, which our Savior
did sometime utter concerning false-hearted Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 23. 3.
They say, and do not. Thus the foolish Barrowist deriveth his Schism by way of
Conclusion, as to him it seems, directly and plainly out of your principles.
Him therefore we leave to be satisfied by you, from whom he has sprung: And if
such, by your own acknowledgment, be persons dangerous, although as yet the
alterations which they have made, are of small and tender growth; the changes
likely to ensue, throughout all States and Vocations within this Land, in case
your desire should take place, must be thought upon. First, Concerning the
Supreme Power of the Highest, they are no small Prerogatives, which now
thereunto belonging, the Form of your Discipline will constrain it to resign;
as in the last Book of this Treatise we have showed at large. Again, it may
justly be feared, whether our English Nobility, when the Matter came in trial,
would contentedly suffer themselves to be always at the Call, and to stand to
the sentence of a number of mean persons, assisted with the presence of their
poor Teacher; a man (as sometimes it happens) though better able to speak, yet
little or no whit apter to judge, then the rest: From whom, be their dealings
never so absurd (unless it be by way of Complaint to a Synod) no Appeal may be
made unto any one of higher Power; is as much as the Order of your Discipline
admits no standing in Equality of Courts, no Spiritual Judge to have any
ordinary Superior on Earth, but as many Supremacies as there are Parishes and
several Congregations. Neither is it altogether without cause, that so many do
fear the overthrow of all Learning, as a threatened sequel of this your Intended
Discipline: Sap. 6. 24.
For if the Worlds Preservation depend upon the multitude of the wise; and of
that sort, the number hereafter be not likely to wax overgreat, when (that
therewith the son of Syrach professes himself at the heart grived) men of
understanding are already so little set by: Eccles. 26. 29.
How should their minds, whom the love of so precious a Jewel fills with
secret jealousy, even in regard of the lest things which may any way hinder
the flourishing estate thereof, choose but misdoubt lest this Discipline, which
always you match with Divine Doctrine, as her natural and true Sister, be found
unto all kinds of knowledge a Stepmother; seeing that the greatest worldly
hopes, which are proposed unto the chiefest kind of Learning, ye seek utterly
to extirpate as Weeds; and have grounded your Platform on such Propositions, as
do after a sort undermine those most renowned Habitations, where, through the
goodness of Almighty God, all commendable Arts and Sciences, are with exceeding
great industry hitherto (and so may they for ever continue) studied, proceeded
in, and professed? To charge you, as purposely bent to the overthrow of that,
wherein so many of you have attained no small perfection, were injurious. Only
therefore, I wish, that your selves did well consider, how opposite certain of
your Positions are unto the state of Collegiate Societies, whereon the two
Universities consist. Those Degrees which their Statutes bind them to take,
are by your Laws taken away, your selves who have sought them, ye so excuse; as
that ye would have men to think ye judge them not allowable, but tolerable
only: and to be borne with, for some help which ye find in them unto the
furtherance of your purposes, till the corrupt estate of the Church may be
better reformed. Your Laws forbidding Ecclesiastical Persons utterly the
exercise of Civil Power, must needs deprive the Heads and Masters in the same
Colleges of all such Authority as now they exercise, either at home, by
punishing the faults of those, who not as children to their Parents by the Law
of Nature, but altogether by Civil Authority are subject unto them; or abroad,
by keeping Courts amongst their Tenants. Your Laws making permanent inequality
amongst Ministers, a thing repugnant to the Word of God, enforce those
Colleges, the Seniors whereof are all, or any part of them, Ministers under
the Government of a Master in the same Vocation, to choose, as often as they meet
together, a new President. For if so ye judge it necessary to do in Synods, for
the avoiding of permanent inequality amongst Ministers; the same cause must
needs, even in these Collegiate Assemblies, enforce the like: Except
peradventure ye mean to avoid all such absurdities, by dissolving those
Corporations, and by bringing the Universities unto the Form of the School of
Geneva; Which thing men the rather are inclined to look for; in as much as the
Ministry, wherein to their Founders, with singular Providence, have by the
same Statutes appointed them necessarily to enter at a certain time, Hum. (...)
to the (...) p. 5^.
your Laws bind them much more necessarily to forbear, till some Parish abroad
call for them. Your opinion concerning the Law Civil, is That the knowledge
thereof might be spared, as a thing which this Land does not need. Professors
in that kind being few, ye are the bolder to spurn at them, and not to
dissemble your minds, as concerning their removal: In whose Studies, although
my self have not much been conversant, nevertheless exceeding great cause, I
see, there is to wish, that thereunto more encouragement were given, as well
for the singular Treasures of Wisdom therein contained, as also for the great
use we have thereof, both in Decision of certain kinds of causes arising daily
within our selves, and especially for Commerce with Nations abroad, whereunto
that knowledge is most requisite. The Reasons wherewith ye would persuade, that
Scripture is the only rule to frame all our actions by, are in every respect
as effectual for proof, that the same it the only Law whereby to determine all
our Civil Controversies. And then what does let; but that as those men may have
their desire, who frankly broach it already, That the Work of Reformation will
never be perfect, till the Law of Jesus Christ be received alone; so Pleaders
and Counselors may bring their Books of the Common Law, and bestow them as the
Students of curious and needless Arts did theirs in the Apostles time? Acts 19.
19.
I leave them to scan, how for thosewords of yours may reach, wherein ye
declare; That where as now many houses lie waste through inordinate Suits of
Law, Humb. Motion Page 74.
This one thing will show the excellency of Discipline for the Wealth of the
Realm, and quiet of Subjects; That the Church is to censure such a Party, who
is apparently troublesome and contentious, and without REASONABLE CAUSE, upon a
mere Will and Stomach, does vex and molest his Brother, and trouble the
Country. For mine own part, I do not see, but that it might very well agree
with your Principles, if your Discipline were fully planted, even to send out
your Writs of Surcease unto all Courts of England besides, for the most things
handled in them. Counterp. Page 108.
A great deal further I might proceed, and descend lower; but for as much as
against all these and the like difficulties, your answer is, That we ought to
search what things are consonant to Gods Will; not which be most for our own
ease; and therefore that your Discipline being (for such is your Error) the
absolute Commandment of Almighty God, it must be received, although the World
by receiving it, should be clean turned upside down: Herein lies the greatest
danger of all. For whereas the name of Divine Authority, is used to countenance
these things, which are not the Commandments of God, but your own Erroneous
Collections; on him ye must father whatsoever ye shall afterward be led,
either to do in withstanding the Adversaries of your Cause, or to think in
maintenance of your doings. And what this may be, God does know. In such kinds
of Error, the Mind once imagining it self to seek the execution of Gods Will,
laboreth forthwith to remove both things and persons, which any way hinder it
from taking place; and in such cases, if any strange or new thing seem
requisite to be done, a strange and new opinion, concerning the lawfulness
thereof, is withal received and broached under countenance of Divine Authority.
One example herein may serve for many, to show, That false opinions touching
the Will of God to have things done, are wont to bring forth mighty and violent
practices against the hindrances of them; And those practices new opinions
more pernicious then the first, yea, most extremely sometimes opposite to that
which the first did seem to intend. Where the people took upon them the
Reformation of the Church, by casting out Popish Superstition, they having
received from their Pastors a General Instruction, that whatsoever the Heavenly
Father has not planted, Mat. 15. 13.
must be rootod out; proceeded in some foreign places so far, that down went
Oratories, and the very Temples of God themselves: For as they chanced to take
the compass of their Commission stricter or larger, so their dealings were
accordingly more or less moderate. Amongst others, there sprang up presently
one kind of men, with whose zeal and forwardness, the rest being compared,
were thought to be mavelous cold and dull. These grounding themselves on
Rules more general; that whatsoever the Law of Christ commands not, thereof
Antichrist is the Author; and that whatsoever Antichrist, or his adherents did
in the World, the true Professors of Christ are to undo; found out many things
more then others had done, the Extirpation whereof was in their conceit, as
necessary as of any thing before removed. Hereupon they secretly made their
doleful complaints every where as they went, that albeit the World did begin to
profess some dislike of that which was evil in the Kingdom of Darkness, yet
Fruits worthy of a true-Repentance were not seen; and that if men did repent as
they ought, Guy de Bres c^ner. lerreur des Anabapristes, page 4.
they must endeavor to purge the truth of all manner evil, to the end, there
might follow a new World afterward, wherein righteousness only should dwell.
Private Repentance they said, ^^st appear by every man's fashioning his own
life, contrary unto the custom and orders of this present World, both in
greater things and in less. To this purpose, they had always in their mouths,
those greater things, Charity, Faith, the true fear of God, the Cross, the
Mortification of the flesh. All their Exhortations were to set light of the
things in this World, to account riches and honors vanity, and in taken
thereof, not only to seek neither; but if men were possessors of both, even to
cast away the one, and resign the other, that all men might see their unfeigned
conversion unto Christ. Page 5. Page 16. Page 118, 119.
They were Sollicitors of Men to Fasts, to often Meditations of Heavenly
things, and as it were Conferences in secret with God by Prayers, not framed
according to the frozen manner of the World, but expressing such fervent
desires as might even force God to hea^ken unto them. Where they found men in
Diet, Attire, Furniture of House, or any other way observers of civility, and
decent order, such they reproved as being carnally and earthly minded. Every
word otherwise then severely and sadly uttered, Page 116, 120.
seemed to pierce like a Sword thereon them. If any man were pleasant, Page 124.
their manner was presently with sighs to repeat those words of our Savior
Christ, Luke 6. 12.
Woe be to you which now laugh, for ye shall lament. So great was their delight
to be always in trouble, that such as did quietly lead their lives, they judged
of all other men to be in most dangerous case. Page 117.
They so much affected to cross the ordinary custom in every thing, that when
other men's use was to put on better attire, they would be sure to show
themselves openly abroad in worses: The ordinary names of the days in the week,
they thought it a kind of profaneness to use, and therefore accustomed
themselves to make no other distinction, then by Numbers, The first, second,
third day. From this they proceeded unto Public Reformation, Page 40.
first Ecclesiastical, and then Civil. Touching the former, they boldly
avouched, that themselves only had the Truth, which thing upon peril of their
lives, they would at all times defend; and that since the Apostles lived, the
same was never before in all points sincerely taught. Wherefore, that things
might again be brought to that ancient integrity which Jesus Christ by his Word
requires, they began to control the Ministers of the Gospel, for attributing
so much force and virtue unto the Scriptures of God read, whereas the Truth
was, that when the Word is said to engender Faith in the Heart; and to convert
the Soul of Man, or to work any such Spiritual Divine effect, these speeches
are not thereunto appliable as it is read or preached, but as it is ingrafted
in us by the power of the Holy Ghost, opening the eyes of our understanding,
and so revealing the Mysteries of God, according to that which Jeremy promised
before should be, Jere. 31.34.
saying, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and I will write it in their
hearts. The Book of God they notwithstanding for the most part so admired, Page
25.
that other disputation against their opinions then only by allegation of
Scripture they would not hear; Page 27.
besides it, they thought no other Writings in the World should be studied; in
so much, as one of their great Prophets exhorting them to cast away all
respects unto Humane Writings, so far to his motion they condescended, that as
many as had any Books, save the Holy Bible in their custody, they brought and
set them publicly on fire. When they and their Bibles were alone together,
what strange fantastical opinion soever at any time entered into their heads,
their use was to think the Spirit taught it them. Their phrensies concerning
our Saviors Incarnation, the state of Souls departed, and such like, are
things needless to be rehearsed. And for as much as they were of the same Suit
with those of whom the Apostle speaks, saying, 2 Timothy 3. 7.
They are still learning, but never attain to the knowledge of truth, it was no
marvel to see them every day broach some new thing, not heard of before. Which
restless levity they did interpret to be their growing to Spiritual Perfection,
and a proceeding from Faith to Faith. Page 65.
The differences amongst them grew by this mean in a manner infinite, so that
scarcely was there found any one of them, the forge of whose Brain was not
possessed with some special mystery. Page 65.
Whereupon although their mutual contentions were most fiercely prosecuted
amongst themselves Page 135.
yet when they came to defend the cause common to them all against the
Adversaries of their Faction, they had ways to lick one another whole, the
sounder in his own persuasion excusing THE DEAR BRETHREN, Page 25.
which were not so far enlightened, and professing a charitable hope of the
Mercy of God toward them, notwithstanding their swerving from him in some
things. Page 71.
Their own Ministers they highly magnified, as men whose vocation was from God:
The rest their manner was to term disdainfully Scribes and Pharisees, to
account their Calling an Humane Creature, Page 124.
and to detain the people as much as might be from hearing them. As touching
Sacraments, Baptism administered in the Church of Rome, Page 764.
they judged to be but an execrable Mockery and no Baptism; both because the
Ministers thereof in the Papacy are wicked Idolaters, lewd Persons, Thieves,
and Murderers, cursed Creatures, ignorant Beasts, and also for that to baptize,
is a proper action belonging unto none but the Church of Christ, whereas Rome
is Antichrists Synagogue. The custom of using Godfathers and Godmothers at
Christnings, Page 748.
they scorned. Baptism of Infants, although confessed by themselves, Page 512.
to have been continued even sithence the very Apostles own times, yet they
altogether condemned, partly, Page 518.
because sundry errors are of no less antiquity; and partly, for that there is
no Commandment in the Gospel of Christ, which says, Baptize Infants; but he
contrariwise in saying, Page 722.
Go Preach and Baptize, does appoint, Page. 726.
that the Minister of Baptism shall in that action first administer Doctrine,
and then Baptism; as also in saying, Whosoever does believe and is baptized,
Page 688.
be appoints, that the party to whom Baptism is administered, shall first
believe, and then be baptized; to the end, that Believing may go before this
Sacrament in the Receiver, no otherwise then Preaching in the Giver, since
equally in both, the Law of Christ declares, not only what things are
required, but also in what order they are required. The Eucharist they received
(pretending our Lord and Savior example) after Supper: Page 38.
And for avoiding all those impieties which have been grounded upon the
Mystical words of Christ, This is my Body. This is my Blood; they thought it
not safe to mention either Body or Blood in that Sacrament, but rather to
abrogate both, and to use no words but these, Take, Page 122.
eat, declare the death of our Lord. Drink, show forth our Lords death. In
Rites and Ceremonies, their Profession was hatred of all Conformity with the
Church of Rome: For which cause, they would rather endure any torment, then
observe the solemn Festivals which others did, in as much as Antichrist (they
said) was the first inventer of them. The pretended end of their Civil
Reformation, was, That Christ might have dominion over all; that all Crowns and
Scepters might be thrown down at his feet; that no other might reign over
Christian men, but he; no Regiment keep them in aw, but his Discipline; amongst
them no Sword at all be carried besides his, the Sword of Spiritual
Excommunication. For this cause they labored with all their might, in
over-turning the Seats of Magistracy, Page 841.
because Christ has said, Kings of Nations; in abolishing the execution
Justice, because Christ has said, Resist not evil; in forbidding Oaths, the
necessary means of Judicial trial, Page 833.
because Christ has said, Swear not at all: Finally, in bringing in Community
of Goods, Page 849.
because Christ by his Apostles has given the World such example, to the end,
that men might excel one another, not in Wealth, the Pillar of Secular
Authority, but in Virtue. These men at the first were only pitied in their
Error, and not much withstood by any, Page 40.
the great Humility, Zeal, and Devotion, which appeared to be in them, was in
all men's opinion a pledge of their harmless meaning. The hardest that men of
sound understanding conceived of them, was but this, O quam honesta voluntate
miseri errant? I actant. de Justir. lib. 5. cap. 19. Page 6.
With how good a meaning these poor Souls do evil? Luther made request unto
Frederick, Duke of Saxony, that within his Dominion they might be favorably
dealt with and spared, for that (their Error exempted) they seemed otherwise
right good men. By means of which merciful Toleration they gathered strength,
much more then was safe for the State of the Commonwealth wherein they lived.
They had their secret Corner-meetings and Assemblies in the night, the people
flocked unto them by thousands. Page 420.
The means whereby they both allured and retained so great multitudes, were
most effectual; First, A wonderful show of zeal toward God, wherewith they
seemed to be even rapt in every thing they spoke: Page 55.
Secondly, An hatred of sin, and a singular love of integrity, which men did
think to be much more then ordinary in them, by reason of the custom which they
had to fill the ears of the people with Invectives against their authorized
Guides, as well Spiritual as Civil: Thirdly, The bountiful relief wherewith
they eased the broken estate of such needy Creatures, as were in that respcit
the more apt to be drawn away. Fourthly, A tender compassion which they were
thought to take upon the miseries of the common sort, over whose heads their
manner was even to pour down showers of tears in complaining, that no respect
was had unto them, that their goods were devoured by wicked Cormorants, their
persons had in contempt, Page 6.
all Liberty, both Temporal and Spiritual, taken from them; Page 7.
that it was high time for God now to hear their groans, and to send them
deliverance. Lastly, A cunning slight which they had to stroke and smoothe up
the minds of their followers, as well by appropriating unto them all the
favorable Titles, the good words, and the gracious promises in Scripture; as
also by casting the contrary always on the heads of such as were severed from
that retinue. Whereupon, the peoples common aeclamation unto such deceivers
was: These are verily the Men of God, these are his true and sincere Prophets.
If any such Prophet or Man of God, Page 7.
did suffer by order of Law, condign and deserved punishment, were it for
Felony, Rebellion, Murder; or what else; that people (so strangely were their
hearts enchanted) as though Blessed St. Stephen had been again Martyred, did
lament, that God took away his most dear servants from them. In all these
things being fully persuaded, that what they did, Page 27.
it was obedience to the Will of God, and that all men should do the like;
there remained after speculation, Practice, whereby the whole World thereunto
(if it were possible) might be framed. This they saw could not be done, but
with mighty opposition and resistance; against which, Page 6.
to strengthen themselves, they secretly entered into a League of Association.
And peradventure considering, that although they were many, yet long Wars would
in time waste them out; they began to think, whether it might not be, that God
would have them do for their speedy and mighty increase, the same which
sometime Gods own chosen people, the people of Israel did. Glad and fain they
were to have it so; which very desire was it self apt to breed b^th an opinion
of possibility, and a willingness to gather Arguments of likelihood, that so
God himself would have it. Nothing more clear unto their seeming, then that a
New Jerusalem being often spoken of in Scipture, they undoubtedly were
themselves that New Jerusalem, and the Old did by way of a certain Fegurative
resemblance signify what they should both be, and do. Here they drew in a Sea
of Matter, by amplifying all things unto their own Company, which are any where
spoken concerning Divine Favors and Benefits bestowed upon the Old Commonwealth
of Israel; concluding, that as Israel was delivered out of Egypt, so they
spiritually out of the Egypt of this Worlds servile thraldom unto Sin and
Superstition: As Israel was to root out the Idolatrous Nations, and to plant
instead of them, a people which feared God; so the same Lords good will and
pleasure was now, that these new Israelites should under the conduct of other
Joshua's Sampsons, and Gideons, perform a work no less miraculous in casting
out violently the wicked from the Earth, and establishing the Kingdom of Christ
with perfect liberty: And therefore, as the cause why the Children of Israel
took unto one Man many Wives, might be, lest the casualties of War should any
way hinder the promise of God concerning their multitude, from taking effect in
them; so it was not unlike that, for the necessary propagation of Christ's
Kingdom under the Gospel, the Lord was content to allow as much. Now whatsoever
they did in such sort collect out of Scripture, when they came to justify or
persuade it unto others, all was the Heavenly Fathers appointment, his
commandment, his will and charge. Which thing is the very point, in regard
whereof, I have gathered his Declaration. For my purpose herein is to show,
that when the minds of men are once erroneously persuaded, that it is the Will
of God to have those things done which they fancy; then Opinions are as Thorns
in their sides, never suffering them to take rest till they have brought their
speculations into practice. The lets and impediments of which practice, their
restless desire and study to remove, leads them every day forth by the hand
into other more dangerous opinions, sometimes quite and clean contrary to their
first pretended meanings. So as what will grow out of such Errors as go masked
under the cl^ak of Divine Authority, impossible it is, that ever the wit of man
should imagine, till time have brought forth the fruits of them: For which
cause, it behooves Wisdom to fear the sequels thereof, even beyond all apparent
cause of fear. These men, in whose mouths at the first, sounded nothing but
only Mortification of the Flesh, were come at the lenght, to think they might
lawfully have their six or seven Wives apiece: They which at the first, thought
Judgment and Justice it self to be merciless cruelty; accounted at the length,
their own hands sanctified with being imbrued in Christian blood: They who at
the first were wont to beat down all Dominion, and to urge against poor
Constables, Kings of Nations; had at the length, both Consuls and Kings of
their own erection amongst themselves: Finally, they which could not brook at
the first, that any man should seek, no not by Law, the recovery of Goods
injuriously taken or withheld from him, were grown at the last to think they
could not offer unto God more acceptable Sacrifice, then by turning their
Adversaries clean out of house and home, and by enriching themselves with all
kind of spoil and pillage. Page 41.
Which thing being laid to their charge, they had in a readiness their answer,
That now the time was come, when, according to our Saviors promise, Matthew. 5.
^.
The meek ones must inherit the Earth; and that their title hereunto was the
same which the righteous Israelites had unto the goods of the wicked Egyptians.
Exodus 11. 2.
Wherefore since the World has had in these men so fresh experience, how
dangerous such active Errors are, it must not offend you, though touching the
sequel of your present misperswasions, much more be doubted, then your own
intents and purposes do happily aim at. And yet your words already are somewhat,
when ye affirm, that your Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, ought to be in
this Church of England, Mart. in his third Libel, page 28.
Whether Her Majesty and our State will, or no: When for the animating of your
Confederates, ye publish the Musters which ye have made of your own Bands, and
proclaim them to amount to I know not how many thousands; when ye threaten,
that since neither your Suits to the Parliament, nor Supplications to our
Convocation-House; neither your Defenses by Writing, nor Challenges of
Disputation in behalf of that Cause, are able to prevail, we must blame our
selves, if to bring in Discipline, some such means hereafter be used, as shall
cause all our hearts to ache. That things doubtful, are to be construed in the
better part, Demons^r. in the Pref.
is a Principle not safe to be followed in Matters concerning the Public State
of a Commonweal. But howsoever these and the like Speeches, be accounted as
Arrows idly shot at random, without either eye had to any Mark, or regard to
their lighting place; has not your longing desire for the practice of your
Discipline, brought the Matter already unto this demurrer amongst you; whether
the people and their Godly Pastors, that way affected, ought not to make
Separation from the rest, and to begin the Exercise of Discipline, without the
License of Civil Powers, which License they have sought for, and are not heard?
Upon which question, as ye have now divided your selves, the warier sort of you
taking the one part, and the forwarder in zeal, the other; so in case these
earnest Ones should prevail, what other sequel can any wise man imagine but
this, that having first resolved that Attempts for Discipline without Superiors
are lawful, it will follow in the next place to be disputed. What may be
attempted against Superiors, which will not have the Scepter of that Discipline
to rule over them? Yea, even by you which have staid your selves from running
headlong with the other sort, somewhat notwithstanding there has been done
without the leave or liking of your lawful Superiors, for the exercise of a
part of your Discipline amongst the Clergy thereunto addicted. And lest
Examination of Principal Parties therein should bring those things to light,
which might hinder and let your proceedings; behold, for a Bar against that
impediment, one Opinion ye have newly added unto the rest, even upon this
occasion, an Opinion to exempt you from taking Oaths, which may turn to the
molestation of your Brethren in that cause. The next Neighbor Opinions
whereunto, when occasion requires, may follow for Dispensation with Oaths
already taken, if they afterward be found to import a necessity of detecting
ought which may bring such good men into trouble or damage, whatsoever the
cause be. O merciful God, what man's wit is there able to sound the depth of
those dangerous and fearful evils, whereinto our weak and impotent nature is
inclineable to sink it self, rather the^ to show an acknowledgment of Error in
that which once we have unadvisedly taken upon us to defend, against the
stream, as it were, of a contrary public resolution! Wherefore, if we any
thing respect their Error, who being persuaded, even as ye are, have gone
further upon that persuasion then ye allow, if we regard the present State of
the highest Governor placed over us, if the quality and disposition of our
Nobles, if the Orders and Laws of our famous Universities, if the Profession of
the Civil, or the Practice of the Common Law amongst us, if the mischiefs
whereinto, even before our eyes, so many others have fallen headlong from no
less plausible and fair beginnings then yours are: There is in every of these
Considerations most just cause to fear, lest our hastiness to embrace a thing
of so perilous consequence, should cause Posterity to feel those evils, which
as yet are more easy for us to prevent, then they would be for them to remedy.

9. The best and safest way for you therefore, my dear Brethren, is, The
Conclusion of all.
To call your Deeds past to a new reckoning, to re-examine the cause ye have
taken in hand, and to try it even point by point, argument by argument, with
all the diligent exactness ye can, to lay aside the Gall of that Bitterness
wherein your minds have hitherto ever-abounded, and with meekness to search
the Truth. Think ye are Men, deem it not impossible for you to err; sift
unpartially your own hearts, whether it be force of Reason, or vehemence of
Affection, which has bred, and still does feed these Opinions in you. If Truth
do any where manifest it self, seek not to smother it with glo^ing Delusion,
acknowledge the greatness thereof, and think it your best Victory, when the
same does prevail over you^

That ye have been earnest in speaking or writing again and again the contrary
way, should be noblemish or discredit at all unto you. Amongst so many so huge
Volumes, as the infinite pains of St. Augustine have brought forth, what one
has gotten him greater love, commendation, and honor, then the Book wherein he
carefully collecteth his own over-sights, and sincerely condemns them? Many
speeches there are of Jobs, whereby his Wisdom and other Virtues may appear;
but the glory of an ingenuous mind he has purchased by these words only, Job
39. 37.
Behold, I will lay mine hand on my mouth, I have spoken once, yet will I not
therefore maintain Argument; yea, twice, howbeit for that cause further I will
not proceed. Far more comfort it were for us (so small is the joy we take in
these strises) to labor under the same yoke, as men that look for the same
eternal reward of their labors, to be enjoined with you in Bands of
indissoluble Love and Amity, to live as if our persons being many, our souls
were but one, rather than in such dismembered sort, to spend our few and
wretched days in a tedious prosecuting of wearisome contentions; the end
whereof, if they have not some speedy end, will be heavy, even on both sides.
Brought already we are, even to that estate which Gregory Nazianzen mournfully
describes, Greg. Naz. in Apol.
saying, My mind leads me (since there is no other remedy) to fly and to
convey my self into some corner out of sight, where I may escape from this
cloudy tempest of maliciousness, whereby all parts are entered into a deadly war
amongst themselves, and that little remnant of love which was, is now consumed
to nothing. The only godliness we glory in, is to find out somewhat whereby
we may judge others to be ungodly. Each others faults we observe, as matter of
exprobration, and not of grief. By these means we are grown hateful in the eyes
of the Heathens themselves, and (which wounds us the more deeply) able we are
not to deny, but that we have deserved their hatred: With the better sort of
our own, our fame and credit is clean lost. The less we are to marvel, if they
judge vilely of us, who although we did well, would hardly allow thereof. On
our backs they also build that are lewd, and what we object one against
another, the same they use, to the utter scorn and disgrace of us all. This we
have gained by our mutual home-dissentions: This we are worthily rewarded with,
which are more forward to strive, then becomes men of virtuous and mild
disposition. But our trust in the Almighty is, that with us Contentions are now
at the highest flote, and that the day will come (for what cause of despair is
there?) when the Passions of former Enmity being allayed, we shall with ten
times redoubled tokens of our unfeignedly reconciled love, show our selves each
toward other the same, which Joseph and the Brethren of Joseph were at the
time of their enterview in Egypt. Our comfortable expectation and most thirsty
desire whereof, what man soever amongst you shall any way help to satisfy, (as
we truly hope, there is no one amongst you, but some way or other will.) The
blessings of the God of Peace, both in this World, and in the World to come, be
upon him more then the Stars of the Firmament in number.

WHAT THINGS ARE HANDLED In the following BOOKS.
BOOK I. COncerning LAWS in General. BOOK II. Of the use of Divine Law
contained in Scripture; Whether that be the only Law which ought to serve for
our Direction in all things without exception? BOOK III. Of Laws concerning
Ecclesiastical Polity: Whether the Form thereof be in Scripture so set down,
that no Addition or Charge is lawful? BOOK IV. Of General Exceptions taken
against the Laws of our Polity, as being Popish, and banished out of certain
Reformed Churches. BOOK V. Of our Laws that concern the Public Religious
Duties of the Church, and the manner of bestowing that Power of Order, which
enableth Men in sundry Degrees and Callings to execute the same. BOOK VI. Of
the Power of Jurisdiction, which the Reformed Platform claims unto
Lay Elders, with others. BOOK VII. Of the Power of Jurisdiction, and the Honor
which is annexed thereunto in Bishops. BOOK VIII. Of the Power of
Ecclesiastical Dominion or Supreme Authority, which with us the highest
Governor or Prince has, as well in regard of Domestical Jurisdictions, as of
that other Foreignly claimed by the Bishop of Rome.
OF THE LAWS OF Ecclesiastical Polity.
BOOK I. Concerning Laws, and their several kinds in general.
The Matter contained in this First Book.
1. THe cause of Writing this General Discourse concerning Laws. 2. Of that Law
which God from before the beginning has set for himself, to do all things by.
3. The Law which Natural Agents observe, and their necessary manner of keeping
it. 4. The Law which the Angels of God obey. 5. The Law whereby Man is in his
Actions directed to the Imitation of God. 6. Men's first beginning to understand
that Law. 7. Of Man's Will, which is the first thing that Laws of Action are
made to guide. 8. Of the Natural finding out of Laws by the Light of Reason, to
guide the Will unto that which is good. 9. Of the benefit of keeping that Law
which Reason teaches. 10. How Reason does lead Men unto the making of Humane
Laws, whereby Politic Societies are governed, and to agreement about Laws,
whereby the Fellowship or Communion of Independent Societies stanoeth. 11.
Wherefore God has by Scripture further made known such Supernatural Laws^ as
do serve for Men's direction. 12. The cause why so many Natural or Rational Laws
are set down in holy Scripture. 13. The benefit of having Divine Laws written.
14. The sufficiency of Scripture unto the end for which it was instituted. 15.
Of Laws Positive contained in Scripture; the Mutability of certain of them, and
the general use of Scripture. 16. A Conclusion, showing how all this belongs
to the Cause in question.


HE that goes about to persuade a multitude, that they are not so
well-governed as they ought to be; The cause of writing this General Discourse.
shall never want attentive and favorable. Hearers; because they know the
manifold defects whereunto every kind of Regiment is subject; but the secret
lets and difficulties, which in public proceedings, are innumerable and
inevitable, they have not ordinarily the judgment to consider. And because such
as openly reprove supposed disorders of State, are taken for Principal Friends
to the Common Benefit of all, and for men that carry singular Freedom of Mind:
Under this fair and plausible color whatsoever they utter, passes for good
and current. That which wants in the weight of their Speech, is supplied by
the aptness of Men's minds to accept and believe it. Whereas on the other side,
if we maintain things that are established, we have not only to strive with a
number of heavy prejudices, deeply rooted in the hearts of men, who think that
herein we serve the time, and speak in favor of the present State, because
thereby we either hold or seek preferment; but also to bear such Exceptions as
Minds so avetted beforehand, usually take against that which they are loath
should be poured into them. Albeit therefore, much of that we are to speak in
this present Cause, may seem to a number perhaps tedious, perhaps obscure,
dark, and intricate, (for many talk of the Truth, which never sounded the depth
from whence it springs: And therefore when they are led thereunto, they are
soon weary, as men drawn from those beaten paths wherewith they have been
inured;) yet this may not so far prevail, as to cut off that which the matter
it self requires, howsoever the nice humor of some be therewith pleased, or
no. They unto whom we shall seem tedious, are in no wise injured by us, because
it is in their own hands to spare that labor which they are not willing to
endure. And if any complain of obscurity, they must consider, that in these
Matters it comes no otherwise to pass, then in sundry the works both of Art,
and also of Nature, where that which has greatest force in the very things we
see, is notwithstanding itself oftentimes not seen. The stateliness of Houses,
the goodliness of Trees, when we behold them delights the eye; but that
Foundation which bears up the one, that Root which ministers unto the other
nourishment and life, is in the bosom of the Earth concealed; and if there be
occasion at any time to search into it, such labor is then more necessary then
pleasant, both to them which undertake it, and for the lookers on. In like
manner, the use and benefit of good Laws, all that live under them, may enjoy
with delight and comfort, albeit the grounds and first original causes from
whence they have sprung, be unknown, as to the greatest part of men they are.
But when they who withdraw their obedience, pretend, That the Laws which they
should obey, are corrupt and vicious: For better examination of their quality,
it behooves the very Foundation and Root, the highest Wellspring and Fountain
of them to be discovered. Which because we are not oftentimes accustomed to do,
when we do it, the pains we take are more needful a great deal then acceptable,
and the Matters which we handle, seem by reason of newness, (till the mind
grow better acquainted with them) dark, intricate, and unfamiliar. For as much
help whereof as may be in this case, I have endeavored throughout the Body of
this whole Discourse, that every former part might give strength unto all that
follow, and every latter bring some light unto all before: So that if the
judgments of men do but hold themselves in suspense, as touching these first
more General Meditations, till in order they have perused the rest that ensue;
what may seem dark at the first, will afterward be found more plain, even as
the latter particular decisions will appear, I doubt not, more strong, when the
other have been read before. The Laws of the Church, whereby for so many Ages
together we have been guided in the Exercise of Christian Religion, and the
Service of the true God, our Rites, Customs, and Orders of Ecclesiastical
Government, are called in question: We are accused as men that will not have
Christ Jesus to rule over them; but have wilfully cast his Statutes behind
their backs, hating to be reformed and made subject unto the Scepter of his
Discipline. Behold therefore, we offer the Laws whereby we live, unto the
General Trial and Judgment of the whole World; heartily beseeching Almighty
God, whom we desire to serve according to his own Will, that both we and others
(all kind of Partial affection being clean laid aside) may have eyes to see,
and hearts to embrace the things that in his sight are most acceptable. And
because the Point, about which we strive, is the Quality of our Laws, our first
entrance hereinto cannot better be made, then with consideration of the Nature
of Law in general, and of that Law which gives Life unto all the rest which
are commendable, just, and good, namely, the Law whereby the Eternal himself
does work. Proceeding from hence to the Law, first of Nature, then of
Scripture, Of that Law which God from before the beginning has set for himself
to do all things by.
we shall have the easier access unto those things which come after to be
debated, concerning the particular Cause and Question which we have in hand.

2. All things that are, have some operation not violent or casual: Neither
does any thing ever begin to exercise the same, without some fore-conceived end
for which it works. And the end which it works for, is not obtained, unless
the Work be also fit to obtain it by; for unto every end, every operation will
not serve: That which does assign unto each thing the kind, that which does
moderate the force and power, that which does appoint the form and measure of
working, the same we term a Law: So that no certain end could ever be attained,
unless the Actions whereby it is attained, were regular; that is to say, Made
suitable, fit, and correspondent unto their end, by some Canon Rule or Law.
Which thing does first take place in the Works, even of God himself. All things
therefore do work after a sort, according to Law; all other things according to
a Law, whereof some Superiors unto whom they are subject, is Author; only the
Works and Operations of God, have him both for their Worker, and for the Law
whereby they are wrought. The Being of God, is a kind of Law to his working;
for that Perfection which God is, gives Perfection to that he does. Those
Natural, Necessary, and Internal Operations of God, the Generation of the Son,
the Proceeding of the Spirit, are without the compass of my present intent;
which is to touch only such Operations as have their Beginning and Being by a
voluntary purpose, wherewith God has eternally decreed, when, and how they
should be; which Eternal Decree is that we term an Eternal Law. Dangerous it
were for the feeble Brain of Man, to wade far into the doings of the most High;
whom although to know be Life, and Joy to make mention of his Name; yet our
soundest knowledge is, to know, that we know him not as indeed he is, neither
can know him; and our safest eloquence concerning him, is our silence, when we
confess without confession, that his glory is inexplicable, his greatness above
our capacity and reach. He is above, and we upon Earth; therefore it behooves
our words to be wary and few. Our God is One, or rather very Oneness, and mere
Unity, having nothing but it Self in it Self, and not consisting (as all things
do besides God) of many things. In which Essential Unity of God, a Trinity
Personal nevertheless subsisteth, after a manner far exceeding the possibility
of man's conceit. The works which outwardly are of God, they are in such sort of
him being One, that each Person has in them somewhat peculiar and proper. For
being Three, and they all subsisting in the Essence of one Deity, from the
Father, by the Son, through the Spirit, all things are. John 16. 13, 14, 15.
That which the Son does hear of the Father, and which the Spirit does receive
of the Father and the Son, the same we have at the hands of the Spirit, as
being the last; and therefore the nearest unto us in order, although in power
the same with one Second and the First. The wise and learned among the very
Heathens themselves, have all acknowledged some first cause, whereupon
originally the Being of all things depends. Neither have they otherwise
spoken of that Cause then as an Agent, which knowing what and why it works,
observes in working a most exact Order or Law. Thus much is signified by that
which Homer mentions, Jupiters counsel was accomplished.
, (...). Thus much acknowledged by Mercurius Trismegistus, The Creator made the
whole world not with hands, but by Reason. Sub. in Ecleg. Phys.
(...). Thus much confessed by Anaxagoras and Plato, terming the Maker of the
World, an Intellectual Worker. Finally, the Stoiks, although imagining the
first cause of all things to be Fire, held nevertheless, that the same Fire
having Art, did Proceed by a certain and a set way in the making of the World.
O (...). They all confess therefore, in the working of that first cause, that
Counsel is used, Reason followed, a Way observed, that is to say, Constant
Order and Law is kept, whereof it self must needs be Author unto it self:
Otherwise it should have some worthier and higher to direct it, and so could
not it self be the first, being the first, it can have no other then it self to
be the Author of that Law, which it willingly works by. God therefore is a
Law both to himself, and to all other things besides. To himself, he is a Law
in all those things whereof our Savior speaks, saying, John 5. 17.
My Father works as yet, so I. God works nothing without cause. All those
things which are done by him, have some end, for which they are done; and the
end for which they are done, is a Reason of his Will to do them. His Will had
not inclined to create Woman, but that he saw it could not be well, if she were
not created. Genesis 2. 1^.
Non est bonum, It is not good man should be alone; therefore let us make an
helper for him. That and nothing else is done by God, which to leave undone,
were not so good. If therefore it be demanded, why God having power and ability
infinite, the effects notwithstanding of that power are all so limited, as we
see they are: The reason hereof is, the End which he has proposed, and the Law
whereby his Wisdom has stinted the effects of his power in such sort, that it
does not work infinitely, but correspondently unto that end for which it
works, even all things, (...), in most decent and comely sort, all things in
measure, number, and weight. Sapi. 8. 1. Sapi. 11. 17.
The General End of Gods External Working, is the exercise of his most glorious
and most abundant virtue. Which abundance does show it self in variety, and for
that cause this variety is oftentimes in Scripture expressed by the name of
riches. Ephesians. 1. 7. Phil 4. 19. Col. 2. 3. Prove. 15. 4.
The Lord has made all things for his own sake. Not that any thing is made to
be beneficial unto him, but all things for him to show beneficence and grace in
them. The particular drift of every Act proceeding externally from God, we are
not able to discern, and therefore cannot always give the proper and certain
reason of his Works. Howbeit undoubtedly, a proper and certain Reason there is
of every Finite Work of God, in as much as there is a Law imposed upon it;
which if there were not, it should be Infinite, even as the Worker himself is.
They err therefore, who think that of the Will of God to do this or that, there
is no Reason besides his Will. Many times no Reason known to us; but that there
is no reason thereof, I judge it most unreasonable to imagine, in as much as he
works all things, (...), not only according to his own Will, Ephesians. 1. 11.
but the counsel of his own Will. And whatsoever is done with counsel or wise
resolution, has of necessity some reason why it should be done, albeit that
reason be to us in some things so secret, that it forces the wit of man to
stand, as the Blessed Apostle himself does, amazed thereat, Rom 11 23.
O the depth of the riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God. How
unsearchable are his Judgments, etc. That Law Eternal which God himself has
made to himself, and thereby works all things, whereof he is the Cause and
Author; that Law in the admirable frame whereof shines with most perfect
Beauey, the Countenance of that Wisdom which has testified concerning her
self, Prove. ^. ^3.
The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, even before his works of
old, I was set up: That Law which has been the Pattern to make, and is the
Card to guide the World by; that Law which has been of God, and with God
everlastingly; that Law, the Author and Observer whereof is, one only God, to
be blessed for ever; how should either Men or Angels be able perfectly to
behold? The Book of this Law, we are neither able nor worthy to open and look
into. That little thereof, which we darkly apprehend, we admire; the rest, with
religious ignorance, we humbly and meekly adore. Seeing therefore, that
according to this Law he works, Of whom, through whom, and for whom, are all
things; although there seem unto us confusion and disorder in the affairs of
this present world^ Romans 11. 36. Boet. lib. 4. de Consol. Philos.
Tamen quoniam bonus mundum rector temperat, recte fieri cuncta ne dubites. Let
no man doubt, but that every thing is well done, because the World is rule by
so good a Guide, as transgresses not his own Law; then which, nothing can be
more absolute, perfect, and just. The Law whereby he works, is Eternal, and
therefore can have no show or color of mutability: For which cause, a part of
that Law being opened in the Promises which God has made (because his Promises
are nothing else but Declarations, what God will do for the good of men)
touching those Promises the Apostle has witnessed, That God may as possibly
deny himself, and not be God, as fail to perform them. And concerning the
Counsel of God, he terms it likewise a thing Unchangeable; 2 Timothy 2. 13. Heb.
^. 17.
the Counsel of God, and that Law of God, whereof now we speak, being one. Nor
is the freedom of the Will of God, any whit abated, let, or hindered, by means
of this; because the Imposition of this Law upon himself, is his own free and
voluntary act. This Law therefore, we may name Eternal, being that order which
God before all Ages has fet down with himself, for himself to do all things by.

The Law which Natural Agents have given them to observe, and their necessary
manner of keeping it.
3. I am not ignorant, that by Law Eternal, the Learned for the most part do
understand the Order, not which God has eternally purposed himself in all his
Works to observe, but rather that, which with himself he has set down as
expedient to be kept by all his Creatures, according to the several conditions
wherewith he has endued them. They who thus are accustomed to speak, apply the
name of Law unto that only rule of working, which Superior Authority imposes;
whereas we somewhat more enlarging the sense thereof, term any kind of Rule or
Canon whereby Actions are framed, a Law. Now that Law, which as it is laid up
in the bosom of God, they call Eternal, receives according unto the different
kind of things which are subject unto it, different and sundry kinds of
names. That part of it, which orders Natural Agents, we call usually Natures
Law; that which Angels do clearly behold, and without any swerving observe, is
a Law Celestial and Heavenly; the Law of Reason, that which binds Creatures
reasonable in this World, and with which by reason they most plainly perceive
themselves bound; that which binds them, and is not known but by special
Revelation from God, Divine Law. Humane Law, that which out of the Law, either
of Reason, or of God, Men probably gathering to be expedient, they make it a
Law. All things therefore, which are as they ought to be, are conformed unto
this Second Law Eternal; and even those things, which to this Eternal Law are
not conformable, are notwithstanding in some sort ordered by the First Eternal
Law. For what good or evil is there under the Sun; what action correspondent or
repugnant unto the Law which God has imposed upon his Creatures, but in, or
upon it, God does work according to the Law which himself has eternally
purposed to keep; that is to say, The First Eternal Law? So that a twofold Law
Eternal being thus made, it is not hard to conceive how they both take place in
Id omne quod in rebus creatis sir, est materia legis aeternae. Th. l. 1, 2. ^
93. art. 4,5,6. Nullomondo aliquid legibus summi creatoris ordinationique
subtrahitor, a quo pax univerlitatis administratur. August. de Civit. Dei, lib.
12. c. 22 Immo and pecca^um, quateni^ a Deo just permirrkur, cadit in legem
aternam. Etiam legi aterna subjicitur peccatum; quateous voluntaria legis
transgressio paenal^ quoddam incommedum anime inserit, juxtaillud Augustini.
Jutin^i Domine, and sic est, in poena sua sihi sit omnis animus in ordinatus.
Confess. lib. 1. cap. 12. Nec male scholastic^. Quemadmodum inquiunt videraus
res naturales cunningentes, hoc ipso quod a sine particulari suo, atque ad^o a
lege aterna exorbiran; in candem legem arternam incidere quatenus consequuntur
alium ^inem a lege etiam aterna ipsis in casu particulari constiturum: Sic
verisimile est homines etiam cum peccant and desciseunt a lege aeterna^ ut
praecipiente, reincidere in ordinem aeternae legis ut punientis.
all things. Wherefore to come to the Law of Nature, albeit thereby we
sometimes mean that manner of working which God has set for each created thing
to keep; yet for as much as those things are termed most properly Natural
Agents, which keep the Law of their kind unwittingly, as the Heavens and
Elements of the World, which can do no otherwise then they do: And for as much
as we give unto Intellectual Natures, the name of Voluntary Agents, that so we
may distinguish them from the other, expedient it will be, that wesever the Law
of Nature observed by the one, from that which the other is tied unto. Touching
the former, their strict keeping of one Tenure, Statute, and Law is spoken of
by all, but has in it more then men have as yet attained to know, or perhaps
ever shall attain, seeing the travel of wading herein, is given of God to the
Sons of Men; that perceiving how much the least thing in the World has in it,
more then the wisest are able to reach unto, the may by this means learn
humility. Moses, in describing the Work of Creation, attributes speech unto
God: God said, Let there be light: Let there be a Firmament: Let the Waters
under the Heavens be gathered together into one place: Let the Earth bring
forth: Let there be Lights in the Firmament of Heaven. Was this only the
intent of Moses, to signify the infinite greatness of Gods Power, by the
easiness of his accomplishing such effects, without travel, pain, or labor?
Surely, it seems that Moses had herein, besides this, a further purpose,
'namely, first, to teach that God did not work as a necessary, but a voluntary
Agent, intending beforehand; and decreeing with himself, that which did
outwardly proceed from him. Secondly, to show that God did then institute a Law
natural to be observed by Creatures; and therefore according to the manner of
Laws, the Institution thereof is described, as being established by solemn
injunction. His commanding those things to be which are, and to be in such sort
as they are, to keep that tenure and course which they do, imports the
establishment of Natures Law. This Worlds first Creation, and the preservation
since of things created, what is it, but only so far forth a manifestation by
execution, what the Eternal Law of God is concerning things natural? And as it
comes to pass in a Kingdom rightly ordered, that after a Law is once
published, it presently takes effect far and wide, all States framing
themselves thereunto; even so let us think it fares in the Natural course of
the World: Since the time that God did first proclaim the Edicts of his Law
upon it, Heaven and Earth have hearkened unto his voice, and their labor has
been to do his will: He made a Law for the Rain; He gave his Decree unto the
Sea, that the Waters should not pass his Commandment. Now, if Nature should
intermit her course, and leave altogether, though it were but for a while, the
observation of her own Laws; if those Principal and Mother Elements of the
World, whereof all things in this lower World are made, should lose the
qualities which now they have; if the frame of that Heavenly Arch erected over
our Heads, should loosen and dissolve it self; if Celestial Spheres should
forget their wonted motions, and by irregular volubility turn themselves any
way as it might happen; if the Prince of the Lights of Heaven, Psalm. 19. 5.
which now as a Giant does run his unwearied course; should, as it were,
through a languishing faintness, begin to stand, and to rest himself; if the
Moon should wander from her beaten way, the times and seasons of the year blend
themselves, by disordered and confused mixture, the Winds breathe out their
last gasp, the Clouds yield no Rain, the Earth be defeated of Heavenly
influence, the Fruits of the Earth pine away, as Children at the withered
Breasts of their Mother, no longerable to yield them relief: What would become
of Man himself, whom these things now do all serve? See we not plainly, that
obedience of Creatures unto the Law of Nature, is the stay of the whole World?
Notwithstanding, with Nature it comes sometimes to pass, as with art. Let
Phidias have rude and obstinate stuff to carve, though his art do that it
should, his work will lack that beauty which otherwise in fitter matter it
might have had. He that strikes an Instrument with skill, may cause
notwithstanding a very unpleasant sound, if the string whereon he strikes,
chance to be incapable of harmony. In the matter whereof things natural
consist, that of Theophrastus takes place, Theophrast. in Metaph.
(...) Much of it is oftentimes such, as will by no means yield to receive that
impression which were best and most perfect. Which defect in the matter of
things natural, they who gave themselves unto the contemplation of nature
amongst the Heathen, observed often: But the true original cause thereof,
Divine Malediction, laid for the sin of Man upon these Creatures, which God had
made for the use of Man; this being an Article of that saving truth which God
has revealed unto his Church, was above thereach of their merely natural
capacity and understanding. But howsoever, these swervings are now and then
incident into the course of Nature; nevertheless, so constantly the Laws of
Nature, are by Natural Agents observed, that no man denies, but those things
which Nature works, are wrought either always, or for the most part, after
one and the same manner. If here it be demanded, Arist. Rhet. 1. cap. 35.
What that is which keeps Nature in obedience to her own Law, we must have
recourse to that higher Law, whereof we have already spoken; and because all
other Laws do thereon depend, from thence we must borrow so much as shall need
for brief resolution in this point. Although we are not of opinion therefore,
as some are, that Nature in working, has before her certain exemplary draughts
or patterns, which subsisting in the bosom of the Highest, and being thence
discovered, she fixes her eye upon them, as Travelers by Sea upon the
Pole Star of the World, and that according thereunto she guides her hand to
work by imitation: Although we rather embrace the Oracle of Hippocrates. This
an (...) Acts 17. ^^.
That each thing, both in small and in great, fulfilleth the task which destiny
has set down. And concerning the manner of excecuting and fulfilling the same,
What they do, they know not, yet is it in show and appearance, as though they
did know what they do; and the truth is, they do not discern the things which
they look on: Nevertheless, for as much as the works of Nature are no less
exact, then if she did both behold and study how to express some absolute shape
or mirror always present before her; yea, such her dexterity and skill
appears, that no intellectual Creature in the World were able by capacity, to
do that which Nature does without capacity and knowledge, it cannot be, but
Nature has some Directer of infinite knowledge to guide her in all her ways.
Who the guide of Nature, but only the God of Nature? In him we live, move, and
are. Those things which Nature is said to do, are by Divine Art performed,
using Nature as an Instrument; nor is there any such Art or Knowledge Divine in
Nature her self working, but in the guide of Natures work. Whereas therefore
things natural, which are not in the number of Voluntary Agents (for of such
only we now speak, and of no other) do so necessarily observe their certain
Laws, that as long as they keep those Form in other Creatures is a thing
proportionable n^^ the si^ul in living Creatures. 5: asi^e it is nor, nor
other. wise di^ernable then only by effects. According to the diversity of
inward Forms, things of the World are distinguished into their kinds.
Forms which give them their Being, they cannot possibly be apt or inclinable
to do otherwise then they do; seeing the kinds of their operations are both
constantly and exactly framed, according to the several ends for which they
serve, they themselves, in the mean while, though doing that which is fit, yet
knowing neither what they do, nor why: It follows, that all which they do in
this sort, proceeds originally from some such Agent, as knows, appoints,
holds up, and even actually frames the same. The manner of this Divine
Efficiency being far above us, we are no more able to conceive by our Reason,
then Creatures unreasonable by their Sense, are able to apprehend after what
manner we dispose and order the course of our affairs. Only thus much is
discerned, that the Natural Generation and Process of all things, receives
order of proceeding from the settled stability of Divine Understanding. This
appoints unto them their kinds of working, the disposition whereof, in the
Purity of Gods own Knowledge and Will, is rightly termed by the name of
Providence. The same being referred unto the things themselves here disposed by
it, was wont by the Ancient to be called Natural Destiny. That Law, the
performance whereof we behold in things natural, is as it were an authentical,
or an original Draught, written in the bosom of God himself; whose Spirit being
to execute the same, uses every particular nature, every mere natural agent,
only as an Instrument created at the beginning, and ever since the beginning,
used to work his own will and pleasure withal. Vide Yh^m. in Compend. Theol.
cap. 9. O^^ne quod u^ove^ur ab aliquo, est quast instrumentum quod dam primi
moventis, Ride^alum est au^m eriam apud inductos ponere instrumentum moverinum
ab aliquo principali ageme.
Nature therefore, is nothing else but Gods Instrument: In the course whereof,
Dionysius perceiving some sudden disturbance, is said to have cried out, Aut
Dens natura patitur, aut mundi machina dissolvitur; Either God does suffer
impediment, and is by a greater then himself hindered; or if that be impossible,
then has he determined to make a present dissolution of the World, the
execution of that Law beginning now to stand still, without which the World
cannot stand. This Workman, whose servitor Nature is, being in truth but only
One, the Heathens imagining to be more, gave him in the Sky, the name of
Jupiter, in the Air, the name of June, in the Water, the name of Neptune, in
the Earth, the name of Vesla, and sometimes of Ceres; the name of Apollo in the
Sun, in the Moon, the name of Diana, the name of AEolus, and diverse other in
the Winds; and to conclude, even so many Guides of Nature they dreamed of, as
they saw there were kinds of things natural in the World. These they honored,
as having power to work or cease accordingly as men deseived of them: But unto
us, there is one only Guide of all Agents Natural, and he both the Creator and
the Worker of all in all, alone to be blessed, adored, and honored by all
forever. That which hitherto has been spoken, concerns Natural Agents
considered in themselves: But we must further remember also (which thing to
touch, in a word, shall suffice,) That as in this respect they have their Law,
which Law directs them in the means whereby they tend to their own
perfection; so likewise another Law there is, which touches them as they are
sociable parts united into one Body: A Law which binds them each to serve
unto others good, and all to prefer the good of the whole, before whatsoever
their own particular, as we plainly see they do, when things natural in that
regard, forget their ordinary natural wont: That which is heavy, mounting
sometime upwards of its own accord, and forsaking the Center of the Earth,
which to it self is most natural, even as if it did hear it self commanded to
let go the good it privately wishes, and to relieve the present distress of
Nature in common.

4. But now that we may lift up our eyes (as it were) from the Tootstool to the
Throne of God, The Law which Angels on work by. Psalm. ^4. 4. Heb 1. 7. Ephesians. 3.
10. Dan. 7. 10. Matthew. 2^. ^3. Heb. 12. 22. Luke 2. 13. Matthew. 6. 10. and 10.
10. Psalm p. 11. 12, Luke 15. 9. Heb. 1. 14. Acts. 10. 9. Dan. 9. 23. Matthew. 12.
10. Dan. 4. 10. (...) Arist. Metaph. 12. cap. 9. Jo^ 38. 9. Matthew. 18. 10.
Psalm. 148. 2. Heb. 1. 6. ^ai. 6. 3^.
and leaving these Natural, consider a little the state of Heavenly and Divine
Creatures: Touching Angels, which are Spirits Immaterial and Intellectual, the
glorious Inhabitants of those Sacred Palaces, where nothing but Light and
Blessed Immortality, no shadow of matter for tears, discontentments, griefs,
and uncomfortable passions to work upon; but all joy, tranquillity, and peace,
even for ever and ever does dwell. As in number and order they are huge,
mighty, and royal Armies, so likewise in perfection of obedience unto that Law,
which the Highest, whom they adore, love, and imitate, has imposed upon them.
Such observants they are thereof, that our Savior himself being to set down
the perfect Idea of that which we are to pray and wish for on Earth, did not
teach to pray or wish for more, then only that here it might be with us, as
with them it is in Heaven. God which moves mere Natural Agents as an efficient
only, does otherwise move Intellectual Creatures, and especially his holy
Angels: For beholding the Face of God, in admiration of so great excellency,
they all adore him; and being rapt with the love of his beauty, they cleave
inseparably for ever unto him, Desire to resemble him in goodness, makes them
unwearable, and even unsatiable in their longing, to do by all means, all
manner of good unto all the Creatures of God, but especially unto the Children
of Men. In the countenance of whose Nature looking downward, they behold
themselves beneath themselves, even as upward in God, beneath whom themselves
are, they see that character which is no where but in themselves and us,
resembled. Thus far even the Painims have approached; thus far they have seen
into the doings of the Angels of God; Orpheus confessing, that the Fiery Throne
of God is attended on by those most industrious Angels, careful how all things
are performed amongst men, and the Mirror of Humane Wisdom plainly teaching,
That God moves Angels, even as that thing does stir Man's heart, which is
thereunto presented amiable. Angelical Actions may therefore be reduced unto
these three general kinds. Th's is intimated wheresoever we find them termed
the Sons of God, as Job 1. 6. and 38. 7. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude, verse 6. Psalm. 148.
2. Luke 7. 13. Matthew. 26. 53. Psalm. 148. 2. Heb. 12. 21. Apoc. 22. 9.
First, Most delectable Love arising from the visible apprehension of the
Purity, Glory, and Beauty of God invisible, saving only unto Spirits that are
pure: Secondly, Adoration, grounded upon the evidence of the greatness of God,
on whom they see how all things depend: Thirdly, Imitation, bred by the
presence of his exemplary goodness, who cease nor before them daily to fill
Heaven and Earth with the rich treasures of most free and undeserved Grace. Of
Angels, we are not to consider only what they are, and do, in regard of their
own Being, but that also which concerns them as they are linked into a kind
of Corporation amongst themselves, and of Society or Fellowship with men.
Consider Angels, each of them severally in himself, and their Law is that which
the Prophet David mentions, All ye his Angels praise him. Consider the Angels
of God associated, and their Law is that which disposes them as an Army, one
in order and degree above another. Consider finally the Angels, as having with
us that communion which the Apostle to the Hebrews notes; and in regard
whereof, Angels have not disdained to profess themselves our fellow servants.
From hence there springs up a third Law, which binds them to works of
Ministerial employment: Every of which their several Functions, are by them
performed with joy. A part of the Angels of God notwithstanding (we know) have
fallen, and that their fall has been through the voluntary breach of that Law,
which did require at their hands continuance in the exercise of their high and
admirable virtue. Impossible it was, that ever their will should change or
incline to remit any part of their duty, without some object having force to
avert their conceit from God, and to draw it another way; and that before they
attained that high perfection of bliss, wherein now the Elect Angels are
without possibility of falling. Of any thing more then of God, they could not
by any means like, as long as whatsoever they knew besides God, they
apprehended it not in it self, without dependency upon God; because so long,
God must needs seem infinitely better then any thing which they so could
apprehend. Things beneath them, could not in such sort be presented unto their
eyes, but that therein they must needs see always, how those things did depend
on God. It seems therefore, that there was no other way for Angels to sin,
but by reflex of their understanding upon themselves; when being held with
admiration of their own sublimity and honor, the memory of their subordination
unto God, and their dependency on him was drowned in this conceit, whereupon
their adoration, love, and imitation of God, could not choose but be also
interrupted. The fall of Angels therefore, was Pride: Joh. 8. 4^. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
Apoc. 9. 11. Gen 3. 15. 1 Chro 21. 1. Job 1 7. de 2. 5. Joh. 13. 15. Acts 5. 3.
Apoc. 20. 8.
Since their fall, their practices have been the clean contrary unto those
beforementioned; for being dispersed, some in the Air, some on the Earth, some
in the Water; some amongst the Minerals, Dens, and Caves that are under the
Earth, they have, by all means, labored to effect an Universal Rebellion
against the Laws, and as far as its them lies, utter destruction of the Works
of God. These wicked spirits, the Heathens honored instead of Gods, both
generally under the name of Dii inferi, Gods Infernal; and particularly, some
in Oracles, some in Idols, some as Household Gods, some as Nymphs: In a word, No
foul and wicked spirit, which was not one way or other honored of Men as God,
till such time as Light appeared in the World, and dissolved the works of the
Devil. Thus much therefore may suffice for Angels, the next unto whom in degree
are Men.

The Law whereby Man is in his Actions directed to the Imitation of God.
5. God alone excepted, who actually and everlastingly is, whatsoever he may be,
and which cannot hereafter be, that which now he is not; all other things
besides, are somewhat in possibility, which as yet they are not in act. And for
this cause, there is in all things an appetite or desire, whereby they incline
to something which they may be; and when they are it, they shall be perfecter
then now they are. All which Perfections are contained under the general name
of Goodness. And because there is not in the World any thing whereby another
may not some way be made the perfecter, therefore all things that are, (...)
Arist. de An. lib. 1. cap. 4.
are good. Again, since there can be no goodness desired, which proceeds not
from God himself, as from the supreme cause of all things; and every effect
does after a sort contain, at leastwise resemble the cause from which it
proceeds: All things in the World are said, in some sort, to seek the
highest, and to cover more or less the participation of God himself; yet this
does no where so much appear, as it does in Man, because there are so many
kinds of Perfections which Man seeks! The first degree of Goodness, is, that
General Perfection which all things do seek, in desiring the continuance of
their Being; all things therefore coveting, as much as may be, to be like unto
God in Being ever, that which cannot hereunto attain personally, does seek to
continue it self another way; that is, by Offspring and Propagation. The next
degree of Goodness is, that which each thing coveteth, by affecting resemblance
with God, in the constancy and excellency of those operations which belong unto
their kind! The Immutability of God they strive unto, by working either
always, or for the most part, after one and the same manner; his absolute
exactness they imitate, by tending unto that which is most exquisite in every
particular. Hence have risen a number of Axioms in Philosophy; showing, (...)
Arist 2 de Coct. cap. 9 Matthew. 5. 48. Sap. 7. 27.
How the works of nature do always aim at that which cannot be bettered. These
two kinds of Goodness rehearsed, are so nearly united to the things themselves
which desire them, that we scarcely perceive the appetite to stir in reaching
forth her hand toward them. But the desire of those Perfections which grow
externally, is more apparent, especially of such as are not expressly desired,
unless they be first known, or such as are not for any other cause, then for
Knowledge it self desired. Concerning Perfections in this kind, that by
proceeding in the Knowledge of Truth, and by growing in the exercise of Virtue,
Man, amongst the Creatures of this inferior World, aspireth to the greatest
Conformity with God: This is not only known unto us, whom he himself has so
instructed, but even they do acknowledge, who amongst men are not judged the
nearest unto him. With Plato, what one thing more usual, (...)
then to excite men unto the love of Wisdom, by showing, how much wise men are
thereby exalted above men; how knowledge does raise them up into Heaven; how it
makes them, though not Gods, yet ^as Gods, high, admirable, and divine? And
Mercurius Trismegistus speaking of the virtues of a righteous Soul, Such
spirits (says he) are never slayed with praising and speaking well of all men,
with doing good unto every one by word and deed, because they study to frame
themselves according to THE PATTERN of the Father of Spirits.

6. In the Matter of Knowledge, there is between the Angels of God, Men's first
beginning to grow to the knowl die of that Law which they are to observe. Vide
Isal. 7. 16.
and the Children of Men this difference: Angels already have full and complete
knowledge in the highest degree that can be imparted unto them: Men, if we view
them in their Spring, are at the first without understanding or knowledge at
all. Nevertheless, from this utter vacuity they grow by degrees, till they come
at length to be even as the Angels themselves are. That which agrees to the
one now, the other shall attain unto in the end, they are not so far disjoined
and severed, but that they come length to meet. The Soul of Man being
therefore at the first as a Book, wherein nothing is, and yet all things may be
imprinted; we are to search by what steps and degrees it rises unto Perfection
of Knowledge. Unto that which has been already set down, concerning Natural
Agents, this we must add, That albeit therein we have comprised as well
Creatures living, as void of life, if they be in degree of nature beneath Men;
nevertheless, a difference we must observe between those Natural Agents that
work altogether unwittingly; and those which have, though weak, yet some
understanding what they do, as Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts, have. Beasts are in
sensible capacity as ripe, even as men themselves, perhaps more ripe. For as
Stones, though in dignity of Nature, inferior unto Plants, yet exceed them in
firmness of strength, or durability of Being, and Plants, though beneath the
excellency of Creatures endued with sense, yet exceed them in the Faculty of
Vegetation, and of Fertility: So Beasts, though otherwise behind Men, may
notwithstanding in actions of Sense and Fancy go beyond them, because the
endeavors of Nature, when it has an higher perfection to seek, are in lower
the more remiss, not esteeming thereof so much as those things do, which have
no better proposed unto them. The Soul of Man therefore, being capable of a
more Divine Perfection, has (besides the Faculties of growing unto sensible
knowledge, which is common unto us with Beasts) a further hability, whereof in
them there is no show at all, the ability of reaching (...) Merc. Tris.
Aristotelical demonstration.
higher then unto sensible things: Till we grow to some ripeness of years, the
Soul of Man does only store it self with conceits of things of inferior and
more open quality, which afterward do serve as Instruments unto that which is
greater; in the mean while, above the reach of meaner Creatures is ascends
not. When once it comprehends any thing above this, as the differences of
time, affirmations, negations, and contradiction in Speech, we then count it to
have some use of Natural Reason. Whereunto, if afterward there might be added
the right helps of true Art and Learning (which helps, I must plainly confess,
this age of the World, carrying the name of a Learned Age, does neither much
know, not greatly regard) there would undoubtedly be almost as great difference
in maturity of judgment between men therewith inured, and that which now men
are, as between men that are now, and Innocents. Which speech, if any condemn,
as being over Hyperbolical, let them consider but this one thing: No Art is at
the first finding out so perfect, as Industry may aftermake it; yet the very
first Man, that to any purpose knew the way we speak of, and followed it, has
alone thereby performed more, very near, in all parts of Natural Knowledge,
then sithence in any one part thereof the whole World besides has done: In the
poverty of that other new devised aid, two things there are notwithstanding
singular. Ramistry.
Of mavelous quick dispatch it is, and does show them that have it, as much
almost in three days, as if it had dwelt threescore years with them. Again,
because the curiosity of Man's wit does many times with persuade farther in the
search of things, then were convenient, the same is thereby restrained unto
such generalities, as every where offering themselves, are apparent unto men of
the weakest conceit that need be: So as following the Rules and Precepts
thereof, we may find it to be an Art, which teaches the way of speedy
Discourse, and restrains the mind of Man, that it may not wax overwise.
Education and Instruction are the means, the one by use, the other by precept,
to make our Natural Faculty of Reason, both the better, and the sooner able to
judge rightly between Truth and Error, Good and Evil. But at what time a man
may be said to have attained so far forth the use of Reason, as suffices to
make him capable of those Laws, whereby he is then bound to guide his actions:
This is a great deal more easy for common sense to discern, then for any man
by skill and learning to determine; even as it is not in Philosophers, who best
know the nature both of Fire and Gold, to teach what degree of the one, will
serve to purify the other, so well as the Artizan (which does this by fire)
discerns by Sense, when the fire has that degree of heat which suffices for
his purpose.

Of Man's Will, which is the thing that Laws of Action are made to guide Ephesians.
^. 23.
7. By Reason, Man attaineth unto the knowledge of things that are, and are not
sensible; it rests therefore, that we search how Man attaineth unto the
knowledge of such things unsensible, as are to be known, that they may be done.
Seeing them that nothing can move, unless there be some end, the desire whereof
provokes unto motion: How should that Divine Power of the Soul, that Spirit of
our Mind, as the Apostle terms it, ever stir it self unto action, unless it
have also the like spur: The end for which we are moved to work, is sometimes
the goodness which we conceive of the very working it self, without any further
respect at all; and the cause that procures action, is the mere desire of
action, no other good besides being thereby intended. Of certain turbulent
wits, it is said, Salust.
Illis quieta movere magna merces videbatur. They thought the very disturbance
of things established, an hire sufficient to set them on work: Sometimes that
which we do, is referred to a further end, without the desire whereof, we would
leave the same undone, as in their actions that gave Alms, Matthew. 6. 2.
to purchase thereby the praise of men. Man in Perfection of Nature, being made
according to the likeness of his Maker, resembles him also in the manner of
working; so that whatsoever we work as men, the same we do wittingly work, and
freely: Neither are we, according to the manner of Natural Agents, any way so
tied, but that it is in our power to leave the things we do undone. The good
which either is gotten by doing, or which consists in the very doing it self,
causes not action, unless apprehending it as good, we so like and desire it.
That we do unto any such end, the same we choose and prefer before the leaving
of it undone. Choice there is not, unless the thing which we take, be so in our
power, that we might have refused and left it. If fire consume the stubble, it
chooses not so to do, because the nature thereof is such, that it can do no
other: To choose, is to will one thing before another; and to will, is to bend
our Souls to the having or doing of that which they see to be good. Goodness is
seen with the Eye of the Understanding, and the Light of that Eye, is Reason:
So that two Principal Fountains there are of Humane Action, Knowledge and Will;
which Will, in things tending toward any end, is termed Choice. Concerning
Knowledge; Deuteronomy. 30. 19.
Behold, says Moses, I have set before you this day, good end evil, life and
death. Concerning Will, he adds immediately Choose life; that is to say, the
things that tend unto Life, them choose: But of one thing we must have special
care, as being a matter of no small moment, and that is, How the Will properly
and strictly taken, as it is of things which are referred unto the end that man
desires, differs greatly from that inferior natural desire, which we call
Appetite. The object of Appetite is, whatsoever sensible good may be wished
for; the object of Will is, that good which Reason does lead us to seek.
Affections, as Joy, and Grief, and Fear, and Anger, with such like, being, as
it were, the sundry fashions and forms of Appetite, can neither rise at the
conceit of a thing indifferent, nor yet choose but rise at the sight of some
things. Wherefore it is not altogether in our power, whether we will be stirred
with Affections, or no. Whereas Actions which issue from the disposition of the
Will, are in the Power thereof to be performed or stayed. Finally, Appetite is
the Wills Solicitor, and the Will is Appetites Controuler; what we covet
according to the one, by the other we often reject: Neither is any other desire
termed properly Will, but that where Reason and Understanding, or the show of
Reason, prescribes the thing desired. It may be therefore a question, Whether
those operations of men are to be counted voluntary, wherein that good which is
sensible, provokes Appetite, and Appetite causes Action, Reason being never
called to counsel; as when we eat or drink, or betake ourselves unto rest, and
such like. The truth is, that such actions in men having attained to the use of
Reason, are voluntary: For as the Authority of higher Powers, bath force even
in those things which are done without their privity, and are of so mean
reckoning, that to acquaint them therewith it needs not: In like sort,
voluntarily we are said to do that also, which the Will, if it listed, might
hinder from being done, although about the doing thereof, we do not expressly
use our Reason or Understanding, and so immediately apply our Wills thereunto.
In cases therefore of such facility, the Will does yield her assent, as it
were, with a kind of silence, by not dissenting; in which respect, her force
is not so apparent, as in express Mandates or Prohibitions, especially upon
advice and consultation going before. Where Understanding therefore needs in
those things, Reason is the Director of Man's Will, by discovering in Action
what is good: For the Laws of Weldoing, are the Dictates of right Reason.
Children which are not as yet come unto those years whereat they may have,
again, Innocents, which are excluded by Natural Defect from ever having;
thirdly, Madmen, which for the present cannot possibly have the use of right
Reason to guide themselves, have for their guide the Reason that guides other
men, which are Tutors over them, to seek and to procure their good for them. In
the rest, there is that Light of Reason, whereby good may be known from evil;
and which discovering the same rightly, is termed right. The Will
notwithstanding, does not incline to have, or do that which Reason teaches to
be good, unless the same do also teach it to be possible. For albeit the
Appetite, being more general, may wish any thing which seems good, be it
never so impossible; O mihi praeteritos referat si Jupiter annos! (...) Alcin.
de Degrees. Plat.
yet for such things, the reasonable Will of Man does never seek. Let Reason
teach impossibility in any thing, and the Will of Man does let it go, a thing
impossible it does not affect, the impossibility thereof being manifest. There
is in the Will of Man, naturally that freedom, whereby it is apt to take or
refuse any particular object whatsoever, being presented unto it. Whereupon it
follows, That there is no particular object so good, but it may have the show
of some difficulty or unpleasant quality annexed to it^ in respect whereof, the
Will may shrink and decline it: Contrariwise (for so things are blended) there
is no particular evil which has not some appearance of goodness whereby to
in^inuate it self: For evil, as evil, cannot be desired; if that be desired
which is evil, the cause is the goodness which is, or seems to be joined with
it. Goodness does not move by being, but by being apparent; and therefore many
things are neglected, which are most precious, only because the value of them
lies hid. Sensible Goodness is most apparent, near, and present; which causes
the Appetite to be therewith strongly provoked. Now Pursuit and Refusal in the
Will do follow, the one the Affirmation, the other the Negation of Goodness;
which the Understanding apprehends, grounding it self upon Sease, unless some
higher Reason do chance to teach the contraty. And if Reason have taught it
rightly to be good, yet not so apparently, that the Mind receives it with
utter impossibility of being otherwise; still there is place left for the Will
to take or leave. Whereas therefore, amongst so many things as are to be done,
there are so few, the goodness whereof, Reason in such sort does, or easily can
discover, we are not to marvel at the choice of evil, even then when the
contrary is probably known. Hereby it comes to pass, that Custom inuring the
Mind by long practice, and so leaving there a sensible Impression, prevails
more then reasonable Persuasion what way soever. Reason therefore may rightly
discern the thing which is good, and yet the Will of Man not incline it self
thereunto, as often as the prejudice of sensible Experience does oversway: Nor
let any Man think, that this does make any thing for the just excuse of
Iniquity; for there was never sin committed, wherein a less good was not
preferred before a greater, and that wilfully; which cannot be done without the
singular disgrace of Nature, and the utter disturbance of that Divine Order,
whereby the pre-eminence of chiefest Acceptance, is by the best things
worthily challenged. There is not that good which concerns us, but it has
evidence enough for it self, if Reason were diligent to search it out. Through
neglect thereof, abused we are with the show of that which is not; sometimes
the subrilty of Satan enveighling us, as it did Ev^ 2 Cor. 11.3.
; sometimes the hastiness of our Wills preventing the more considerate Advice
of sound Reason, as in the Luke 9.51.
Apostles, when they no sooner saw what they liked not, but they forthwith were
desirous of fire from Heaven; sometimes the very custom of evil making the
heart obdurate against whatsoever instructions to the contrary, as in them,
over whom our Savior spoke weeping, Matthew. 23 37.
O Jerusalem, how often, and thou would not? Still therefore that wherewith
we stand blameable, and can no way excuse it, is, in doing evil, we prefer a
less good before a greater, the greatness whereof is by Reason investigable,
and may be known. The search of Knowledge is a thing painful; and the
painfulness of Knowledge, is that which makes the Will so hardly inclinable
thereunto. The Root hereof, Divine Malediction; whereby the Sap. 9. 15. A
corruptible Body is heavy unto the Soul, and the earthly Mansion keepet't down
the Mind that is full of cares. And hardly can we discern the things that are
upon Earth, and with great labor find we out the things which are before us.
Who can then seek out the things that are in Heaven? Ephesians. 5 14. Heb. 12.1.12.
1 Cor. 16.15. Prove. 2. 4. Luke 13.84.
Instruments being weakened, wherewithal, the Soul (especially in reasoning)
does work, it prefereth rest in Ignorance, before wearisome labor to know: For
a spur of Diligence therefore, we have a natural thirst after Knowledge
ingrafted in us. But by Reason of that original weakness in the Instruments,
without which, the Understanding part is not able in this World by discourse to
work, the very conceit of painfulness is as a bridle to stay us. For which
cause the Apostle, who knew right well, that the weariness of the flesh is an
heavy clog to the Will, strikes mightily upon this Key, Awake thou that
sleep, cast off all which presses down; watch, labor, strive to go forward,
and to grow in knowledge.

Of the Natural way of finding out Laws by Reason, to guide the will unto that
which is good.
8. Wherefore to return to our former intent of discovering the Natural way,
whereby Rules have been found out concerning that Goodness wherewith the Will
of Man ought to be moved in Humane Actions; as every thing naturally and
necessarily does desire the utmost good and greatest Perfection, whereof Nature
has made it capable, even so Man. Our felicity therefore being the object and
accomplishment of our desire, we cannot choose but wish and cover it. All
particular things which are subject unto Action, the Will does so far forth
incline unto, as Reason judges them the better for us, and consequently the
more available to our bliss. If Reason err, we fall into evil, and are so far
forth deprived of the general Perfection we seek. Seeing therefore, that for
the framing of Men's actions, the knowledge of good from evil is necessary, it
only rests, that we search how this may be had: Neither must we suppose,
that there needs one Rule to know the good, (...) Arist. de An lib. 8.
and another the evil by. For he that knows what is straight, does even
thereby discern what is crooked, because the absence of straightness in bodies
capable thereof, is crookedness. Goodness in Actions is like unto straightness,
wherefore that which is done well, we term right: For as the straight way is
most acceptable to him that travelleth, because by it he comes soonest to his
journeys end; so in Action, that which does lie the evenest between us and the
end we desire, must needs be the fittest for our use. Besides which fitness for
use, there is also in rectitude, Beauty; as contrariwise in obliquity,
deformity. And that which is good in the Actions of Men, does not only delight
as profitable, but as amiable also. In which consideration, the Grecians most
divinely have given to the Active perfection of Men, a name expressing both
Beauty and Goodness; because Goodness in ordinary speech, is for the most part
applied only to that which is beneficial: But we in the name of Goodness, (...)
do here imply both. And of discerning Goodness, there are but these two ways;
the one, the knowledge of the causes whereby it is made such; the other, the
observation of those signs and tokens, which being annexed always unto
Goodness, argue, That where they are found, there also Goodness is, although we
know not the cause by force whereof it is there. The former of these, is the
most sure and infallible way, but so hard, that all shun it, and had rather
walk as men do in the dark, by hap-hazard, then tread so long and intricate
Mazes for Knowledge sake. As therefore Physicians are many times forced to
leave such Methods of curing, as themselves know to be the fittest, and being
overruled by their Patients impatiency, are fain to try the best they can, in
taking that way of cure, which the cured will yield unto: In like sort,
considering how the case does stand with this present Age full of Tongue, and
weak of Brain, behold we yield to the stream thereof; into the Causes of
Goodness we will not make any curious or deep inquiry; to touch them now and
then it shall be sufficient, when they are so near at hand, that easily they
may be conceived without any far removed discourse: That way we are contented
to prove, which being the worse in it self,is notwithstanding now by reason of
common imbecility, the fitter and likelier to be brooked. Signs and tokens to
know good by, are of sundry kinds; some more certain, and some less: The most
certain token of evident Goodness is, if the general persuasion of all men do
so account it. And therefore a common received Error, is never utterly
overthrown, till such times as we go from Signs unto Causes, and show some
manifest Root or Fountain thereof common unto all, whereby it may clearly
appear how it has come to pass, that so many have been overseen. In which
case, surmises and slight probabilities will not serve, because the universal
consent of men, is the perfectest and strongest in this kind, which
comprehends only the signs and tokens of Goodness. Things casual do vary,
and that which a man does but chance to think well of, cannot still have the
like hap. Wherefore although we know not the cause, yet thus much we may know,
that some necessary cause there is, whenever the judgments of all men
generally, or for the most part, run one and the same way, especially in
matters of that discourse: For of things necessarily and naturally done, there
is no more affirmed but this. (...)
They keep either always, or for the most part, one Tenure. The general and
perpetual voice of men is, as the Sentence of God himself. Non potest er^^^
contin^ gare uhi omnes idem oplnamor. Mta. Ticat. in 1 Pol, Quiequid in omnibus
inlid viduis uniue speciei communite^ mess id causam communew habext oporiet,
quae est en^um individuorum species and na:u^^. lilem. Quod and tora aliquia
specie hr, universalis parrienlari qe naturae sir instinctu, Fleia, de Christ.
Rel. Si proficere cup^, primo ^^e^^ id ve, rum pura qu^l sana men's cumn^um
ho^^ian^ atrestatur, ^us^ la Compend. cap. 1.
For that which all men have at all times learned, Nature her self must needs
have taught; and God being the Author of Nature, her voice is but his
Instrument. By her, from him, we receive whatsoever in such sort we learn.
Infinite duties there are, the goodness whereof is by this rule sufficiently
manifested, although we had no other warrant besides to approve them. The
Apostle St. Paul having speech concerning the Heathen, says of them, Romans 2.1^.
They are a Law unto themselves. His meaning is, that by force of the Light of
Reason, wherewith God illuminateth every one which comes into the World, Men
being enabled to know truth from falsehood, and good from evil, do thereby learn
in many things what the Will of God is, which will himself not revealing by any
extraordinary means unto them; but they by natural discourse attaining the
knowledge thereof, seem the Makers of those Laws which indeed are his, and they
but only the finders of them out. A Law therefore generally taken, is a
directive rule unto goodness of operation. Non licet natural universaleque
hominum judicium sals^^ van unique existimare. Ides. (...) Arist. lib. 10. cap.
2.
The rule of Divine Operations outward, is the definitive appointment of Gods
own Wisdom set down within himself. The rule of Natural Agents that work by
simple necessity, is the determination of the Wisdom of God, known to God
himself, the Principal Director of them, but not unto them that are directed to
execute the same. The rule of Natural Agents which work after a sort of their
own accord, as the Beasts do, is the judgment of common sense or fancy,
concerning the sensible goodness of those objects wherewith they are moved. The
rule of Ghostly or Immaterial Natures, as Spirits and Angels, is their
intuitive intellectual judgment concerning the amiable beauty and high goodness
of that object which with unspeakble joy and delight does set them on work. The
rule of Voluntary Agents on Earth, is the sentence that Reason gives
concerning the goodness of those things which they are to do: And the sentences
which Reason gives, are some more, some less general, before it come to define
in particular actions, what is good. The main principles of Reason, are in
themselves apparent. For to make nothing evident of it self unto Man's
understanding, were to take away all possibility of knowing any thing. (...)
Theoph. in Metaph.
And herein that of Theophrastus is true, They that seek a reason of all
things, do utterly overthrow Reason. In every kind of Knowledge, some such
grounds there are, as that being proposed, the Mind does presently embrace
them as tree from all possibility of Error, clear and manifest without proof.
In which kind, Axioms or Principles more general, are such as this, That the
greater good is to be chosen before the less. If therefore it should be
demanded, what reason there is, why the will of man, which does necessarily
shun harm, and covet whatsoever is pleasant and sweet, should be commanded to
count the pleasures of sin, Gall, and notwithstanding the bitter Accidents
wherewith Virtuous Actions are compast, yet still to rejoice and delight in
them: Surely this could never stand with Reason; but that Wisdom thus
prescribing, groundeth her Laws upon an infallible rule of Comparison, which
is, That small difficulties, when exceeding great good is sure to ensue; and on
the other side momentany benefits, when the hurt which they draw after them, is
unspeakable, are not at all to be respected. This rule is the ground whereupon
the Wisdom of the Apostle builds a Law, enjoining Patience unto himself, 1
Cor. 4. 17.
The present lightness of our affliction works unto us, even with abundance
upon abundance, an eternal weight of glory; while we look not on the things
which are seen, but on the things which are not seen: For the things which are
seen, are temporal; but the things which are not seen, are eternal. Therefore
Christianity to be embraced, whatsoever calamities in those times it was
accompanied withal. Upon the same ground our Savior proves the Law most
reasonable, that does forbid those crimes, which men for gains sake fall into.
For a man to win the World, if it be with the loss of his Soul, what benefit or
good is it? Axioms less general, yet so manifest, that they need no farther
proof, are such as these, God to be worshipped; Parents to be honored; Matthew
15.26.
Others to be used by us, as we our selves would be by them. Such things, as
soon as they are alleged, all men acknowledge to be good; they require no
proof or further discourse to be assured of their goodness. Notwithstanding
whatsoever such principle there is, it was at the first found out by discourse,
and drawn from out of the very Bowels of Heaven and Earth: For we are to note,
that things in the World are to us discernable, not only so far forth as
serves for our vital preservation, but further also in a twofold higher
respect. For first, if all other uses were utterly taken away; yet the Mind of
Man being by Nature speculative and delighted with contemplation in it self,
they were to be known even for mere Knowledge and Understandings sake. Yea
further, besides this, the knowledge of every the least thing in the World,
has in it a second peculiar benefit unto us, in as much as it serves to
minister Rules, Canons, and Laws for Men to direct those actions by, which we
properly term Humane. This did the very Heathens themselves obscurely
insinuate, by making Themis, which we call Ius or Right, to be the Daughter of
Heaven and Earth. We know things either as they are in themselves, or as they
are in mutual relation one to another. The knowledge of that which Man is in
reference unto himself, and other things in relation unto Man, I may justly
term the Mother of all those Principles, which are as it were Edicts, Statutes,
and Decrees, in that Law of Nature, whereby Humane Actions are framed. First
therefore, having observed that the best things where they are not hindered, do
still produce the best Operations; (for which cause, where many things are to
concur unto one effect, the best is in all congruity of Reason to guide the
residue, that it prevailing most, the work principally done by it, may have
greatest perfection;) when hereupon we come to observe in our selves, of what
excellency our Souls are, in comparison of our Bodies, and the divine part in
relation unto the baser of, our Souls; seeing that all these concur in
producing Humane Actions, it cannot be well, Arist. Polit. 1. cap. 5.
unless the chiefest do command and direct the rest. The Soul then ought to
conduct the Body, and the Spirit of our Minds, the Soul. This is therefore the
first Law, whereby the highest power of the Mind requires general obedience
at the hands of all the rest, concurring with it unto Action. Touching the
several grand Mandates, which being imposed by the understanding Faculty of the
Mind, must be obeyed by the Will of Man, they are by the same method found
out, whether they import our duty toward God, or toward Man. Touching the
one, I may not here stand to open, by what degrees of discourse the Minds even
of mere Natural Men, have attained to know, not only that there is a God, but
also what Power, Force, Wisdom, and other properties that God has, and how all
things depend on him. Arist Polit. 1. cap 5.
This being therefore presupposed, from that known relation which God has unto
us (...)Piat. in Th^at.
as unto children, and unto all good things as unto effects, whereof himself is
the (...)Ar^st. Metaph. lib. 8. cap. 2.
principal cause, these Axioms and Laws Natural concerning our duty have
arisen. (...) Plat. in Tim.
That in all things we go about, his aid is by Prayer to be craved: Arist.
Ethic. lib. 8. cap. ult.
That be cannot have sufficient honor done unto him, but the uttermost of that
we can do to honor him, we must; which is in effect the same that we read,
Deuteronomy. 6.4.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind. Which Law our Savior does term Matthew. ^1.20.
The first, and the great Commandment. Touching the next, which as our Savior
adds, as like unto this (he means in amplitude and largeness, in as much as
it is the Root out of which all Laws of duty to Men-ward have grown, as out of
the former all Offices of Religion toward God) the like Natural enducement
has brought men to know, that it is their duty no less to love others then
themselves. For seeing those things which are equal, must needs all have one
measure; if I cannot but wish to receive all good, even as much at every man's
hand, as any man can wish unto his own soul, how should I look to have any part
of my desire herein satisfied, unless my self be careful to satisfy the like
desire, which is undoubtedly in other men, we all being of one and the same
Nature? To have any thing offered them repugnant to this desire, must needs in
all respects grieve them as much as me: So that if I do harm, I must look to
suffer; there being no reason that others should show greater measure of love
to me, then they have by me showed unto them. My desire therefore to be loved
of my equals in nature, as much as possible may be, imposes upon me a natural
duty of bearing to them-ward fully the like affection. From which relation of
equality between our selves, and them that are as our selves, what several
Rules and Canons Natural Reason has drawn for direction of life, no man is
ignorant; as namely, Quod qu^ in se approba^, ^n alio reprubare non posse. lib.
in arenam C. de inos. teft. Quod quisque juris in alum slatuerer, Ipsum quoque
codem u l debere. lib. quod qui^que. An omni peni: di injuril arque vl
abslinendum, lib. 1. sect. 1. Qued vi, out clain. Matthew. 82. 40. On these two
Commandments hanseth the whole Law. Genesis 39. 9. Mark 10. 4. Acts 4. 37. and 5.
4. 2 These 3. ^.
That because we would take no harm, we must therefore do none; that since we
would not be in any thing extremely dealt with, we must our selves avoid all
extremity in our dealings; that from all violence and wrong we are utterly to
abstain, with such like; which further to wade in, would be tedious, and to our
present purpose not altogether so necessary, seeing that on these two General
Heads already mentioned, all other specialities are dependent. Wherefore the
natural measure whereby to judge our doings, is the sentence of Reason,
determining and setting down what is good to be done. Which sentence is either
mandatory, showing what must be done; or else permissive, declaring only what
may be done; or thirdly, admonitory, opening what is the most convenient for us
to do. The first takes place, where the comparison does stand altogether
between doing, and not doing of one thing, which in it self is absolutely good
or evil; as it had been for Joseph to yield, or not to yield, to the impotent
desire of his lewd Mistress, the one evil, the other good simply. The second
is, when of diverse things evil, all being not evitable, we are permitted to
take one; which one, saving only in case of so great urgency, were not
otherwise to be taken; as in the matter of Divorce amongst the Jews. The last,
when of diverse things good, one is principal and most eminent; as in their act
who sold their possessions, and laid the price at the Apostles feet; which
possessions they might have retained unto themselves without sin: Again, in the
Apostle St. Paul's own choice, to maintain himself by his own labor; whereas in
living by the Churches maintenance, as others did, there had been no offense
committed. In goodness therefore, there is a latitude or extent, whereby it
comes to pass, that even of good actions, some are better then other some;
whereas otherwise one man could not excel another, but all should be either
absolutely good, as hitting jump that indivisible Point or Center wherein
goodness consists; or else missing it, they should be excluded out of the
number of well-doers. Degrees of well-doing there could be none, except perhaps
in the seldomness and oftenness of doing well: But the Nature of Goodness being
thus ample, a Law is properly that which Reason in such sort defines to be
good, that it must be done. And the Law of Reason or Humane Nature is that,
which men by discourse of Natural Reason, have rightly found out themselves to
be all for ever bound unto in their actions. Laws of Reason have these marks to
be known by: Such as keep them, resemble most lively in their voluntary
actions, that very manner of working which Nature her self does necessarily
observe in the course of the whole World. The Works of Nature are all
behoveful, beautiful, without superfluity or defect; even so theirs, if they be
framed according to that which the Law of Reason teaches. Secondly, Those Laws
are investigable by Reason, without the help of Revelation, Supernatural and
Divine. Finally, In such sort they are investigable, that the knowledge of them
is general, the World has always been acquainted with them, according to that
which one in Sophocles observes, (...) Soph. Auti.
concerning a Branch of this Law. It is no child of two days, or yesterdays
birth, but has been no man knows how long sithence. It is not agreed upon by
one, or two, or few, but by all; which we may not so understand, as if every
particular Man in the whole World did know and confess whatsoever the Law of
Reason does contain: But this Law is such, that being proposed, no man can
reject it as unreasonable and unjust. Again, there is nothing in it; but any
man (having natural perfection of wit, and ripeness of judgment) may by labor
and travel find out. And to conclude principles, the general thereof are such,
as it is not easy to find men ignorant of them. Law Rational therefore, which
men commonly use to call the Law of Nature, meaning thereby the Law which
Humane Nature knows it self in Reason universally bound unto, which also for
that cause may be termed most fitly, the Law of Reason; this Law, I say,
comprehends all those things, which Men by the Light of their Natural
Understanding evidently know, or at leastwise may know, to be beseeming or
unbeseeming, virtuous or vicious, good or evil for them to do. Now, although it
be true, which some have said, that whatsoever is done amiss, the Law of Nature
and Reason thereby is transgrest, because even those offenses which are by
their special qualities, breaches of Supernatural Laws, do also, for that they
are generally evil, violate in general that principle of Reason, which wills
universally to fly from evil; yet do we not therefore so far extend the Law of
Reason, as to contain in it all manner of Laws whereunto reasonable Creatures
are bound, but (as has been showed) we restrain it to those only duties,
which all men by force of Natural Wit, either do, or might understand to be
such duties as concern all men. Th. 1, 2. q. 94: art. 3. Omaeia peccara sunt in
universum contra rationem and naturae legem. Aug. de Civie Del, 1. ^a. cap. 1.
Omne titlum naturae nocer, ac per hoc contra naturam est. De Doct Chr. lib. ^.
cap. 14.
Certain half-waking men there are (as St. Augustine notes) who neither
altogether asleep in f^lly, nor yet thoroughly awake in the light of true
understanding, have thought that there is not at all any thing just and
righteous in it self; but look wherewith Nations are inured, the same they take
to be right and just. Whereupon their Conclusion is, That seeing each sort of
people has a different kind of right from other, and that which is right of
it is own nature, must be every where one and the same; therefore in it self
there is nothing right. These good folks (says he, that I may not trouble
their wits with the rehearsal of too many things) have not looked so far into
the World as to perceive that, Do as thou would be done unto, is a sentence
which all Nations under Heaven are agreed upon. Refer this sentence to the love
of God, and it extinguisheth all heinous crimes: Refer it to the love of thy
Neighbor, and all grievous wrongs it banisheth out of the World. Wherefore, as
touching the Law of Reason, this was (it seems) St. Augustines judgment;
namely, that there are in it some things which stand as principles universally
agreed upon; and that out of those Principles, which are in themselves evident,
the greatest Moral duties we ow toward God or Man, may without any great
difficulty be concluded. If then it be here demanded, by what means it should
come to pass (the greatest part of the Law Moral being so easy for all men to
know) that so many thousands of men notwithstanding have been ignorant, even of
principal Moral Duties, not imagining the breach of them to be sin: I deny not,
but lewd and wicked custom, beginning perhaps at the first amongst few,
afterward spreading into greater multitudes, and so continuing from time to
time, may be of force even in plain things, to smother the light of Natural
understanding, because men will not bend their wits to examine, whether things
wherewith they have been accustomed, be good or evil. For examples sake, that
grosser kind of Heathenish Idolatry, whereby they worshipped the very works of
their own hands, was an absurdity to Reason so palpable, that the Prophet David
comparing Idols and Idolaters together, makes almost no odds between them, but
the one in a manner, as much without wit and sense as the other; Psalm. 115. 18.
They that make them, are like unto them, and so are all that trust in them.
That wherein an Idolater does seem so absurd and foolish, is by the Wiseman
thus expressed, Wisd. 13.17.
He is not ashamed to speakunto that which has no life: He calls on him that
is weak, for health: He prays for life unto him which in dead; of him, which
has no experience, he requires help: For his journey, he sueth to him which
is not able to go: For gain, and work, and success in his affairs, he seeks
furtherance of him that has no manner of power. The cause of which senseless
stupidity, is afterward imputed to custom. Wisd. 14. 12.
When a Father mourned grievously for his son that was taken away suddenly, he
made an image for him that was once dead, whom now he worshipped as a god,
ordaining to his servants Ceremonies and Sacrifices. Thus by process of time
this wicked custom prevailed, and was kept as a Law; the Authority of Rulers,
the Ambition of Craftsmen, and such like means, thrusting forward the ignorant,
and increasing their superstition. Unto this which the Wiseman has spoken,
somewhat besides may be added. For whatsoever we have hitherto taught, or shall
hereafter, concerning the force of Man's natural understanding, this we always
desire withal to be understood, that there is no kind of faculty or power in
Man, or any other Creature, which can rightly perform the Functions allotted to
it, without perpetual aid and concurrence of that Supreme Cause of all things.
The benefit whereof, as often as we cause God in his justice to withdraw, there
can no other thing follow then that which the Apostle notes, even men endued
with the Light of Reason, Ephesians. 4.17.
to walk notwithstanding in the vanity of their mind, having their cogitations
darkened, and being strangers from the Life of God, through the ignorance which
is in them, because of the hardness of their hearts. And this cause is
mentioned by the Prophet Isaiah, speaking of the ignorance of Idolaters, who
see not how the manifest Law of Reason condemns their gross iniquity and sui;
They have not in them, Isai. 44. 18.19.
says he, so much wit as to think, Shall I bow to the stock of a tree? All
knowledge and understanding is taken from them; for God has shut their eyes,
that they cannot see. That which we say in this case of Idolatry, serves for
all other things, wherein the like kind of general blindness has prevailed
against the manifest Laws of Reason. Within the compass of which Laws, we do
not only comprehend whatsoever may be easily known to belong to the duty of
all men; but even whatsoever may possibly be known to be of that quality; so
that the same be by necessary consequence deduced out of clear and manifest
principles. For if once we descend unto probable Collections what is convenient
formen, we are then in the Territory where free and arbitrary Determinations,
the Territory where Humane Laws take place, which Laws are after to be
considered.

9. Now the due observation of this Law which Reason teaches us, The benefit
of keeping that Law which Reason teaches.
cannot but be effectual unto their great good that observe the same. For we
see the whole World, and each part thereof so compacted, that as long as each
thing performs only that work which is natural unto it, it thereby
preserves both other things, and also it self. Contrariwise, let any principal
thing, as the Sun, the Moon, any one of the Heavens or Elements, but once
cease, or fail, or swerve; and who does not easily conceive, that the sequel
thereof would be ruin both to it self, and whatsoever depends on it? And is
it possible, that Man being not only the noblest Creature in the World, but
even a very World in himself, his transgressing the Law of his Nature should
draw no manner of harm after it? Yes, Tribulation and anguish unto every soul
that does evil. Good does follow unto all things by observing the course of
their nature, and on the contrary side evil, by not observing it; but not unto
Natural Agents that good which we call Reward, not that evil which we properly
term Punishment. The reason whereof is, because amongst Creatures in this
World, only Man's observation of the Law of his Nature is Righteousness, only
Man's transgression Sin. And the reason of this is, the difference in his manner
of observing or transgressing the Law of his Nature. He does not otherwise then
voluntarily the one, or the other. What we do against our wills, or
constrainedly, we are not properly said to do it; because the motive cause of
doing it, is not in our selves, but carries us; as if the Wind should drive a
Feather in the Air, we no whit furthering that whereby we are driven. In such
cases therefore the evil which is done, moves compassion; Men are pitied for
it, as being rather miserable in such respect then culpable. Some things are
likewise done by Man, though not through outward force and impulsion, though
not against, yet without their Wills; as in Alienation of Mind, or any the
like inevitable utter absence of Wit and Judgment. For which cause, no Man did
ever think the hurtful actions of furious Men and Innocents to be punishable.
Again, some things we do neither against nor without, and yet not simply and
merely with our Wills; but with our Wills in such sort moved, that albeit there
be no impossibility but that we might, nevertheless we are not so easily able
to do otherwise. In this consideration, one evil deed is made more pardonable
then another. Finally, that which we do being evil, is notwithstanding by so
much more pardonable, by how much the exigence of so doing, or the difficulty
of doing otherwise, is greater; unless this necessity or difficulty have
originally risen from our selves. It is no excuse therefore unto him, who being
drunk commits incest, and alleges, that his wits were not his own; in as
much as himself might have chosen, whether his wits should by that mean have
been taken from him. Now Rewards and Punishments do always presuppose some
thing willingly done well or ill; without which respect, though we may
sometimes receive good or harm, yet then the one is only a Benefit, and not a
Reward; the other simply an Hurt, not a Punishment. From the sundry
dispositions of Man's will, which is the root of all his actions, there grows
variety in the sequel of Rewards and Punishments, which are by these and the
like rules measured: Voluntate sublara, omnem actum parem esse; lib. soedis.
simam, de adult. Bonam voluntatem plerunque pro sacto reputari l. si quis in
Testament.
Take away the will, and all acts are equal: That which we do not, and would
do, is commonly accepted as done. By these and the like rules, Men's actions are
determined of, and judged, whether they be in their own nature, rewardable or
punishable. Rewards and Punishments are not received, but at the hands of such
as being above us, have power to examine and judge our deeds. How men come to
have this authority one over another in External Actions, we shall more
diligently examine in that which follows. But for this present, so much all
do acknowledge, that since every man's heart and conscience does in good or evil,
even secretly committed and known to none but it self, either like or disallow
it self, and accordingly either rejoice, very Nature exulting, as it were, in
certain hope of reward, or else grieve as it were, Divos cast adeunto,
pietatem adhi bento. Q^i secus faxit, Deun ipse vindex crit.
in a sense of future punishment; neither of which can in this case be looked
for from any other, saving only from him who discerns and judges the very
secrets of all hearts: Therefore he is the only Rewarder and Revenger of all
such Actions; although not of such actions only, but of all, whereby the Law
of Nature is broken, whereof himself is Author. For which cause, the Roman
Laws, called The Laws of the Twelve Tables, requiring offices of inward
affection, which the eye of Man cannot reach unto, threaten the neglecters of
them with none but Divine Punishment.

How Reason does lea^ Men unto the making of Humane Laws, whereby Politic
Societies are governed, and to Agreement about Laws, whereby the Fellowship or
Communion of Independent Society stands. (...). Arist. Rhher. 1.
10. That which hitherto we have set down, is (I hope) sufficient to show their
brutishness, which imagine that Religion and Virtue are only as Men will
account of them; that we might make as much account, if we would, of the
contrary, without any harm unto our selves, and that in Nature they are as
indifferent one as the other. We see then how Nature it self reaches Laws and
Statutes to live by. The Laws which have been hitherto mentioned, do bind men
absolutely, even as they are men, although they have never any settled
Fellowship, never any solemn Agreement amongst themselves what to do, or not to
do. But forasmuch as we are not by our selves sufficient to furnish our selves
with competent store of things needful for such a life as our Nature does
desire, a life fit for the dignity of man: Therefore to supply those defects
and imperfections which are in us living single and solely by our selves, we
are naturally enduced to seek Communion and Fellowship with others. This was
the cause of Men's uniting themselves at the first in Politic Societies, which
Societies could not be without government, nor government without a distinct
kind of Law from that which has been already declared. Two Foundations there
are which beat up Public Societies; the one, a Natural Inclination, whereby
all men desire sociable life and fellowship; the other, an order expressly or
secretly agreed upon, touching the manner of their Union in living together.
The latter is that which we call the Law of a Commonweal, the very Soul of a
Politic Body, the parts whereof are by Law animated, held together, and set on
work in such Actions as the common good requires. Laws Politic, ordained for
External Order and Regiment amongst Men, are never framed as they should be,
unless presuming the Will of Man to be inwardly obstinate, rebellious, and
averse from all obedience unto the Sacred Laws of his Nature: In a word, unless
presuming Man to be in regard of his depraved mind, little better then a wild
beast, they do accordingly provide notwithstanding so to frame his outward
actions, that they be no hindrance unto the common good, for which Societies
are instituted; unless they do this, they are not perfect. It rests
therefore, that we consider how Nature finds out such Laws of Government, as
serve to direct even Nature depraved to a right end. All men desire to lead in
this world an happy life: The life is led most happily, wherein all Virtue is
exercised without impediment or let. 1 Timothy 6. 8.
The Apostle in exhorting men to contentment, although they have in this world
no more then very bare Food and Raiment, gives us thereby to understand, that
those are even the lowest of things necessary, that if we should be stripped of
all those things, without which we might possibly be, yet these must be left;
that destitution in these, is such an impediment, as till it be removed,
suffers not the mind of Man to admit any other care. For this cause first,
Genesis 1. 29. and 2. 17. and 4. 2. and 4. 20.
God assigned Adam maintenance of Life, and then appointed him a Law to
observe: For this cause after Men began to grow to a number; the first thing we
read they gave themselves unto, was the Tilling of the Earth, and the Feeding
of Cattle. Having by this mean whereon to live, the principal actions of their
life afterward, are noted by the Exercise of their Religion. True it is, that
the Kingdom of God must be the first thing in our purposes and desires. Matthew.
6.33.
But in as much as a righteous life presupposes life, in as much as to live
virtuously, it is impossible except we live: Therefore the first impediment,
which naturally we endeavor to remove, is penury and want of things, without
which we cannot live. Unto life many implements are necessary; mo, if we seek
(as all men naturally do) such a life as has in it joy, comfort, delight, and
pleasure. To this end we see how quickly sundry Arts Mechanical were found out
in the very prime of the World. Genesis 4.20,21, 22.
As things of greatest necessity are always first provided for, so things of
greatest dignity are most accounted of by all such as judge rightly. Although
therefore Riches be a thing which every Man wishes, yet no Man of judgment can
esteem it better to be Rich, then Wise, Virtuous, and Religious. If we be both,
or either of these, it is not because we are so born: For into the World we
come as empty of the one, as of the other, as naked in Mind as we are in Body.
Both which necessities of Man had at the first no other helps and supplies,
then only domestical; such as that which the Prophet implies, Isai. 4g^ 15.
saying, Can a Mother forget her child? Such as that which the Apostle
mentions, 1 Timothy 5.8.
saying, He that cares not for his own, is worse then an Infidel: Such as that
concerning Abraham, Genesis 13. 19.
Abraham will command his sons and his household after him, that they keep the
way of the Lord. But neither that which we learn of our selves, nor that which
others teach us, can prevail, where wickedness and malice have taken deep root.
If therefore, when there was but as yet one only family in the World, no means
of instruction, Humane or Divine, could prevent effusion of blood: How could it
be chosen, but that when Families were multiplied and increased upon Earth;
Genesis 4. 8.
after Separation, each providing for it self, Envy, Strife, Contention, and
Violence, must grow amongst them? For has not Nature furnished Man with Wit
and Valor, and as it were with Armor, which may be used as well unto extreme
evil as good? Yea, were they not used by the rest of the World unto evil? Unto
the contrary only, Genesis 6. 5. Genesis 5.
by Seth, Enoch, and those few the rest in that Line? We all make complaint of
the iniquity of our times; not unjustly, for the days are evil. But compare
them with those times wherein there were no civil Societies, with those times
therein there was as yet no manner of Public Regiment established, with those
times wherein there were not above eight righteous persons living upon the face
of the Earth: 2 Pet. 2. 5.
And we have surely good cause to think, that God has blessed us exceedingly,
and has made us behold most happy days. To take away all such mutual
grievances, injuries, and wrongs, there was no way but only by growing unto
Composition and Agreement amongst themselves, by ordaining some kind of
Government public, and by yielding themselves subject thereunto; that unto
whom they granted authority to rule and govern, by them the peace,
tranquillity, and happy estate of the rest might be procured. Men always knew,
that when Force and Injury was offered, they might be Defenders of themselves;
they knew that howsoever men may seek their own commodity, yet if this were
done with injury unto others, it was not to be suffered, but by all men, and by
all good means to be withstood: Finally, they knew that no man might in Reason
take upon him to determine his own right, and according to his own
determination proceed in maintenance thereof, in as much as every man is
toward himself and them whom he greatly affects partial: And therefore that
strifes and troubles would be endless, except they gave their common consent,
all to be ordered by some whom they should agree upon. Without which consent,
there were no reason that one Man should take upon him to be Lord or Judge over
another, because, although there be according to the opinion of some very great
and judicious Men, a kind of Natural Right in the Noble, Arist. Polit. lib. 3.
and 4.
Wise, and Virtuous, to govern them which are of servile disposition;
nevertheless for manifestation of this their right, and men's more peaceable
contentment on both sides, the assent of them whom are to be governed, seems
necessary. To Fathers within their Private Families, Nature has given a
supreme power; for which cause we see throughout the World, even from the first
Foundation thereof, all men have ever been taken as Lords and Lawful Kings in
their own houses. Howbeit, over a whole grand multitude, having no such
dependency upon any one, and consisting of so many Families, as every Politic
Society in the World does; impossible it is, that any should have complete
lawful power, but by consent of men, or immediate appointment of God, because
not having the Natural Superiority of Fathers, their power must needs be either
usurped, and then unlawful; or if lawful, then either granted or consented unto
by them, over whom they exercise the same, or else given extraordinarily from
God, unto whom all the World is subject. It is no improbable opinion therefore
which the Arch-Philosopher was of, Arist. Polit. lib. 1. cap. 5. Vide and
latonem in 3. de legibus.
That as the chiefest person in every household, was always as it were a King,
so when numbers of households joined themselves in civil Societies together,
Kings were the first kind of Governors amongst them. Which is also (as it
seems) the reason, why the name of Father continued still in them, who of
Fathers were made Rulers; as also the ancient custom of Governors to do as
Melchisedec, and being Kings to exercise the Office of Priests, which Fathers
did at the first, grew perhaps by the same occasion: Howbeit, not this the
only kind of Regiment that has been received in the World. The
inconveniences of one kind, have caused sundry other to be devised: So that in
a word, all Public Regiment, of what kind soever, seems evidently to have
risen from deliberate Advice, Consultation, and Composition between Men,
judging it convenient and behoveful; there being no impossibility in Nature
considered by it self, but that men might have lived without any Public
Regiment. Howbeit, the corruption of our nature being presupposed, we may not
deny, but that the Law of Nature does now require of necessity some kind of
Regiment; so that to bring things unto the first course they were in, and
utterly to take away all kind of Public Government in the World, were
apparently to overturn the whole World. The case of Man's nature standing
therefore as it does, some kind of Regiment the Law of Nature does require;
yet the kinds thereof being many, Nature tieth not to any one, but leaves the
choice as a thing arbitrary. At the first, when some certain kind of Regiment
was once approved, it may be that nothing was then further thought upon for the
manner of governing, but all permitted unto their Wisdom and Discretion which
were to rule; Cum premeretur ini^io multitudo ab jis qui majores opes habebant,
a^l unum aliquem consugieban virtute prastantem; qui cum prohiberet injeria
renuiores aequitate consti ^ uendo summos cum intimis parijure retinehar. Cum
id minus cantingeret. leges sunt inventae Cic. Ossic. lib. 2. (...) Arist.
Rher. ad Alex.
till by experience they found this for all parts very inconvenient, so as the
thing which they had devised for a remedy, did indeed but increase the sore
which it should have cured. They saw that to live by one Man's will, became the
cause of all Men's misery. This constrained them to come unto Laws, wherein all
men might see their duties beforehand, and know the penalties of transgressing
them. Tanta est enim vis voluptatum, ut and ^ignorantiam protelet in
occasionem, and conscientiam cer^rampat in dissimulationem. Ter^ul. lib. de
Spectacul.
If things be simply good or evil, and withal universally so acknowledged,
there needs no new Law to be made for such things. The first kind therefore of
things appointed by Laws Humane, contains whatsoever being in it self
naturally good or evil, is notwithstanding more secret then that it can be
discerned by every man's present conceit, without some deeper discourse and
judgment. In which discourse, because there is difficulty and possibility many
ways to err, unless such things were set down by Laws, many would be ignorant
of their duties, which now are not; and many that know what they should do,
would nevertheless dissemble it, and to excuse themselves, pretend ignorance
and simplicity, which now they cannot. And because the greatest part of Men,
are such as prefer their own private good before all things; even that good
which is Sensual, before whatsoever is most Divine: And for that the labor of
doing good, together with the pleasure arising from the contrary, does make men
for the most part slower to the one, and proner to the other, then that duty
prescribed then by Law, can prevail sufficiently with them. Therefore unto Laws
that Men do make for the benefit of Men, it has seemed always needful to add
Rewards, which may more allure unto good, then any hardness deterreth from it;
and Punishments, which may more deter from evil, then any sweetness thereto
allureth. Wherein as the generality is Natural, Virtue rewardable, and Vice
punishable; So the particular determination of the Reward or Punishment,
belongs unto them by whom Laws are made. Theft is naturally punishable, but
the kind of punishment is Positive; and such lawful, as Men shall think with
discretion convenient by Law to appoint. In Laws, that which is Natural,
binds universally; that which is Positive, not so. To let go those kind of
Positive Laws which Men impose upon themselves, as by vow unto God, contract
with Men, or such like; somewhat it will make unto our purpose, a little more
fully to consider, what things are incident unto the making of the Positive
Laws for the Government of them that live united in Public Society. Laws do
not only teach what is good, but they enjoin it, they have in them a certain
constraining force; and to constrain Men unto any thing inconvenient, does seem
unreasonable. Most requisite therefore it is, that to devise Laws which all Men
shall be forced to obey, none but Wisemen be admitted. Laws are Matters of
Principal Consequence; Men of common Capacity, and but ordinary Judgment, are
not able (for how should they?) to discern what things are fittest for each
kind and state of Regiment. We cannot be ignorant how much our obedience unto
Laws, depends upon this point. Let a man, though never so justly, oppose
himself unto them that are disordered in their ways, and what one among them
commonly does not stomach at such Contradiction, storm at Reproof, and hate
such as would Reform them? Notwithstanding, even they which brook it worst,
that Men should tell them of their duties, when they are told the same by a
Law, think very well and reasonably of it. For why? They presume that the Law
does speak with all indifferency; that the Law has no side respect to their
persons; that the Law is as it were an Oracle proceeding from Wisdom and
Understanding. Howbeit, Laws do not take their constraining force from the
quality of such as devise them, but from that power which does give them the
strength of Laws. That which we spoke before concerning the Power of
Government, must here be applied unto the power of making Laws whereby to
govern, which power God has over all, and by the Natural Law, whereunto he
has made all subject, the lawful power of making Laws, to command whole
Politic Societies of Men, belongs so properly unto the same entire
Societies, that for any Prince or Potentate, of what kind soever upon Earth,
to exercise the same of himself, and not either by express Commission
immediately and personally received from God, or else by Authority derived at
the first from their consent upon whose persons they impose Laws, it is no
better then mere tyranny. Laws they are not therefore which Public Approbation
has not made so: But Approbation not only they give who personally declare
their assent, by voice, sign, or act; but also when others do it in their
names, by right originally, at the least, derived from them. As in Parliaments,
Councils, and the like Assemblies, although we be not personally our selves
present, notwithstanding our Assent is by reason of other Agents there in our
behalf. And what we do by others, no reason but that it should stand as our
Deed, no less effectually to bind us, then if our selves had done it in
person. In many things Assent is given, they that give it, not imagining they
do so, because the manner of their assenting is not apparent. As for example,
when an absolute Monarch commands his Subjects that which seems good in his
own discretion; has not his Edict the force of a Law, whether they approve or
dislike it? Again, that which has been received long sithence, and is by
custom now established, we keep as a Law which we may not transgress; yet, what
consent was ever thereunto sought or required at our hands? Of this point
therefore we are to note, that since Men naturally have no full and perfect
power to command whole Politic Multitudes of Men; therefore utterly without
our consent, we could in such sort be at no Man's commandment living. And to be
commanded, we do consent, when that Society whereof we are part, has at any
time before consented, without revoking the same after by the like Universal
Agreement. Wherefore, as any Man's Deed past is good as long as himself
continues; so the Act of a Public Society of Men done Five hundred years
sithence, stands as theirs, who presently are of the same Societies, because
Corporations are Immortal; we were then alive in our Predecessors, and they in
their Successors do live still. Laws therefore Humane of what kind soever, are
available by consent. If here it be demanded how it comes to pass, that this
being common unto all Laws which are made, there should be found even in good
Laws so great variety as there is; We must note the Reason hereof to be, the
sundry particular ends whereunto the different disposition of that Subject or
Matter for which Laws are provided, causes them to have a special respect in
making Laws. Arist. Polit. lib. 2. cap. 11^t.
A Law there is mentioned amongst the Grecians, whereof Pillacus is reported to
have been Author; and by that Law it was agreed, that he which being overcome
with drink, did then strike any man, should suffer punishment double as much,
as if he had done the same being sober. No man could ever have thought this
reasonable, that had intended thereby only to punish the injury committed,
according to the gravity of the Fact: For who knows not, that harm advisedly
done, is naturally less pardonable, and therefore worthy of sharper punishment:
But for as much as none did so usually this way offend as men in that case,
which they wittingly fell into, even because they would be so much the more
freely outrageous: It was for their public good where such disorder was grown,
to frame a Positive Law for remedy thereof accordingly. To this appertain those
known Laws of making Laws; as that Lawmakers must have an eye to that place
where, and to the men amongst whom; that one kind of Laws cannot serve for all
kind of Regiment; that where the Multitude bears sway, Laws that shall tend
unto the preservation of that State, must make common smaller Offices to go by
lot, for fear of strife and division likely to arise; by reason that ordinary
qualities sufficing for discharge of such Offices, they could not but by many
be desired, and so with danger contended for, and not missed without grudge and
coffeehouse; whereas at an uncertain lot, none can find themselves grieved,
on whomsoever it lights. Contrariwise the greatest, whereof but few are
capable, to pass by Popular Election, that neither the people may envy such as
have those Honors, in as much as themselves bestow them, and that the chiefest
may be kindled with desire, to exercise all parts of rare and beneficial
Virtue; knowing they shall not lose their labor by growing in fame and
estimation amongst the people. If the Helm of chief Government be in the hands
of a few of the wealthiest, that then Laws providing for continuance thereof,
must make the punishment of contumely, and wrong offered unto any of the common
sort, sharp and grievous; that so the evil may be prevented, whereby the rich
are most likely to bring themselves into hatred with the people, who are not
wont to take so great offense, when they are excluded from Honors and Offices,
as when their persons are contumeliously trodden upon. In other kinds of
Regiment, the like is observed concerning the difference of Positive Laws,
which to be everywhere the same, is impossible, and against their Nature. Now
as the Learned in the Laws of this Land observe, Staundf. P^C. ^ice to the
Pleas of the Crown.
that our Statutes sometimes are only the Affirmation or Ratification of that
which by Common Law was held before; so here it is not to be omitted, that
generally all Laws Humane, which are made for the ordering of Politic
Societies, be either such as establish some duty, whereunto all Men by the Law
of Reason did before stand bound; or else such as make that a duty now, which
before was none: The one sort we may for distinction sake call Mixedly, and the
other Merely Humane. That which plain or necessary Reason binds Men unto, may
be in sundry considerations expedient to be ratified by Humane Law. For
example, if Confusion of Blood in Marriage, the liberty of having many Wives at
once, or any other the like corrupt and unreasonable Custom does happen to have
prevailed far, and to have gotten the upper hand of Right Reason with the
greatest part; so that no way is left to rectify such foul disorder, without
prescribing by Law the same things which Reason necessarily does enforce, but
is not perceived that so it does; or if many be grown unto that which the
Apostle did lament in some, concerning whom he writes, saying, Jude, verse. 10.
(...) Arist. Eth. lib. 10. cap. 1^.
That even what things they naturally know, in those very things, as Beasts
void of Reason, they corrupted themselves: Or if there be no such special
accident, yet for as much as the common sort are led by the sway of their
sensual desires; and therefore do more shun sin for the sensible evils which
follow it amongst men, then for any kind of sentence which Reason does
pronounce against it. This very thing is cause sufficient, why duties belonging
unto each kind of Virtue, albeit the Law of Reason teach them, should
notwithstanding be prescribed even by Humane Law. Which Law in this case we
term Mixed, because the matter whereunto it binds, is the same which Reason
necessarily does require at our hands, and from the Law of Reason it differs
in the manner of binding only. For whereas Men before stood bound in
Conscience to do as the Law of Reason teaches; they are now by virtue of
Humane Law become constrainable, and if they outwardly transgress, punishable.
As for Laws which are Merely Humane, the matter of them is any thing, which
Reason does but probably teach to be fit and convenient; so that till such time
as Law has passed amongst men about it, of it self it binds no man. One
example whereof may be this, Lands are by Humane Law in some places, after the
owners decease, divided unto all his Children; in some, all descends to the
eldest Son. If the Law of Reason did necessarily require but the one of these
two to be done, they which by Law have received the other, should be subject to
that heavy sentence which denounces against all that Decree wicked, unjust,
and unreasonable things, Woe. Whereas now, which soever be received, there is no
Law of Reason transgrest; Isa. 10. 1.
because there is probable reason why either of them may be expedient, and for
either of them more then probable reason there is not to be found. Laws,
whether mixtly, or merely Humane, are made by Politic Societies; some only,
as those Societies are civilly united; some, as they are spiritually joined,
and make such a Body as we call the Church. Of Laws Humane in this latter
kind, we are to speak in the Third Book following: Let it therefore suffice
thus far to have touched the force wherewith Almighty God has graciously
endued our Nature, and thereby enabled the same to finde^out both those Laws
which all Men generally are for ever bound to observe; and also such as are
most fit for their behoof, who lead their lives in any ordered State of
Government. Now besides that Law which simply concerns men, as Men; and that
which belongs unto them, as they are Men linked with others in some Form of
Politic Society, there is a third kind of Law which touches all such several
Bodies Politic, so far forth as one of them has Public Commerce with
another. And this third is, The Law of Nations. Between Men and Beasts, there
is no possibility or Sociable Communion, because the Welspring of that
Communion is a Natural delight which Man has to transfuse from himself into
others, and to receive from others into himself, especially those things
wherein the excellency of this kind does most consist. Arist. P. lit. 1. cap 2
The chiefest Instrument of Humane Communion therefore is Speech, because
thereby we impart mutually one to another, the Conceits of our Reasonable
Understanding. And for that cause, seeing Beasts are not hereof capable, for as
much as with them we can use no such Conference, they being in degree, although
above other Creatures on Earth, to whom Nature has denied sense, yet lower
then to be sociable Companions of Man, to whom Nature has given Reason: It is
of Adam said, that amongst the Beasts, Genesis 2. 22.
he sound not for himself any meet companion. Civil Society does more content
the Nature of Man, then any private kind of solitary living; because in
Society, this good of Mutual Participation is so much larger then otherwise.
Herewith notwithstanding we are not satisfied, but we covet (if it might be) to
have a kind of Society and Fellowship, even with all mankind. Cic. Tu^^ 5.
and 1 de Legib.
Which thing Socrates intending to signify, professed himself a Citizen; not
of this or that Commonwealth, but of the World. And an effect of that very
natural desire in us, (a manifest token, that we wish after a sort an Universal
Fellowship with all Men) appears by the wonderful delight men have, some to
visit foreign Countries, some to discover Nations not heard of in former Ages;
we all to know the Affairs and Dealings of other People, yea, to be in League
of Amity with them. And this not only for Trafficks sake, or, to the end, that
when many are confederated, each may make other the more strong; but for such
cause also, as moved the Queen of Sheba to visit Solomon; and in a word,
because Nature does presume, that how many Men there are in the World, so many
Gods, as it were, there are; or at leastwise such they should be toward Men. 1
King 10 1. 2 C^r^n. g. 1. Matthew. 13 42. Luke 11. 3
Touching Laws which are to serve Men in this behalf; even as those Laws of
Reason, which (Man retaining his original Integrity) had been sufficient to
direct each particular person in all his Affairs and Duties, are not
sufficient, but require the access of other Laws now, that Man and his
Offspring are grown thus corrupt and sinful. Again, as those Laws of Polity
and Regiment, which would have served Men living in Public Society together,
with that harmless disposition, which then they should have had, are not able
now to serve, when Men's iniquity is so hardly restrained within any tolerable
bounds: In like manner, the National Laws of Natural Commerce between Societies
of that former and better quality might have been other then now, when Nations
are so prone to offer violence, injury, and wrong. Hereupon has grown in every
of these three kinds, that distinction between Primary and Secondary Laws; the
one grounded upon sincere, the other built upon depraved Nature. Primary Laws
of Nations are such as concern Embassage, such as belong to the courteous
entertainment of Foreigners and Strangers, such as serve for Commodious
Traffic, and the like. Secondary Laws in the same kind, are such as this
present unquiet World is most familiarly acquainted with; I mean Laws of Arms,
which yet are much better known then kept. But what matter the Law of Nations
does contain, I omit to search. The strength and virtue of that Law is such,
that no particular Nation can lawfully prejudice the same by any their several
Laws and Ordinances, more then a Man by his private resolutions the Law of the
whole Commonwealth or State wherein he lives. For as Civil Law being the Act
of a whole Body Politic, does therefore overruled each several part of the
same Body; so there is no reason, that any one Commonwealth of it self, should
to the prejudice of another, anaihilate that whereupon the whole World has
agreed. For which cause, the Lacedaemonians forbidding all access of strangers
into their coasts, Joseph. lib. 2. ^^ n^^a. ra Appl. ^n.
are in that respect both by Josephus and Theodores deservedly blamed, as being
enemies to that Hospitality, which for common Humanities sake, T^^^. lib. 9. de
sa^nd. ^. ^^. Ass^ct.
all the Nations on Earth should embrace. Now as there is great cause of
Communion, and consequently of Laws, for the maintenance of Communion amongst
Nations: So amongst Nations Christian, the like in regard even of Christianity,
has been always judged needful. And in this kind of correspondence amongst
Nations, the force of General Councils does stand. For as one and the same Law
Divine, whereof in the next place we are to speak, is unto all Christian
Churches a rule for the chiefest things; by means whereof they all in that
respect make one Church, Ephe. 4. 5.
as having all but One Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism: So the urgent
necessity of Mutual Communion for Preservation of our Unity in these things; as
also for Order in some other things convenient to be every where uniformly
kept, makes it requisite, that the Church of God here on Earth, have her Laws
of Spiritual Commerce between Christian Nations: Laws, by virtue whereof all
Churches may enjoy freely the use of those Reverend, Religious and Sacred
Consultations, which are termed Councils General. A thing whereof Gods own
Blessed Spirit was the Author, a thing practiced by the holy Apostles
themselves, Acts 15. 23.
a thing always afterward kept and observed throughout the World; a thing
never otherwise, then most highly esteemed of, till Pride, Ambition, and
Tyranny began by factious and vile Endeavors, to abuse that Divine Invention,
unto the furtherance of wicked purposes. But as the just Authority of Civil
Courts and Parliaments is not therefore to be abolished, because sometimes
there is cunning used to frame them according to the private intents of men
over-potent in the Commonwealth: So the grievous abuse which has been of
Councils, should rather cause men to study how so gracious a thing may again be
reduced to that first Perfection, then in regard of stains and blemishes
sithence growing, be held for ever in extreme disgrace. To speak of this matter
as the cause requires, would require very long discourse. All I will presently
say, is this, Whether it be for the finding out of any thing whereunto Divine
Law binds us; but yet in such sort, that Men are not thereof on all sides
resolved; or for the setting down of some Uniform Judgment to stand touching
such things, as being neither way matters of necessity, are notwithstanding
offensive and scandalous, when there is open opposition about them: Be it for
the ending of strifes, touching matters of Christian belief, wherein the one
part may seem to have probable cause of dissenting from the other; or be it
concerning matters of Policy, Order, and Regiment in the Church; I nothing
doubt but that Christian men should much better frame themselves to those
Heavenly Precepts, which our Lord and Savior, with so great instancy gave, as
concerning Peace and Unity, Joh. 14. 27.
if we did all concur in desire to have the use of Ancient Councils again
renewed, rather then these proceedings continued, which either make all
Contentions endless, or bring them to one only Determination, and that of all
other the worst, which is by Sword. It follows therefore, that a new
Foundation being laid, we now adjoyn hereunto that which comes in the next
place to be spoken of; namely, wherefore God has himself by Scripture, made
known such Laws as serve for direction of Men.

11. All things (God only accepted) besides the Nature which they have in
themselves, receive externally some Perfection from other things, Wherefore God
has by Scripture further made known such Supernatural Laws, as do serve for
Men's direction.
as has been showed. In so much, as there is in the whole World no one thing
great or small, but either in respect of knowledge or of use, it may unto our
Perfection add somewhat. And whatsoever such Perfection there is, which our
Nature may acquire, the same we properly term our good, our Sovereign Good or
Blessedness; that wherein the highest degree of all our Perfection consists,
that which being once attained unto, there can rest nothing further to be
desired; and therefore with it our souls are fully content and satisfied, in
that they have, they rejoice, and thirst for no more: Wherefore of good things
desired, some are such, that for themselves, we cover them not, but only
because they serve as Instruments unto that for which we are to seek: Of this
sort, are Riches: Another kind there is, which although we desire for it self,
as Health, and Virtue, and Knowledge; nevertheless, they are not the last mark
whereat we aim, but have their further end whereunto they are referred: So as
in them we are not satisfied, as having attained the utmost we may, but our
desires do still proceed. These things are linked, and as it were chained one
to another. We labor to eat, and we eat to live, and we live to do good, and
the good which we do, Gal. 6. 8. He that sows to the Spirit, shall of the
Spirit reap Life Everlasting.
is as seed sown with reference unto a future Harvest. But we must come at the
length to some pause: For if every thing were to be desired for some other
without any stint, there could be no certain end proposed unto our actions, we
should go on we know not whither; yea, whatsoever we do, were in vain, or
rather nothing at all were possible to be done. For as to take away the first
efficient of our Being, were to annihilate utterly our persons; so we cannot
remove the last final cause of our working, but we shall cause whatsoever we
work to cease. Therefore something there must be desired for it self simply,
and for no other: That is, simply for it self desirable, unto the nature
whereof it is opposite and repugnant to be desired, with relation unto any
other. The Ox and the Ass desire their food, neither propose they unto
themselves any end wherefore; so that of them, this is desired for it self. But
why? By reason of their imperfection, which cannot otherwise desire it; whereas
that which is desired simply for it self, the excellency thereof is such as
permits it not in any sort to be referred unto a further end. Now that which
Man does desire with reference to a further end, the same he desires in such
measure as is unto that end convenient; but what he covers as good in it
self, toward that his desire is ever infinite. Vide Arist. Ethic. lib. 10. c.
10. and Metaph. l. 12. cap. 5. and cap. 4 and cap. 20.
So that unless the last good of all which is desired altogether for it self,
be also infinite; we do evil in making it our end, even as they who placed
their felicity in wealth, or honor, or pleasure, or any thing here attained,
because in desiring any thing as our final perfection, which is not so, we do
amiss. Nothing may be infinitely desired, but that good which indeed is
infinite: For the better, the more desirable; that therefore most desirable,
wherein there is infinity of goodness: So that if any thing desirable may be
infinite, that must needs be the highest of all things that are desired. No
good is infinite, but only God; therefore he is our felicity and bliss;
moreover, desire tends unto union with that it desires. If then in him we be
blessed, it is by force of participation and conjunction with him. Again, it is
not the possession of any good thing, can make them happy which have it, unless
they enjoy the things wherewith they are possessed. Then are we happy
therefore, when fully we enjoy God, as an object wherein the Powers of our
Souls are satisfied, even with everlasting delight: So that although we be men,
yet by being unto God united, we live as it were the Life of God. Happiness
therefore is that estate whereby we attain, so far as possibly may be attained,
the full possession of that which simply for it self is to be desired, and
contains in it after an eminent sort, the contentation of our desires, the
highest degree of all our Perfection. Of such Perfection, capable we are not in
this life: For while we are in the World, we are subject unto sundry (...).
Merc. Tris.
imperfections, grief of body, defects of mind; yea, the best things we do,
are painful, and the exercise of them grievous, being continued without
intermission; so as in those very actions, whereby we are especial'y perfected
in this life, we are not able to persist; forced we are with very weariness,
and that often, to interrupt them: Which rediousness, cannot fall into those
operations that are in the state of bliss, when our union with God is complete.
Complete union with him, must be according unto every power and faculty of our
minds, apt to receive so glorious an object. Capable we are of God, both by
Understanding and Will: By Understanding, as he is that Sovereign Truth, which
comprehends the Rich Treasures of all Wisdom: By Will, as he is that Sea of
Goodness, whereof, whosoever tastes, shall thirst no more. As the Will does now
work upon that object by desire, which is as it were a motion toward the end
as yet unobtained, so likewise upon the same hereafter received, it shall work
also by love. Appetitus inhiantis fit amor fruentis, says St. Augustine. The
longing disposition of them that thirst, is changed into the sweet affection of
them that taste, and are replenished. Whereas we now love the thing that is
good, but good especially, in respect of benefit unto us; we shall then love
the thing that is good, only or principally for the goodness of beauty in it
self. The Soul being in this sort, as it is Active, perfected by love of that
infinite good, shall, as it is Receptive, be also perfected with those
Supernatural Passions of Joy, Peace, and Delight: All this endless and
Everlasting. Matthew 25. The just shall go into life everlasting. Matthew. 22. They
shall be as the Angels of God. 2 Timothy 4. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 4.
Which Perpetuity, in regard whereof our Blessedness is termed A Crown which
withers not, does neither depend upon the nature of the thing it self, nor
proceed from any natural necessity that our Souls should so exercise themselves
for ever in beholding and loving God, but from the Will of God, which does both
freely perfect our nature in so high a degree, and continue it so perfected.
Under Man, no Creature in the World is capable of felicity and bliss: First,
because their chiefest Perfection consists in that which is best for them,
but not in that which is simply best, as ours does. Secondly, because
whatsoever External Perfection they tend unto, it is not better then
themselves, as ours is. How just occasion have we therefore even in this
respect with the Prophet to admire the goodness of God: Psalm. 8.
Lord, what is man that thou should exalt him above the works of thy hands,
so far as to make thy self the Inheritance of his Rest, and the Substance of
his Felicity! Now, if men had not naturally this desire to be happy, how were
it possible that all men should have it? All men have: Therefore this desire in
Man is natural. It is not in our power not to do the same, how should it then
be in our power to do it coldly or remisly? So that our desire being natural,
is also in that degree of earnestness whereunto nothing can be added. And is it
probable that God should frame the hearts of all men so desirous of that which
no man may obtain? Comment in Procaem. 2. Metaph.
It is an Axiom of Nature, that natural desire cannot utterly be frustrate.
This desire of ours being natural, should be frustrate, if that which may
satisfy the same, were a thing impossible for Man to aspire unto. Man does
seek a tripple Perfection; first, a sensual, consisting in those things which
very life it self requires, either as necessary Supplements, or as Beauties
and Ornaments thereof; then an Intellectual, consisting in those things which
none underneath Man, is either capable of, or acquainted with; lastly, a
Spiritual and Divine, consisting in those things whereunto we tend by
supernatural means here, but cannot here attain unto them. They that make the
first of these three, the scope of their whole life, Phil. 3. 19.
are said by the Apostle to have no God, but only their Belly, to be
earthly-minded men. Unto the second they bend themselves, who seek especially
to excel in all such Knowledge and Virtue as does most commend Men. To this
branch belongs the Law of Moral and Civil Perfection: That there is somewhat
higher then either of these two, no other proof does need then the very Process
of Man's desire, which being natural, should be frustrate, if there were not
some farther thing wherein it might rest at the length concented, which in the
former it cannot do. For Man does not seem to rest satisfied, either with
fruition of that wherewith his life is preserved, or with performance of such
actions as advance him most deservedly in estimation; but does further covet,
yea, oftentimes manifestly pursue with great sedulity and earnestness, that
which cannot stand him in any stead for vital use; that which exceeds the
reach of Sense, yea, somewhat above capacity of Reason, somewhat Divine and
Heavenly, which with hidden exultation, it rather surmiseth then conceives;
somewhat it seeks, and what that is directly, it knows not; yet very
intentive desire thereof does so incite it, that all other known delights and
pleasures are laid aside, they give place to the search of this but only
suspected desire. If the Soul of Man did serve only to give him Being in this
life, then things appertaining unto this life, would content him, as we see
they do other Creatures; which Creatures enjoying what they live by, seek no
further, but in his contentation do show a kind of acknowledgment, that there
is no higher good which does any way belong unto them. With us it is otherwise:
For although the Beauties, Riches, Honors, Sciences, Virtues, and Perfections
of all Men living, were in the present possession of one; yet somewhat beyond
and above all this, there would still be sought and earnestly thirsted for. So
that Nature, even in this life, does plainly claim and call for a more Divine
Perfection, then either of these two that have been mentioned. This last and
highest estate of Perfection, whereof we speak, is received of Men in the
nature of a Matthew. 5. 12. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in
Heaven. Aug. de Doct. Christ. cap. 6. Summa merces est ut isto persruamur.
Reward. Rewards do always presuppose such duties performed as are rewardable:
Our natural means therefore unto Blessedness, are our works; nor is it possible
that Nature should ever find any other way to Salvation, then only this. But
examine the works which we do, and since the first Foundation of the World,
what one can say, My ways are pure? Seeing then all flesh is guilty of that for
which God has threatened eternally to punish, what possibility is there this
way to be saved? There rests therefore, either no way unto Salvation, or if
any, then surely a way which is Supernatural, a way which could never have
entered into the heart of man, as much as once to conceive or imagine, if God
himself had not revealed it extraordinarily: For which cause, we term it the
Mystery or Secret way of Salvation. And therefore, St. Ambrose in this matter
appealeth justly from Man to God, Ambros. contra ^ym.
Caeli mysterium doceat me Deus qui condidit, non homo qui seipsum ignoravit:
Let God himself that made me, let not Man that knows not himself, be my
instructor concerning the Mystical Way to Heaven. Magno and excellenti ingenio
viri, com se doctrinae penitus dididissent q^iquid laboris poterat impendi
(contemptis omnibus and privatis and publicis actionibus) ad inquirendea
veritatis studium contulerunt, existimantes (...) esse p^^ larius humanarum
divina^ uacute;m que recum in vestigare ac scire rationem. qua^n struendes
pibus aut cumulandis hogoribus inhirete. Sed neque adepti sunt id quod
volehant, and operam S^mul u^que indusiriam perdiderun: ^ Qu'a veritas id est.
arcanum summi Dei qui fecir omnia, ingenio ac propriis sensibus non potest
comprehendi. Aliequi nihil inter Deum homine^^que distarer, si consilla and
diiposi^^o^ illies Majestatis aeternae cogitatio assequeretur huma^. Quod quia
fieri non peruit ut homini per seipsum ratio divina notesceternon est past^^
hominem Deus lumen sapientiae requirentem diu^^s abbera^e, a^ fine ullo ^ris
effectu vagari per tenebras inextric^^illes. Aperuit oculos ejus aliquando and
notionem veritatis munus ^^um secie, ut and humanim sapientiam nullam esse
mo^nstraret, and erranci ac vago viam consequendae immortalitatis ostenderet,
lerer. Laclant lib. 1. cap. 1.
When Men of excellent wit (says Lactantius) had wholly betaken themselves
unto study, after farewell bidden unto all kind, as well of private as public
Action, they spared no labor that might be spent in the search of Truth;
holding it a thing of much more price, to seek and to find out the reason of
all Affairs, as well Divine as Humane, then to stick fast in the toil of piling
up Riches, and gathering together heaps of Honors. Howbeit, they both did fail
of their purpose, and got not so much as to quit their charges; because Truth,
which is the secret of the most High God, whose proper handiwork all things
are, cannot be compassed with that wit and those senses which are our own. For
God and Man should be very near Neighbors, if Man's cogitations were able to
take a survey of the Counsels and Appointments of that Majesty Everlasting.
Which being utterly impossible, that the Eye of Man by it self should look into
the bosom of Divine Reason: God did not suffer him, being desirous of the Light
of Wisdom, to stray any longer up and down; and with bootless expense of
travel, to w^nder in darkness that had no passage to get out by. His eyes at
the length God did open, and bestow upon him the knowledge of the Truth by way
of Donative, to the end that Man might both be clearly convicted of folly; and
being through Error out of the way, have the path that leads unto immortality
laid plain before him. Thus far Lactantius Firmianus, to show, that God himself
is the Teacher of the Truth, whereby is made known the Supernatural way of
Salvation, and Law for them to live in that shall be saved. In the Natural Path
of Everlasting Life, the first beginning is that ability of doing good, which
God in the day of Man's Creation endued him with; from hence Obedience unto the
Will of his Creator, absolute Righteousness and Integrity in all his Actions;
and last of all, the Justice of God rewarding the worthiness of his de^^^ts
with the Crown of Eternal Glory. Had Adam continued in his first estate, this
had been the way of life unto him and all his Posterity. Whereas I confess
notwithstanding, with the Sent. lib. 4. Sent did. 49. 6. Loueendo de s^rida
justitia, Deus nulli nostrum propter qua cun que merira est debtor
perfectionis reddendae tam inteniae, propter i^moderatum excessum ililus
perfectionis ultra illa me^ica. Sesed esto quod ex liberatiate s^d
determin^sser meritis confer actum tam perfectum tanquam praemium tali quidem
justitia qualis decer eum, scillicet supererogantis in pramis: Tatnen non
sequitur ex h^c neccessario, quo.l per ilam just tia^ si^ reddenda perfectio
perennis anquam ^^^nium, imo a^undans secret retributio in beatirudine un^us
momenti.
wittiest of the School-Divines, that if we speak of strict Justice, God could
no way have been bound to requite Man's labors in so large and ample manner as
Humane Felicity does import; in as much as the dignity of this exceeds so far
the others value. But be it, that God of his great Liberality had determined in
lieu of Man's endeavors to bestow the same, by the rule of that Justice which
best beseems him, namely, the Justice of one that requires nothing
mincingly, but all with pressed, and heaped, and even over-enlarged measure;
yet could it never hereupon necessarily be gathered, that such Justice should
add to the nature of that Reward, the property of everlasting continuance; since
Possession of Bliss, though it should be but for a moment, were an abundant
retribution. But we are not now to enter into this consideration, how gracious
and bountiful our good God might still appear in so rewarding the Sons of Men,
albeit they should exactly perform whatsoever duty their Nature binds them
unto. Howsoever God did propose this Reward, we that were to be rewarded, must
have done that which is required at our hands; we failing in the one, it were
in Nature an impossibility that the other should be looked for. The Light of
Nature is never able to find out any way of obtaining the Reward of Bliss, but
by performing exactly the Duties and Works of Righteousness. From Salvation
therefore and Life, all flesh being excluded this way, behold how the Wisdom of
God has revealed a way Mystical and Supernatural, away directing unto the same
end of life, by a course which groundeth it self upon the guiltiness of sin,
and through sin, desert of condemnation and death. For in this way, the first
thing is the tender compassion of God, respecting us drowned and swallowed up
in misery: The next is Redemption out of the same, by the precious Death and
Merit of a Mighty Savior, which has witnessed of himself, saying, John 14. 6.
I am the Way, the way that leads us from misery into bliss. This
Supernatural Way had God in himself prepared before all Worlds. The way of
Supernatural Duty which to us he has prescribed, our Savior in the Gospel of
St. John does note, terming it by an excellency, The Work of God: John 6. 29.
This is the work of God, that ye believe in him whom he has sent. Not that
God does require nothing unto happiness at the hands of men, saving only a
naked belief (for Hope and Charity we may not exclude;) but that without
belief, all other things are as nothing, and it the ground of those other
Divine Virtues. Concerning Faith, the principal object whereof is, that Eternal
Verity which has discovered the Treasures of hidden Wisdom in Christ.
Concerning Hope, the highest object whereof, is that Everlasting Goodness which
in Christ does quicken the dead. Concerning Charity, the final object whereof
is, that incomprehensible Beauty which shines in the countenance of Christ the
Son of the Living God. Concerning these Virtues, the first of which beginning
here with a weak apprehension of things not seen, ends with the intuitive
Vision of God in the World to come; the second beginning here with a trembling
expectation of things far removed, and as yet but only heard of, ends with
Real and Actual Fruition of that which no Tongue can express; the third
beginning herewith a weak in inclination of heart toward him, unto whom we are
not able to approach, ends with endless Union; the mystery whereof is higher
then the reach of the thoughts of Men. Concerning that Faith, Hope, and
Charity, without which there can be no Salvation; was there ever any mention
made saving only in that Law which God himself has from Heaven revealed?
There is not in the World a syllable muttered with certain truth concerning any
of these three, more then has been supernaturally received from the Mouth of
the Eternal God. Laws therefore concerning these things are Supernatural, both
in respect of the manner of delivering them, which is Divine; and also in
regard of the things delivered, which are such as have not in Nature any cause
from which they flow, but were by the voluntary appointment of God ordained,
besides the course of Nature, to rectify Natures obliquity withal.

The cause why so many Natural or Rational Laws are set down in holy Scripture.
12. When Supernatural Duties are necessarily exacted, Natural are not rejected
as needless. The Law of God therefore is, though principally delivered for
instruction in the one, yet fraught with Precepts of the other also: The
Scripture is fraught even with Laws of Nature, insomuch that Jus natural est
quod in lege and Evangelio con^inetur, page 1 ^^. 1.
Gratian defining Natural Right (whereby is meant the right, which exacteth
those general duties the concern men naturally, even as they are men) terms
Natural Right, that which the Books of the Law and the Gospel do contain.
Neither is it vain, that the Scripture abounds with so great store of Laws in
this kind: For they are either such as we of our selves could not easily have
found out, and then the benefit is not small, to have them readily set down to
our hands; or if they be so clear and manifest, that no man endued with Reason
can lightly be ignorant of them, yet the Spirit, as it were, borrowing them
from the School of Nature, as serving to prove things less manifest, and to
enduce a persuasion of somewhat which were in it self more hard and dark,
unless it should in such fo^^ be cleared, the very applying of them unto cases
particular, is not without most singular use and profit many ways for men's
instruction. Besides, be they plain of themselves or obscure, the evidence of
Gods own testimony added unto the natural assent of Reason, concerning the
certainty of them, does not a little comfort and confirm the same. Wherefore,
in as much as our actions are conversant about things beset with many
circumstances, which cause men of sundry wits, to be also of sundry judgments
concerning that which ought to be done: Requisite it cannot but seem the Rule of
Divine Law should herein help our imbecility, that we might the more
infallibly understand what is good, and what evil. The first principles of the
Law of Nature are easy; hard it were to find men ignorant of them: But
concerning the duty which Natures Law does require at the hands of Men in a
number of things particular, so Joseph lib. secun^o contra Appi^. Lacedamenii
quomoto non sunt ob inhespitalitatem reprehendendi, ^^lumque neglectum
nupriaru^? Elienses vero and Thebaui ^b coi^^um cum masculis pla^ and
impu^entem and contra na^uram: qu^m recti and u^lites exercre putahant? Cum.
que hic omnino perpecroreni, etiam suis legibus miscucre. Vide Th. 12. q. 49
4.5.6. Lex naturae sic currupta suit apul Germanos, ur larrocinium non
reputar^nt peo^^ arum. August Auc quisquiro author est, lib. de quaest. nor.
and ver. rest. Quis nes^^t quid ho^^^ vitae contrairae, au^ ignorer quia quod
sibi heri non vult, al^s manime debeat lacere? At vero naturalis lex eva ^^^^
oppressa consuen^^lin: delinque^di, ^une oppreti matise^^ari sereptis ut Dei
jedicium omnes audirent: Non qub^ ^enires obllrerate est, ^ed quia maxius elup
aurho h^^^^e carebat, idolatriae ^udebitur, timog Dei ^a terris non erat,
^^^^icatio operabatur, circa rem proximi avids e^ar concupisce^ia. Data ergo
lex est, ut quae debantur authoritatem inherent, and quae latere cooperat,
manifestarentur.
far has the Natural Understanding even of sundry whole Nations been darkened,
that they have not discerned, no, not gross iniquity to be sin. Again, being so
prone as wear ^o fawn upon our selves, and to be ignorant as much as may be of
our own deformities, without the feeling Sense whereof we are most wretched;
even so much the more, because not knowing them, we cannot as much as desire to
have them taken away: How should our festered sores be cured, but that God has
delivered a Law as sharp as the two-edged sword, piercing the very closest and
most unsearchable corners of the heart, which the Law of Nature can hardly,
Humane Laws by no means possibly reach unto? Hereby we know even secret
concupiscence to be sin, and are made fearful to offend, though it be but in a
wandering cogitation. Finally, of those things which are for direction of all
the parts of our life needful, and not impossible to be discerned by the Light
of Nature it self; are there not many which few men's natural capacity, and some
which no man's has been able to find out? They are, says St. Augustine, but a
few, and they endued with great ripeness of wit and judgment, free from all
such affairs as might trouble their Meditations, instructed in the sharpest and
the subtilest points of Learning, who have, and that very hardly, been able to
find out but only the Immortality of the Soul. The Resurrection of the Flesh,
what Man did ever at any time dream of, having not heard it otherwise, then
from the School of Nature? Whereby it appears, how much we are bound to yield
unto our Creator, the Father of all Mercy, Eternal Thanks, for that he has
delivered his Law unto the World? a Law wherein so many things are laid open,
clear, and manifest; as a Light, which otherwise would have been buried in
darkness, not without the hazard; or rather not with the hazard, but with the
certain loss of infinite thousands of Souls, most undoubtedly now saved. We see
therefore that our sovereign good is desired naturally, that God the Author of
that natural desire, had appointed natural means whereby to fulfill it; that Man
having utterly disabled his Nature unto those means, has had other revealed
from God, and has received from Heaven a Law to teach him, how that which is
desired naturally, must now supernaturally be attained. Finally, we see, that
because those latter exclude not the former quite and clean as unnecessary,
therefore together with such Supernatural duties as could not possibly have
been otherwise known to the World, the same Law that teaches them, teaches
also with them such Natural duties, as could not by Light of Nature easily have
been known.

13. In the first Age of the World, God gave Laws unto our Fathers, The benefit
of having Divine Laws written.
and by reason of the number of their days, their memories served in stead of
Books; whereof the manifold imperfections and defects being known to God, he
mercifully relieved the same, by often putting then in mind of that whereof it
behoved them to be specially mindful. In which respect, we see how many times
one thing has been iterated unto sundry, even of the best and wisest amongst
them. After that the lives of Men were shortened, means more durable to preserve
the Laws of God from oblivion and corruption grew in use, not without precise
direction from God himself. First therefore of Moses it is said, Exodus 24.4.
Hos. 8. 12.
that he wrote all the words of God; not by his own private motion and device:
For God takes this act to himself, I have written. Furthermore, were not the
Prophets following, commanded also to do the like? Unto the holy Evangelist St.
John, Apoc. 1.11. and 14.13. August. lib. 1. de Cons. Evang. cap. ult.
how often express charge is given, Scribe, write these things? Concerning the
rest of our Lords Disciples, the words of St. Augustine are, Quidquid ille de
suis factis and dictis nos legere voluit, hoc scribendum illis tanquam suis
manibus imperavit. Now although we do not deny it to be a matter merely
accidental unto the Law of God to be written; although writing be not that
which adds authority and strength thereunto: Finally, though his Laws do
require at our hands the same obedience, howsoever they be delivered; his
providence notwithstanding, which has made principal choice of this way to
deliver them, who sees not what cause we have to admire and magnify? The
singular benefit that has grown unto the World by receiving the Laws of God,
even by his own appointment committed unto writing, we are not able to esteem
as the value thereof deserves. When the question therefore is, whether we be
now to seek for any revealed Law of God, otherwhere then only in the Sacred
Scripture; whether we do now stand bound in the sight of God to yield to
Traditions urged by the Church of Rome, the same obedience and reverence we do
to his Written Law, honoring equally, and adoring both as Divine? Our answer
is, No. They that so earnestly plead for the Authority of Tradition, as if
nothing were more safely conveyed, then that which spreads it self by report,
and descends by relation of former Generations, unto the Ages that succeed,
are not all of them (surely a miracle it were, if they should be) so simple, as
thus to persuade themselves; howsoever, if the simple were so persuaded, they
could be content perhaps very well to enjoy the benefit, as they account it, of
that common Error. What hazard the Truth is in, when it passes through the
hands of report, how maimed and deformed it becomes; they are not, they cannot
possibly be ignorant. Let them that are indeed of this mind, consider but
only that little of things Divine, which the I mean those Historical Matters
concerning the ancient state of the first World, the Deluge, the Sons of Noah,
the Children of Isreal's deliverance one of Egypt, the life and doings of Moses
their Captain, with such like: The certain truth whereof delivered in holy
Scripture, is of the Heathen which had them only by report, so in ermingled
with fabulous vanities, that the most which remains in them to be seen, in
the show of dark and obscure steps, where some part of the Truth has gone.
Heathen have in such sort received. How miserable had the State of the Church
of God been long ere this, if wanting the Sacred Scripture, we had no Record of
his Laws, but only the memory of man, receiving the same by report and
relation from his Predecessors? By Scripture, it has in the Wisdom of God,
seemed meet to deliver unto the World much, but personally expedient to be
practiced of certain men; many deep and profound points of Doctrine, as being
the main original ground whereupon the Precepts of duty depend; many
Prophecies, the clear performance whereof might confirm the World in belief of
things unseen; many Histories to serve as Looking-glasses to behold the Mercy,
the Truth, the Righteousness of God toward all that faithfully serve, obey and
honor him; yea, many entire Meditations of Piety, to be as Patterns and
Precedents in cases of like Nature; many things needful for Explication, many
for Application unto particular occasions, such as the Providence of God from
time to time has taken, to have the several Books of his holy Ordinance
written. Be it then, that together with the principal necessary Laws of God,
there are sundry other things written, whereof we might happily be ignorant, and
yet be saved: What? shall we hereupon think them needless? shall we esteem them
as riotous Branches, wherewith we sometimes behold most pleasant Vines
overgrown? Surely, no more then we judge our hands or our eyes superfluous, or
what part soever; which if our Bodies did want, we might notwithstanding any
such defect, retain still the complete Being of Men. As therefore a complete
Man is neither destitute of any part necessary, and has some parts, whereof,
though the want could not deprive him of his essence, yet to have them,
stands him in singular stead in respect of the special uses for which they
serve: In like sort, all those writings which contain in them the Law of God,
all those venerable Books of Scripture, all those Sacred Tomes and Volumes of
holy Writ; they are with such absolute perfection framed, that in them there
neither wants any thing, the lack whereof might deprive us of life; nor any
thing in such wise abounds, that as being superfluous, unfruitful, and
altogether needless, we should think it no loss or danger at all, if we did
want it.

14. Although the Scripture of God therefore be stored with infinite variety of
matter in all kinds, The sufficiency of Scripture unto the end, for which it
was ins^^cured
although it abound with all sorts of Laws, yet the principal intent of
Scripture is to deliver the Laws of Duties Supernatural. Oftentimes it has
been in very solemn manner disputed, whether all things necessary unto
salvation, be necessarily set down in the holy Scriptures, U^rum cognitio
supernaturalis necessary ^i^tori, sit sufficienter tralita in sacra Scriptura?
This question proposal by Se^^^u^, is affirmatively concluded. or no.
If we define that necessary unto salvation, whereby the way to salvation is in
any sort made more plain, apparent and easy to be known; then is there no part
of true Philosophy, no Art of account, no kind of Science, rightly so called,
but the Scripture must contain it. If only those things be necessary, as
surely none else are, without the knowledge and practice whereof, it is not the
will and pleasure of God to make any ordinary grant of salvation; it may be
notwithstanding, and oftentimes has been demanded, how the Books of holy
Scripture contain in them all necessary things, when of things necessary the
very chief is to know what Books we are bound to esteem holy; which point is
confessed impossible for the Scripture it self to teach. Whereunto we may answer
with truth, that there is not in the World any Art or Science, which proposing
unto it self an end (as every one does some end or other) has been therefore
thought defective, if it have not delivered simply whatsoever is needful to the
same end; but all kinds of knowledge have their certain bounds and limits;
each of them presupposes many necessary things learned in other Sciences, and
known beforehand. He that should take upon him to teach men how to be eloquent
in pleading causes, must needs deliver unto them whatsoever Precepts are
requisite unto that end; otherwise he does not the thing which he takes upon
him. Seeing then no man can plead eloquently, unless he be able first to speak;
it follows, that ability of speech is in this case a thing most necessary.
Notwithstanding every man would think it ridiculous, that he which undertaketh
by writing to instruct an Orator, should therefore deliver all the Precepts of
Grammar; because his Profession is to deliver Precepts necessary unto eloquent
speech; yet so, that they which are to receive them be taught beforehand, so
much of that which is thereunto necessary, as comprehends the skill of
speaking. In like sort, albeit Scripture do profess to contain in it all things
which are necessary unto salvation; yet the meaning cannot be simply of all
things which are necessary, but all things that are necessary in some certain
kind or form; as all things that are necessary, and either could not at all,
or could not easily be known by the light of Natural discourse; all things
which are necessary to be known, that we may be saved; but known with
presupposal of knowledge, concerning certain Principles, whereof it receives
us already persuaded, and then instructs us in all the residue that are
necessary: In the number of these Principles, one is the Sacred Authority of
Scripture. Being therefore persuaded by other means, that these Scriptures are
the Oracles of God, themselves do then teach us the rest, and lay before us all
the duties which God requires at our hands, as necessary unto salvation.
Further, there has been some doubt likewise, whether containing in Scripture,
do import express setting down in plain terms, or else comprehending in such
sort, that by reason we may from thence conclude all things which are
necessary. Against the former of these two constructions, instance has sundry
ways been given. For our belief in the Trinity, the Co-eternity of the Son of
God with his Father, the proceeding of the Spirit from the Father and the Son,
the duty of Baptizing Infants: These, with such other principal points, the
necessity whereof is by none denied, are notwithstanding in Scripture no where
to be found by express literal mention, only deduced they are out of Scripture
by collection. This kind of comprehension in Scripture, being therefore
received, still there is no doubt, how far we are to proceed by collection,
before the full and complete measure of things necessary be made up. For let us
not think, that as long as the World does endure, the wit of man shall be able
to sound the bottom of that which may be concluded out of the Scripture;
especially, if things contained by collection do so far extend, as to draw in
whatsoever may be at any time out of Scripture, but probably and conjecturally
surmized. But let necessary collection be made requisite, and we may boldly
deny, that of all those things which at this day are with so great necessity
urged upon this Church, under the name of Reformed Church Discipline, there is
any one which their Books hitherto have made manifest to be contained in the
Scripture. Let them, if they can, allege but one properly belonging to their
cause, and not common to them and us, and show the deduction thereof out of
Scripture to be necessary. It has been already showed, how all things
necessary unto salvation, in such sort as before we have maintained, must needs
be possible for men to know; and that many things are in such sort necessary,
the knowledge whereof is by the light of Nature impossible to be attained.
Whereupon it follows, that either all flesh is excluded from possibility of
salvation, which to think were most barbarous; or else, that God has by
supernatural means revealed the way of life so far forth as does suffice. For
this cause, God has so many times and ways spoken to the sons of men: Neither
has he by speech only, but by writing also instructed and taught his Church.
The cause of writing has been, to the end that things by him revealed unto the
World, might have the longer continuance, and the greater certainty of
assurance; by how much that which stands on Record, has in both those
respects pre-eminence above that which passes from hand to hand, and has no
Pens, but the Tongues; no Book, but the ears of Men to record it. The several
Books of Scripture having had each some several occasion and particular
purpose, which caused them to be written; the Contents thereof, are according
to the exigence of that special end whereunto they are intended. Hereupon it
grows, that every Book of holy Scripture does take out of all kinds of
truth, Ephesians. 5.25.
Natural, 2 Timothy 3 8.
Historical, Ti^. 1. 12.
Foreign, 2 Pet. 2.4.
Supernatural, so much as the matter handled requires. Now for as much as there
have been Reasons alleged sufficient to conclude, that all things necessary
unto salvation must be made known, and that God himself has therefore revealed
his Will, because otherwise men could not have known so much as is necessary:
his surceasing to speak to the World, since the publishing of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, and the delivery of the same in writing, is unto us a manifest
token that the way of salvation is now sufficiently opened, and that we need no
other means for our full instruction, then God has already furnished us
withal. The main drift of the whole New Testament, John 23. 31.
is that which St. John sets down as the purpose of his own History, These
things are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is Christ the Son of God,
and that in believing, ye might have life through his Name. The drift of the
Old, that which the Apostle mentions to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
The holy Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto salvation. So that the
general end, both of Old and New, is one; the difference between them
consisting in this, That the Old did make wise by teaching salvation through
Christ that should come; the New, by teaching that Christ the Savior is come;
and that Jesus whom the Jews did crucify, and whom God did raise again from
the dead, is he. When the Apostle therefore affirms unto Timothy, that the
Old was able to make him wise to salvation, it was not his meaning, that the
Old alone can do this unto us, which live sithence the publication of the New.
For he speaks with presupposal of the Doctrine of Christ, known also unto
Timothy; 2 Timothy 3. 14.
and therefore first it is said, Continue thou in those things which thou have
learned, and art persuaded, knowing of whom thou have been taught them. Again,
those Scriptures he grants, were able to make him wise to salvation; Verse. 15.
but he adds, through the Faith which is in Christ. Wherefore without the
Doctrine of the New Testament, teaching that Christ has wrought the Redemption
of the World; which Redemption the Old did foreshew he should work; it is not
the former alone, which can on our behalf, perform so much as the Apostle does
avouch, who presupposes this, when he magnifieth that so highly. And as his
words concerning the Books of ancient Scripture, do not take place, but with
presupposal of the Gospel of Christ embraced; so our own words also, when we
extol the complete sufficiency of the whole entire Body of the Scripture, must
in like sort be understood with this caution, That the benefit of Natures Light
be not thought excluded as unnecessary, because the necessity of a Diviner
Light is magnified. There is in Scripture therefore no defect, but that any
man, what place or cailing soever he hold in the Church of God, may have
thereby the light of his Natural Understanding so perfected, that the one being
relieved by the other, there can want no part of needful instruction unto any
good work which God himself requires, be it Natural, or Supernatural,
belonging simply unto men, as men; or unto men, as they are united in
whatsoever kind of Society. It suffices therefore, that Nature and Scripture
do serve in such full sort, that they both jointly, and not severally either of
thou, be so complete, that unto Everlasting felicity, we need not the knowlegde
of any thing more then these two may easily furnish our minds with on all
sides: And therefore they which add Traditions, as a part of Supernatural
necessary Truth, have not the Truth, but are in Error: For they only plead,
that whatsoever God reveals as necessary for all Christian men to do or
believe, the same we ought to embrace, whether we have received it by writing
or otherwise, which no man denies; when that which they should confirm, who
claim so great reverence unto Traditions, is, that the same Traditions are
necessarily to be acknowledged divine and holy. For we do not reject them
only, because they are not in the Scripture, but because they are neither in
Scripture, nor can otherwise sufficiently by any Reason be proved to be a God.
That which is of God, and may be evidently proved to be so, we deny not but it
has in his kind, although unwritten, yet the self same force and authority
with the written Laws of God. It is by ours acknowledged, That the Apostles did
in every Church institute and ordain some Rites and Customs, serving for the
seemliness of Church Regiment; which Rites and Customs they have not committed
unto writing. Whitakerus adverius Bellarmen. quast. 6. cap ^.
Those Rites and Customs being known to be Apostolical, and having the nature
of things changeable, were no less to be accounted of in the Church, then other
things of the like degree; that is to say, capable in like sort of alteration,
although set down in the Apostles writings. For both being known to be
Apostolical, it is not the manner of delivering them unto the Church, but the
Author from whom they proceed, which does give them their force and credit.

15. Laws being imposed either by each man upon himself, Of Laws Posisitive
contained in Scripture; the mutability of certain of them, and the general use
of Scripture.
or by a Public Society, upon the particulars thereof; or by all the Nations
of Men, upon every several Society; or by the Lord himself, upon any or every
of these: There is not amongst these four kinds any one, but contains sundry
both Natural and Positive Laws. Impossible it is, but that they should fall
into a number of gross Errors, who only take such Laws for Positive, as have
been made or invented of men; and holding this Position, hold also, that all
Positive, and none but Positive Laws are mutable. Laws Natural do always bind;
Laws Positive not so, but only after they have been expressly and wittingly
imposed. Laws Positive there are in every of those kinds beforementioned. As
in the first kind, the Promises which we have past unto Men, and the Vows we
have made unto God; for these ar^ Laws which we tie our selves unto, and till
we have so tied our selves, they bind us not. Laws Positive in the second
kind, are such as the Civil Constitutions peculiar unto each particular
Commonweal. In the third kind, the Law of Heraldry in War, is Positive: And in
the last, all the Judicials which God gave unto the people of Israel to
observe. And although no Laws but Positive, be mutable; yet all are not
mutable, which be Positive. Positive Laws are either permanent, or else
changeable, according as the matter it self is, concerning which they were
first made. Whether God or Man be the Maker of them, alteration they so far
forth admit, as the Matter does exact Laws that concern Supernatural duties,
are all Positive; and either concern Men supernaturally, as Men, or else as
parts of a Supernatural Society; which Society we call the Church. To concern
Men as Men supernaturally, is to concern them as duties, which belong of
necessity to all, and yet could not have been known by any to belong unto them,
unless God had opened them himself; in as much as they do not depend upon any
Natural ground at all, out of which they may be deduced, but are appointed of
God to supply the defect of those natural ways of salvation, by which we are
not now able to attain thereunto. The Church being a Supernatural Society, does
differ from Natural Societies in this, that the persons unto whom we associate
our selves, in the one, are Men, simply considered as Men: But they to whom we
be joined in the other, are God, Angels, and holy Men. Again, the Church being
hoth a Society, and a Society Supernatural: Although as it is a Society, it
have the self same original grounds which other Politic Societies have,
namely, the Natural inclination which all men have unto sociable life, and
consent to some certain Bond of Association; which Bond is the Law that
appoints what kind of order they shall be associated in: Yet unto the
Church, as it is a Society Supernatural, this is peculiar; that part of the
Bond of their Association which belongs to the Church of God, must be a Law
Supernatural, which God himself has revealed, concerning that kind of worship
which his people shall do unto him. The substance of the service of God
therefore, so far forth as it has in it any thing more then the Law of Reason
does reach, may not be invented of Men, as it is amongst the Heathens; but must
be received from God himself, as always it has been in the Church, saving
only when the Church has been forgetful of her duty. Wherefore to end with a
general Rule concerning all the Laws which God has tied men unto: Those Laws
Divine that belong, whether naturally or supernaturally, either to men as men,
or to men as they live in Politic Society, or to men as they are of that
Politic Society which is the Church, without any further respect had unto any
such variable accident; as the Estate of men, and of Societies of men, and of
the Church it self in this World is subject unto; all Laws that so belong unto
men, Isai. 29. 13. Their fear toward me, was taught by the precept of men.
they belong for ever, yea, although they be Positive Laws, unless being
Positive, God himself which made them, alter them. The reason is, because the
subject or matter of Laws in general, is thus far forth constant: Which matter
is that for the ordering whereof Laws were instituted, and being instituted,
are not changeable without cause: Neither can they have cause of change, when
that which gave them their first institution, remains for ever one and the
same. On the other side, Laws that were made for Men, or Societies, or
Churches, in regard of their being such, as they do not always continue, but
may perhaps be clean otherwise awhile after, and so may require to be otherwise
ordered then before; the Laws of God himself, which are of this nature, no man
endued with common sense, will ever deny to be of a different constitution from
the former, in respect of the ones constancy, and the mutability of the other.
And this does seem to have been the very cause why St. John does so peculiarly
term the doctrine that teaches salvation by Jesus Christ, Apoc. 14. 6. (...)
Plaro in sine 2. Polir.
Evangelium AEternum, An eternal Gospel; because there can be no reason
wherefore the publishing thereof should be taken away, and any other instead of
it proclaimed, as long as the World does continue: Whereas the whole Law of
Rites and Ceremonies, although delivered with so great solemnity, is
notwithstanding clean abrogated, in as much as it had but temporary cause of
Gods ordaining it. But that we may at the length conclude this first general
introduction unto the Nature and Original Birth, as of all other Laws, so
likewise of those which the Sacred Scripture contains; concerning the Author
whereof, even Infidels have confessed, that he can neither err nor deceive:
Albeit, about things easy and manifest unto all men by common sense, there
needs no higher consultation, because as a man whose wisdom is in weighty
affairs admired, would take it in some disdain to have his counsel solemnly
asked about a toy; so the meanness of some things is such, that to search the
Scripture of God for the ordering of them, were to derogate from the reverend
Authority and Dignity of the Scripture, no less then they do by whom Scriptures
are in ordinary talk very idly applied unto vain and childish trifles; yet
better it were to be superstitious, then profane: To take from thence our
direction, even in all things great or small, then to wade through matters of
principal weight and moment, without ever caring what the Law of God has,
either for or against our designs. Concerning the custom of the very Paynims,
thus much Strabo witnesses, (...) Geogr. lib. 16.
Men that are civil, do lead their lives after one Common Law, appointing them
what to do. For that otherwise a multitude should with harmony amongst
themselves, concur in the doing of onething, (for this is civilly to live) or
that they should in any sort manage community of life, it is not possible. Now
Laws or Statutes are of two sorts: For they are either received from Gods, or
else from Men. And our ancient Predecessors did surely most honor and reverence
that which was from the Gods: For which cause, Consultation with Oracles, was a
thing very usual and frequent in their times. Did they make so much account of
the voice of their gods, which in truth were no gods; and shall we neglect the
precious benefit of conference with those Oracles of the true and living God,
whereof so great store is left to the Church, and whereunto there is so free,
so plain, and so easy access for all men? Psalm. 11^.98.
By thy Commandments (this was David's confession unto God) thou have made me
wiser then mine enemies: Again, I have had more understanding then all my
Teachers, because thy Testimonies are my Meditations. What pains would not they
have bestowed in the study of these Books, who traveled Sea and Land to gain
the treasure of some few days talk with men, whose wisdom the World did make
any reckoning of? Vid^. Orphei Carmin^.
That little which some of the Heathens did chance to hear, concerning such
matter as the Sacred Scripture plentifully contains, they did in wonderful
sort affect; their speeches, as often as they make mention thereof, are strange,
and such as themselves could not utter as they did other things: But still
acknowledged that their wits, which did every where else conquer hardness, were
with profoundness here over-matched. Wherefore seeing that God has endued us
with Sense, to the end that we might perceive such things as this present life
does need; and with reason, left that which Sense cannot reach unto, being both
now, and also in regard of a future estate hereafter necessary to be known,
should lie obscure: Finally, with the Heavenly support of Prophetical
Revelation, (...) Philo de Mos.
which does open those hidden Mysteries that Reason could never have been able
to find out, or to have known the necessity of them unto our everlasting good:
Use we the precious gifts of God, unto his glory and honor that gave them,
seeking by all means to know what the Will of our God is, what righteous before
him, in his sight what holy, perfect, and good, that we may truly and
faithfully do it.

16. Thus far therefore we have endeavored in part to open, A Conclusion,
showing how all this belongs to the cause in question.
of what nature and force Laws are, according unto their several kinds: The
Law which God with himself has eternally set down to follow in his own works:
The Law which he has made for his Creatures to keep: The Law of natural and
necessary Agents: The Law which Angels in Heaven obey: The Law whereunto by the
Light of Reason, Men find themselves bound, in that they are Men: The Law
which they make by composition for Multitudes and Politic Societies of Men to
be guided by: The Law which belongs unto each Nation: The Law that concerns
the Fellowship of all: And lastly, The Law which God himself has
supernaturally revealed. It might peradventure have been more popular and more
plausible to vulgar ears, if this first discourse had been spent in extolling
the force of Laws, in showing the great necessity of them when they are good,
and in aggravating their offense, by whom Public Laws are injuriously
traduced. But for as much as with such kind of matter the Passions of Men are
rather stirred one way or other, then their knowledge any way set forward unto
the trial of that whereof there is doubt made: I have therefore turned aside
from that beaten path, and chosen, though a less easy, yet a more profitable
way, in regard of the end we propose. Lest therefore any man should marvel
whereunto all these things tend^ the drift and purpose of all, is this, even to
show in what manner, as every good and perfect gift, Jam. 1.17.
so this very gift of good and perfect Laws is derived from the Father of
Lights, to teach men a reason why just and reasonable Laws are of so great
force, of so great use in the World; and to inform their m^ndes with some
method of reducing the Laws, whereof there is present controversy unto their
first original causes, that so it may be in every particular Ordinance thereby
the better discerned, whether the same be reasonable, just, and righteous, or
no. Is there any thing which can either be thoroughly understood, or soundly
judged of, till the very first causes and principles from which originally it
springs, Arist. Phys. 1. 1. cap. 1.
be made manifest? If all parts of knowledge have been thought by wise men to
be then most orderly delivered and proceeded in, when they are drawn to their
first original; seeing that our whole question concerns the quality of
Ecclesiastical Laws, let it not seem a labor superfluous, that in the entrance
thereunto, all these several kinds of Laws have been considered; in as much as
they all concur as principles, they all have their forcible operations therein,
although not all in like aprent and manifest manner: By means whereof it comes
to pass, that the force which they have, is not observed of many. Easier a
great deal it is for Men by Law, to be taught what they ought to do, then
instructed how to judge as they should do of Law; the one being a thing which
belongs generally unto all; the other, such as none but the wiser and more
judicious sort can perform. Arist. Ethic. 10. (...) Intelligie de legum
qualitate judicium.
Yea, the wisest are always touching this point, the readiest to acknowledge,
that soundly to judge of a Law, is the weightiest thing which any man can take
upon him. But if we will give judgment of the Laws under which we live; first,
let that Law Eternal be always before our eyes, as being of principal force and
moment to breed in religious minds a dutiful estimation of all Laws, the use
and benefit whereof we see; because there can be no doubt, but that Laws
apparently good, are (as it were) things copied out of the very Tables of that
High Everlasting Law, even as the Book of that Law has said concerning it
self, Prove. 8. 15.
By me Kings reign, and by me Princes decree Justice. Not as if Men did behold
that Book, and accordingly frame their Laws; but because it works in them,
because it discovers, and (as it were) reads it self to the World by them,
when the Laws which they make are righteous. Furthermore, although we perceive
not the goodness of Laws made; nevertheless, since things in themselves may have
that which we peradventure discern not: Should not this breed a fear into our
hearts, how we speak or judge in the worse part concerning that, the unadvised
disgrace whereof may be no mean dishonor to him, toward whom we profess all
submission and aw? Surely there must be very manifest iniquity in Laws, against
which we shall be able to justify our contumelious Invectives. The chiefest
root whereof, when we use them without cause, is ignorance, how Laws inferior
are derived from that supreme or highest Law. The first that receive impression
from thence, are Natural agents. The Law of whose operations might be happily
thought less pertinent, when the question is about Laws for Humane actions, but
that in those very actions which most spiritually and supernaturally concern
men, the Rules and Axioms of Natural operations have their force. What can be
more immediate to our Salvation, then our persuasion concerning the Law of
Christ toward his Church? What greater assurance of love toward his Church,
then the knowledge of that Mystical Union, whereby the Church is become as near
unto Christ, as any one part of his flesh is unto other? That the Church being
in such sort his, he must needs protect it; what proof more strong, then if a
manifest Law so require, which Law it is not possible for Christ to violate?
And what other Law does the Apostle for this allege, but such as is both
common unto Christ with us, and unto us with other things Natural. Ephesians. 5. 2.
No man hates his own flesh, but does love and cherish it? The Axioms of that
Law therefore, whereby Natural agents are guided, have their use in the Moral,
yea, even in the Spiritual actions of men, and consequently in all Laws
belonging unto men howsoever. Neither are the Angels themselves so far severed
from us in their kind and manner of working, but that between the Law of their
Heavenly operations, and the Actions of men in this our state of mortality,
such correspondence there is, as makes it expedient to know in some sort the
one, for the others more perfect direction. Would Angels acknowledge themselves
Fellow Servants with the Sons of Men, Apoc. 19. 10.
but that both having One Lord, there must be some kind of Law which is one
and the same to both, whereunto their obedience being perfecter, is to our
weaker, both a Pattern and a Spur? Or would the Apostles, speaking of that
which belongs unto Saints, 1 Pet. 1. 12. Ephesians. 3. 10. 1 Timothy 5. 21.
as they are linked together in the Bond of Spiritual Society, so often make
mention how Angels are therewith delighted; if in things publicly done by the
Church, we are not somewhat to respect what the Angels of Heaven do? Yea, so
far has the Apostle St. Paul proceeded, as to signify that even about the
outward Orders of the Church, which serve but for comeliness, some regard is to
be had of Angels; 1 Cor. 11. 10.
who best like us when we are most like unto them in all parts of decent
demeanor. So that the Law of Angels we cannot judge altogether impertinent unto
the affairs of the Church of God. Our largeness of speech, how men do find out
what things Reason binds them of necessity to observe, and what it guides
them to choose in things which are left as Arbitary, the care we have had to
declare the different Nature of Laws which severally concern all men, from such
as belong unto men, either civilly or spiritually associated; such as pertain
to the Fellowship which Nations, or which Christian Nations have amongst
themselves; and in the last place, such as concerning every or any of these God
himself has revealed by his holy Word; all serves but to make manifest, that
as the Actions of men are of sundry distinct kinds, so the Laws thereof must
accordingly be distinguished. There are in men operations, some Natural, some
Rational, some Supernatural, some Politic, some finally Ecclesiastical: Which
if we measure not each by his own proper Law, whereas the things themselves are
so different, there will be in our understanding and judgment of them,
confusion. As that first Error shows whereon our opposites in this cause have
grounded themselves: For as they rightly maintain, that God must be glorified
in all things, and that the actions of men cannot tend unto his glory, unless
they be framed after his Law: So it is their Error, to think that the only Law
which God has appointed unto men in that behalf, is the Sacred Scripture. By
that which we work naturally, as when we breath, sleep, move, Psalm. 148. 7, 8,
9.
we set forth the glory of God as Natural agents do, albeit we have no express
purpose to make that our end, nor any advised determination therein to follow a
Law, but do that we do (for the most part) not as much as thinking thereon.
Romans 1. 2^.
In reasonable and Moral actions, another Law takes place; a Law by the
observation whereof we glorify God in such sort, as no Creature else under Man
is able to do; because other Creatures have not judgment to examine the quality
of that which is done by them; and therefore in that they do, they neither can
accuse not approve themselves. Men do both, as the Apostle teaches; yea, those
men which have no written Law of God to show what is good or evil, Romans 2. 15.
carry written in their hearts the Universal Law of Mankind, the Law of
Reason, whereby they judge as by a Rule which God has given unto all Men for
that purpose. The Law of Reason does somewhat direct Men how to honor God as
their Creator; but how to glorify God in such sort as is required, to the end,
he may be an Everlasting Savior; this we are taught by Divine Law, which Law
both ascertaineth the truth, and supplieth unto us the want of that other Law.
So that in Moral actions, Divine Law helps exceedingly the Law of Reason to
guide Man's life; but in Supernatural, it alone guides, Proceed we further, Let
us place Man in some Public Society with others, whether Civil or Spiritual;
and in this case there is no remedy, but we must add yet a further Law. For
although, even here likewise, the Laws of Nature and Reason be of necessary
use; yet somewhat over and besides them is necessary, namely, Humane and
Positive Law, together with that Law which is of commerce between Grand
Societies, the Law of Nations, and of Nations Christian. For which cause, the
Law of God has likewise said, Romans 13. 1.
Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers. The Public Power of all
Societies, is above every Soul contained in the same Societies. And the
principal use of that Power is to give Laws unto all that are under it; which
Laws in such case we must obey, unless there be reason showed, which may
necessarily enforce, That the Law of Reason, or of God, does enjoin the
contrary: Because except our own private, and but probable resolutions, be by
the Law of Public Determinations overruled, we take away all possibility of
sociable life in the World. A plainer example whereof, then our selves, we
cannot have. How comes it to pass, that we are at this present day so rent
with mutual contentions, and that the Church is so much troubled about the
Polity of the Church? No doubt, if men had been willing to learn how many Laws
their actions in this life, are subject unto, and what the true force of each
Law is, all these controversies might have died the very day they were first
brought forth. It is both commonly said, and truly, That the best men otherwise
are not always the best in regard of Society. The reason whereof is, for that
the Law of Men's actions is one, if they be respected only as Men; and another,
when they are considered as parts of a Politic Body. Many men there are, then
whom nothing is more commendable when they are singled: (...) Arist. Ethic.
lib. 5. cap. 3.
And yet in Society with others, none less fit to answer the duties which are
looked for at their hands. Yea, I am persuaded, that of them, with whom in this
cause we strive, there are whose betters among men would be hardly found, if
they did not live amongst men, but in some Wilderness by themselves. The cause
of which, their disposition so unframable unto Societies wherein their live,
is, for that they discern not aright, what place and force these several kinds
of Laws ought to have in all their actions. Is there question either concerning
the Regiment of the Church in general, or about Conformity between one Church
and another, or of Ceremonies, Offices, Powers, Jurisdictions in our own
Church? Of all these things, they judge by that rule which they frame to
themselves with some show of probability; and what seems in that sort
convenient, the same they think themselves bound to practice, the same by all
means they labor mightily to uphold; whatsoever any Law of Man to the contrary
has determined, they weigh it not. Thus by following the Law of Private
Reason, where the Law of Public should take place, they breed disturbance. For
the better inuring therefore of Men's minds with the true distinction of Laws,
and of their several force, according to the different kind and quality of our
actions, it shall not peradventure be amiss to show in some one example, how
they all take place. To seek no further, Job 31. 3. Psalm. 145. 19, 16.
let but that be considered, then which there is not any thing more familiar
unto us, our food. What things are food, and what are not, we judge naturally
by sense, neither need we any other Law to be our Directer in that behalf, then
the self-same which is common unto us with Beasts. But when we come to consider
of food, as of a benefit which God of his bounteous goodness has provided for
all things living; the Law of Reason does here require the duty of Thankfulness
at our hands toward him, at whose hands we have it. And lest Appetite in the
use of Food, should lead us beyond that which is meet, we ow in this case
obedience to that Law of Reason, which teaches mediocrity in meats and drinks.
The same things Divine Law teaches also, as at large we have showed it, does
all parts of Moral duty, whereunto we all of necessity stand bound, in regard
of the life to come. But of certain lendes of food the Jews sometime had, and
we our selves likewise have a Mystical, Religious, and Supernatural use; they
of their Paschal Lamb and Oblations; we of our Bread and Wine in the Eucharist:
Which use none but Divine Law could institute. Now as we live in Civil Society,
the State of the Commonwealth wherein we live, both may and does require
certain Laws concerning food; which Laws, saving only that we are Members of
the Commonwealth, where they are of force, we should not need to respect as
Rules of Action; whereas now in their place and kind, they must be respected
and obeyed. Yea, the self-same matter is also a subject wherein sometime
Ecclesiastical Laws have place; so that unless we will be Authors of Confusion
in the Church, our private discretion, which otherwise might guide us a
contrary way; must here submit it self to be that way guided, which the Public
Judgment of the Church has thought better. In which case, that of Zonaras
concerning Fasts may be remembered. (...) Zonarin Can. Apust. 65.
Fastings are good, but let good things be done in good and convenient manner.
He that transgresses in his Fasting the Orders of the holy Fathers, the
Positive Laws of the Church of Christ, must be plainly told, that good things
do lose the grace of their goodness, when in good sort they are not performed.
And as here Men's private fancies must give place to the higher Judgment of that
Church, which is in Authority a Mother over them: So the very Actions of whole
Churches have, in regard of Commerce and Fellowship with other Churches, been
subject to Laws concerning food, the contrary unto which Laws had else been
thought more convenient for them to observe; as by that order of Abstinence
from Strangled and Blood may appear; an order grounded upon that Fellowship
which the Churches of the Gentiles had with the Jews. Acts 15.20.
Thus we see how even one and the self-same thing is under diverse
considerations conveyed through many Laws; and that to measure by any one kind
of Law all the Actions of Men, were to confound the admirable Order wherein God
has disposed all Laws, each as in nature, so in degree, distinct from other.
Wherefore that here we may briefly end, Of Law there can be no less
acknowledge, then that her Seat is the Bosom of God, her Voice the Harmony of
the World: All things in Heaven and Earth do her homage, the very least as
feeling her care, and the greatest as not exempted from her Power: Both Angels,
and Men, and Creatures of what condition soever, though each in different sort
and manner, yet all with uniform consent, admiring her as the Mother of their
Peace and Joy.

OF THE LAWS OF Ecclesiastical Polity.
Book II. Concerning their First Position who urge Reformation in the Church of
England: Namely, That Scripture is the only rule of all things, which in this
life may be done be men.
The Matter contained in this Second Book.
1. AN Answer to their first Proof brought out of Scripture, Prove. 2. 9. 2. To
their second, 1 Cor. 10. 31. 3. To their third, 1 Timothy 4. 5. 4. To their
fourth, Romans 14. 23. 5. To their proofs out of Fathers, who dispute negatively
from the Authority of Holy Scripture. 6. To their proof by the Scriptures
custom of disputing from Divine Authority negatively. 7. An Examination of
their Opinion concerning the force of Arguments taken from humane Authority for
the ordering of men's actions and persuasions. 8. A Declaration what the truth
is in this matter.


AS that which in the Title has been proposed for the matter whereof we treat
is only the Ecclesiastical Law whereby we are governed; So neither is it my
purpose to maintain any other thing, then that which therein Truth and Reason
shall approve. For concerning the dealings of men, who administer Government,
and unto whom the Execution of that Law belongs, they have their Judge who
sits in Heaven, and before whose Tribunal Seat they are accountable for
whatsoever abuse or corruption, which (being worthily misliked in this Church)
the want either of Care or of Conscience in them has bred. We are no Patrons
of those things therefore; the best defense whereof is speedy redress and
amendment. That which is of God we defend, to the uttermost of that ability
which he has given: that which is otherwise, let it wither even in the root
from whence it has sprung. Wherefore all these abuses being severed and set
apart, which use from the corruption of men, and not from the Laws themselves:
Come we to those things which in the very whole entire form of our
Church-Polity have been (as we persuade our selves) injuriously blamed by them
who endeavor to overthrow the same, and instead thereof to establish a much
worse, only through a strong misconceit they have, that the same is grounded
on Divine Authority. Now, whether it be that through an earnest longing desire
to see things brought to a peaceable end; I do but imagine the matters whereof
we contend, to be fewer then indeed they are; or else for that in truth they
are fewer when they come to be discust by Reason, then otherwise they seem when
by heat of contention they are divided into many slips, and of every Branch an
heap is made: Surely, as now we have drawn them together, choosing out those
things which are requisite to be severally all discust, and omitting such mean
Specialities as are likely (without any great labor) to fall afterward of
themselves; I know no cause why either the number or the length of these
Controversies should diminish our hope of seeing them end with concond and love
on all sides; which of his infinite love and goodness, the Father of all peace
and unity grant. Unto which Scope that our endeavor may the more directly
tend, it seems fittest that first those things be examined, which are as
seeds from whence the rest that ensue have grown. And of such the most general
is, that, wherewith we are here to make our entrance: A Question not moved (I
think) any where in other Churches, and therefore in ours the more likely to be
soon (I trust) determined: the rather for that it has grown from no other root
then only a desire to enlarge the necessary use of the Word of God; which
desire has begotten an Error enlarging it further then (as we are persuaded)
soundness of truth will bear. For whereas God has left sundry kinds of Laws
unto men, and by all those Laws the actions of men are in some sort directed:
T. C. l. 1. p.59, 60.
They hold that one only Law, the Scripture, must be the Rule to direct in all
things, even so far as to the taking up of a Rush or Straw. About which point
there should not need any question to grow, and that which is grown might
presently end, if they did yield but to these two restraints: The first is, Not
to extend the actions whereof they speak, so low as that Instance does import,
of taking up a Straw, but rather keep themselves at the least within the
compass of Moral Actions, Actions which have in them Vice of Virtue: The
second, Not to exact at our hands for every action the knowledge of some place
of Scripture, out of which we stand bound to deduce it, as by diverse
Testimonies they seek to enforce; but rather as the truth is, so to
acknowledge, that it suffices if such actions be framed according to the Law
of Reason; the general Axioms, Rules and Principles of which Law, being so
frequent in Holy Scripture, there is no let but in that regard, even out of
Scripture such duties may be deduced by some kind of Consequence (as by long
circuit of Deduction it may be that even all Truth, out of any Truth, may be
concluded) howbeit no man bound in such sort to deduce all his actions out of
Scripture, as if either the place be to him unknown whereon they may be
concluded, or the reference unto that place not presently considered of, the
action shall in that respect be condemned as unlawful. In this we dissent, and
this we are presently to examine.

1. In all parts of knowledge rightly so termed, things most general are most
strong; Thus it must be, inasmuch as the certainty of our persuasion touching
particulars, depends altogether upon the credit of those Generalities out of
which they grow. The first pretended proof of the first Position out of
Scripture. Prove. 2. 9. T. C. lib. 1. p. 20. I say, That the Word of God
contains whatsoev^r things can fall into any part of man's life. For in
Solomon says in the second Chapter of the Proverbs, My son, if thou receive my
words, etc. then they shall understand justice, and iudgement^ and equity, and
every good way.
Albeit therefore every cause admit not such Infallible Evidence of proof, as
leaves no possibility of doubt or scruple behind it; yet they who claim the
general assent of the whole world unto that which they teach, and do not fear
to give very hard and heavy sentence upon as many as refuse to embrace the
same, must have special regard that their first Foundations and Grounds be more
then slender probabilities. This whole Question which has been moved about the
kind of Church Regiment, we could not but for our own resolution sake,
endeavor to unrip and sist; following therein as near as we might, the conduct
or that judicial Method which serves best for invention of Truth. By means
whereof, having found this the Head Theorem of all their Discourses, who plead
for the change of Ecclesiastical Government in England, namely, That the
Scripture of God is in such sort the rule of humane actions, that simply
whatsoever we do, and are not by it directed thereunto, the same is sin; we
hold it necessary that the proofs hereof be weighed: Be they of weight
sufficient or otherwise, it is not ours to judge and determine; only what
difficulties there are, which as yet withold our assent, till we be further
and better satisfied, I hope, no indifferent amongst them will scorn or refuse
to hear. First, therefore whereas they allege, That Wisdom does teach men
every good way; and have thereupon inferred, that no way is good in any kind
of action, unless Wisdom do by Scripture lead unto it: See they not plainly how
they restrain the manifold ways which Wisdom has to teach men by, unto one
only way of teaching, which is by Scripture? The bounds of Wisdom are large;
and within them much is contained. Wisdom was Adams Instructor in Paradise:
Wisdom endued the Fathers who lived before the Law, with the knowledge of holy
things; by the wisdom of the Law of God. David attained to excel others in
understanding; Psalm. 119. 95.
and Solomon likewise to excel David, by the self-same wisdom of God,
teaching him many things besides the Law. The ways of well-doing are in number
even as many, as are the kinds of voluntary actions: so that whatsoever we do
in this World, and may do it ill, we show our selves therein by well-doing to
be wise. Now if wisdom did teach men by Scripture not only all the ways that
are right and good in some certain kind, according to that of 2 Timothy 3. 16.
The whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach,
to improve, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God
may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works. He means all and
only those good works which belong unto us as we are Men of God, and which unto
salvation are necessary. Or if we understand by men of God. God's Ministers,
there is not required in them an universal skill of every good work or way, but
an hability to teach whatsoever men are bound to do that they may be saved: And
with this kind of knowledge the Scripture suffices to furnish them as
touching matter.
S. Paul, concerning the use of Scripture; but did simply without any manner of
exception, restraint, or distinction, teach every way of doing well: There is
no Art but Scripture should teach it, because every Art does teach the way how
to do something or other well: To teach men therefore Wisdom professes, and to
teach them every good way: but not every good way by one way of teaching.
Whatsoever either men on Earth, or the Angels of Heaven do know, it is as a
drop of that unemptiable Fountain of Wisdom; which Wisdom, has diversely
imparted her treasures unto the World. As her ways are of sundry kinds, so her
manner of teaching is not merely one and the same. Some things she opens by
the Sacred Books of Scripture; some things by the glorious works of Nature:
with some things she inspireth them from above by spiritual influence; in some
things she leads and traineth them only by worldly experience and practice.
We may not so in any one special kind admire her, that we disgrace her in any
other; but let all her ways be according unto their place and degree adored.

2. That all things be done to the glory of God, The second Proof out of
Scripture, 1 Cor. 10. 32. T. C. l. 1 p.26. S. Paul says, That whether we eat
or drink or whatsoever we do, we must do it to the glory of God; but no man can
glorify God in any thing but by obedience; and there is no obedience but in
respect of the commandment and word of God therefore it follows that the Word
of God directs a man to all his actions.
the blessed Apostle (it is true) exhorts. The glory of God is the admirable
excellency of that Virtue Divine, which being made manifest, causes Men and
Angels to extol his greatness, and in regard thereof to fear him. By being
glorified, it is not meant, that he does receive any augmentation of glory at
our hands; but his Name we glorify, when we testify our acknowledgement of
his glory. Which albeit we most effectually do by the virtue of obedience;
nevertheless it may be perhaps a Question, Whether S. Paul did mean that we sin
as often as ever we go about any thing, without an express intent and purpose to
obey God therein. He says of himself, I do in all things please all men,
seeking not mine own commodity, but rather the good of many, that they may be
saved. Shall it hereupon be thought, that St. Paul did not move either hand or
foot, but with express intent even thereby to further the common salvation of
men? We move, we sleep, we take the cup at the hand of our friend, a number of
things we oftentimes do, only to satisfy some natural desire, without present,
express and actual reference unto any Commandment of God. Unto his glory even
these things are done which we naturally perform, and not only that which
morally and spiritually we do. For by every effect proceeding from the most
concealed instincts of Nature, his power is made manifest. But it does not
therefore follow, that of necessity we shall sin, unless we expressly intend
this in every such particular. But be it a thing which requires no more then
only our general presupposed willingness to please God in all things, or be it
a matter wherein we cannot so glorify the Name of God as we should, without an
actual intent to do him in that particular some special obedience; yet for any
thing there is in this sentence alleged to the contrary, God may be glorified
by obedience, and obeyed by performance of his will, and his will be performed
with an actual intelligent desire to fulfill that Law which makes known what
his will is, although no special clause or sentence of Scripture be in every
such action set before men's eyes to warrant it. For Scripture is not the only
Law whereby. God has opened his will touching all things that may be done; but
there are other kind of Laws which notify the will of God, as in the former
Book has been proved at large: nor is there any Law of God, whereunto he does
not account our obedience his glory. Do therefore all things unto the glory of
God, (says the Apostle) be inoffensive both to the Jews and Grecians, and the
Church of God; even as I please all then in all things, not seeking mine own
commodity, but manies, that they may be saved. In the least thing done
disobediently toward God, or offensively against the good of men, whose
benefit we ought to seek for as for our own, we plainly show that we do not
acknowledge God to be such as indeed he is, and consequently that we glorify
him not. This the blessed Apostle teaches; but does any Apostle teach that we
cannot glorify God otherwise then only in doing what we find that God in
Scripture commands us to do? The Churches dispersed amongst the Heathen in
the East part of the World, are by the Apostle S. Peter exhorted, 1 Pet. 2. 11.
to have their conversation honest amongst the Gentiles, that they which spoke
evil of them as of evil doers, might by the good works which they should see,
glorify God in the day of visitation. As long as that which Christians did was
good, and no way subject unto just reproof, their virtuous conversation was a
mean to work the Heathens conversion unto Christ. Seeing therefore this had
been a thing altogether impossible, but that Infidels themselves did discents,
in matters of life and conversation, when believers did well, and when
otherwise; when they glorified their Heavenly Father, and when not: It
follows, that somethings wherein God is glorified, may be some other way
known then only but the sacred Scripture, of which Scripture the Gentiles
being utterly ignorant, did notwithstanding judge rightly of the quality of
Christian men's actions. Most certain it is, that nothing but only sin does
dishonoar God. So that to glorify him in all things, is to do nothing whereby
the Name of God may be blasphemed; nothing whereby the salvation of Jew or
Grecian, Romans 2. 34.
or any in the Church of Christ may be let or hindered; 1 Cor. 10. 33. Romans 2.
23.
nothing whereby his Law is transgrest. But the Question is, Whether only
Scripture do show whatsoever God is glorified in.

3. And though meats and drinks be said to be sanctified by the Word of God,
and by Prayer, The first Scripture proi. 1 Timothy 4. 5. and thirds which S. Easil
said at moves and drinks, 1 that they are cause tight into us by ^^^^^ of God;
the same is do desynd ersloted of all things less whenever we have the used of
(...) The forth Scripture prof. Tim. 4. 23. T. C. l. 1. p. 87.
yet neither is this a Reason sufficient to prove, That by Scripture we must of
necessity be directed, in every light and common thing, which is incident unto
any part of Man's life. Only it shows that unto us the Word, that is to say,
the Gospel of Christ, having not delivered any such difference of things clean
and unclean as the Law of Moses did unto the Jews, there is no cause but that
we may use indifferently all things, as long as we do not (like Swine) take the
benefit of them without a thankful acknowledgement of his liberality and
goodness, by whose Providence they are enjoyed. And therefore the Apostle gave
warning beforeshifhed to that need of such as should enjoyed to abstain from
meats, which God has streased to be received will thanksgiving, by them which
believe and know the Truth. For every creature of God in good, and nothing to
be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving; because it sanctified by the
Word of God and Prayer. The Gospel, by not malling many things unclean! as the
Law did, has sanctified those things generally to asked which particularly
each man unto himself must sanctify by a reverend and holy the ^^ which will
hardly be down so far as to serve their purpose, who have imagined the World in
such sort to sanctify all things, that neither food saw he tastest, nor
Principle on, nor in the World any thing done, but this deed must needs be sin
in them which do not first know it appointed unto them by Scripture before they
do it.

4. But to come unto that which of all other things in Scripture is most stood
upon that place of S. Paul they say, is of all other most clear, where speaking
of those things which are called indifferent, in the end he concludes, That
whatsoever is not of faith, of sin his Faith is not But th respect of the Word
of God therefore whatsoever is not done by the Word of God, is sin. Whereunto
the answer, that albest the name of Faith being properly and strictly taken, it
must needs have reference unto some uttered word, as the Object of belief:
nevertheless, since the ground of credit is the credibility of things credited;
and things are made credible, either by the known condition and quality of the
utterer, or by the manifest likelihood of Truth, Psalm. 19.8. Apoc. 3. 14. 2
Cor. 1. 18.
which they have in themselves; hereupon it rises, that whatsoever we are
persuaded of, the same we are generally said to believe. In which generality
the Object of Faith may not so narrowly be restrained, as if the same did
extend no further then to the only Scriptures of God. John 10. 38.
Though (says our Savior) ye believe not me, believe my works, that ye may
know and believe that the Father is in me, and I in him. The other Disciples
said unto Thomas, John 20. 25.
We have seen the Lord; but his answer unto them was, Except I see in his hands
the print of the nails, and put my finger into them, I will not believe. Can
there be any thing more plain, then that which by these two Sentences
appears? Namely, That there may be a certain belief grounded upon other
assurance then Scripture; any thing more clear, then that we are said not only
to believe the things which we know by another relation, but even whatsoever
we are certainly persuaded of, whether it be by reason, or by sense? Forasmuch
therefore as ( And if any will say, that S. Paul means there a full (...) ^^^
and perwasion that that which he does is well it is granted that S. Paul does
is well done, I grant it: But from whance can that spring but from Faith? How
can we persuade and assure our selves that we do well, but whereas we have the
Word of God for our warrant? T. C. l. 1. c. 27.
) it is granted that S. Paul does mean nothing; else by Faith, but only a full
persuasion that that which we do it well done; against which kind of Faith or
persuasion, as S. Paul does count it sin to enterprise any thing,( What also
that so me even of those Heathen men have taught, that nothing wight to be
done, whereof thou douhtest whether it be right or wrong? Whereby if appears,
that even those which has no knowledge of the Word of God, did see much of the
equity of this which the Apostle requires of a Christian man: Aut that the
chiefest diffarence is, that where they seat men for the difference of good and
evil to the light of reason, In such things the Apostle se^deth them to the
School of Christ in his Word, which only is able through faith to give them
assurance and resolution in their doings, T. C. l. 1. p. 60.
) so likewise some of the very Heathen have taught, as Tully, That nothing
ought to be done whereof thou doubtest, whether it be right or wrong; whereby
it appears that even those which had no knowledge of the Word of God, did see
much of the equity of this which the Apostle requires of a Christian man; I
hope we shall not seen altogether unnecessarily to doubt of the soundness of
their opinion, who think simply that nothing but only the Word of God, can
give us assurance in any thing we are to do, and resolve us that we do well.
For might not the Jews have been fully persuaded that they did well to think
(if they had so thought) that in Christ God the Father was, although the only
ground of this, their Faith, had been the wonderful works they saw him do?
Might not, yea, did not Thomas fully in the end persuade himself, that he did
well to think that body which now was raised, to be the same which had been
crucified? John 20.21.
That which gave Thomas this assurance was his sense; Thomas; Because thou have
seen, thou believe, says our Savior. What Scripture had Tully for his
assurance? Yet I nothing doubt, but that they who allege him think he did well
to set down in Writing, a thing so consonarie unto truth. Finally, We all
believe that the Scriptures of God are Sacred, and that they have proceeded
from God, our selves we assure that we do right well in so believing. We have
for this point a Demoustration sound and infallible. But it is not the Word of
God which does or possibly can assure us, that we do well to think it his Word.
For if any one Book of Scripture did give testimony to all, yet sell that
Scripture which gives credit to the rest, would require another Scripture to
give credit unto it neither could we ever come unto any pause whereon to rest
our assurance this way: so that unless beside Scripture, there were something
which might assure us that we do well, we could nor think we do well; no, not
in being assured that Scripture is a sacred and holy Rule of well-doing. On
which determination we, might be contented to stay our selves, without further
proceeding herein, but that we are drawn on into a larger speech, by reason of
their so great earnestness, who beat more, and more upon these last alleged
words, as being of all other most pregnant. Whereas, therefore they still
argue, T.C. 1. 2. p. 58.
That wheresoever faith is wanting, there is sin; and in every action not
commanded, faith is wanting; Ergo, in every action not commanded, there is sin:
I would demand of them; First, forasmuch, as the nature of things indifferent,
is neither to be commanded, nor forbidden, but left free and arbitrary; how
there can be any thing indifferent, i^ for want of Faith, sin be committed,
when any thing not commanded is done. So that of necessity they must add
somewhat, and at least wise thus, set it down: In every action not commanded of
God, or permitted with approbation, Faith is wanting, and for want of Faith
there is sin. The next thing we are to enquire is, What those things be which
God permits with approbation, and how we may know them to be so permitted?
When there are unto one end sundry means; as for example, for the sustenance of
our bodies many kinds of food, many sorts of raiment to cloth our nakedness,
and so in other things of like condition: Here the end it self being necessary,
but not so any one mean thereunto; necessary that our bodies should he both fed
and clothed, howbeit no one kind of food or raiment necessary; therefore we
hold these things free in their own nature and indifferent. The choice is left
to our own discretion, except a principal Bond of some higher duty remove the
indifferency that such things have in themselves. Their indifferency is
removed, if either we take away our own liberty, Acts. 5.
as Ananias did, for whom to have sold or held his Possessions it was
indifferent, till his Solemn Vow and Promise into God had strictly bound him
one only way: or if God himself have precisely abridged the same, by
restraining us unto, or by barring us from some one or more things of many,
which otherwise were in themselves altogether indifferent. Many fashions of
Priestly Attire there were, whereof Aaron and his Sons might have had their
free choice without sin, Exodus 28.43. Levit. 11.
but that God expressly tied them unto one. All meats indifferent unto the Jew,
were it not that God by name excepted some, as Swines flesh. Impossible
therefore it is we should otherwise think, then that what things God does
neither command nor forbid, the same he permits with approbation either to
be done or left undone. 1 Cor. 6.12.
All things are lawful unto me, says the Apostle, speaking as it seems, in
the person of the Christian Gentile, for maintenance of liberty in things
indifferent: whereunto his answer is, that nevertheless, All things are not
expedient; in things indifferent there is a choice, they are not always equally
expedient. Now in things although not commanded of God, yet lawful, because
they are permitted, the Question is, What light shall show us the convenience
which one has above another? For answer, their final Determination is, That
whereas the Heathen did send men for the difference of good and evil to the
light of reason, in such things the Apostle sends us to the school of Christ
in his Word, which only is able through faith to give us assurance and
resolution in our doings. Which word Only, is utterly without possibility of
ever being proved. For what if it were true concerning things indifferent, that
unless the Word of the Lord had determined of the free use of them, there could
have been no lawful use of them at all; which notwithstanding is untrue;
because it is not the Scriptures setting down such things as indifferent, but
their not setting down as necessary, that does make them to be indifferent; yet
this to our present purpose serves nothing at all. We enquire not now, Whether
any thing be free to be used, which Scripture has nor set down as free? but
concerning things known and acknowledged to be indifferent, whether
particularly in choosing any one of them before another, we sin, if any thing
but Scripture direct us into this our choice. When many meats are set before
me, all are indifferent, none unlawful; I take one as most convenient. If
Scripture require me so to do, then is not the thing indifferent, because I
must do what Scripture requires. They are all indifferent; I might take any,
Scripture does not require of me to make any special choice of one: I do
notwithstanding make choice of one, my discretion teaching me so to do. A hard
case, that hereupon I should be justly condemned of sin. Not let any man think
that following the judgment of natural discretion in such cases, we can have
no assurance that we please God. For to the Author and God of our nature, how
shall any operation proceeding in natural sort, he in that respect
unacceptable? The nature which himself has given to work by, he cannot but be
delighted with, when we exercise the same any way without Commandment of his to
the contrary. My desire is, to make this cause so manifest, that if it were
possible, no doubt or scruple concerning the same, might remain in any man's
cogitation. Some truths there are, the verity whereof time does alter: As it is
now true that Christ is risen from the dead; which thing was not true at such
time as Christ was living on earth, and had not suffered. It would be known
therefore, whether this which, they teach concerning the sinful stain of all
actions not commanded of God, be a truth that does now appertain unto us only,
or a perpetual truth, in such sort that from the first beginning of the world,
unto the last consummation thereof, it neither has been, nor can be otherwise.
I see not how they can restrain this unto any particular time, how they can
think it true now, and not always true, that in every action not commanced
there is for want of Faith sin. Then let them cast back their eyes unto former
generations of men, and mark what was done in the prime of the World: Seth,
Enoch, Noah, Sem, Abraham, Job, and the rest that lived before any syllable of
the Law of God was written, did they not sin as much as we do in every action
not commanded? That which God is unto us by his Sacred Word, the same he was
unto them by such like means as Eliphaz in Job describes. Job 2. 10.
If therefore we sin in every action which the Scripture commands us not, it
follows that they did the like in all such actions as were not by Revelation
from Heaven exacted at their hands: Unless God from Heaven did by vision still
show them what to do, they might do nothing; not eat, not drink, not sleep, not
move. Yea, but even as in darkness, candle light may serve to guide men's steps,
which to use in the day were madness; so when God had once delivered his Law in
writing, it may be, they are of opinion, that then it must needs be sin for men
to do any thing, which was not there commanded them to do, whatsoever they
might do before. Let this be granted, and it shall hereupon plainly ensue,
either that the light of Scripture once shining in the world, all other light
of Nature is therewith in such sort drowned, that now we need it not, neither
may we longer use it; or if it stand us in any stead, yet, as Aristotle
speaks of men whom nature has framed for the state of servitude, saying,
Arist. Pal. 11
They have reason so far forth as to conceive when others direct them, but
little or none in directing themselves by themselves; so likewise our natural
capacity and judgment must serve us only for the right understanding of that
which the sacred Scripture teaches. Had the Prophets who succeeded Moses, or
the blessed Apostles which followed them, been settled in this persuasion, never
would they have taken so great pains in gathering together natural Arguments,
thereby to teach the faithful their Duties. To use unto them any other Motive
then Scriptures est, Thou it is written, had been to teach them other grounds
of their Actions then Scripture; which I grant, they allege commonly, but not
only. Only Scripture they should have alleged, had they been thus persuaded,
that so far forth we do sin, as we do any thing otherwise directed then by
Scripture. S. Augustine was resolute in points of Christianity to credit none,
how godly and learned soever he were, unless he confirmed his sentence by the
Scriptures, or by some reason not contrary to them. Let them therefore with S.
Augustine reject and condemn that which is not grounded either on the
Scripture, August. Ep. 18.
or on some reason not contrary to Scripture, and we are ready to give them our
hands in token of friendly consent with them.

5. But against this it may be objected, The First Assertion endeavored to be
proved by the use of taking Arguments Negatively from the Authority of
Scripture: which kind of disputing is mual in the Fathers.
and is, That the Fathers do nothing more usually in their Books, then draw
Arguments from the Scripture negatively in reproof of that which is evil;
Scriptures teach it not, avoid it therefore: these disputes with the Fathers
are ordinary, neither is it hard to show that the Prophets themselves have so
reasoned. Which Arguments being sound and good, it should seem that it cannot
be unsound or evil to hold still the same Asserrion, against which hitherto we
have disputed. For if it stand with reason thus to argue, Such a thing is not
taught us in Scripture, therefore we may not receive or allow it: how should it
seem unreasonable to think, that whatsoever we may lawfully do, the Scripture
by commanding it must make it lawful? But how far such Arguments do reach, it
shall the better appear by considering the matter wherein they have been urged.
First therefore this we constantly deny, that of so many Testimonies as they
are able to produce for the strength of Negative Arguments, any one does
generally (which is the point in question) condemn either all opinions as
false, or all actions as unlawful, which the Scripture teaches us not. The
most that can be collected out of them is only, that in some cases a Negative.
Argument taken from Scripture is strong, whereof no man endued with judgment
can doubt. But does the strength of some Negative Argument prove this kind of
Negative Argument strong, by force whereof, all things are denied which
Scripture affirms not, or all things which Scripture prescribes not
condemned? The Question between us is concerning matter of Action, what things
are lawful, or unlawful for men to do. The Sentences alleged out of the
Fathers, are as peremptory, and as large in every respect for matter of
Opinion, as of action; which argues that in truth they never meant any
otherwise to tie the one then the other unto Scripture, both being thereunto
equally tied, as far as each is required in the same kind of necessity unto
Salvation. If therefore it be not unlawful to know, and with full persuasion to
believe much more then Scripture alone does teach; if it be against all Sense
and Reason to condemn the knowledge of so many Arts and Sciences as are
otherwise learned then in Holy Scripture, notwithstanding the manifest Speeches
of ancient Catholic Fathers which seem to close up within the bosom thereof
all manner good and lawful knowledge; wheresore should their words be thought
more effectual to show that we may not in deeds and practice, then they are to
prove that in speculation and knowledge, we ought not to go any further then
the Scripture? Which Scripture being given to teach matters of belief, no less
then of action; the Fathers must needs be, and are even as plain against
credit, besides the relation, as against practice, without the injunction of
the Scripture. S. Augustine has said, Aug cont. liter. Peril. l. 3. c. 6.
Whether it be question of Christ, or whether it be question of his Church, or
of what thing soever the question be: I say not, if we, but if an Angel from
Heaven shall tell us any thing beside that you have received in the Scripture
under the Law and the Gospel, let him be accursed. In like sort Tertallian,
Tertul. de praescript. advers
We may not give our selves this liberty to bring in any thing of our will,,
T.C. l 2. p. 81. Augustine says, Whether it be question of Christ, or whether
it be question of his Church, etc. And lest the Answer should restrain the
general saying of Augustine, unto the Doctrine of the Gospel, so that he would
thereby save out the Discipline; even Tertullian himself, before he was embrued
with the Heresy of Montanus, gives Testimony unto the Discipline in these
world. We may not give our selves, etc.
nor choose any thing that other men bring in of their will; we have the
Apostles themselves for Authors, which themselves brought nothing of their own
will; but the Discipline which they received of Christ, they delivered
faithfully unto the people; in which place the name of Discipline imports
not, as they who allege it would fain have it construed, but as any man who
notes the circumstance of the place, and the occasion of uttering the words,
will easily acknowledge, even the self-same thing it signifies, which the name
of Doctrine does; and as well might the one as the other there have been used.
To help them farther, Hierom. centra Helvid. Hilar. in Psalm. 131.
does not S. Jerome, after the self-same manner dispute. We believe it not,
because we read it not: yea, We ought not so much as to know the things which
the Book of the Law contains not, says S. Hilary. Shall we hereupon then
conclude, that we may not take knowledge of, or give credit unto any thing
which sense, or experience, or report, or art does propose, unless we find the
same in Scripture? No, it is too plain that so far to extend their Speeches, is
to wrest them against their true intent and meaning. To urge any thing upon the
Church, requiring thereunto that Religious Assent of Christian Belief,
wherewith the words of the Holy Prophets are received; to urge any thing as
part of that supernatural and celestially revealed Truth which God has taught,
and not to show it in Scripture, this did the ancient Fathers evermore think
unlawful, impious execrable. And thus as their Speeches were meant, so by us
they must be restrained. As for those alleged words of Cyprian, T. C. l. r. p.
8. Let him hear what Cyprian says, The Christian Religion (says he) shall
find, that, etc Vere he mandatum legem comptectitur and Prophetas, and in he
verbo ownium Scripturarum volumina coarctantuo. Hot natura, hac ratis, hac
Demine, verbi tui clam at authoritas, he exore two andivinus, hieinvenit
consummationem nem omnis Religio. Prinum of hocmandatum and ultimum. hot it
librovita cens^^t: um indeficiencie and haminibus and Argella exhibes
lessiemen. Legate hoc unum verbum and in hot mandato medietur Christiana
Religio. andinseriet ex hoc Scripunta omulum dotle marum regelas emarisse. and
bine naset and but reveral quicquid Ecclesiastica con^^^^ disciplina. and in
omalous irthamessis and frivolum quaiquid dileetio non confirmal men confirmat.
The Christian Religion shall find, that out of this Scripture Rules of all
Doctrines have sprung, and that from hence does spring, and hither does return
whatsoever the Ecclesiastical Discipline does contain. Surely this place would
never have been brought forth in this cause, if it had been but once read over
in the Author himself, out of whom it is cited. For the words are uttered
concerning that one principal Commandment of Love; in the honor whereof
hespeaketh after this sort; Surely this Commandment contains the Law and the
Prophets, and in this one Word is the Abridgement of all the Volumes of
Scripture: This Nature, and Reason, and the authority of thy Word, O Lord, does
proclaim; this we have heard out of thy month; herein the perfection of all
Religion does consist. This is the first Commandment and the last: This being
written in the Book of Life, is (as it were) an everlasting lesson both to Men
and Angels. Let Christian Religion read this one Word, and meditate upon this
Commandment, and out of this Scriptrue it shall find the Rules of all Learning
to have spring, and from hence to have risen, and hither to return, whatsoever
the Ecclesiastical Discipline contains; and that in all things it is vain and
bootless which Charity confirms not. Was this a sentence (trow you) of so
great force to prove that Scripture is the only Rule of all the actions of
men? Might they not hereby even as well prove, that one Commandment of
Scripture is the only rule of all things, and so exclude the rest of the
Scripture, as now they do all means besides Scripture? But thus it fares, when
too much desire of contradiction causes our speech rather to pass by number,
then to stay for weight. Well, but Tertullian does in this case speak yet more
plainly: The Scripture (says he) denies what it notes not: which are indeed
the words of Tertullian. But what? the Scripture reckons up the Kings of
Israel, and amongst those Kings, David; the Scripture reckons up the sons of
David, and amongst those sons, Tertul. lib. de Monog. T. C. l. 2. p 81. And in
another place Tertullian says, That the Scripture deniest that when it notes
nor.
Solomon. To prove that amongst the Kings of Israel, there was no David but
only one; no Solomon but one in the sons of David, Tertullians Argument will
fitly prove. For inasmuch as the Scripture did propose to reckon up all; if
there were more, it would have named them. In this case the Scripture does deny
the thing it notes not. Howbeit I could not but think that man to do me some
piece of manifest injury, which would hereby fasten upon me a general Opinion,
as if I did think the Scripture to deny the very Reign of King Henry the
Eighth, because it no where notes that any such King did reign. Tertullians
speech is probable concerning such matter as he there speaks of. There was,
says Tertullian, no second Lamech, like to him that had two wives; the
Scripture denies what it notes not. As therefore it notes one such to have
been in that Age of the World; so had there been more, it would by likelihood as
well have noted many as one. What infer we now hereupon? There was no second
Lamech; the Scripture denies what it notes not. Were it consonant unto reason
to divorce these two Sentences, the former of which does show how the latter is
retrained, and not marking the former, to conclude by the latter of them, that
simply whatsoever any man at this day does think true, is by the Scripture
denied, unless it be there affirmed to be true? I wonder that a case so weak
and feeble has been so much persisted in. But to come unto those their
Sentences, wherein matters of action are more apparently touched, the Name of
Tertullian is as before, so here again pretended; who writing unto his Wife two
Books, T. C. l. 2. p. 80. And that in indifferent things it is not enough that
they be not against the Word but that they be according to the Word, it may
appear by other place, where he says, That whatsoever pleases not the Lord,
displeases him, and with hurt is received, live. 2. ad uxorem.
and exhorting her in the one to live a Widow, in case God before her should
take him unto his mercy; and in the other, if she did marry, yet not to join
her self to an Infidel, as in those times some Widows Christian had done for
the advancement of their estate in this present world; he urges very earnestly
S. Paul's words, Only in the Lord: Whereupon he demands of them that think
they may do the contrary, what Scripture they can show where God has dispensed
and granted license to do against that which the blessed Apostle so strictly
does enjoin? And because in defense it might perhaps be replied, Seeing God
does will that couples which are married when both are Infidels, if either
party chance to be after converted unto Christianity, this should not make
separation between them, as long as the unconverted was willing to retain the
other on whom the grace of Christ had shined; wherefore then should that let
the making of marriage, which does not dissolve marriage being made? After
great Reasons showed why God does in Converts being married, allow continuance
with Infidels, and yet disallow that the faithful when they are free should
enter into bonds of Wedlock with such, concludes in the end concerning those
women that so marry, Quae Domino non plarent, utique effendnt utique malo se
inserunt.
They that please not the Lord, do even thereby offend the Lord; they do even
thereby throw themselves into evil; that is to say, while they please him not
by manying in him, they do that whereby they incur his displeasure; they make
an offer of themselves into the service of that enemy with whose servants they
link themselves in so near a bond. What one syllable is there in all this,
prejudicial any way to that which we hold? For the words of Tertullian as they
are by them alleged, are two ways mis-understood; both in the former part,
where that is extended generally to all things in the Neuter Gender, which he
speaks in the Feminine Gender of Women's persons; and in the latter, where,
received with hurt, is put instead of willful incurring that which is evil. And
so in sum, Tertullian does neither mean nor say as is pretended, Whatsoever
pleases not the Lord, displeases him; and with hurt it received; but, Those
women that please not the Lord by their kind of marrying, do even thereby
offend the Lord, they do even thereby throw themselves into evil: Somewhat more
show there is in a second place of Tertullian, which notwithstanding when we
have, examined T. C. l. 2 l. 81. And to come yet nearer, where he disputes
against the wearing of crown or garland (which is indifferent in it self) to
those which objecting asked. Where the Scripture says, There man might nor
wear a Crown? He answers, by asking where the Scripture says that they may
wear? And unto them replying that it is permitted, which is not forbidden, He
answers, that it is forbidden, which is not permitted. Whereby appears,
that the Argument of the Scriptures negatively holds nor only in the Doctrine
and Ecclesiastical Discipline, but even in matters arbitrary and variable by
the advice of the Church. Where it is not enough that they be not forbidden,
unless there be some Word which does permit the use of them: It is not enough
that the Scripture speaks one against them, unless it speak for them; And
finally, where it displeases the Lord which pleases him not, we must of
necessity have the Word of his mountain declare his pleasure.
it will be found as the rest are. The Roman Emperors custom was at certain
Solemn times to bestow on his Soldiers a Donative; which Donative they
received, wearing Garlands upon their heads. There were in the time of the
Emperors Severus and Antoninus, many who being Soldiers had been converted
unto Christ, and notwithstanding continued still in that Military course of
life. In which number, one man there was amongst all the rest, who at such a
time coming to the Tribune of the Army to receive his Donative, came but with a
Garland in his hand, and not in such sort as others did. The Tribune offended
hereat, demanded what this great singularity would mean: To whom the Soldier,
Christianus sum, I am a Christian. Many there were so besides him, which yet
did otherwise at that time, whereupon grew a Question, Whether a Christian
Soldier might herein do as the unchristian did, and wear as they wore. Many of
them which were very sound in Christian belief, did rather commend the zeal of
this man, then approve his action. Tertullian was at the same time a Moutanist,
and an enemy unto the Church for condemning that Prophetical Spirit, which
Montanus and his followers did boast they had received; as it in them Christ
had performed his last promise; as if to them he had sent the Spirit that
should be their Perfecter and final Instructor in the mysteries of Christian
truth. Which exulceration of mind made him apt to take all occasions of
contradiction. Wherefore in honor of that action, and to gall their minds who
did not so much commend it, he wrote his Book de Corona Militis, not
dissembling the stomach wherewith he wrote it. Tent de (...).
For the first man he commended as one more constant then the rest of his
Brethren, Who presumed, says he, that they might well enough serve two Lords.
Afterward choler somewhat rising within him, he adds, It does even remain
that they should also devise how to rid themselves of his Martyrdom, toward
the Prophecies of whose Holy Spirit they have already showed their disdain.
They mutter that their good and long peace it now in hazard. I doubt not but
serve of them send the Scriptures before, truss up bag and baggage, make
themselves in a readiness, that they may fly from City to City; for that is the
only point of the Gospel, which they are careful not to forget. I know even
their Pastors very well what men they are; in peace Lions, Hearts in time of
trouble and fear: Now these men, says Tertullian, They must be answered, Where
do we find it written in Scripture, that a Christian man may not wear a
Garland ^ And as men's speeches uttered in heat of distempered affection, have
oftentimes much more eagerness then weight; so he that shall mark the Proofs
allege, and the Answers to things objected in that Book, will now and then
perhaps espy the like imbecility. Such is that Argument whereby they that wore
on their heads Garlands, are charged as transgressors of Natures Law, and
guilty of Sacrilege against God the Lord o: Nature inasmuch as Flowers in such
sort worn, can neither be smelt no^ seen well by those that wear them: And God
made Flowers sweet and beautiful, that being seen and smelt unto, they might so
delight. Neither does Tertullian bewray this weakness in striking only, but
also in repelling their strokes with whom he contendeth. They ask, says he,
What Scripture is there which does teach that we should not be crowned? And
what Scripture is there which does teach that we should? For in requiring on
the contrary part the aid of Scripture, they do give sentence beforehand that
their part ought also by Scripture to be aided: Which answer is of no great
force. There is no necessity, that if I confess I ought not to do that which
the Scripture forbids me, I should thereby acknowledge my self bound to do
nothing which the Scripture commands me not. For many inducements beside
Scripture may lead me to that, which if Scripture be against, they all give
place, and are of no value; yet otherwise are strong and effectual persuade.
Which thing himself well enough understanding, and being not ignorant that
Scripture in many things does neither command nor forbid, but use silence; his
resolution in fine, is, that in the Church a number of things are strictly
observed, whereof no Law of Scripture makes mention one way or other; that of
things once received and confirmed by use, long usage is a Law sufficient; that
in Civil affairs, when there is no other Law, custom it self does stand for
Law, that inasmuch as Law does stand upon Reason, to allege Reason serves as
well as to cite Scripture; that whatsoever is reasonable, the same is lawful,
whosoever is the Author of it; that the authority of custom is great, finally,
that the custom of Christians was then, and had been a long time, not to wear
Garlands, and therefore that undoubtedly they did offend, who presumed to
violate such a custom, by not observing that thing, the very inveterate
Observation whereof was a Law sufficient to bind all men to observe it, unless
they could show some higher Law, some Law of Scripture to the contrary. This
presupposed, it may stand then very well with strength and soundness of reason,
even thus to answer, Whereas they ask what Scripture forbids them to wear a
Garland? we are in this case rather to demand, What Scripture commands them?
they cannot here allege, that that is permitted which is not forbidden them:
no, that is forbidden them which is not permitted. For long received custom
forbidding them to do as they did (if so be it did forbid them) there was no
excuse in the world to justify their act, unless in the Scripture they could
show some Law that did license them thus to break a received custom. Now
whereas in all the Books of Tertullian besides, there is not so much found as
in that one, to prove not only that we may do, but that we ought to do sundry
things which the Scripture commands not; out of that very Book these
Sentences are brought to make us believe that Tertullian was of a clean
contrary mind. We cannot therefore hereupon yield; we cannot grant, that hereby
is made manifest the Argument of Scripture negative to be of force, not only in
Doctrine and Ecclesiastical Discipline, but even in matters arbitrary. For
Tertullian does plainly hold even in that Book, that neither the matter which
he entreats of was arbitrary, but necessary, inasmuch as the received custom
of the Church did tie and bind them not to wear Garlands as the Heathens did;
yea, and further also he reckons up particularly a number of things whereof
he expressly concludes, Haram and aliaram ejusmodi disciplinarum si legem
expostules Scripturarum, nullam invenies; which is as much as if he had said in
express words, Many things thereare which concern the Discipline of the Church,
and the duties of men, which to abrogate and take away, the Scriptures
negatively urged may not in any case persuade us, but they must be observed,
yea, although no Scripture be found which requires any such thing. Tertullian
therefore undoubtedly does not in this Book show himself to be of the same
mind with them, by whom his name is pretended.

6. But first the sacred Scriptures themselves afford oftentimes such Arguments
as are taken from Divine Authority both one way and other; The first Assertion
endeavored to be confirmed by the Scripture^ custom of disputing from Divine
authority negatively, 1 Job. a. 9. God is light and there is in him no darkness
at all. Hebr. 6.1^. It is impossible that God should ^e. Number. 22.19. God is not
as man, that he should fve, T. C. l 2. p. 41. It is not hard to show that the
Prophets have reasoned Negatively. As when in the person of the Lord the
Prophet says, Whereof I have not spoken, Jer. 19.3. And which never eatred
into my heart, Jer. 7. 31, 32. And where he condemns them, because they have
not asked counsel at the mouth of the Lord, Isai. 30.2. And it may be showed,
that the same kind of Argument has been used in things which are not of the
substance of Salvation or Damnation, and whereof there was no Commandment to
the contrary (as in the former there was, Levit. 18. 31. and 30, 3. Deuteronomy. 17.
16.) In Joshua the Children of Israel are charged by the Prophet, that they
asked not counsel at the mouth of the Lord, when they entered into Covenant with
the Gibeanites, Joshua 19. 14. And yet that Covenant was not made contrary unto
any Commandment of God. Moreover, We read that when David had taken this
counsel, to build a Temple unto the Lord, albeit the Lord had revealed before
in his Word, that there should be such a standing place, where the Ark of the
Covenant and the Service should have a certain abiding: And albeit there was no
Word of God which forbad David to build the Temple; yet the Lord (with
commendation ^^ his good affection and zeal he had to the advancement of his
glory) concludes against David's Resolution to build the Temple, with this
Reason: Namely, That he had given no Commandment of this who should build it. 1 Chronicles. 1^. 6.
The Lord has commanded, therefore it must be: And again, in like sort, He
has not, therefore it must not be; some certainty concerning this point
seems requisite to be set down: God himself can neither possibly err, nor
lead into error. For this cause his Testimonies, whatsoever he affirms, are
always truth, and most infallible certainty. Yea, further, because the things
that proceed from him are perfect without any manner of defect or maim; it
cannot be but that the words of his mouth are absolute, and lack nothing which
they should have, for performance of that thing whereunto they tend. Whereupon
it follows, that the end being known whereunto he directs his speech, the
Argument negatively is evermore strong and forcible, concerning those things
that are apparently requisite unto the same end. As for example, God intending
to set down sundry times that which in Angels is most excellent, has not any
where spoken so highly of them as he has of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ;
therefore they are not in dignity equal unto him. It is the Apostle S. Paul's
Argument. The purpose of God was to teach his people, both unto whom they
should offer sacrifice, and what sacrifice was to be offered. To burn their
sons in fire unto Baal he did not command them, he spoke no such thing, neither
came it into his mind: therefore this they ought not to have done. Which
Argument the Prophet Jeremy uses more then once, as being so effectual and
strong, that although the thing he reproves were not only not commanded, but
forbidden them, and that expressly; yet the Prophet chooses rather to charge
them with the fault of making a Law unto themselves, Levit. 18. 21 and 2. 3.
Deuteronomy. 28. 10.
than the crime of transgressing a Law which God had made. For when the Lord
had once himself pecisely set down a form of executing that wherein we are to
serve him, the fault appears greater to do that which we are not, then not to
do that which we are commanded. In this we seem to charge the Law of God with
hardness only, in that with foolishness; in this we show our selves weak and
unapt to be doers of his Will, in that we take upon us to be Controllers of his
Wisdom: in this we fail to perform the thing which God sees meet, convenient,
and good, in that we presume to see what is meet and convenient better then God
himself. In those actions therefore, the whole form whereof God has of purpose
set down to be observed, we may not otherwise do then exactly, as he has
prescribed: In such things Negative Arguments are strong. Again, with a
Negative Argument David is pressed concerning the purpose he had to build a
Temple unto the Lord: Thus says the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 17.6.
Thou shall not build me an House to dwell in. Wheresoever I have walked with
all Israel, spoke I one word to any of the Judges of Israel, whom I commanded
to feed my people, saying, Why have ye not built me an house? Isai. 30. 1.
The Jews urged with a negative argument touching the aid which they sought at
the hands of the King of Egypt; We to those rebellious children (says the
Lord) which walk forth to go down into Egypt, and have not asked counsel at my
mouth, to strengthen themselves with the strength of Pharaoh. Finally, the
league of Joshua with the Gibeonites is likewise with a Negative Argument
touched. It was not as it should be: And why? the Lord gave them not that
advice: They sought not counsel at the mouth of the Lord. By the virtue of
which examples, Josh 9.14.
if any man should suppose the force of Negative Arguments approved, when they
are taken from Scripture, in such sort as we in this question are pressed
therewith, they greatly deceive themselves. For unto which of all these was it
said, that they had done amiss in purposing to do, or in doing any thing at all
which the Scripture commanded them not? Our Question is, Whether all be sin
which is done without direction by Scripture, and not, whether the Israelites
did at any time amiss by following their own minds, without asking counsel of
God. No, it was that peoples singular privilege, a favor which God vouchsafed
them above the rest of the world, that in the affairs of their estate, which
were not determinable one way or other by the Scripture, himself gave them
extraordinary direction and counsel, as often as they sought it at his hands.
Thus God did first by speech unto Noses, after by Urim and Thummim unto
Priests; lastly, by dreams and visions unto Prophets, from whom in such cases
they were to receive the answer of God. Concerning Joshua therefore, thus spoke
the Lord unto Moses saying, Number. 27.21
He shall stand before Eleazer the Priest, who shall ask counsel for him by the
judgment of Urim before the Lord: whereof had Joshua been mindeful, the fraud
of the Gibeonites could not so smoothly have past unespied till there was no
help. The Jews had Prophets to have resolved them from the mouth of God himself
whether Egyptian aids should profit them, yea, or no: but they thought
themselves wise enough, and him unworthy to be of their counsel. In this
respect therefore was their reproof, though sharp, yet just, albeit there had
been no charge precisely given them that they should always take heed of Egypt.
But as for David, to think that he did evil in determining to build God a
Temple, because there was in Scripture no Commandment that he should build it,
were very injurious: the purpose of his heart was religious and godly, the act
most worthy of honor and renown; neither could Nathan choose but admire his
virtuous intent, exhort him to go forward, and beseech God to prosper him
therein. Put God saw the endless troubles which David should be subject unto,
during the whole time of his Regiment, and therefore gave charge to defer so
good a work till the days of tranquillity and peace, wherein it might without
interruption be performed. David supposed that it could not stand with the duty
which he owed unto God, to set himself in an house of Cedar-trees, 1 Chronicles 17.
T. C. l. 2. p. 50 Mr. Harding reproacheth the Bishop of Salisbury with this
kind of reasoning: unto whom the Bishop answers, The Argument of Authority
negatively, is taken to be good, whenever proof is taken of Gods Word, and is
used not only by us, but also by many of the Catholic Fathers. A little after
he shows the Reason why the Argument of Authority of the Scripture negatively
is good; namely for that the Word of God is perfect. In another place unto M.
Harding, casting him in the teeth with Negative Arguments, he allulgeth places
out of Irenaeus Chrysostom, Le^, which reasoned Negatively of the Authority of
the Scriptures. The places which he alleges be very full and plain in
generality, without any such restraints as the Answers imagined, as they are
there to be seen.
and to behold the Ark of the Lords Covenant unsettled. This opinion the Lord
abateth, by causing Nathan to show him plainly, that it should be no more
imputed unto him for a fault, then it had been unto the Judges of Israel before
him, his case being the same which theirs was, their times not more unquiet
then his, nor more unfit for such an action. Wherefore concerning the force of
Negative Arguments so taken from the authority of Scripture, as by us they are
denied, there is in all this less then nothing. And touching that which unto
this purpose is borrowed from the Controversies sometimes handled between Mr.
Harding and the worthiest Divine that Christendom has bred for the space of
some hundreds of years, who being brought up together in one University, it
fell out in them which was spoken of two others, Vest. Patere. Iugurtha ac
Marius sub codem Africana milna^ies, in iisdem castris didir^re quae rested in
cotrariis facerent. Art. 1. Divis. 29. Gal. 3. Orig in Levit, ^^m. 5.
They learned in the same, that which in contrary Camps they did practice. Of
these two the one objecting that with us Arguments taken from Authority
Negatively are over common, the Bishops answer hereunto is, that this kind of
Argument is thought to be good, whenever proof is taken of Gods Word; and is
used not only by in, but also by S. Paul, and by many of the Catholic
Fathers, S. Paul says, God said not unto Abraham, In thy seeds all the Nations
of the earth shall be blessed; but, In thy seed, which is Christ; and thereof
he thought he made a good Argument. Likewise, says Origin, The Bread which the
Lord gave unto his Disciples, saying unto them, Take and eat, be deferred not,
nor commanded to be reserved till the next day. Such, Arguments Origin and
other learned Fathers thought to stand for good, whatsoever misliking Mr.
Harding has sound in them. This kind of proof is thought to hold in Gods
Commandments, for that they be full and perfect: and God has specially charged
us, that we should neither put to them, nor take from them: and therefore it
seems good unto them that have learned of Christ. Unus est magister vester
Christus, and have heard the voice of God the Father from Heaven, Ipsum audite.
Matthew. 25. Matthew. 17.
But unto them that add to the Word of God what them lists, and make Gods
will subject unto their will, and break Gods Commandments for their own
traditions sake, unto them it seems not good. Again, the English Apology
alleging the example of the Greeks, how they have neither private Masses, nor
mangled Sacraments, nor Purgatories, nor Pardons; it pleases Mr. Harding to
jest out the matter, Desent. par. 9 ed. 15. divis.
to use the help of his wits where strength of truth failed him, and to answer
with scoffing at Negatives. The Bishops defense in this case is, The ancient
learned Fathers having to deal with politic Heretics, that in defense of
their Errors avouched the judgment of all the old Bishops and Doctors that had
been before them, and the general consent of the Primitive and whole universal
Church, and that with as good regard of truth, and as faithfully as you do now;
the better to discover the shameless boldness, and nakedness of their doctrine,
were oftentimes likewise forced to use the negative, and so to drive the same
Heretics, as we do you, to prove their Affirmatives, which thing to do it was
never possible. The ancient Father Iraeneus thus stayed himself, as we do, by
the Negative. Hoc neq. Prophetae praedicaverunt, neque Dominus docuit, neque
Apostoli tradiderunt; Lib. 1. cap. 1.
This thing neither did the Prophets publish, nor our Lord teach, nor the
Apostles deliver. By a like Negative Chrysostom says, De incomp^na^. De^.
^om. 3. Epist 93. c. 12.
This tree neither Paul planted, nor Apollos watered, nor God increased. In
like sort Leo says, What needs it to believe that thing that neither the Law
has taught, nor the Prophets have spoken, nor the Gospel has preached, Epist.
97. 6. 30. Epist. 165.
nor the Apostles have delivered? And again, How are the new devices brought in
that our Fathers never knew? S. Augustine having reckoned up a great number of
the Bishops of Rome, by a general Negative says thus, In all this order of
succession of Bishops, Lib 4. E^. 32.
there is not one Bishop found that was a Donatist. S. Gregory being himself a
Bishop of Rome, and writing against the Title of Universal Bishop, says thus,
None of all my Predecessors ever consented to use this ungodly Title; No Bishop
of Rome ever took upon him this name of singularity. By such Negatives, Mr.
Harding, we reprove the vanity and novelty of your Religion; We tell you, none
of the Catholic, ancient, learned Father, either Greek or Latin, ever used
either your private Mass, or your half Communion, or your barbarous unknown
prayers. Paul never planted them, Apollos, never watered them, God never
increased them; they are of your selves, they are not of God. In all this there
is not a Syllable which any way crosses us. For concerning Arguments Negative
taken from Humane Authority, they are here proved to be in some cases very
strong and forcible. They are not in our estimation idle reproofs, when the
Authors of needless Innovations are opposed with such Negatives, as that of
Leo, How are these new devices brought in which our Fathers never knew? When
their grave and reverend Superiors do reckon up unto them, as Augustine did to
the Donatists, large Catalogues of Fathers, wondered at for their wisdom piety
and learning, amongst whom for so many Ages before us, no one did ever so think
of the Churches affairs, as now the World does begin to be persuaded; surely by
us they are not taught to take exception hereat, because such Arguments are
Negative. Much less when the like are taken from the sacred authority of
Scripture, if the matter it self do bear them. For in truth the question is
not, Whether an Argument from Scripture negatively may be good, but whether it
be so generally good, that in all actions men may urge it? The Fathers, I
grant, do use very general and large terms, even as Hiero the King did in
speaking of Archimedes, From henceforward whatsoever Archimedes speaks, it
must be believed. His meaning was not that Archimedes could simply in nothing
be deceived, but that he had in such fort approved his skill, that he seemed
worthy of credit for ever after in matters appertaining unto the science he was
skilful in. In speaking thus largely it is presumed, that men's speeches will be
taken according to the matter whereof they speak. Let any man therefore that
carries indifferency of judgment, peruse the Bishops speeches, and consider
well of those negatives concerning Scripture, which he produces out of
Irenaeus Chrysostom and Leo, which three are chosen from among the residue,
because the sentences of the others (even as one of theirs also) do make for
defense of negative Argments taken from humane Authority, and not from divine
only. They mention no more restraint in the one then in the other: yet I think
themselves will not hereby judge, that the Fathers took both to be strong,
without restraint unto any special kind of matter, wherein they held such
Argument forcible. Nor does the Bishop either say or prove any more, then that
an Argument in some kinds of matter may be good, although taken negatively from
Scripture.

Their opinion concerning the force of Arguments, taken from humane authority
for the ordering of men's act^o^ or persuasions.
7. An earnest desire to draw all things unto the determination of bare and
naked Scripture, has caused here much pains to be taken in abating the
estimation and credit of man. Which if we labor to maintain as far as Truth
and Reason will bear, let not any think that we travel about a matter not
greatly needful. For the scope of all their pleading against man's Authority, is
to overthrow such Orders, Laws, and Constitutions in the Church, as depending
thereupon, if they should therefore be taken away, would peradventure leave
neither face nor memory of Church to continue long in the world, the world
especially being such as now it is. That which they have in this case spoken, I
would for brevity sake let pass, but that the drist of their speech being so
dangerous, T. C. l. 1 p. 25. When the question is of the authority of a man, it
heldeth not th^r affirmatively not negatively. The Reason is, because the
infirmity of man can never attain to the perfection of any thing whereby he
might speak all things that are to be spoken to it; neither yet be free from
error in those things which he speaks or gives out. And therefore this
argument neither affirmatively nor negatively compels the hearer, but only
induces him to some liking or disliking of that for which it is brought, and
is rather for an Orator to persuade the simpler sort, then for a Disputer to
enforce him that is learned. 1 Cor.1.^1. Ioh ^.34.
then words are not to be neglected. Wherefore to say that simply an Argument
taken from man's Authority, does hold no way, neither Affirmatively nor
Negatively, is hard. By a man's Authority we here understand the force which his
word has for the assurance of another mind that builds upon it; as the
Apostle somewhat did upon their report of the house of Chloe, and the
Samaritans in a matter of far greater moment, upon the report of a simple
Woman. For so it is said in S. John's Gospel, Many of the Samaritans of that
City believed in him for the saying of the woman, which testified, He has told
me all things that ever I did. The strength of man's Authority is Affirmatively
such, that the weightiest affairs in the world depend thereon, In judgment and
justice are not hereupon proceedings grounded? Says not the Law, that in the
mouth of two or three Witnesses every word shall be confirmed? This the Law of
God would not say, Deuteronomy. 19.15. Matthew. 18. 16.
if there were in a man's testimony no force at all to prove any thing. And if
it be admitted that in matter of Fact, there is some credit to be given to the
testimony of man, but not in matter of opinion and judgment, we see the
contrary both acknowledged and universally practiced also throughout the world.
The sentences of wise and expert men were never but highly esteemed. Let the
title of a man's right be called in question, are we not bold to rely and build
upon the judgment of such as are famous for their skill in the Laws of this
Land? In matter of State, the weight many times of some one man's authority is
thought reason sufficient even to sway over whole Nations. And this is not only
with the simple sort, but the learneder and wiser we are, the more such
Arguments in some cases prevail with us. The Reason why the simpler sort are
moved with Authority, is the conscience of their own ignorance; whereby it
comes to pass, that having learned men in admiration, they rather fear to
dislike them, then know wherefore, they should allow and follow their
judgments. Contrariwise with them that are skilful, authority is much more
strong and forcible; because they only are able to discern how just cause there
is why to some men's Authority, so much should be attributed. For which cause
the name of Hippocrates (no doubt) were more effectual to persuade even such
men as Galen himself, then to move a silly Emperick. So that the very self-same
Argument in this kind which does but induce the vulgar sort to like, may
constrain the wiser to yield. And therefore not Orators only with the people,
but even the very profoundest Disputers in all faculties have hereby often with
the best learned prevailed most. As for Arguments taken from humane Authority,
and that negatively, for example sake, if we should think the assembling of the
people of God together by the sound of a Bell, the presenting of Infants at the
Holy Font, by such as we commonly call their Godfathers, or any other the like
received custom to be impious, because some men of whom we think very
reverently, have in their Books and Writings no where mentioned or taught that
such things should be in the Church, this reasoning were subject unto just
reproof; it were but feeble, weak, and unsound. Notwithstanding even negatively
an Argument from humane Authority may be strong; as namely thus: The Chronicles
of England mention no more then only six Kings bearing the name of Edward,
since the time of the last Conquest; therefore it cannot be there should be
more. So that if the question be of the authority of a man's testimony, we
cannot simply avouch, either that affirmatively, it does not any way hold, or
that it has only force to induce the simpler sort, and not to constrain men of
understanding and ripe judgment to yield assent, or that negatively it has in
it no strength at all. For unto every of these the contrary of most plain.
Neither does that which is alleged concerning the infirmity of men, overthrow
or disprove this. Men are blinded with ignorance and error; many things escape
them, and in many things they may be deceived; yea, those things which they do
know, they may either forget, or upon sundry indirect considerations let pass,
and although themselves do not err, yet may they through malice or vanity,
even of purpose deceive others. Howbeit, infinite cases there are wherein all
these impediments and lets are so manifestly excluded, that there is no show or
color whereby any such Exception may be taken, but that the testimony of man
will stand as a ground of infallible assurance. That there is a City of Rome,
that Pins Quintus and Gregory the thirteenth, and others have been Popes of
Rome, I suppose we are certainly enough persuaded. The ground of our
persuasion, who never saw the place nor persons before named, can be nothing
but man's testimony. Will any man here notwithstanding allege those mentioned
humane infirmities as Reasons, why these things should be mistrusted or doubted
of? yea, that which is more, utterly to infringe the force and strength of man's
testimony, were to shake the very Fortress of Gods truth. For whatsoever we
believe concerning Salvation by Christ, although the Scripture be therein the
ground of our belief, yet the authority of man is, if we mark it, the key which
opens the door of entrance into the knowledge of the Scripture. The Scripture
does not teach us the things that are of God, unless we did credit men who have
taught us that the words of Scripture do signify those things. Some way
therefore, notwithstanding man's infirmity, yet his Authority may enforce
assent. Upon better advice and deliberation so much is perceived, and at the
length confessed, that Arguments taken from the Authority of men, may not only so
far forth as has been declared, but further also be of some force in Humane
Sciences; T. C. la. p. 10. Although this kind of Argument of Authority of men
is good neither in humane n^r divine sciences yet it has some small force in
humane sciences, for if such as naturally, and in that he is a man, he may come
to some ripeness of judgment in those s^^ences, which in divine maturi has no
force at all; as of him which naturally, and as he is a man, can no more judge
of them then a blind man of colors; yea, so far is it from drawing crolit, If
it be barely spoken, without Reason and testimony of Scripture, that it
ea^rieth also a su^pition of untruth whatsoever proceeds from him; which the
Apostle did well note, when to signify a thing corruptly spoken, and against
the truth, he says, that it is spoken according to man, Romans 3. He says not
as a wicked and flying man, but simply as a man: And although this corruption
be reformed in many, yet for so much as in whom the knowledge of the truth is
most advanced, there remains both ignorance and disordered affections
(whereof either of them turns him from speaking of the truth) no man's
authority, with the Church especially and those that are called and persuaded
of the Authority of the Word of God, can bring any assurance unto the
Conscience.
which force be it never so small, does show that they are not utterly naught.
But in Matters Divine it is still maintained stiffly that they have no manner
force at all. Howbeit, the very self same reason, which causes to yield that
they are of some force in the one, will at the length constrain also to
acknowledge that they are not in the other altogether unforcible. For it the
natural strength of man's wit may by experience and stucie attain unto such
ripeness in the knowledge of things humane, that men in this respect may
presume to build somewhat upon their judgment; what reason have we to think
but that even in matters Divine, the like wits furnished with necessary helps,
exercised in Scripture with like diligence, and assisted with the grace of
Almighty God, may grow unto so much perfection of knowledge, that men shall
have just cause, when any thing pertinent unto Faith and Religion is doubted
of, the more willingly to incline their minds toward that which the sentence
of so grave, wise, and learned in that faculty shall judge most sound? For the
controversy is of the weight of such men's judgments. Let it therefore be
suspected, let it be taken as gross, corrupt, repugnant unto the truth,
whatsoever concerning things divine above nature shall at any time be spoken as
out of the mouths of mere natural men, which have not the eyes wherewith
heavenly things are discerned: For this we contend not. But whom God has
endued with principal gifts to aspire unto knowledge by; whose exercises,
labors, and divine studies he has so blessed, that the World for their great
and rate skill that way has them in singular admiration; may we reject even
their judgment likewise, as being utterly of no moment? For mine own part, I
dare not so lightly esteem of the Church, and of the principal Pillars therein.
The truth is, that the mind of man desires evermore to know the truth,
according to the most infallible certainty which the nature of things can
yield. The greatest assurance generally with all men, is that which we have by
plain aspect and intuitive beholding. Where we cannot attain unto this there^
what appears to be true, by strong and invincible demonstration, such as
wherein it is not by any way possible to be deceived, thereunto the mind does
necessarily assent, neither is it in the choice thereof to do otherwise. And in
case these both do fail, then which way greatest probability leads, thither
the mind does evermore incline. Scripture with Christian men being received as
the Word of God; that for which we have probable, yea, that which we have
necessary reason for, yea, that which we see with out eyes, is not thought so
sure as that which the Scripture of God teaches; because we hold that his
speech reveals there what himself sees, and therefore the strongest proof of
all, and the most necessarily assented unto by us (which do thus receive the
Scripture) is the Scripture. Now it is not required, nor can be exacted at our
hands, that we should yield unto any thing other assent, then such as does
answer the evidence which is to be had of that we assent unto. For which cause
even in matters Divine, concerning some things we may lawfuly doubt and suspend
our judgment, enclining neither to one side or other; as namely, touching the
time of the fall both of man and Angels; of some things we may very well retain
an opinion that they are probable and not unlikely to be true, as when we hold
that men have their souls rather by creation then propagation, or that the
Mother of our Lord lived always in the state of Virginity as well after his
birth as before (for of these two, the one, her virginity before, is a thing
which of necessity we must believe; the other, her continuance in the same
state always, has more likelihood of truth then the contrary;) finally, in all
things then are our Consciences best resolved, and in a most agreeable sore
unto God and Nature settled, when they are so far persuaded as those grounds of
^erswasion which are to be had will bear. Which thing I do so much the rather
set down, for that I see how a number of souls are, for want of right
Information in this Point, oftentimes grievously vexed. When bare and unbuilded
Conclusions are put into their minds, they finding not themselves to have
thereof any great certainty, imagine that this proceeds only from lack of
Faith, and that the Spirit God does not work in them, as it does in true
Believers; by this means their hearts are much troubled, they fall into anquish
and perplexity: whereas the truth is, that how bold and confident soever we may
be in words, when it comes to the point of trial, such as the evidence is,
which the Truth has either in it self, or through proof, such is the hearts
assent thereunto; neither can it be stronger, being grounded as it should be. I
grant that proof derived from the authority of man's judgment, is not able to
work that assurance which does grow by a stronger proof; and therefore although
ten thousand General Councils would set down one and the same definitive
sentence concerning any Point of Religion whatsoever, yet one Demonstrative
Reason alleged, or one Manifest Testimony cited from the mouth of God himself
to the contrary, could not choose but over-weigh them all; inasmuch as for them
to have been deceived, it is not impossible; it is, that demonstrative Reason
or Testimony Divine should deceive. Howbeit, in defect of proof infallible,
because the mind does rather follow probable persuasions, then approve the
things that have in them no likelihood of truth at all; surely if a Question
concerning matter of Doctrine were proposed, T. C. l.2. p. 21. Of diverse
sentences of the Fathers themselves (whereby some have likened them to brute
Beasts without Reason, which suffer themselves to be led by the judgment and
authority of others, some have preferred the judgment of one simple rude man,
alleging reason, unto companies of learned men) I will conte^ my self at this
time with two or three Sentences. Ir^neuo says, whatsoever is to be showed in
the Scripture, cannot be showed but out of the ^cripture themselves, l. 3 cap.
12 Jerome says, No man, ^s he never so holy or eloquent, has any authority
after the Apostles, in Psalm. 86. Augustin^ says, That he will believe none,
how godly and learned soever he be, unless he confirm his sentence by the
Scriptures, or by some reason nor contrary to them, Ep. 18. And in another
place, Hear this. The Lord says; hear not this, Don^ius says, ^^gatus says,
Vincentius says, Hilarious says, Ambrose says, Augustine says, but hearken
unto the, the Lord says, Ep 8. And again, having to do with an Arrian, he
affirms, that neither he ought to bring forth the Council of Ni^e, nor the
other the Council of Arimi^e, thereby to bring prejudice each to other; neither
outh^ the Arrian to be holden by the authority of the one, nor himself by the
authority of the other, but by the Scriptures, which are witnesses proper ^^
neither, but common to both, matter with matter, cause with cause, reason with
reason ought to be debated, Cont. Max. Atrian. p. 14. cap. And in another ^^ce
against Petil. the Donarist, he says, Let not these words he heard between us,
I say; You say, let us hear this, Thus ^aith the Lord. And by and by speaking
of the Scriptures he says, There let us seek the Church, there let us try the
cause. De unit. Eccles. cap. 3. Hereby it is manifest that the argument of the
authority of man affirmatively in nothing worth.
and on the one side no kind of proof appearing, there should on the other be
alleged and showed that so a number of the Learnedest Divines in the World
have ever thought; although it did not appear what Reason or what Scripture led
them to be of that judgment, yet to their very bare judgment somewhat a
reasonable man would attribute, notwithstanding the common imbecillities which
are incident unto our nature. And whereas it is thought, that especially with
the Church, and those that are called, and persuaded of the Authority of the
Word of God, man's authority with them especially should not prevail; it must
and does prevail even with them, yea, with them especially as far as equity
requires, and farther we maintain it not. For men to be tied and led by
Authority, as it were with a kind of captivity of judgment, and though there
be reason to the contrary not to listen unto it, but to follow like Beasts the
first in the Herd, they know not, nor care not whither, this were brutish.
Again, that authority of men should prevail with men either against or above
Reason, is no part of our belief. Companies of learned men, be they never so
great and reverend are to yield unto Reason, the weight whereof is no whit
prejudiced by the simplicity of his person which does allege it, but being
found to be sound and good, the bare opinion of men to the contrary, must of
necessity stoop and give place. Irenaeus writing against Marcion, which held
one God Author of the Old Testament, and another of the New; to prove that the
Apostles preached the same God which was known before to the Jews, he copiously
alleges sundry their Sermons and Speeches uttered concerning that matter, and
recorded in Scripture. And lest any should be wearied with such store of
Allegations, in the end he concludes,. While we labor for these
Demonstrations out of Scripture, and do summarily, declare the things which
many ways have been spoken, be contented quietly to hear, and do not think my
speech redious: Quoniam oftensiones quae sunt in Scripturis, non possunt
oftendi nisi ex ipsis Scripturis; Because demonstrations that art in Scripture
may not otherwise be showed, then by citing them out of the Scriptures
themselves where they are. Which words make so little unto the purpose, that
they seem, as it were offended at him which has called them thus solemnly
forth to say nothing. And concerning the Verdict of S. Jerome, If no man, be he
never so well learned, have after the Apostles Authority to publish new
Doctrine as from Heaven, and to require the Worlds assent as unto truth
received by Prophetical Revelation; does this prejudice the credit of learned
men's judgments in opening that truth, which by being conversant in the
Apostles Writings, they have themselves from thence learned? S. A^gustine
exhorts not to hear men, but to hearken what God speaks. His purpose is not
(I think) that was we should stop our ears against his own exhortation, and
therefore he cannot mean simply that audience should altogether be denied unto
men; but either that if men speak one thing, and God himself teach another,
then he, not they, to be obeyed; or if they both speak the same thing, yet then
also man's speech unworthy of hearing, not simply, but in comparison of that
which proceeds from the mouth of God. Yea, but we doubt what the will of God
is. Are we in this case forbidden to hear what men of judgment think it to be?
If not, then this Allegation also might very well have been spared. In that
ancient strife which was between the Catholic Fathers and Arrians, Donatists,
and others, of like perverse and froward disposition, as long as to Fathers or
Councils alleged on the one side, the like by the contrary side were opposed,
impossible it was that ever the Question should by this mean grow unto any
issue or end. The Scripture they both believed; the Scripture they knew could
not give sentence on both sides; by Scripture the controversy between them was
such as might be determined. In this case what madness was it with such kinds
of proofs to nourish their contention, when there were such effectual means to
end all controversy that was between them? Hereby therefore it does not as yet
appear that an Argument of Authority of man affirmatively, is in matters Divine
nothing worth. Which Opinion being once inserted into the minds of the vulgar
sort, what it may grow unto God knows. Thus much we see, it has already made
thousands so headstrong, even in gross and palpable Errors, that a man whose
capacity will scarce serve him to utter five words in sensible manner, blusheth
not in any doubt concerning matter of Scripture to think his own bare Yea, as
good as the Nay of all the wise, grave and learned judgments that are in the
whole world: Which insolency must be represt, or it will be the very bane of
Christian Religion. Our Lords Disciples marking what speech he uttered unto
them, and at the same time calling to mind a common opinion held by the
Scribes, between which opinion and the words of their Master, it seemed unto
them that there was some contradiction, which they could not themselves answer,
Matthew. 17.10.
with full satisfaction of their own minds; the doubt they propose to our
Savior, saying, Why then say the Scribes that Elias must first come? They knew
that the Scribes did err greatly, and that many ways even in matters of their
own profession. They notwithstanding thought the judgment of the very Scribes
in matters Divine to be of some value; some probability they thought there was
that Elias should come, inasmuch as the Scribes said it. Now no truth can
contradict any truth; desirous therefore they were to be taught, how both might
stand together; that which they knew could not be false, because Christ spoke
it; and this which to them did seen true, only because the Scribes had said it.
For the Scripture from whence the Scribes did gather it, w^ not then in their
heads. We do not find that our Savior reproved them of Error, for thinking
the judgment of the Scribes to be worth the objecting, for esteeming it to be
of any moment or value, in matters concerning God. We cannot therefore be
persuaded that the will of God is, we should so far reject the authority of
men, as to reckon it nothing. No, it may be a question, whether they that urge
us unto this be themselves so persuaded indeed. Men do sometimes bewray that by
deeds, which to confess they are hardly drawn. Mark then if this be not general
with all men for the most part. When the judgments of learned men are alleged
against them, what do they but either elevate their credit, or oppose unto them
the judgments of others as learned? Which thing does argue that all men
acknowledge in them some force and weight, for which they are loath the cause
they maintain should be so much weakened, as their Testimony is available.
Again, what reason is there why alleging Testimonies as Proofs, men give them
some title of credit, honor and estimation whom they allege, unless
beforehand it be sufficiently known who they are? what reason hereof but only
a common engrafted persuasion, that in some men there may be found such
qualities as are able to countervail those exceptions which might be taken
against them, and that such men's authority is not lightly to be shaken off?
Shall I add further, that the force of Arguments drawn from the Authority of
Scripture it self, as Scriptures commonly are alleged, shall (being sifted) be
^ound to depend upon the strength of this so much despised and debased
authority of man? Surely it does, and that oftener then we are aware of. For
although Scripture be of God, and therefore the proof which is taken from
thence, must needs be of all other most invincible; yet this strength at has
not, unless it avouch the self-same thing, for which it is brought. If there be
either undeniable appearance that so it does, or reason such as cannot deceive,
then Scripture Proof (no doubt) in strength and value exceeds all. But for
the most part, even such as are readiest to cite for one thing Five hundred
sentences of holy Scripture; what warrant have they, that any one of them does
mean the thing for which it is alleged? Is not their surest ground most
commonly, either some probable conjecture of their own, or the judgment of
others taking those Scriptures as they do? Which notwithstanding to mean
otherwise then they take them, it is not still altogether impossible. So that
now and then they ground themselves on Humane authority, even when they most
pretend Divine. Thus it fares even clean throughout the whole controversy
about that Discipline which is so earnestly urged and labored for. Scriptures
are plentifully alleged to prove that the whole Christian World for ever ought
to embrace it. Hereupon men term it, The Discipline of God. T. C. lib. 2. 2^.
It at any time it happened unto Augustine (as it did against the Donatists and
others) to allege the authority of the ancient Fathers, which had been heiu^e
him; yet this was not done before he had laid a sure foundation of his cause in
the Scriptures, and that also being provoked by the adversaries of the truth,
who hare themselves high of some Council, or of some man of name that had
^avorcil that part.
Howbeit, examine, sist, and resolve their alleged proofs, till you come to
the very root from whence they spring, the heart wherein their strength lies;
and it shall clearly appear unto any man of judgment, that the most which can
be inferred upon such plenty of Divine Testimonies is only this, That some
things which they maintain as far as some men can probably conjecture, do seem
to have been out of Scripture not absurdly gathered. Is this a warrant
sufficient for any man's conscience to build such proceedings upon, as have
been, and are put in ure for the establishment of that cause? But to conclude,
I would gladly understand how it comes to pass, that they which so
peremptorily do maintain that Humane Authority is nothing worth, are in the
cause which they favor so careful to have the common sort of men persuaded,
that the wisest, the godliest, and the best learned in all Christendom are that
way given, seeing they judge this to make nothing in the World for them? Again,
how comes it to pass, they cannot abide that Authority should be alleged on
the other side, if there be no force at all in Authorities on one side or
other? Wherefore labor they to strip their Adversaries of such furniture as
does not help? Why take they such needless pains to furnish also their own
cause with the like? If it be void and to no purpose, that the names of men are
so frequent in their Books, what did move them to bring them in, or does to
suffer them there remaining? Ignorant I am not how this is salved, They do it
but after the truth made manifest, first by Reason, or by Scripture: They do it
not, but to control the enemies of truth, who bear themselves bold upon Humane
Authority, making not for them, but against them rather. Which answers are
nothing: For in what place, or upon what consideration soever it be they do it,
were it in their own opinion of no force being done, they would undoubtedly
refrain to do it.

8. But to the end it may more plainly appear, A Declaration what the truth is
in this matter.
what we are to judge of their sentences, and of the cause it self wherein they
are alleged; first, it may not well be denied, that all actions of men endued
with the use of reason, are generally either good or evil. For although it be
granted, that no action is properly termed good or evil, unless it be
voluntarily; yet this can be no let to our former Assertion, That all actions
of men endued with the use of reason, are generally either good or evil;
because even those things are done voluntarily by us, which other Creatures do
naturally, in as much as we might stay our doing of them if we would. Beasts
naturally do take their food and rest, when it offers it self unto them. If
men did so too, and could not do otherwise of themselves, there were no place
for any such reproof as that of our Savior Christ unto his Disciples, Matthew.
86. 40.
Could ye not watch with me one hour? That which is voluntarily performed in
things tending to the end, if it be well done, must needs be done with
deliberate consideration of some reasonable cause, wherefore we rather should
do it then not. Whereupon it seems, that in such actions only those are said
to be good or evil, which are capable of deliberation: So that many things
being hourly done by men, wherein they need nor use with themselves any manner
of consultation at all, it may perhaps hereby seem that well or ill doing
belongs only to our weightier affairs, and to those deeds which are of so
great importance that they require advice. But thus to determine were
perilous, and peradventure un^ound also. I do rather incline to think, that
seeing all the unforced actions of men are voluntary; and all voluntary actions
tending to the end have choice; and all choice presupposes the knowledge of
some cause wherefore we make it; where the reasonable cause of such actions so
readily offers it self, that it needs not be sought for; in those things
though we do not deliberate, yet they are of their nature apt to be deliberated
on, in regard of the will which may incline either way, and would not any one
way bend it self, if there were not some apparent motive to lead it.
Deliberation actual we use, when there is doubt what we should incline our
wills unto. Where no doubt is, deliberation is not excluded as unpertinent unto
the thing, but as needless in regard of the Agent, which sees already what to
resolve upon. It has no apparent absurdity therefore in it to think, that all
actions of men endued with the use of reason, are generally either good or
evil. Whatsoever is good, the same is also approved of God; and according unto
the sundry degrees of goodness, the kinds of Divine approbation are in like
sort multiplied. Some things are good, yet in so mean a degree of goodness,
that men are only not disproved nor disallowed of God for them. Ephis. 5. 29.
Matthew 5. 46. 1 ^ian. 5. 8.
No man hates his own flesh. If ye do good unto them that do so to you, the
very Publicans themselves do as much: They are worse then Infidels that have no
care to provide for their own. In actions of this sort, the very light of
nature alone may discover that which is so far forth in the sight of God
allowable. Some things in such sort are allowed, that they be also required as
necessary unto salvation, by way of direct, immediate and proper necessity
final; so that without performance of them we cannot by ordinary course be
saved, nor by any means be excluded from life observing them. In actions of
this kind our chiefest direction is from Scripture; for Nature is no sufficient
Teacher what we should do that we may attain unto life everlasting. The
unsufficiency of the light of nature, is by the light of Scripture so fully and
so perfectly herein supplied, that further light then this has added, there
does not need unto that end.

Finally, some things although not so required of necessity, that to leave them
undone excludes from Salvation, are notwithstanding of so great dignity and
acceptance with God, that most ample reward in Heaven is laid up for them.
Hereof we have no Commandment either in Nature or Scripture which does exact
them at our hands; yet those Motives these are in both, which draw most
effectually our minds unto them: In this kind there is not the least action,
but it does somewhat make to the accessory augmentation of our bliss. Matthew.
1^. 42.
For which cause our Savior does plainly witness, that there shall not be as
much as a cup of cold water bestowed for his sake without reward. Hereupon
depends whatsoever difference there is between the states of Saints in glory:
hither we refer whatsoever belongs unto the highest perfection of man by way
of service toward God: Hereunto that servour and first love of Christians did
bend it self, causing them to sell their possessions, and lay down the price at
the blessed Apostles feet. Acts 4. 31. 1 These. 2. 7, 9.
Hereat S. Paul undoubtedly did aim, in so far abridging his own liberty; and
exceeding that which the bond of necessary and enjoined duty tied him unto.
Wherefore seeing that in all these several kinds of actions, there can be
nothing possibly evil which God approves; and that he approves much more then
he does command; and that his very Commandments in some kind, as namely, his
Pr^cepts comprehended in the Law of Nature, may be otherwise known the^ only
by Scripture; and that to do them, howsoever we know them, must needs he
acceptable in his sight: Let them with whom we have hitherto disputee, consider
well, how it can stand with Reason to make the bare mandate of Sacred Scripture
the only Rule of all good and evil in the actions of mortal men. The
testimonies of God are true, the Testimonies of God are perfect, the
Testimonies of God are all-sufficient unto that end for which they were given.
Therefore accordingly we do receive them, we do not think that in them God has
omitted any thing needful unto his purpose, and left his intent to be
accomplished by our devisings. What the Scripture purposes, the same in all
points it does perform. Howbeit, that here we swerve not in judgment, one
thing especially we must observe, namely, That the absolute perfection of
Scripture is seen by relation unto that end whereto it tends. And even hereby
it comes to pass, the first such as imagine the general and main drift of the
body of sacred Scripture not to be so large as it is, nor that God did thereby
intend to deliver, as in truth he does, a full instruction in all things unto
salvation necessary, the knowledge whereof man by nature could not otherwise in
this life attain unto: They are by this very mean induced, either still to look
for new Revelations from Heaven, or else dangerously to add to the Word of God
uncertain Tradition, that so the Doctrine of man's Salvation may be complete;
which Doctrine we constantly hold in all respects without any such thing added
to be so complete, that we utterly refuse as much as once to acquaint our
selves with any thing further. Whatsoever, to make up the Doctrine of man's
Salvation, is added as in supply of the Scriptures unsufficiency, we reject it:
Scripture purposing this, has perfectly and fully done it. Again, the scope
and purpose of God in delivering the Holy Scripture, such as do take more
largely then behooves, they on the contrary side racking and stretching it
further then by him was meant, are drawn into sundry as great inconveniences.
These pretending the Scriptures perfection, infer thereupon, T. C. lib. p. 6.
Where this Doctrine is accused of bringing men to despair, it has wrong. For
when doubting is the way to despair, against which this Doctrine offers the
remedy; it must need^ be that it brings comfort and joy to the conscience of
man.
That in Scripture all things lawful to be done must needs be contained. We
count those things perfect which want nothing requisite for the end whereto
they were instituted: As therefore God created every part and particle of man
exactly perfect, that is to say, in all points sufficient unto that use for
which he appointed it; so the Scripture, yea, every sentence thereof is
perfect, and wants nothing requisite unto that purpose for which God
delivered the same. So that if hereupon we conclude, that because the Scripture
is perfect, therefore all things lawful to be done are comprehended in the
Scripture; we may even as well conclude so of every sentence, as of the whole
sum and body thereof, unless we first of all prove that it was the drift, scope
and purpose of Almighty God in holy Scripture, to comprize all things which man
may practice. But admit this, and mark, I beseech you, what would follow. God
in delivering Scripture to his Church, should clean have abrogated amongst them
the Law of Nature, which is an infallible knowledge imprinted in the minds of
all the children of men, whereby both general principles for directing of
humane actions are comprehended, and conclusions derived from them; upon which
conclusions grows in particularity the choice of good and evil in the daily
affairs of this life. Admit this, and what shall the Scripture be but a snare
and a torment to weak Consciences, filling them with infinite perplexities,
scrupulosities, doubts insoluble, and extreme despairs? Not that the Scripture
it self does cause any such thing (for it tends to the clean contrary, and
the fruit thereof is resolute assurance and certainty in that it teaches:) but
the necessities of this life urging men to do that which the light of Nature,
common discretion, and judgment of it self directs them unto; on the other
side, this Doctrine teaching them that so to do were so sin against their own
souls, and that they put forth their hands to iniquity, whatsoever they go
about, and have not first the sacred Scripture of God for direction; how can it
choose but bring the simple a thousand times to their wits end, how can it choose
but vex and amaze them? For in every action of common life to since out some
sentence clearly and infallibly setting before our eyes what we ought to do
(seem we in Scripture never so expert) would trouble us more then we are aware.
In weak and tender minds we little know what misery this strict opinion would
breed, besides the stops it would make in the whole course of all men's lives
and actions; make all things sin which we do by direction of Natures light, and
by the rule of common discretion without thinking at all upon Scripture. Admit
this Position, and Parents shall cause their children to sin, as often as they
cause them to do any thing before they come to years of capacity and be ripe
for Knowledge in the Scripture. Admit this, and it shall not be with Masters as
it was with him him in the Gospel; but servants being commanded to go, Luke 7.
^.
shall stand still, till they have errand warranted unto them by Scripture.
Which as it stands with Christian duty in some cases, so in common affairs to
require it, were most unfit. Two opinions therefore there are concerning
sufficiency of holy Scripture, each extremely opposite unto the other, and both
repugnant unto truth. The Schools of Rome teach Scripture to be unsufficient,
as if, except Traditions were added, it did not contain all revealed and
supernatural Truth, which absolutely is necessary for the children of men in
this life to know, that they may in the next be saved. Others justly condemning
this opinion, grow likewise unto a dangerous extremity, as if Scripture did not
only contain all things in that kind necessary, but all things simply, and in
such sort, that to do any thing according to any other Law, were not only
unnecessary, but even opposite unto salvation, unlawful and sinful. Whatsoever
is spoken of God, or things appertaining to God, otherwise then as the truth
is, though it seem an honor, it is an injury. And as incredible praises given
unto men, do often abate and impair the credit of their deserved commendation;
so we must likewise take great heed, lest in attributing unto Scripture more
then it can have, the incredibility of that, do cause even those things which
indeed it has most abundantly, to be less reverendly esteemed. I therefore
leave it to themselves to consider, Whether they have in this First Point
overshot themselves, or not; which, God does know, is quickly done, even when
our meaning is most sincere, as I am verily persuaded, theirs in this case was.

OF THE LAWS OF Ecclesiastical Polity.
Book III. Concerning their Second Assertion, That in Scripture there must be
of necessity contained a Form of Church Polity, the Laws whereof may in no wise
be altered.
The Matter contained in this Third Book.
1. WHat the Church is, and in what respect Laws of Polity are thereunto
necessarily required. 2. Whether it be necessary that some particular Form of
Church Polity be set down in Scripture, since the things that belong
particularly to any such Form are not of necessity to salvation. 3. That
matters of Church Polity are different from matters of Faith and Salvation, and
that they themselves so teach, which are out Reprovers for so teaching. 4. That
hereby we take not from Scripture any thing, which thereunto with the soundness
of truth may be given. 5. Their meaning who first urged against the Polity of
the Church of England, that nothing ought to be established in the Church more
then is commanded by the Word of God. 6. How great injury men by so thinking
should offer unto all the Churches of God. 7. A shift notwithstanding to
maintain it, by interpreting Commanded, as though it were meant that greater
things only ought to be found set down in Scripture particularly, and lesser
framed by the general Rules of Scripture. 8. Another Device to defend the same,
by expounding Commanded, as if it did signify grounded as Scripture, and were
opposed to things sound out by the light of natural reason only. 9. How Laws
for the Polity of the Church may be made by the advice of men, and how those
being nor repugnant to the Word of God, are approved in his sight. 10. The
neither Gods being the Author of Laws, nor yet his committing of them to
Scripture, is any Reason sufficient to prove that they admit no addition or
change. 11. Whether Christ must needs intend Laws unchangeable altogether, or
have forbidden any where to make any other Law then himself did deliver.


ALbeit the substance of those Controversies whereinto we have begun to wade,
What the Church is, and in what respect Laws of Pulky are thereunto necessarily
required.
be rather of outward things appertaining to the Church of Christ, then of any
thing wherein the nature and being of the Church consists: yet because the
Subject or Matter which this Position concerns, is, A Forms of Church
Government, or Church-Polity; It therefore behooves us so far forth to consider
the nature of the Church, as is requisite for men's more clear and plain
understanding, in what respect Laws of Polity or Government are necessary
thereunto. That Church of Christ, which we properly term his body Mystical, can
be but one; neither can that one be sensibly discerned by any man, inasmuch as
the parts thereof are some in Heaven already with Christ, and the rest that are
on earth (albeit their natural persons be visible) we do not discern under this
property whereby they are truly and infallibly of that body. Only our minds by
intellectual conceit are able to apprehend, that such a real body there is, a
body collective, because it contains an huge multitude; a body mystical,
because the mystery of their conjunction is removed altogether from sense.
Whatsoever we read in Scripture, concerning the endless love, and the saving
mercy, which God shows toward his Church, the only proper subject thereof is
this Church. Concerning this Flock it is that our Lord and Savior has
promised, John 10. 22.
I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
pluck them out of my hands. They who are of this Society have such Marks and
Notes of distinction from all others, as are not objects unto our sense; only
unto God who sees their hearts, and understands all their secret
cogitations, unto him they are clear and manifest. All men knew Nathaniel to be
an Israelite. But our Savior piercing deeper, gives further Testimony of him
then men could have done with such certainty as he did, and 1.47.
Behold indeed an Israelite, and 21. 15.
in whom there is no guile. If we profess as Peter did, that we love the Lord,
and profess it in the hearing of men; charity is prone to believe all things,
and therefore charitablemen are likely to think we do so, as long as they see
no proof to the contrary. But that our love is sound and sincere, that it
comes from a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1 5.
a good conscience, and a faith unfeigned, who can pronounce, saving only the
searcher of all men's hearts, who alone intuitively does known in this kind who
are his? And as those everlasting promises of Love, Mercy, and Blessedness,
belong to the mystical Church; even so on the other side, when we read of any
duty which the Church of God is bound unto, the Church whom this does concern
is a sensible known company. And this Visible Church in like sort is but one,
continued from the first beginning of the World to the last end. Which company
being divided into two moyeties, the one before the other since the coming of
Christ, that part which since the coming of Christ, partly has embraced, and
partly shall hereafter embrace the Christian Religion, we term as by a more
proper name the Church of Christ. And therefore the Apostle affirms plainly
of all men Christian, that be they Jew or Gentiles, bond or free, they are all
incorporated into one company, they all make but( Ephesians. 2. 16. That he might
r. o n cise both unto God in one body.
) one body. The unity of which visible body and Church of Christ, consists in
that Uniformity which all several persons thereunto belonging have, by reason
of that one Lord, whose servants they all profess themselves; that one Faith
which they all acknowledge, that one Baptism, wherewith they are all initiated.
The visible Church of Jesus Christ is therefore one, in outward profession of
those things which supernaturally appertain to the very Essence of
Christianity, and are necessarily required in every particular Christian man.
Ephesians. 3. 16. That the Genries should be in their ^^. also, and of the ^^^^b^d^.
Let all the house of Israel know for certainty, says Peter, that God has
made him both Lord and Christ, even this Jesus whom ye have crucified.
Christians therefore they are not, which call not him their Master and Lord.
And from hence it came, that first at Antioch, and afterward throughout the
whole world, all that were of the Church visible were called Christians, ^ile
T. p. 3. 7. art. 3: 1 Cor. 12. 13. Ephesians. 4. 5. Acts. 2.36. John 13 13. Col. 3.
21. and 2. 1.
even amongst the Heathen: which name unto them was precious and glorious; but
in the estimation of the rest of the world, even Christ Jesus himself was( 1
Cer. 1. 23.
execrable, for whose sake all men were so likewise which did acknowledge him
to be their Lord. This himself did foresee, and therefore armed his Church to
the end they might sustain it without discomfort. All these things they will do
unto you for my names sake; yea, the time shall come, that whosoever kills
you will think that he does God good service. These things I tell you, that
when the hour shall come ye may then call to mind how I told you beforehand
of them. Vide and Tanilum lib. An sal. 15. Not qussitissturis ^^^it ass^^i^,
quos per flagiria invites vulgus Christianes appellabat. Au^ior nominis ejus
Christus qui Tiberio (...)p^^^^^^rem P^ntion Pilatum (...) ^rat. Repress^g; in
p^esers exitiabilu superstitio r^^s^^^ erumpehat, ^^^ and per Iudsam, originem
ejus, mali, jed per urhem ^^i^m, quo cu^cta undique atrocia aus p^denda ^^^^^^:
^^l.bro^^^^^. John 15. 21. ^^d 86. 2. 4.
But our naming of Jesus Christ the Lord is not enough to prove us Christians,
unless we also embrace that Faith which Christ has published unto the World.
To show that the Angel of Pergamus continued in Christianity, behold how the
Spirit of Christ speaks, Thou keep my Name, and thou have not denied my
Faith. Concerning which Faith, Apec. 2. 13. T^cul. de Virgin. Veland.
The rule thereof, says Tertullian, is one alone, immovable, and no way
possible to be better framed anew. What rule that is he shows by rehearsing
those few Articles of Christian belief. Iter. Advers. Ha^es. lib. ^. 1. cap. 2.
etc.
And before Tertullian, Irency; The Church though scattered through the whole
World, unto the uttermost borders of the Earth, has from the Apostles and
their Disciples received Belief. The parts of which Belief, he also recites in
substance the very same with Tertullian, and thereupon infers, This Faith
the Church being spread far and wide, preserves as if one House did contain
them: These things it equally embraces, as though it had even one Soul, one
Heart, and no more: It publishes, teaches, and delivers these things with
Uniform consent, as if God had given it lut one only Tongue wherewith to
speak. He which amongst the Guides of the Church is best able to speak,
utters no more then this; and less then this, the most simple do not utter,
when they make Profession of their Faith. Now although we know the Christian
Faith, and allow of it, yet in this respect we are but entering; entered we are
not into the Visible Church, before our admittance by the door of Baptism.
Wherefore immediately upon the acknowledgment of Christian Faith, Acts 8. 38.
and 22. 16. and 2. 41.
the Eunuch (we see, was baptized by Philip, Paul by Ananias, by Peter a huge
multitude containing Three thousand Souls; which being once Baptized, were
reckoned in the number of Souls added to the Visible Church. As for those
Virtues that belong unto Moral Righteousness, and honesty of life, we do not
mention them, because they are not proper unto Christian Men, as they are
Christian, but do concern them as they are Men. True it is, the want of these
Virtues excludes from Salvation. So does much more the absence of inward
belief of heart; so does despair and lack of Hope; so emptiness of Christian
Love and Charity. But we speak now of the Visible Church, whose Children are
signed with this mark, One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. In whomsoever these
things are, the Church does acknowledge them for her Children; them only she
holds for Aliens and Strangers, in whom these things are not found. For want
of these it is, that Saracens, Jews, and Infidels, are excluded out of the
bounds of the Church: Others we may not deny to be of the Visible Church, as
long as these things are not wanting in them. For apparent it is, that all Men
are of necessity either Christians, or not Christians. If by External
Profession they be Christians, then are they of the Visible Church of Christ;
and Christians by External Profession they are all, whose mark of Recognisance
has in it those things which we have mentioned, yea, although they be impious
Idolaters, wicked Heretics, Persons excommunicable, yea, and cast out for
notorious improbity. Such withal we deny not to be the Imps and Limbs of Satan,
even as long as they continue such. Is it then possible, that the self-same men
should belong both to the Synagogue of Satan, and to the Church of Jesus
Christ? Unto that Church which is his Mystical Body, not possible^ because that
Body consists of none but only true Israelites, true Sons of Abraham, true
Servants and Saints of God. Howbeit of the Visible Body and Church of Jesus
Christ, those may be, and oftentimes are, in respect of the main parts of their
outward Profession, who inregard of their inward disposition of mind, yea, of
External Conversation, yea, even of some parts of their very Profession, are
most worthily both hateful in the sight of God himself, and in the eyes of the
sounder part of the Visible Church, Matthew. 13.47. and 13. 24.
most execrable. Our Savior therefore compares the Kingdom of Heaven to a
Net, whereunto all which comes, neither is, nor seems Fish: His Church he
compares unto a Field, where Tares manifestly known end seen by all Men, do
grow intermingled with good Corn; and even so shall continue till the final
consummation of the World. God has had ever, and ever shall have some Church
Visible upon Earth. Exodus 23. ^^. 106.19, 20. 2 Kings 18 4. Jere 11.14. 2 Kings
23. 17. l^i. 17. 3. and 1. 4. and 60. 15.
When the People of God whorshipped the Calf in the Wilderness; when they
adored the Brazen Serpent; when they served the gods of Nations; when they
bowed their knees to Baal; when they burnt Incense and offered Sacrifice unto
Idols: True it is, the wrath of God was most fiercely inflamed against them,
their Prophets justly condemned them, as an adulterous seed and a wicked
generation of Miscreants, which had forsaken the living God; and of him were
likewise forsaken, in respect of that singular Mercy wherewith he kindly and
lovingly embraces his faithful Children. Howbeit retaining the Law of God, and
the holy Seal of his Covenant, Jere. 13. 11.
the Sheep of his Visible Flock they continued even in the depth of their
Disobedience and Rebellion. 1 Kings 13. 8.
Wherefore not only amongst them God always had his Church, because he had
thousands which never bowed their knees to Baal; but whose knees were bowed
unto Baal, Jere. 13. 11. 1 Kings 19. 18.
even they were also of the Visible Church of God. Nor did the Prophet so
complain, as if that Church had been quite and clean extinguished; but he took
it as though there had not been remaining in the World any besides himself,
that carcied a true and an upright heart toward God, with care to serve him
according unto his holy Will, For lack of diligent observing the difference,
first, between the Church of God, Mystical and Visible, then between the
Visible sound and corrupted, sometimes more, sometimes less; the oversights are
neither few nor light, that have been committed. This deceives them, and
nothing else, who think that in the time of the first World, the Family of Noah
did contain all that were of the Visible Church of God. From hence it grew, and
from no other cause in the World, that the Affrican Bishops in the Council of
Carthage, knowing how the Administration of Baptism belongs only to the
Church of Christ; and supposing that Heretics, which were apparently severed
from the sound believing Church, could not possibly be of the Church of Jesus
Christ; thought it utterly against Reason, That Baptism administered by men of
co^^upt belief, should be accounted as a Sacrament. And therefore in
maintenance of Rebaptization, their Arguments are built upon the sore-alledged
ground, ^^^u^a. In Council. Car. Matthew 7. 24. and 16. 18. and ^^. 19.
That Heretics are not at all any part of the Church of Christ. Our Savior
founded his Church on a Rock, and not upon Heresy; Power of Baptizing he gave
to his Apostles, unto Heretics he gave it not. Wherefore they that are without
the Church, and oppose themselves against Christ, do but scatter his Sheep and
Flock. Without the Church, Baptize they cannot. Again, Are Heretics
Christians, or are they not? If they be Christians, wherefore remain they not
in Gods Church? If they be no Christians, how make they Christians? Or to what
purpose shall those words of the Lord serve? He which is not with me, is
against me: And, S^^^^^ium in ^^^^ Con. il. Matthew. 12. 30.
He which gathers not with me, scaltereth. Wherefore evident it is, that upon
misbegotten Children, and the brood of Antichrist, without Rebaptization the
Holy Ghost cannot descend. But none in this case so earnest as Cyprian: I know
no Baptism but one, and that in Church only; none without the Church, where he
that does cast out the Devil, has the Devil: He does examine about Belief,
whose lips and words do breathe forth a Canker: The faithless does offer the
Articles of Faith, a wicked Creature forgiveth wickedness; in the Name of
Christ, Antichrist signeth; he which is cursed of God, blesses; a dead carrion
promises life; a man unpeaceable, gives peace; a blasphemer calls upon the
Name of God; a profane person does exercise Priesthood; a Sacrilegious wretch
does prepare the Altar; and in the neck of all these that evil also comes, the
Eucharist, a very Bishop of the Devil does presume to consecrate. All this was
true, but not sufficient to prove, that Heretics were in no sort any part of
the Visible Church of Christ, and consequently their Baptism no Baptism. This
opinion therefore was afterward both condemned by a better advised Council,
and also revoked by the chiefest of the Authors thereof themselves. In Con^i^^
(...). Vide H^^^^ Dial. At^^^. Lucif^^^a.
What is it but only the self-same error and misconceit, wherewith others
being at this day likewise possessed; they ask us where our Church did lurk, in
what Cave of the Earth it slept for so many hundreds of years together; before
the bath of Martin Luther? As if we were of opinion, that Luther did erect a
new Church of Christ. No, the Church of Christ which was from the beginning,
is, and continues unto the end. Of which Church, all parts have not been
always equally sincere and sound. In the days of Abia, it plainly appears,
that Judah was by many degrees more free from pollution then Israel, as that
solemn Oration shows; wherein he pleads for the one against the other in
this wise. 2 Chre. 13.
O Jeroboam, and all Israel, hear you me: Have ye not driven away the Priests
of the Lord, the Sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you Priests like
the people of Nations? Whosoever comes to consecrate with a young bullock, and
seven Rams, the same may be a Priest of them that are no gods. But we belong
unto the Lord our God, and have not forsaken him; and the Priests the sons of
Aaron minister unto the Lord every morning, and every evening, Burnt-offerings,
and sweet Incense; and the Bread is set in order upon the pure Table, and the
Candlestick of Gold with the Lamps thereof, to burn every evening; for we keep
the watch of the Lord o^r God, but ye have for saken him. In St. Paul's time,
the integrity of Rome was famous; Corinth many ways reproved; they of Galatia
much more out of square. In St. John's time, Ephesus and Smyrna in far better
state then Thyatira and Pergamus were. We hope therefore, that to reform our
selves, if at any time we have done amiss, is not to sever our selves from the
Church we were of before. In the Church we were, and we are so still. Other
diffcrence between our estate before and now, we know none, but only such as
we see in Judah; which having sometime been Idolatrous, became afterward more
soundly religious, Hos. 14. 15, and 17.
by renouncing Idolatry and Superstition. If Ephraim be joined to Idols, the
counsel of the Prophet is, Let him alone. If Israel play the Harlot, let not
Judah sin. If it seem evil unto you, Josh. 14. 15.
says Joshua, to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you will serve;
whether the gods whom your Fathers served beyond the flood, or the gods of the
Amorites, in whose Land ye dwell: But I and mine house will serve the Lord. The
indisposition therefore of the Church of Rome to reform her self, must be no
stay unto us from performing our duty to God; even as desire of retaining
Conformity with them, could be no excuse, if we did not perform that duty.
Notwithstanding so far as lawfully we may, we have held and do hold Fellowship
with them. For even as the Apostle does say of Israel, Romans 11.28.
that they are in one respect enemies, but in another beloved of God: In like
sort with Rome, we dare not communicate concerning sundry her gross and
grievous abominations; yet touching those main parts of Christian truth wherein
they constantly still persist, we gladly acknowledge them to be of the Family
of Jesus Christ; and our hearty prayer unto God Almighty is, that being
conjoined so far forth with them, they may at the length (if it be his will) so
yield to frame and reform themselves, that no distraction remain in any thing,
but that we all may with one heart and one mouth, glorify God the Father of
our Lord and Savior, whose Church we are. As there are which make the Church
of Rome utterly no Church at all, by reason of so many, so grievous Errors in
their Doctrines: So we have them amongst us, who under pretense of imagined
corruptions in our Discipline, do give even as hard a judgment of the Church of
England it self. But whatsoever either the one sort or the other teach, we must
acknowledge even Heretics themselves to be, though a maimed part, yet a part
of the Visible Church. If an Infidel should pursue to death an Heretic
professing Christianity, only for Christian Profession sake, could we deny
unto him the honor of Martyrdom? Yet this honor all men know to be proper unto
the Church. Heretics therefore are not utterly cut off from the Visible Church
of Christ. If the Fathers do any where, as oftentimes they do, make the true
Visible Church of Christ, and Heterical companies opposite; they are to be
construed as Separating Heretics, not altogether from the company of
Believers, but from the fellowship of sound Believers. For whereprofest
unbelief is, there can be no Visible Church of Christ; there may be, where
sound belief wants. Infidels being clean without the Church, deny directly,
and utterly reject the very Principles of Christianity; which Heretics
embrace, and err only by misconstruction: Whereupon their opinions, although
repugnant indeed to the Principles of Christian Faith, are notwithstanding by
them held otherwise, and maintained as most consonant thereunto. Wherefore
being Christians in regard of the general Truth of Christ which they openly
profess; yet they are by the Fathers every where spoken of, as men clean
excluded out of the right believing Church, by reason of their particular
Errors, for which all that are of a sound belief must needs condemn them. In
this consideration, the answer of Calvin unto Farell, concerning the children
of Popish Parents does seem crazed. Calvin. Epish. 1.
Whereas, says he, you ask our judgment about a matter, whereof there is doubt
amongst you, whether Ministers of our Order, professing the pure Doctrine of
the Gospel, may lawfully admit unto Baptism an Infant whose Father is a
stranger unto our Churches, and whose Mother has salm from us unto the Papacy,
so that both the Parents are Popish. Thus we have thought good to answer;
namely, that it is an absurd thing for us to baptize them which cannot be
reckoned Members of our Body. And since Papists children are such, we see not
how it should be lawful to Minister Baptism unto them. Sounder a great deal is
the answer of the Ecclesiastical College of Geneva unto Knox, who having
signified unto them, that himself did not think it lawful to Baptize bastards,
or the children of Idolaters (he means Papists) or of Persons Excommunicate,
till either the Parents had by repentance submitted themselves unto the Church,
or else their children being grown unto the years of understanding, Epist. 283.
should come and sue for their own Baptism. For thus thinking, says he, I am
thought to be over severe, Epist. 285.
and that not only by them which are Popish; but even in their judgments also
who think themselves Maintainers of the Truth. Master Knox's oversight herein
they controuled. Their Sentence was, Wheresoever the Profession of Christianity
has not utterly perished and been extinct, Infants are beguiled of their
right, if the Common Seal be denied them. Which conclusion in it self is sound,
although it seems the ground is but weak whereupon they build it: For the
reason which they yield of their Sentence, is this; The promise which God does
make to the faithful concerning their Seed, reaches unto a thousand
Generations; it rests not only in the first degree of Descent. Infants
therefore whose Great Grandfathers have been holy and godly, do in that respect
belong to the Body of the Church, although the Fathers and Grandfathers of whom
they descend, have been Apostates: Because the tenure of the Grace of God which
did adopt them Three hundred years ago, and more in their Ancient Predecessors,
cannot with justice be defeated and broken off by their Parents impiety coming
between. By which reason of theirs, although it seem that all the World may be
baptized, in as much as no man living is a thousand descents removed from Adam
himself; yet we mean not at this time, either to uphold, or to overthrow it;
only their alleged conclusion we embrace, so it be construed in this sort:
That for as much as men remain in the Visible Church, till they utterly
renounce the Profession of Christianity, we may not deny unto Infants their
right, by withholding from them the public sign of holy Baptism, if they be
born where the outward acknowledgment of Christianity is not clean gone and
extinguished. For being in such sort born, their Parents are within the Church,
and therefore their birth does give them interest and right in Baptism. Albeit
not every Error and Fault, yet Heresies and Crimes which are not actually
repented of, and forsaken, exclude quite and clean from that Salvation which
belongs unto the Mystical Body of Christ; yea, they also make a Separation
from the Visible sound Church of Christ; altogether from the Visible Church,
neither the one nor the other does sever. As for the Act of Excommunication, it
neither shuts out from the Mystical, nor clean from the Visible; but only
from Fellowship with the Visible in holy duties. With what congruity then does
the Church of Rome deny, that her enemies, whom she holds always for
Heretics, do at all appertain to the Church of Christ; when her own do freely
grant, that albeit the Pope (as they say) cannot teach Heresy, nor propound
Error, he may notwithstanding himself worship Idols, think amiss concerning
matters of Faith, yea, give himself unto Acts Diabolical, even being Pope? How
exclude they us from being any part of the Church of Christ, under the color
and pretense of Heresy, when they cannot but grant it possible, even for him
to be as touching his own personal persuasion Heretical, who in their opinion
not only is of the Church, but holds the chiefest place of Authority over
the same? But of these things we are not now to dispute. That which already we
have set down, is for our present purpose sufficient. By the Church therefore,
in this question, we understand no other then only the Visible Church. For
preservation of Christianity there is not any thing more needful, then that
such as are of the Visible Church, have mutual Fellowship and Society one with
another. In which consideration, as the main Body of the Sea being one, yet
within diverse Precincts has diverse names; so the Catholic Church is in like
sort divided into a number of distinct Societies, every of which is termed a
Church within it self. In this sense the Church is always a Visible Society of
Men; not an Assembly, but a Society. For although the name of the Church be
given unto Christian Assemblies, although any number of Christian men
congregated, may be termed by the name of a Church, yet Assemblies properly are
rather things that belong to a Church. Men are assembled for performance of
Public Actions; which Actions being ended, the Assembly dissolveth it self,
and is no longer in being; whereas the Church which was assembled, does no less
continue afterward, then before. Tertul. Exhort. ad Caslie. Ubi tres, Ecclesia
est, licet laici.
Where but three are, and they of the Laity also, says Tertullian, yet there
is a Church; that is to say, a Christian Assembly. But a Church, as now we are
to understand it, is a Society, that is, a number of men belonging unto some
Christian Fellowship, the place and limits whereof are certain. That wherein
they have communion, is the Public Exercise of such duties as those mentioned
in the Apostles Acts, Instruction, Breaking of Bread, and Prayer. Acts. 2. 47.
As therefore they that are of the Mystical Body of Christ, have those inward
Graces and Virtues, whereby they differ from all others which are not of the
same Body: Again, whosoever appertain to the Visible Body of the Church, they
have also the notes of External Profession, whereby the World knows what they
are: After the same manner, even the several Societies of Christian men, unto
every of which the name of a Church is given, with addition betokening
severally, as the Church of Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, England, and so the rest,
must be endued with correspondent general properties belonging unto them, as
they are Public Christian Societies. And of such properties common unto all
Societies Christian, it may not be denied, that one of the very chiefest is
Ecclesiastical Polity. Which word I therefore the rather use, because the name
of Government, as commonly men understand it in ordinary speech, does not
comprise the largeness of that whereunto in this question it is applied. For
when we speak of Government, what does the greatest part conceive thereby, but
only the exercise of Superiority peculiar unto Rulers and Guides of others? To
our purpose therefore the name of Church-Polity will better serve, because it
contains both Government, and also whatsoever besides belongs to the
ordering of the Church in public. Neither is any thing in this degree more
necessary then Church-Polity, which is a Form of ordering the Public Spiritual
Affairs of the Church of God.

2. But we must note, that he which affirms speech to be necessary amongst
all men throughout the World, does not thereby import, Whether it be necessary
that some particular Form of Church-Polity be set down in Scripture, since the
things that belong particularly unto any such Form, are not of necessary to
Salvation. Tertul. de hibitu mul. AErouli sine necesse: est, quae Del non lunt.
Romans 2. 15. Lact. lib. 6. c. 8. Ille legis hujus inventor, disceptater, lator.
Cic. 3. de Repub.
that all men must necessarily speak one kind of Language; even so the
necessity of Polity, and Regiment in all Churches may be held, without holding
any one certain form to be necessary in them all, nor is it possible that any
Form of Polity, much less of Polity Ecclesiastical, should be good, unless God
himself be Author of it. Those things that are not of God (says Tertullian)
they can have no other then Gods Adversary for their Author. Be it whatsoever
in the Church of God, if it be not of God, we hate it. Of God it must be;
either as those things sometimes were, which God supernaturally revealed, and
so delivered them unto Moses for Government of the Commonwealth of Israel; or
else as those things which men find out by help of that light, which God has
given them unto that end. The very Law of Nature it self, which no man can deny
but God has instituted, is not of God, unless that be of God, whereof God is
the Author as well this latter way as the former. But forasmuch as no form of
Church-Polity is thought by them to be lawful, or to be of God, unless God be
so the Author of it, that it be also set down in Scripture, they should tell us
plainly, whether their meaning be that it must be there set down in whole, or
in part. For if wholly, let them show what one form of Polity ever was so.
Their own to be so taken out of Scripture, they will not affirm; neither deny
they that in part, even this which they so much oppugn is also from thence
taken. Again, they should tell us, whether only that be taken out of
Scripture, which is actually and particularly there set down; or else that
also, which the general Principles and Rules of Scripture potentially contain.
The one way they cannot so much as pretend, that all the parts of their own
Discipline are in Scripture; and the other way their mouths are stopped, when
they would plead against all other Forms besides their own; seeing the general
Principles are such, as do not particularly prescribe any one, but sundry may
equally be consonant unto the general Axioms of the Scripture. But to give them
some larger scope, and not to close them up in these streights: Let their
Allegations be considered, wherewith they earnestly bend themselves against
all, which deny it necessary that any one complete Form of Church-Polity should
be in Scripture. First therefore, whereas it has been told them, that matters
of Faith, and in general, matters necessary unto Salvation, are of a different
nature from Ceremonies, Order, and the kind of Church Government; and that the
one is necessary to be expressly contained in the Word of God, or else
manifestly collected out of the same, the other not so; that it is necessary
not to receive the one, unless there be something in Scripture for them; the
other free, if nothing against them may thence be alleged. Although there do
not appear any just or reasonable cause to reject or dislike of this;
nevertheless, as it is not easy to speak to the contentation of minds
exulcerated in themselves, but that somewhat there will be always which
displeases; so herein for two things we are reproved. Two things misliked; the
one, that we distinguish matters of Discipline or Church Government from
matters of Faith, and necessary unto Salvation: The other, that we are
injurious to the Scripture of God, in abridging the large and rich Continks
thereof. Their words are these: You which distinguish between these, and say,
that matters of Faith and necessary unto Salvation, may not be tolerated in the
Church, unless they be expressly contained in the Word of God, or manifestly
gathered; but that Ceremonies, Order, Discipline, Government in the Church, may
not be received against the Word of God, and consequently may be received if
there be no word against them, although there be none for them. You (I say)
distinguishing or dividing after this sort, do prove your self an evil divider.
As though matters of Discipline and kind of Government, were not matters
necessary to Salvation, and of Faith. It is no small injury which you do unto
the Word of God, to pin it in so narrow room, as that it should be able to
direct us but in the Principal Points of our Religion; or as though the
Substance of Religion, or some rude and unfashioned matter of Building of the
Church were uttered in them; and those things were left out that should pertain
to the Form and Fashion of it; or, as if there were in the Scriptures only to
cover the Churches nakedness, and not also Chains, and Bracelets, and Rings,
and other Jewels to adorn her and set her out: or that to conclude, There were
sufficient to quench her thirst, and kill her hunger, but not to minister unto
her a more liberal, and (as it were) a more delicious and dainty diet. These
things you seem to say, when you say, that matters necessary to Salvation, and
of Faith, are contained in Scripture, especially when you oppose these things
to Ceremonies, Order, Discipline, and Government. T. C. lib. 1. page 26.
The first is, Misdistinguishing, because matters of Discipline and
Church Government are (as they say) matters necessary to Salvation, and of
Faith, whereas we put a difference betwixt the one and the other. Our second
fault is Injurious dealing with the Scripture of God, as if it contained only
the Principal Points of Religion, some rude and unfashioned matter of Building
the Church, but had lest out that which belongs unto the form and fashion of
it; as if there were in the Scripture no more then only to cover the Churches
nakedness, and not Chains, Bracelets, Rings, Jewels to adorn her; sufficient to
quench her thirst, to kill her hunger, but not to minister a more liberal, and
(as it were) a more delicous and dainty diet. In which case our Apology shall
not need to be very long.

That Matters of Discipline are different from Matters of Faith and Salvation;
and that they themselves so teach which are our Reprovers.
3. The mixture of those things by speech, which by Nature are divided, is the
Mother of all Error. To take away therefore that Error which Confusion
breeds, distinction is requisite. Rightly to distinguish, is by conceit of
mind to sever things different in Nature, and to discern wherein they differ.
So that if we imagine a difference where there is none, because we distinguish
where we should not, it may not be denied that we misdistinguish. The only
trial whether we do so, yea or no, depends upon comparison between our
conceit, and the nature of things conceived. Touching matters belonging to the
Church of Christ, this we conceive, that they are not of one suit. Some things
are merely of Faith, which things it does suffice, that we know and believe;
some things not only to be known, but done, because they concern the actions
of men. Articles about the Trinity, are matters of mere Faith, and must be
believed. Precepts concerning the Works of Charity, are matters of Action;
which to know, unless they be practiced, is not enough. This being so clear to
all men's understanding, I somewhat marvel that they especially should think it
absurd to oppose Church Government, a plain matter of Action, unto matters of
Faith, who know that themselves divide the Gospel into Doctrine and Discipline.
For if matters of T. C. lib. 2. page 1 We offer to show the Discipline to be a
part of the Gospel. And again, p. 5. I speak of the Discipline as of a part of
the Gospel. If the Discipline be one part of the Gospel, what other part can
they assign ^^^ Doctrine, to answer in Division to the Discipline?
Discipline be rightly by them distinguished from matters of Doctrine, why not
matters of Government by us as reasonably set against matters of Faith? Do not
they under Doctrine comprehend the same, which we intend by matters of Faith?
Do not they under Discipline, comprise the Regiment of the Church? When they
blame that in us, which themselves follow, they give men great cause to doubt,
that some other thing then judgment does guide their speech. What the Church of
God stands bound to know or do, the same in part Nature teaches. And because
Nature can teach them but only in part, neither so fully as is requisite for
man's salvation; not so easily, as to make the way plain and expedite enough,
that many may come to the knowledge of it, and so be saved; therefore in
Scripture has God both collected the most necessary things, that the School of
Nature teaches unto that end; and reveals also whatsoever we neither could
with safety be ignorant of, nor at all be instructed in, but by Supernatural
Revelation from him. So that Scripture containing all things that are in this
kind any way needful for the Church, and the principal of the other sort: This
is the next thing wherewith we are charged as with an Error. We teach, that
whatsoever is unto Salvation termed necessary by way of excellency; whatsoever
it stands all men upon to know or do, that they may be saved; whatsoever
there is, whereof it may truly be said, This not to believe, is eternal death
and damnation; or, This every soul that will live, must duly observe: Of which
sort the Articles of Christian Faith, and the Sacraments of the Church of
Christ are. All such things, if Scripture did not comprehend, the Church of God
should not be able to measure out the length and the breadth of that way
wherein for ever she is to walk: Heretics and Schismatics never ceasing, some
to abridge, some to enlarge, all to pervert and obscure the same. But as for
those things that are accessory hereunto, those things that so belong to the
way of Salvation, as to alter them, is no otherwise to change that way, then a
path is changed by altering only the uppermost face thereof; which be it laid
with Gravel, or set with Grass, or paved with stones, remains still the same
path: In such things, because discretion may teach the church what is
convenient, we hold not the Church further tied herein unto Scripture, then
that against Scripture nothing be admitted in the Church, lest that path which
ought always to be kept even, do thereby come to be overgrown with Brambles and
Thorns. Matthew 23. 23.
If this be unfound, wherein does the point of unsoundness lie? Is it not that
we make some things necessary, some things accessory and appendent only? For
our Lord and Savior himself does make that difference, by terming Judgment,
and Mercy, and Fidelity, with other things of like nature, The greater and
weightier matters of the Law. Is it then in that we account Ceremonies,
(wherein we do not comprise Sacraments, or any other the like substantial
duties in the exercise of Religion, but only such External Rites as are
usually annexed unto Church actions) is it an oversight, that we reckon these
things and The Government of the Church of Christ granted by Fenner himself, to
be thought a matter of great moment, yet not of the substance of Religion.
Against Doctor Bridges, p. 121. if it be Fenner which was the Author of that
Book.
matters of Government in the number of things accessory, not things necessary
in such sort as has been declared? Let them which therefore think as
blameable, consider well their own words. Do they not plainly compare the one
unto Garments, which cover the Body of the Church; the other unto Rings,
Bracelets, and Jewels, that only adorn it? The one to that Food which the
Church does live by, the other to that which makes her Diet liberal, dainty,
and more delicious? Is dainty fare a thing necessary to the sustenance, or to
the clothing of the Body rich attire? If not, how can they urge the necessity
of that which themselves resemble by things not necessary? Or by what
construction shall any man living be able to make those comparisons true,
holding that distinction untrue, which puts a difference between things of
External Regiment in the Church, and things necessary unto Salvation?

4. Now as it can be to Nature no injury, That we do not take from Scripture
any thing which may be thereunto given with soundne^s of Truth. Arist. Pol.
lib. 1. cap. 8 etc. Plato in Menex. Arist. lib. 3. de Anima, c. 45.
that of her we say the same which diligent beholders of her works have
observed; namely, that she provideth for all living Creatures nourishment which
may suffice; that she brings forth no kind of Creature whereto she is
wanting in that which is needful: Although we do not so far magnify her
exceeding bounty, as to affirm, that she brings into the World the Sons of
Men adorned with gorgeous attire, or makes costly buildings to spring up out
of the Earth for them: So I trust that to mention what the Scripture of God
leaves unto the Churches discretion in some things, is not in any thing to
impair the honor which the Church of God yields to the sacred Scriptures
perfection. Wherein seeing that no more is by us maintained, then only that
Scripture must needs teach the Church whatsoever is in such sort necessary, as
has been set down; and that it is no more disgrace for Scripture to have left
a number of other things free to be ordered at the discretion of the Church,
then for Nature to have lest it unto the wit of man to devise his own attire,
and not to look for it as the Beasts of the field have theirs. If neither this
can import, nor any other proof sufficient be brought forth, that we either
will at any time, or ever did affirm the sacred Scripture to comprehend no more
then only those bare necessaries; if we acknowledge that as well for
particular application to special occasions, as also in other manifold
respects, infinite Treasures of Wisdom are over and besides abundantly to be
found in the holy Scripture; yea, that scarcely there is any noble part of
knowledge, worthy the mind of man, but from thence it may have some direction
and light; yea, that although there be no necessity it should of purpose
prescribe any one particular form of Church Government; yet touching the manner
of governing in general, the Precepts that Scripture sets down are not few,
and the examples many which it proposes for all Church-Governors, even in
particularities to follow; yea, that those things, finally, which are of
principal weight in the very particular Form of Church-Polity (although not
that Form which they imagine, but that which we against them uphold) are in the
self-same Scriptures contained: If all this be willingly granted by us, which
are accused to pin the Word of God in so narrow room, as that it should be able
to direct us but in principal points of our Religion; or as though the
substance of Religion, or some rude and unfashioned matter of building the
Church were uttered in them, and those things left out that should pertain to
the form and fashion of it: Let the cause of the Accused, be referred to the
Accusers own conscience, and let that judge whether this accusation be deserved
where it has been laid.

Their meaning who first did plead against the Polity of the Church of England,
urging that, Nothing ought to be established in the Church, which is not
commanded by the Word of God; and what Scripture they thought they might ground
this Assetion upon Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32. Whatsoever I command you, take heed
you do it. Thou shall ^ut nothing theirto, not take ought there from.
5. But so easy it is for every man living to err, and so hard to wrest from
any man's mouth the plain acknowledgment of Error, that what has been once
inconsiderately defended, the same is commonly persisted in, as long as wit by
whetting it self, is able to find out any shift, be it never so slight,
whereby to escape out of the hands of present contradiction. So that it comes
herein to pass with men unadvisedly fallen into Error, as with them whose state
has no ground to uphold it, but only the help which by subtle conveyance they
draw out of casual events arising from day to day, till at length they be clean
spent. They which first gave out, That nothing ought to be established in the
Church, which is not commanded by the Word of God, thought this principle
plainly warranted by the manifest words of the Law, Ye shall put nothing unto
the Word which I command you, neither shall ye take ought therefrom, that ye
may keep the Commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you. Wherefore
having an eye to a number of Rites and Orders in the Church of England, as
marrying with a Ring, Crossing in the one Sacrament, Kneeling at the other,
observing of Festival days more then only that which is called the Lords day,
enjoining Abstinence at certain times from some kinds of Meat, Churching of
Women after Childe-birth, Degrees taken by Divines in Universities, sundry
Church Offices, Dignities, and Callings; for which they found no Commandment in
the holy Scripture, they thought by the one only stroke of that Axiom to have
cut them off. But that which they took for an Oracle, being sifted, was
repealed. True it is concerning the Word of God, whether it be by
misconstruction of the sense, or by falsification of the words, wittingly to
endeavor that any thing may seem Divine which is not, or any thing not seem
which is, were plainly to abuse, and even to falsify Divine Evidence; which
injury offered but unto men, is most worthily counted heinous. Which point I
wish they did well observe, with whom nothing is more familiar then to plead in
these causes, The Law of God, the Word of the Lord: Who notwithstanding, when
they come to allege what Word, and what Law they mean, their common ordinary
practice is, to quote by-speeches in some Historical Narration, or other, and
to urge them as if they were written in most exact form of Law. What is to add
to the Law of God, if this be not? When that which the Word of God does but
deliver Historically, we construe without any warrant, as if it were legally
meant, and so urge it further then we can prove that it was intended; do we not
add to the Laws of God, and make them in number seem more then they are? It
stands us upon to be careful in this case. For the sentence of God is heavy
against them, that wittingly shall presume thus to use the Scripture.

The same Asse^^ion we cannot hold, without doing wrong unto all Churches.
6. But let that which they do hereby intend be granted them; let it once stand
as consonant to Reason, That because we are forbidden to add to the Law of God
any thing, or to take ought from it; therefore we may not for matters of the
Church, make any Law more then is already set down in Scripture: Who sees not
what sentence it shall enforce us to give against all Churches in the World, in
as much as there is not one, but has had many things established in it, which
though the Scripture did never command, yet for us to condemn were rashness?
Let the Church of God, even in the time of our Savior Christ serve for example
unto all the rest. In their Domestical celebration of the Passover, I ^^^ 13.
Caenaterium: de que Matthew. 27. 12. Ibide Caeral^^^ nuptiali.
which Supper they divided (as it were) into two courses; what Scripture did
give commandment, that between the first and the second; he that was chief,
should put off the residue of his Garments, and keeping on his Feast-robe
only, wash the feet of them that were with him? What Scripture did command
them never to lift up their hands unwashe in Prayer unto God, which custom
Aristaus (be the credit of the Author more or less) shows wherefore they did
so religiously observe? Acts. 2.
What Scripture did command the Jews every Festival day to fast till the sixth
hour? The custom both mentioned by Josephus in the History of his own life, and
by the words of Peter signified. Tedious it were to rip up all such things, as
were in that Church established, yea, by Christ himself, and by his Apostles
observed, though not commanded any where in Scripture.

7. Well, yet a gloss there is to color that Paradox, and notwithstanding all
this; A shi^t to maintain, that Nothing ought to be established in the Church,
which is not commanded in the Word of God, namely, that Commandments are or two
sorts; and that all things lawful in the Church are commanded, if not by
special I recep^; yet by general Rules in the Word. 1 Cor. 10 32. and 14. 40.
and 14.26. Romans 14. 6. 9. T.C. l. 1 p 35.
still to make it appear in show not to be altogether unreasonable: And
therefore till further reply come, the cause is held by a feeble distinction;
that the Commandments of God being either general or special, although there be
no express word for every thing in specialty, yet there are general
Commandments for all things, to the end, that even such cases as are not in
Scripture particularly mentioned, might not be left to any to order at their
pleasure, only with Caution, That nothing be done against the Word of God; and
that for this cause the Apostle has set down in Scripture four general Rules,
requiring such things alone to be received in the Church, as do best and
nearest agree with the same Rules, that so all things in the Church may be
appointed, not only not against, but by and according to the Word of God. The
Rules are these, Nothing scandalous or offensive unto any, especially unto the
Church of God; All things in order and with seemliness; All unto edification;
finally, All to the glory of God. Of which kind, how many might be gathered
out of the Scripture, if it were necessary to take so much pains? Which Rules
they that urge, minding thereby to prove, that nothing may be done in the
Church, but what Scripture commands, must needs hold that they tie the Church
of Christ no otherwise, then only because we find them there set down by the
Finger of the Holy Ghost. So that unless the Apostle by writing had delivered
those Rules to the Church, we should by observing them, have sinned, as now by
not observing them. In the Church of the Jews, is it not granted, That the
appointment of the hour for daily Sacrifices; the building of Synagogues
throughout the Land, to hear the Word of God, and to pray in, when they came
not up to Jerusalem; the erecting of Pulpits and Chairs to teach in; the order
of Burial; the Rites of Marriage, with such like, being matters appertaining to
the Church; yet are not any where prescribed in the Law, but were by the
Churches discretion instituted? What then shall we think? Did they hereby add
to the Law, and so displease God by that which they did? None so hardly
persuaded of them. Does their Law deliver unto them the self-same general Rules
of the Apostle, that framing thereby their Orders, they might in that respect
clear themselves from doing amiss? St. Paul would then of likelihood have cited
them out of the Law, which we see he does not. The truth is, they are Rules and
Canons of that Law which is written in all men's hearts; the Church had for ever
no less then now stood bound to observe them, whether the Apostle had mentioned
them, or no. Seeing therefore those Canons do bind as they are Edicts of
Nature, which the Jews observing as yet unwritten, and thereby framing such
Church Orders as in their Law were not prescribed, are notwithstanding in that
respect unculpable: It follows, that sundry things may be lawfully done in
the Church, so as they be not done against the Scripture, although no Scripture
do command them; but the Church only following the Light of Reason, judge them
to be in discretion meet. Secondly, unto our purpose, and for the question in
hand, Whether the Commandments of God in Scripture, be general or special, it
skilleth not? For if being particularly applied, they have in regard of such
particulars, a force constraining us to take some one certain thing of many,
and to leave the rest; whereby it would come to pass, that any other
particular, but that one being established, the general Rules themselves in
that case would be broken; then is it utterly impossible, that God should leave
any thing great or small free for the Church to establish, or not. Thirdly, if
so be they shall grant, as they cannot otherwise do, that these Rules are no
such Laws as require any one particular thing to be done, but serve rather to
direct the Church in all things which she does; so that free and lawful it is
to devise any Ceremony, to receive any Order, and to authorize any kind of
Regiment, no special Commandment being thereby violated; and the same being
thought such by them to whom the judgment thereof appertains; as that it is
not scandalous, but decent, tending unto edification, and setting forth the
glory of God; that is to say, agreeable unto the general Rules of holy
Scripture; this does them no good in the World, for the furtherance of their
purpose. That which should make for them, must prove, that men ought not to
make Laws for Church Regiment, but only keep those Laws which in Scripture
they find made. The plain intent of the Books of Ecclesiastical Discipline is
to show, that men may not devise Laws of Church Government; but are bound for
ever to use and to execute only those, which God himself has already devised
and delivered in the Scripture. The self-same drift the Admonitioners also had,
in urging, that nothing ought to be done in the Church, according unto any Law
of Man's devising, but all according to that which God in his Word has
commanded. Which not remembering, they gather out of Scripture General Rules to
be followed in making Laws; and so in effect they plainly grant, that we our
selves may lawfully make Laws for the Church, and are not bound out of
Scripture only to take Laws already made, as they meant who first alleged
that principle whereof we speak. One particular Platform it is which they
respected, and which they labored thereby to force upon all Churches; whereas
these general Rules do not let, but that there may well enough be sundry. It is
the particular Order established in the Church of England, which thereby they
did intend to alter, as being not commanded of God; whereas unto those general
Rules they know, we do not defend, that we may hold any thing unconformable.
Obscure it is not what meaning they had, who first gave out that grand Axiom;
and according unto that meaning, it does prevail far and wide with the Favorers
of that part. Demand of them, wherefore they conform not themselves unto the
Order of our Church? and in every particular, their answer for the most part
is, We find no such thing commanded in the Word. Whereby they plainly require
some special Commandment for that which is exacted at their hands; neither are
they content to have matters of the Church examined by general Rules and
Canons. As therefore in controversies between us and the Church of Rome, that
which they practice, is many times even according to the very grossness of that
which the vulgar sort conceives; when that which they teach, to maintain it,
is so nice and subtle, that hold can very hardly be taken thereupon: In which
cases we should do the Church of God small benefit, by disputing with them
according unto the finest points of their dark conveyances, and suffering that
sense of their Doctrine to go uncontrouled, wherein by the common sort, it is
ordinarily received and practiced. So considering what disturbance has grown
in the Church amongst our selves, and how the Authors thereof do commonly build
altogether on this as a sure Foundation, Nothing ought to be established in the
Church, which in the Word of God is not commanded: Were it reason, that we
should suffer the same to pass without controulment, Another Answer in defense
of the former Assertion, whereby the meaning thereof is opened in this sort.
All Church Orders must be commanded in the Word, that is to say. Grounded upon
the Word, and made according, at the least wise unto the general Rules of holy
Scripture. As for such things as are found out by any Star or Light of Reason,
and are in that respect received, so they be not against the Word of God, all
such things it holds unlawfully received.
in that current meaning whereby every where it prevails, and stay till some
strange construction were made thereof, which no man would lightly have thought
on, but being driven thereunto for a shift?

8. The last refuge in maintaining this Position, is thus to construe it,
Nothing ought to be established in the Church, but that which is commanded in
the Word of God; that is to say, All Church Orders must be grounded upon the
Word of God, in such sort grounded upon the Word, not, that being sound out by
some Star, or Light of Reason, or Learning, or other help, they may be
received, so they be not against the Word of God, but according at leastwise
unto the general Rules of Scripture they must be made. Which is in effect as
much as to say, We know not what to say well in defense of this Position: And
therefore lest we should say it is false, there is no remedy but to say, that
in some sense or other it may be true, if we could tell how. First, that Scholy
had need of a very favorable Reader, and a tractable, that should think it
plain construction, when to be commanded in the Word, and grounded upon the
Word, are made all one. If when a man may live in the state of Matrimony,
seeking that good thereby which Nature principally desires, he make rather
choice of a contrary life in regard of St. Paul's judgment 1 Cor 7.
: That which he does, is manifestly grounded upon the Word of God, yet not
commanded in his Word, because without breach of any Commandment he might do
otherwise. Secondly, whereas no man in Justice and Reason, can be reproved for
those actions which are framed according unto that known Will of God, whereby
they are to be judged, and the Will of God which we are to judge our actions
by, no sound Divine in the World ever denied to be in part made manifest even
by the Light of Nature, and not by Scripture alone: If the Church being
directed by the former of these two (which God has given, who gave the other,
that man might in different sort be guided by them both) if the Church, I say,
Arist. Polit. 1.
do approve and establish that which thereby it judges meet, and sindeth not
repugnant to any word or syllable of holy Scripture, who shall warrant our
presumptuous boldness, controuling herein the Church of Christ? But so it is,
the name of the Light of Nature is made hateful with men, the Star of Reason
and Learning, and all other such like helps, begins no otherwise to be
thought of, then if it were an unlucky Comet; or as if God had so accursed it,
that it should never shine or give light in things concerning our duty any way
toward him, but be esteemed as that Star in the Revelation, called Wormword;
Apoc. 8. 10.
which being fallen from Heaven, makes Rivers and Waters in which it falls, so
bitter, that men tasting them, die thereof. A number there are, who think they
cannot admire as they ought, the power and authority of the Word of God, if in
things Divine they should attribute any force to Man's reason. For which cause
they never use reason so willingly as to disgrace Reason. Their usual and
common Discourses are unto this effect. First, 1 Cor 2. 14
The Natural Man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God: For they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. Secondly, Col 2. 8
It is not for nothing that St. Paul gives charge to beware of Philosophy,
that is to say, such knowledge as Men by Natural Reason attain unto. Thirdly,
Consider them that have from time to time opposed themselves against the Gospel
of Christ, and most troubled the Church with Heresy. Have they not always been
great admirers of Humane Reason? Has their deep and profound skill in Secular
Learning, made them the more obedient to the Truth, and not armed them rather
against it? Fourthly, They that fear God will remember how heavy his sentences
are in this case: 1 Cor. 1. 19.
I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will cast away the Understanding of
the Prudent. Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of
this World? Has not God made the Wisdom of this World foolishness? Seeing the
World by Wisdom know not God: In the Wisdom of God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of Preaching to save Believers. Fifthly, The Word of God in it self
is absolute, exact, and perfect. The Word of God is a two-edged sword; as for
the Weapons of Natural Reason, they are as the Armor of Saul, rather cumbersome
about the Soldier of Christ, then needful. They are not of force to do that,
which the Apostles of Christ did by the power of the Holy Ghost, My Preaching,
1 Cor. 2. 4.
therefore says Paul, has not been in the enticing speech of Man's wisdom, but
in plain evidence of the Spirit of Power; that your Faith might not be in the
Wisdom of men, but in the Power of God. Sixthly, If I believe the Gospel, there
needs no reasoning about it to persuade me: If I do not believe, it must be
the Spirit of God, and not the Reason of Man that shall convert my heart unto
him. By these and the like Disputes, an opinion has spread it self very far in
the World; as if the way to be ripe in Faith, were to be raw in Wit and
Judgment; as if Reason were an enemy unto Religion, childish simplicity the
Mother of Ghostly and Divine Wisdom. The cause why such Declamations prevail so
greatly, is, For that men suffer themselves in two respects to be deluded; one
is, that the Wisdom of Man being debased, either in comparison with that of
God, or in regard of some special thing, exceeding the reach and compass
thereof, it seems to them (not marking so much) as if simply it were
condemned; another, That Learning, Knowledge, or Wisdom, falsely so termed,
usurping a name whereof they are not worthy; and being under that name
controuled, their reproof is by so much the more easily misapplied, and through
equivocation, wrested against those things, whereunto so precious names do
properly and of right belong. This duly observed, does to the former
Allegations it self make sufficient answer. Howbeit, for all Men's plainer and
fuller satisfaction; First, Concerning the inability of How they knew both God,
and the Law of God. Romans 1.21.31.
Other things of God there be, which are neither so found, nor though they be
showed, can ever be approved without the special operation of Gods good Grace
and Spirit. Of such things sometime spoke the Apostle St. Paul, declaring how
Christ had called him to be a Witness of his Death and Resurrection from the
Dead, according to that which the Prophets and Moses had foreshewed. Festus, a
mere Natural man, an Infidel, Acts 25. 19.
a Roman; one whose ears were unacquainted with such matter, heard him, but
could not reach unto that whereof he spoke; the suffering, Acts 26. 24.
and the rising of Christ from the dead, he rejected as idle superstitious
fancies, not worth the hearing. The Apostle that knew them by the Spirit, and
spoke of them with Power of the Holy Ghost, I Cor. 2. 14
seemed in his eyes but learnedly mad. Which example makes manifest what
elsewhere the same Apostle teaches, namely, that Nature has need of Grace,
whereunto Col. 2. 8.
Take heed lest any spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit. He that
exhorts to beware of an enemies policy, does not give counsel to be
impolitick; but rather to use all prudent foresight and circumspection, lest
our simplicity be overreached by cunning sleights. The way not to be
inveighled by them that are so guileful through skill, is thoroughly to be
instructed in that which makes skilful against guile, and to be armed with
that true and sincere Philosophy, which does teach against that deceitful and
vain, which spoileth. Thirdly, Cresconius the Heretic complained greatly of
St. Augustine, as being too full of Logical subtilties. Heresy prevails
only by a counterfeit show of Reason; whereby notwithstanding it becomes
invincible, unless it be convicted of Fraud by manifest Remonstrance, clearly
true, and unable to be withstood. When therefore the Apostle requires hability
to convict Heretics, Tit. 1. 9, 11.
can we think he judges it a thing unlawful, and not rather needful to use the
Principal Instrument of their Conviction, the Light of Reason? It may not be
denied, but that in the Fathers writings, there are sundry sharp invectives
against Heretics, even for their very Philosophical reasonings. The cause
whereof Tertullian confesses, not to have been any dislike conceived against
the kind of such reasonings, but the end. Tert. de Retur. Carnis.
We may (says he) even in matters of God, be made wiser by Reasons drawn from
the Public Persuasions which are grafted in Men's minds; So they be used to
further the Truth, not to bolster Error, so they make with, not against that
which God has determined. For there are some things even known by Nature, as
the Immortality of the Soul to many, our God unto all. I will therefore my self
also, use the sentence of some such as Plato, pronouncing every Soul Immortal.
I my self too will use the secret acknowledgment of the communalty, bearing
Record of the God of gods: But when I hear men allege, That which is dead, is
dead; and, While thou art alive, be alive; and, After death an end of all, even
of death it self: Then will I call to mind both, that the heart of the people
with God is accounted dust, and that the very Wisdom of the World, is
pronounced Folly. If then an Heretic fly also unto such vicious, popular, and
secular conceits, my answer unto him shall be; Thou Heretic, avoid the
Heathen, although in this ye be one, that ye both belie God; yet thou that do
his under the Name of Christ, differest from the Heathen, in that thou seem
to thy self a Christian. Leave him therefore his conceits, seeing that neither
will be learn thine. Why do thou, having sight, trust to a blind guide? Thou
which have put on Christ, take raiment of him that is naked? If the Apostle
have armed thee, why do thou borrow a strangers shield? Let him rather learn
of thee to acknowledge, then thou of him to renounce the Resurrection of the
Flesh. In a word, the Catholic Fathers did good unto all by that Knowledge,
whereby Heretics hindering the Truth in many, might have furthered therewith
themselves; but that obstinately following their own ambitious, or otherwise
corrupted affections, instead of framing their wills to maintain that which
Reason taught, they bent their wits to find how Reason might seem to teach
that which their Wills were set to maintain. For which cause the Apostle says
of them justly, that they are for the most part (...), Th. 3 1^.
men condemned even in, and of themselves. For though they be not all
persuaded, that it is truth which they withstand; yet that to be error which
they uphold, they might undoubtedly the sooner a great deal attain to know, but
that their study is more to defend what once they have stood in, then to find
out sincerely and simply, what truth they ought to persist in for ever.
Fourthly, there is in the World no kind of knowledge, whereby Egyptian and
Caldean wisdom, Mathematical, wherewith Moses and Daniel were furnished; or
that Natural, Moral, Acts 7. 22. Dan. 1. 17. 1 Kings 4. 29, 30. Acts 22. 13.
and Civil wisdom wherewith Solomon excelled all Men; or that Rational and
Oratorial wisdom of the Grecians, which the Apostle St. Paul brought from
Tarsus; or that Judaical, which he learned in Jerusalem, sitting at the feet of
Gamaliel: To detract from the dignity thereof, were to injure even God himself,
who being that Light which none can approach unto, has sent out these lights
whereof we are capable, even as so many sparkles resembling the Bright Fountain
from which they rise. But there are that bear the title of Wisemen, and
Scribes, and great Disputers of the World, and are nothing indeed less then
what in show they most appear. These being wholly addicted unto their own wills,
use their wit, their learning, and all the wisdom they have, to maintain that
which their obstinate hearts are delighted with, esteeming in the frantic
error of their minds, the greatest madness in the World to be Wisdom, and the
highest Wisdom foolishness. Such were both Jews and Grecians which professed,
the one sort Legal, and the other Secular skill, neither enduring to be taught
the Mystery of Christ: Unto the glory of whose most blessed Name, who so study
to use both their Reason, and all other Gifts, as well which Nature, as which
Grace has endued them with; let them never doubt, but that the same God, who
is to destroy and confound utterly that wisdom falsely so named in others, does
make reckoning of them as of true Scribes; Scribes by Wisdom instructed to the
Kingdom of Heaven; Matthew. 13. 52.
Scribes against that Kingdom, hardened in a vain opinion of Wisdom; which in
the end being proved folly, must needs perish; true Understanding, Knowledge,
Judgment, and Reason, continuing for evermore. Fifthly, Unto the Word of God,
being Heb. 4. 12.
put in the hands of reasonable men; and Reason as the weapon that flew Goliath,
if they be as David was that use it. Touching the Apostles, he which gave them
from above such Power for miraculous confirmation of that which they taught,
endued them also with Wisdom from above, to teach that which they so did
confirm. Our Savior made choice of Twelve simple and unlearned Men, that the
greater their lack of Natural wisdom was, the more admirable that might appear
which God supernaturally endued them with from Heaven. Such therefore as knew
the poor and silly estate wherein they had lived, could not but wonder to hear
the Wisdom of their speech, and be so much the more attentive unto their
teaching. They studied for no Tongue they spoke withal; of themselves they were
rude, and knew not so much as how to premeditate; the Spirit gave them speech
and cloquent utterance: But because with St. Paul it was otherwise, then with
the rest, in as much as he never conversed with Christ upon Earth as they did;
and his education had been scholastical altogether, which theirs was not:
Hereby occasion was taken by certain Malignants, secretly to undermine his
great Authority in the Church of Christ, as though the Gospel had been taught
him by others, then by Christ himself, and as if the cause of the Gentiles
conversion and belief, through his means, had been the learning and skill which
he had by being conversant in their Books, which thing made them so willing to
hear him, and him so able to persuade them; whereas the rest of the Apostles
prevailed, because God was with them, and by a miracle from Heaven confirmed
his Word in their mouths. They were mighty in deeds: As for him, being absent,
his Writings had some force; in presence, his Power not like unto theirs. In
sum, concerning his Preaching, their very byword was (...), 2 Cor. 10 10.
addle speech, empty talk. His Writings full of great words, but in the Power
of miraculous Operations; His presence, not like the rest of the Apostles.
Hereupon it arises, that St. Paul was so often driven to make his Apologies.
Hereupon it arises, that whatsoever time he had spent in the study of Humane
Learning, he makes earnest protestation to them of Corinth, that the Gospel
which he had preached amongst them, did not by other means prevail with them,
then with others the same Gospel taught by the rest of the Apostles of Christ.
1 Cor. 2.4.
My Preaching, says he, has not been in the persuasive speeches of Humane
Wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of Power; that your faith may
not be in the wisdom of men, but in the Power of God. What is it which the
Apostle does here deny? Is it denied that his speech amongst them had been
persuasive? No; for of him the sacred History plainly restifieth, Acts 18. 4.
11.
that for the space of a year and a half, he spoke in their Synagogue every
Sabbath, and persuaded both Jews and Grecians. How then is the speech of men
made persuasive? Surely there can be but two ways to bring this to pass, the
one Humane, the other Divine. Either St. Paul did only by art and natural
industry cause his own speech to be credited; or else God by miracle did
authorize it, and so bring credit thereunto, as to the speech of the rest of
the Apostles. Of which two, the former he utterly denies. For why? If the
Preaching of the rest had been effectual by miracle, his only by force of his
own learning; so great inequality between him and the other Apostles in this
thing, had been enough to subvert their Faith. For might they not with reason
have thought, that if he were sent of God, as well as they, God would not have
furnished them and not him, with the power of the Holy Ghost? Might not a great
part of them, being simple happily have feared, lest their assent had been
cunningly gotten unto his doctrine, rather through the weakness of their own
wits, then the certainty of that Truth which he had taught them? How unequal
had it been, that all Believers through the Preaching of other Apostles, should
have their Faith strongly built upon the evidence of Gods own miraculous
approbation; and they whom he had converted, should have their persuasion built
only upon his skill and wisdom who persuaded them? As therefore calling from
men may authorize us to teach, although it could not authorize him to teach as
other Apostles did: So although the wisdom of man had not been sufficient to
enable him such a Teacher as the rest of the Apostles were, unless Gods
miracles had strengthened both the one and the others Doctrine; yet unto our
ability, both of teaching and learning the Truth of Christ, as we are but mere
Christian men, it is not a Reb. 11. 16.
to pour out Supplications and Prayers before him, or to do him any service,
which does not first believe him both to be, and to be a rewarder of them who
in such sort seek unto him. Let men be taught this either by Revelation from
Heaven, or by Instruction upon Earth; by Labor, Study, and Meditation, or by
the only secret Inspiration of the Holy Ghost; whatsoever the mean be they
know it by, if the knowledge thereof were possible without discourse of Natural
Reason; why should none be found capable thereof but only men, nor men till
such time as they come unto ripe and full ability to work by reasonable
understanding? The whole drift of the Scripture of God, what is it, but only
to teach Theology? Theology, what is it, but the Science of things Divine? What
Science an be attained unto, without the help of Natural Discourse and Reason?
1 Cor. 12. 1^.
Judge you of that which I speak, says the Apostle. In vain it were to speak
any thing of God, but that by Reason. Men are able somewhat to judge of that
they hear, and by discourse to discern how consonant it is to Truth. Scripture
indeed teaches things above Nature, things which our Reason by it self could
not reach unto. Yet those things also we believe. knowing by Reason, that the
Scripture is the Word of God. In the presence of Festus, a Roman, and of King
Agrippa, a Jew, St. Paul omitting the one, who neither knew the Jews Religion,
not the Books whereby they were taught it, speaks unto the other of things
foreshewed by Moses, and the Prophets, and performed in Jesus Christ, intending
thereby to prove himself so unjustly accused, that unless his Judges did
condemn both Moses and the Prophets, him they could not choose but acquit, who
taught only that fulfilled, which they so long since had foretold. His cause
was easy to be discerned; what was done, their eyes were witnesses; what Moses
and the Prophets did speak, their Books could quickly show: It was no hard
thing for him to compare them, which knew the one, and believed the other. Acts
2^. 22.
King Agrippa, believe thou the Prophets? I know thou do. The question is,
how the Books of the Prophets came to be credited of King Agrippa. For what
with him did authorize the Prophets, the like with us does cause the rest of
the Scripture of God to be of credit. Because we maintain, That in Scripture we
are taught all things necessary unto Salvation; hereupon very childishly it is
by some demanded, What Scripture can teach us the Sacred Authority of the
Scripture, upon the knowledge whereof our whole Faith and Salvation depends?
As though there were any kind of Science in the World, which leads men unto
knowledge, without presupposing a number of things already known. No Science
does make known the first Principles whereon it builds; but they are always
either taken as plain and manifest in themselves, or as proved and granted
already, some former knowledge having made them evident. Scripture teaches all
supernaturally revealed Truth; without the knowledge whereof, Salvation cannot
be attained. The main principal whereupon, our belief of all things therein
contained, depends, is, That the Scriptures are the Oracles of God himself.
This in it self we cannot say is evident. For then all men that hear it, would
acknowledge it in heart, as they do when they hear that every whole is more
then any part of that whole, because this in it self is evident. The other we
know, that all do not acknowledge when they hear it. There must be therefore
some former knowledge presupposed, which does herein assure the hearts of all
Believers. Scripture teaches us that saving Truth which God has discovered
unto the World by Revelation; and it presumes us taught otherwise, that it
self is Divine and Sacred. The question then being, By what means we are taught
this: some answer, That to learn it we have no other way then only Tradition;
as namely, that so we believe, because both we from our Predecessors, and they
from theirs have so received. But is this enough? That which all men's
experience teaches them, may not in any wise be denied. And by experience we
all know, that the first outward Motive leading men so to esteem of the
Scripture, is the authority of Gods Church. For when we know the whole Church
of God has that opinion of the Scripture, we judge it even at the first an
impudent thing for any man bred and brought up in the Church, to be of a
contrary mind without cause. Afterward the more we bestow our labor in
reading or hearing the Mysteries thereof, the more we find that the thing it
self does answer our received opinion concerning it. So that the former
enducement prevailing somewhat with us before, does now much more prevail, when
the very thing has Ministered further Reason. If Infidels or Atheists chance at
any time to call it in question, this gives us occasion to sift what reason
there is, whereby the testimony of the Church concerning Scripture, and our own
persuasion which Scripture it self has confirmed, may be proved a truth
infallible. In which case the ancient Fathers being often constrained to show,
what warrant they had so much to rely upon the Scriptures, endeavored still to
maintain the authority of the Books of God by Arguments, such as unbelievers
themselves must needs think reasonable, if they judged thereof as they should.
Neither is it a thing impossible, or greatly heard, even by such kind of
proofs so to manifest and clear that point, that no man living shall be able to
deny it, without denying some apparent Principle, such as all men acknowledge
to be true. Wherefore if I believe the Gospel, yet is reason of singular use,
for that it confirms me in this my belief the more: If I do not as yet
believe, nevertheless to bring me into the number of Believers, except Reason
did somewhat help, and were an Instrument which God does use unto such
purposes, what should it boot to dispute with Infidels, or godless persons for
their conversion and persuasion in that point? Neither can I think that, when
grave and learned men do sometime hold, that of this Principle there is no
proof but by the testimony of the Spirit, which assures our hearts therein, it
is their meaning to exclude utterly all force which any kind of Reason may
have in that behalf; but I rather incline to interpret such their speeches, as
if they had more expressly set down, that other motives and enducements, be they
never so strong and consonant unto Reason, are notwithstanding ineffectual of
themselves to work Faith concerning this Principle, if the special Grace of the
Holy Ghost concur not to the enlightening of our minds. For otherwise, I doubt
not but men of wisdom and judgment will grant, That the Church in this point
especially is furnished with Reason, to stop the mouths of her impious
Adversaries; and that, as it were altogether bootless to allege against them,
what the Spirit has taught us, so likewise, that even to our own selves it
needs Caution and Explication, how the testimony of the Spirit may be
discerned, by what means it may be known, lest men think that the Spirit of God
does testify those things which the spirit of error suggesteth. The operations
of the Spirit, especially these ordinary which be common unto all true
Christian men, are, as we know, things secret and undiscernable even to the
very soul where they are, because their nature is of another, and an higher
kind, then that they can be by us perceived in this life. Wherefore albeit the
Spirit lead us into all truth, and direct us in all goodness; yet because these
workings of the Spirit in us, are so privy and secret, we theresore stand on a
plainer ground, when we gather by Reason from the quality of things believed or
done, that the Spirit of God has directed us in both, then if we settle our
selves to believe, or to do any certain particular thing, as being moved
thereto by the Spirit. But of this enough. Acts 13. 36. and 2. 34.
To go from the Books of Scripture, to the sense and meaning thereof, because
the Sentences which are by the Apostles recited out of the Psalms, to prove the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, did not prove it, if so be the Prophet David
meant them of himself: This Exposition therefore they plainly disprove, and
show by manifest Reason, that of David the words of David could not possibly be
meant. Exclude the use of Natural reasoning about the sense of holy Scripture,
concerning the Articles of our Faith, and then that the Scripture does concern
the Articles of our Faith, who can assure us? That which by right Exposition
builds up Christian Faith, being misconstrued breeds Error; between true
and false construction, the difference Reason must show. 1 Pet. 3. 15.
Can Christian men perform that which Peter requires at their hands? Is it
possible they should both believe, and be able without the use of Reason, to
render a Reason of their belief, a Reason sound and sufficient to answer them
that demand it, be they of the same Faith with us, or enemies thereunto? May we
cause our Faith without Reason, to appear reasonable in the eyes of men? This
being required even of Learners in the School of Christ, the duty of their
Teachers in bringing them unto such ripeness, must needs be somewhat more then
only to read the Sentences of Scripture, and then Paraphrastically to scholy
them, to vary them with sundry Forms of speech, without arguing or disputing
about any thing which they contain. This method of teaching, may commend it
self unto the World, by that easiness and facility which is in it; but a Law or
a Pattern it is not, as some do imagine, for all men to follow, that will do
good in the Church of Christ. Our Lord and Savior himself did hope by
disputation to do some good, yea, by disputation not only of, but against the
truth, albeit with purpose for the truth. That Christ should be the Son of
David, Matthew. 22. 43.
was truth, yet against this truth, our Lord in the Gospel objecteth, If Christ
be the Son of David, how does David call him Lord? There is as yet no way known
how to dispute, or to determine of things disputed, without the use of Natural
Reason. If we please to add unto Christ their example, who followed him as
near in all things as they could, the Sermon of Paul and Barnabas, set down in
the Acts, where the people would have offered unto them Sacrifice; in that
Sermon, what is there, but only Natural Reason to disprove their act? Acts 13.
15.
O men, why do ye these things? We are men even, subject to the self-same
Passions with you: We Preach unto you to leave these Vanities, and to turn to
the living God, the God that has not left himself without witness, in that he
has done good to the World, giving rain and fruitful Seasons, filling our
hearts with joy and gladness. Neither did they only use Reason in winning such
unto a Christian belief, as were yet thereto unconverted, but with Believers
themselves they followed the self-same course. In that great and solemn
Assembly of Believing Jews, how does Peter prove, that the Gentiles were
partakers of the Grace of God, as well as they, but by Reason drawn from those
effects, which were apparently known amongst them? Acts 15.
God which knows the hearts, has born them witness in giving unto them the
Holy Ghost as unto you. The light therefore, which the Star of Natural Reason
and Wisdom casts, is too bright to be obscured by the mist of a word or two,
uttered to diminish that opinion which justly has been received concerning the
force and virtue thereof, even in matters that touch most nearly the principal
duties of men, and the glory of the Eternal God. In all which hitherto has
been spoken, touching the force and use of Man's Reason in things Divine, I must
crave, that I be not so understood or construed, as if any such thing, by
virtue thereof, could be done without the aid and assistance of Gods most
blessed Spirit. The thing we have handled according to the question moved about
it; which question is, Whether the Light of Reason be so pernicious, that in
devising Laws for the Church, men ought not by it to search what may be fit and
convenient? For this cause therefore we have endeavored to make it appear, how
in the Nature of Reason it self, there is no impediment, but that the self-same
Spirit which reveals the things that God has set down in his Law, may also
be thought to aid and direct men in finding out by the Light of Reason, what
Laws are expedient to be made for the guiding of his Church, over and besides
them that are in Scripture. Herein therefore we agree with those men, by whom
Humane Laws are defined to be Ordinances, which such as have lawful Authority
given them for that purpose, do probably draw from the Laws of Nature and God,
by discourse of Reason, aided with the influence of Divine Grace: And for that
cause, it is not said amiss touching Ecclesiastical Canons, Violatores, cap. ^
q 1.
That by instinct of the Holy Ghost they have been made, and consecrated by the
reverend acceptance of the World.

9. Laws for the Church are not made as they should be, How Laws for the
Regiment of the Church may be made by the advice of men, following therein the
Light of Reason, and how those Laws being not repugnant to the Word of God, are
approved in his sight.
unless the Makers follow such direction as they ought to be guided by: Wherein
that Scripture stands not the Church of God in any stead, or serves nothing
at all to direct, but may be let pass as needless to be consulted with, we
judge it profane, impious, and irreligious to think. For although it were in
vain to make Laws which the Scripture has already made, because what we are
already there commanded to do, on our parts there rests nothing but only
that it be executed; yet because both in that which we are commanded, it
concerns the duty of the Church by Law to provide, that the looseness and
slackness of men may not cause the Commandments of God to be unexecuted; and a
number of things there are, for which the Scripture has not provided by any
Law, but left them unto the careful discretion of the Church; we are to search
how the Church in these cases may be well directed, to make that provision by
Laws which is most convenient and fit. And what is so in these cases, partly
Scripture, and partly Reason must teach to discern. Scripture comprehending
Examples and Laws; Laws, some Natural, and some Positive; Examples neither are
there for all cases which require Laws to be made, and when they are, they can
but direct as Precedents only. Natural Laws direct in such sort, that in all
things we must for ever do according unto them; Positive so, that against them,
in no case, we may do any thing, as long as the Will of God is, that they
should remain in force. Howbeit, when Scripture does yield us Precedents, how
far forth they are to be followed; when it gives Natural Laws, what particular
order is thereunto most agreeable; when Positive, which way to make Laws
unrepugnant unto them; yea, though all these should want, yet what kind of
Ordinances would be most for that good of the Church which is aimed at, all
this must be by Reason found out. And therefore, Luminis naturalis dictatum
repellere, non modo stultum est, sed and impium, August. lib. 4. dle Trin. cap.
6.
To refuse the conduct of the Light of Nature, says St. Augustine, is not
Folly alone, but accompanied with Impiety. The greatest amongst the School
Divines studying how to set down by exact definition, the Nature of an Humane
Law, (of which nature all the Churches Constitutions are) found not which way
better to do it, then in these words: Out of the Precepts of the Law of Nature,
as out of certain common and undemonstrable Principles, Man's Reason does
necessarily proceed unto certain more particular determinations: Tho. Aqui. 2.
q. 21. art. 3 Ex pracepris Legis na^^ra. lit, qu^li ex quibusdam principii^
Communibus, and indemonstrabilibus, necesse est quod ratio humana procedat ad
aliqua magis particulariter disponenda. Et istae particular di^^ dispositiones
adinventae secundum rationem humanam, dicuntur leges humana, observatis aliti
conditionibus quae pertinent ad rationem legis.
Which particular determinations being found out according unto the Reason of
Man, they have the names of Humane Laws, so that such other conditions be
therein kept as the making of Laws does require, that is, If they whose
Authority is thereunto required, do establish and publish them as Laws. And the
truth is, that all our controversy in this cause concerning the Orders of the
Church, is, What particulars the Church may appoint. That which does find them
out, is the force of Man's Reason. That which does guide and direct his Reason,
is first, the general Law of Nature; which Law of Nature, and the Moral Law of
Scripture, are in the substance of Law all one. But because there are also in
Scripture a number of Laws particular and positive, which being in force, may
not by any Law of Man be violated, we are in making Laws to have thereunto an
especial eye. As for example, it might perhaps seem reasonable unto the Church
of God, following the general Laws concerning the nature of Marriage, to ordain
in particular that Cosin-Germans shall not marry. Which Law notwithstanding
ought not to be received in the Church, if there should be in the Scripture a
Law particular to the contrary, forbidding utterly the Bonds of Marriage to be
so far forth abridged. The same Thomas therefore, whose definition of Humane
Laws we mentioned before, does add thereunto this Caution concerning the Rule
and Canon whereby to make them: 1.2. Quest 95. Act 3.
Humane Laws are Measures in respect of Men, whose actions they must direct;
howbeit such Measures they are, as have also their higher Rules to be measured
by, Which Rules are two, the Law of God, and the Law of Nature. So that Laws
Humane must be made according to the General Laws of Nature, and without
contradiction unto any Positive Law in Scripture; otherwise they are ill made.
Unto Laws thus made and received by a whole Church, they which live within the
bosom of that Church, must not think it a matter indifferent, either to yield,
or not to yield obedience. Is it a small offense to despise the Church of God?
1 Cor. 22. ^^ Prove. 6. 20.
My Son keep thy Fathers Commandment, says Solomon, and forget not thy Mothers
instruction, bind them both always about thine heart. It does not stand with
the duty which we ow to our Heavenly Father, that to the Ordinances of our
Mother the Church, we should show our selves disobedient. Let us not say we
keep the Commandments of the one, when we break the Law of the other: For
unless we observe both, we obey neither. And what does let, but that we may
observe both, when they are not the one to the other in any sort repugnant? For
of such Laws only we speak, as being made in form and manner already declared,
can have in them no contradiction unto the Laws of Almighty God. Yea, that
which is more, the Laws thus made, God himself does in such sort authorize;
that to despise them, is to despise in them him. It is a loose and licentious
opinion which the Anabaptists have embraced, holding, That a Christian Man's
liberty is lost, and the Soul which Christ has redeemed unto himself,
injuriously drawn into servitude under the yoke of Humane Power, if any Law be
now imposed besides the Gospel of Jesus Christ: In obedience whereunto the
Spirit of God, and not the constraint of man is to lead us, according to that
of the blessed Apostle, Such as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of
God, Romans 8. 14.
and not such as live in thraldom unto men. Their judgment is therefore, that
the Church of Christ should admit no Lawmakers, but the Evangelists. The
Author of that which causes another thing to be, is Author of that thing also
which thereby is caused. The light of Natural Understanding, Wit, and Reason,
is from God; John 1. 5.
he it is which thereby does illuminate every man entering into the World. If
there proceed from us any thing afterward corrupt and naught, the Mother
thereof is our own darkness, neither does it proceed from any such cause
whereof God is the Author. He is the Author of all that we think or do, by
virtue of that Light which himself has given. And therefore the Laws which the
very Heathens did gather to direct their actions by, so far forth as they
proceed from the Light of Nature, God himself does acknowledge to have
proceeded even from himself, Romans 1. 6. and 2. 15
and that he was the Writer of them in the Tables of their Hearts. How much
more then is he the Author of those Laws which have been made by his Saints,
endued further with the Heavenly Grace of his Spirit, and directed as much as
might be with such instructions as his Sacred Word does yield? Surely, if we
have unto those Laws, that dutiful regard which their Dignity does require, it
will not greatly need, that we should be exhorted to live in obedience unto
them. I^ they have God himself for their Author, contempt which is offered unto
them cannot choose but redound unto him. The safest, and unto God the most
acceptable way of framing our lives therefore, is with all Humility, Lowliness,
and Singleness of Heart, to study which way our willing Obedience, both unto
God and Man, may be yielded, even to the utmost of that which is due.

10. Touching the Mutability of Laws that concern the Regiment and Polity of
the Church, That neither Gods being the Author of Laws, nor his committing them
to Scripture, nor the continuance of the end for which they were instituted, is
any reason sufficient to prove that they are unchangeable.
changed they are, when either altogether abrogated, or in part repealed, or
augmented with farther additions. Wherein we are to note, that this question
about the changing of Laws, concerns only such Laws as are Positive, and do
make that now good or evil, by being commanded or forbidden, which otherwise of
it self were not simply, the one or the other. Unto such Laws it is expressly
sometimes added, how long they are to continue in force. If this be no where
expressed, then have we no light to direct our judgments, concerning the
changeableness or immutability of them, but by considering the nature and
quality of such Laws. The nature of every Law must be judged of by the end for
which it was made, and by the aptness of things therein prescribed unto the
same end. It may so fall out, that the reason why some Laws of God were given,
is neither opened, nor possible to be gathered by the Wit of Man. As why God
should forbid Adam that one Tree, there was no way for Adam ever to have
certainly understood. And at Adams ignorance of this point Satan took
advantage, urging the more securely a false cause, because the true was unto
Adam unknown. Why the Jews were forbidden to Plough their Ground with an Ox and
an Ass; Deuteronomy. 22. 10, 11.
why to cloth themselves with mingled attire of Wool and Linen, it was both
unto them, and to us it remains obscure. Such Laws perhaps cannot be
abrogated, saving only by whom they were made; because the intent of them
being known unto none but the Author, he alone can judge how long it is
requisite they should endure. But if the reason why things were instituted may
be known, and being known, do appear manifestly to be of perpetual necessity;
then are those things also perpetual, unless they cease to be effectual unto
that purpose, for which they were at the first instituted. Because when a thing
does cease to be available unto the end which gave it being, the continuance of
it must then of necessity appear superfluous. And of this we cannot be
ignorant, how sometimes that has done great good which afterward when time
has changed the ancient course of things, does grow to be either very hurtful,
or not so greatly profitable and necessary. If therefore, the end for which a
Law provideth, be perpetually necessary, and the way whereby it provideth
perpetually also most apt, no doubt but that every such Law ought for ever to
remain unchangeable. Whether God be the Author of Laws, by authorizing that
power of men whereby they are made, or by delivering them made immediately from
himself, by word only, or in writing also, or howsoever; notwithstanding the
Authority of their Maker, the mutability of that end for which they are made,
makes them also changeable. The Law of Ceremonies came from God. Moses had
commandment to commit it unto the Sacred Records of Scripture, where it
continues even unto this very day and hour, in force still as the Jew
surmiseth, because God himself was Author of it; and for us to abolish what he
has established, were presumption most intolerable. Quod pro necesirate
temporis Slatutum est. ressante nece. litate debet cessare pariter quod
urgebar. 1.q. 1.
But (that which they in the blindness of their obdurate hearts are not able to
discern) since the end for which that Law was ordained, is now fulfilled, past,
and gone; how should it but cease any longer to be, which has no longer any
cause of being in force as before? That which necessity of some special time
does cause to be enjoined, binds no longer, then during that time, but does
afterward become free. Which thing is also plain, even by that Law which the
Apostles assembled at the Council of Jerusalem, did from thence deliver unto
the Church of Christ; the Preface whereof to authorize it, was, Quod
pronecessit. Act. 15.
To the Holy Ghost, and to us it has seemed good: Which style they did not use
as matching themselves in Power with the Holy Ghost, but as testifying the Holy
Ghost to be the Author, and themselves, but only Utterers of that Decree. This
Law therefore to have proceeded from God as the Author thereof, no faithful man
will deny. It was of God, not only because God gave them the power whereby
they might make Laws, but for that it proceeded even from the holy Motion and
Suggestion of that secret Divine Spirit, whose sentence they did but only
pronounce. Notwithstanding, as the Law of Ceremonies delivered unto the Jews,
so this very Law which the Gentiles received from the Mouth of the Holy Ghost,
is in like respect abrogated by decease of the end for which it was given.
Countery. p. 8.
But such as do not stick at this point, such as grant that what has been
instituted upon any special cause, needs not to be observed, that cause
ceasing, do notwithstanding herein fail; they judge the Laws of God only by
the Author and main end for which they were made, so that for us to change that
which he has established, they hold it execrable pride and presumption, if so
be the end and purpose for which God by that mean provideth, be permanent. And
upon this they ground those ample Disputes concerning Orders and Offices, which
being by him appointed for the Government of his Church, if it be necessary
always that the Church of Christ be governed, then does the end for which God
provided, remain still; and therefore in those means which he by Law did
establish as being fittest unto that end, for us to alter any thing, is to lift
up our selves against God, and as it were to countermand him. Wherein they mark
not, that Laws are Instruments to rule by, and that Instruments are not only
to be framed according unto the general end for which they are provided, but
even according unto that very particular which rises out of the matter whereon
they have to work. The end wherefore Laws were made may be permanent, and those
Laws nevertheless require some alteration, if there be any unfitness in the
means which they prescribe as tending unto that end and purpose. As for
example, a Law that to bridle theft, does punish Thieves with a quadruple
restitution, has an end which will continue as long as the World it self
continues. Theft will be always, and will always need to be bridled. But that
the mean which this Law provideth for that end, namely, the punishment of
quadruple restitution, that this will be always sufficient to bridle and
restrain that kind of enormity, no man can warrant. Insufficiency of Laws does
sometimes come by want of judgment in the Makers. Which cause cannot fall into
any Law termed properly and immediately Divine, as it may and does into Humane
Laws often. But that which has been once most sufficient, may wax otherwise by
alteration of time and place; that punishment which has been sometimes
forcible to bridle sin, may grow afterward too week and feeble. In a word, we
plainly perceive by the difference of those three Laws which the Jews received
at the hands of God, the Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial, that if the end for
which, and the matter according whereunto God makes his Laws, continue always
one and the same, his Laws also do the like, for which cause the Moral Law
cannot be altered. Secondly, That whether the Matter whereon Laws are made,
continue or continue not, if their end have once ceased, they cease also to be
of force; as in the Law Ceremonial it fares. Finally, That albeit the end
continue, as in that Law of Theft specified, and in a great part of those
ancient Judicials it does; yet for as much as there is not in all respects the
same subject or matter remaining, for which they were first instituted, even
this is sufficient cause of change. And therefore Laws, though both ordained of
God himself, and the end for which they were ordained, continuing, may
notwithstanding cease, it by alteration of persons or times, they be found
unsufficient to attain unto that end. In which respect, why may we not presume,
that God does even call for such change or alteration, as the very condition of
things themselves does make necessary? They which do therefore plead the
Authority of the Lawmakers, as an argument wherefore it should not be lawful to
change that which he has instituted, and will have this the cause why all the
Ordinances of our Savior are immutable; they which urge the Wisdom of God as a
proof, that whatsoever Laws he has made, they ought to stand, unless himself
from Heaven proclaim them disannulled, because it is not in man to correct the
Ordinance of God; may know, if it please them to take notice thereof, that we
are far from presuming to think that men can better any thing which God has
done, even as we are from thinking that men should presume to undo some things
of men, which God does know they cannot better. God never ordained any thing
that could be bettered. Yet many things he has, that have been changed, and
that for the better. That which succeeds as better now when change is
requisite, had been worse, when that which now is changed was instituted.
Otherwise God had not then left this to choose that, neither would now reject
that to choose this, were it not for some new-grown occasion, making that which
has been betterworse. In this case therefore men do not presume to change Gods
Ordinance, but they yield thereunto, We offer to show the Discipline to be a
part of the Gospel, and therefore to have a Common Cause; so that in the
repulse of the Discipline, the Gospel receives a check. And again, I speak of
the Discipline as of a part of the Gospel; and therefore neither under nor
above the Gospel, but the Gospel. T. C. l. 1. p. 14. Tert. De Veland. Virg.
Mart. n 1. Sam. 14. Acts 15.
requiring it self to be changed. Against this it is objected, that to abrogate
or innovate the Gospel of Christ, if Men or Angels should attempt, it were most
heinous and cursed sacrilege. And the Gospel, as they say, contains not
only doctrine instructing men how they should believe, but also Precepts
concerning the Regiment of the Church. Discipline therefore is a part of the
Gospel, and God being the Author of the whole Gospel, as well of Discipline as
of Doctrine, it cannot be but that both of them have a Common Cause. So that as
we are to believe for ever the Articles of Evangelical Doctrine, so the
Precepts of Discipline we are in like sort bound for ever to observe. Touching
Points of Doctrine, as for example, the Unity of God, the Trinity of Persons,
Salvation by Christ, the Resurrection of the Body, Life Everlasting, the
Judgment to come, and such like, they have been since the first hour that there
was a Church in the World, and till the last they must be believed: But as for
Matters of Regiment, they are for the most part of another nature. To make new
Articles of Faith and Doctrine, no Man thinks it lawful; new Laws of
Government, what Commonwealth or Church is there which makes not either at one
time or another? The Rule of Faith, says Tertullian, is but one, and that
alone immovable, and impossible to be framed or cast a new. The Law of outward
Order and Polity not so. There is no reason in the World wherefore we should
esteem it as necessary always to do, as always to believe the same things;
seeing every man knows, that the Matter of Faith is constant, the Matter
contrariwise of Action daily changeable, especially the Matter of Action
belonging unto Church Polity. Neither can I find that Men of soundest judgment
have any otherwise taught, then that Articles of Belief, and things which all
men must of necessity do, to the end they may be saved, are either expressly set
down in Scripture, or else plainly thereby to be gathered. But touching things
which belong to Discipline and outward Polity, the Church has Authority to
make Canons, Laws and Decrees, even as we read, that in the Apostles times it
did. Acts 15.
Which kind of Laws (for as much as they are not in themselves necessary to
Salvation) may after they are made, be also changed as the difference of times
or places shall require. Yea, it is not denied, I am sure, by themselves, that
certain things in Discipline are of that nature, as they may be varied by
times, places, persons, and other the like circumstances. Whereupon I demand,
are those changeable Points of Discipline commanded in the Word of God, or no?
If they be not commanded, and yet may be received in the Church, how can their
former Position stand, condemning all things in the Church, which in the Word
are not commanded? If they be commanded, and yet may suffer change: How can
this latter stand, affirming all things immutable which are commanded of God?
Their distinction touching Matters of Substance and of Circumstance, though
true, will not serve. For be they great things, or be they small, if God have
commanded them in the Gospel, and his commanding them in the Gospel do make
them unchangeable, there is no reason we should more change the one, then we
may the other. If the Authority of the Maker do prove unchangeableness in the
Laws which God has made, then must all Laws which he has made, be necessarily
for ever permanent, though they be out of Circumstance only, and not of
Substance. I therefore conclude, that neither Gods being Author of Laws for
Government of his Church, nor his committing them unto Scripture, is any reason
sufficient, wherefore all Churches should for ever be bound to keep them
without change. But of one thing we are here to give them warning by the way:
For whereas in this Discourse, we have oftentimes professed, that many parts of
Discipline or Church Polity are delivered in Scripture, they may perhaps
imagine that we are driven to confess their Discipline to be delivered in
Scripture; and that having no other means to avoid it, we are in fain to argue
for the changeableness of Laws ordained even by God himself, as if otherwise
theirs of necessity should take place, and that under which we live be
abandoned. There is no remedy therefore, but to abate this Error in them, and
directly to let them know, that if they fall into any such conceit, they do but
a little flatter their own cause. As for us, we think in no respect so highly
of it. Our persuasion is, that no age ever had knowledge of it, but only ours;
that they which defend it, devised it; that neither Christ nor his Apostles, at
any time taught it, but the contrary. If therefore we did seek to maintain that
which most advantageth our own cause, the very best way for us, and the
strongest against them, were to hold even as they do, that in Scripture there
must needs be found some particular Form of Church Polity which God has
instituted, and which Disciplina est Christianae Ecclesae Politia, a Den cius
re^ e Admitisican. ^. ^ causa constituta, ^^ proprerea es eius verbo petenda,
and ob eandem causam omnium Ecclesiarum communi. and omnium temponim. Lib.3. de
Eccles. Duscip. in Anala.
for that very cause belongs to all Churches, to all times. But with any such
partial eye to respect our selves, and by cunning, to make those things seem
the truest, which are the fittest to serve our purpose, is a thing which we
neither like nor mean to follow. Wherefore, that which we take to be generally
true concerning the Mutability of Laws, the same we have plainly delivered, as
being persuaded of nothing more then we are of this; (...) Arist. Ethic. lib.
10. cap. 1.
That whether it be in Matter of Speculation or of Practice, no untruth can
possibly avail the Patron and Defender long, and that things most truly, are
like most behovefully spoken.

Whether Christ have forbidden all change of those Laws which are set down in
Scripture.
11. This we hold and grant for Truth, that those very Laws which of their own
nature are changeable, be notwithstanding incapable of change, is he which gave
them, being of Authority so to do, forbid absolutely to change them; neither
may they admit alteration against the Will of such a Lawmakers. Albeit
therefore we do not find any cause, why of right there should be necessarily
an Immutable Form set down in holy Scripture; nevertheless, if indeed there
have been at any time a Church Polity so set down, the change whereof the
sacred Scripture does forbid; surely for Men to alter those Laws which God for
perpetuity has established, were presumption most intolerable. To prove
therefore, that the Will of Christ was to establish Laws so Permanent and
Immutable, that in any sort to alter them, cannot but highly offend God. Thus
they reason; First, Heb. 3. 5. Either that commendation of the Son, before the
servant is a false testimony, or the Son ordained a Permanent Government in the
Church. If Permanent, then not to be changed. What then do they that hold it
may be changed at the Magistrates pleasure, but advise the Magistrate by his
Positive Laws, to proclaim, That it is his will; that if there shall be a
Church within his Dominions, he will mai^ and deform the same? M. M. page 1^. He
that was as faithful as Moses, left as clear instruction set the Government of
the Church: But Christ was as faithful as Moses. E^g^. Demensir. of Discip.
cap. 1.
If Moses being but a servant in the House of God, did therein establish Laws
of Government for a perpetuity; Laws, which they that were of the Household,
might not alter: Shall we admit into our thoughts, that the Son of God has in
providing for this his Household, declared himself less faithful then Moses;
Moses delivering unto the Jews such Laws as were durable, if those be
changeable which Christ has delivered unto us, we are not able to avoid it,
but (that which to think were heinous impiety) we of necessity must confess,
even the Son of God himself to have been less faithful then Moses? Which
Argument shall need no Touchstone to try it by, but some other of the like
making. Moses erected in the Wilderness a Tabernacle, which was moveable from
place to place: Solomon a sumptuous and stately Temple, which was not moveable;
therefore Solomon was faithfuller then Moses, which no man endued with reason
will think. And yet by this reason it does plainly follow. He that will see how
faithful the one or other was, must compare the things which they both did,
unto the charge which God gave each of them. The Apostle in making comparison
between our Savior and Moses, attributes faithfulness unto both, and makes
this difference between them; Moses in, but Christ over the House of God; Moses
in that House which was his by charge and commission, though to govern it, yet
to govern it as a servant; but Christ over this House, as being his own entire
possession. Our Lord and Savior does make Protestation, John 17. Either God
has left a Prescript Form of Government now, or else he is less careful under
the New Testament, then under the Old. Demonst. of Did. cap. 1.
I have given unto them the words which thou gave me. Faithful therefore he
was, and concealed not any part of his Fathers will. But did any part of that
will require the Immutability of Laws concerning Church Polity? They answer,
Yea; for else God should less favor us then the Jews. God would not have their
Churches guided by any Laws but his own. And seeing this did so continue even
till Christ; now to ease God of that care, or rather to deprive the Church of
his Patronage, what reason have we? Surely none, to derogate any thing from the
ancient love which God has borne to his Church. An Heathen Philosopher there
is, who considering how many things Beasts have, which Men have not, how naked
in comparison of them, how impotent, and how much less able we are to shift for
our selves a long time after we enter into this World, repiningly concluded
hereupon, that Nature being a careful Mother for them, is toward us a
hard-hearted Step-dame. No, we may not measure the affection of our gracious
God toward his by such differences. For even herein shines his Wisdom, that
though the ways of his Providence be many, yet the end which he brings all at
the length unto, is one and the self-same. But if such kind of reasoning were
good, might we not even as directly conclude the very same, concerning Laws of
Secular Regiment? Their own words are these; Ecclesiast. Did. lib. 1.
In the ancient Church of the Jews, God did command, and Moses commit unto
writing, all things pertinent, as well to the Civil as to the Ecclesiastical
State. God gave them Laws of Civil Regiment, and would not permit their
Commonweal to be governed by any other Laws then his own. Does God less regard
our Temporal estate in this World, or provide for it worse then theirs? To us
notwithstanding, he has not as to them, delivered any particular Form of
Temporal Regiment, unless perhaps, we think as some do, that the grafting of
the Gentiles, and their incorporating into Israel, does import, that we ought
to be subject unto the Rites and Laws of their whole Polity. We see then how
weak such Disputes are, and how smally they make to this purpose. Romans 11. 17.
Ephesians. 2. 12, 1^.
That Christ did not mean to set down particular Positive Laws for all things,
in such sort as Moses did, the very different manner of delivering the Laws of
Moses, and the Laws of Christ, does plainly show. Moses had Commandment to
gather the Ordinances of God together distinctly, and orderly to set them down
according unto their several kinds, for each Public Duty and Office, the Laws
that belong thereto, as appears in the Books themselves written of purpose
for that end. Contrariwise the Laws of Christ, we find rather mentioned by
occasion in the writings of the Apostles, then any solemn thing directly
written to comprehend them in legal sort. Again, the Positive Laws which Moses
gave, they were given for the greatest part, with restraint to the Land of
Jury: Behold, Deuteronomy. 4. 5.
says Moses, I have taught you Ordinances and Laws, as the Lord my God
commanded me, that ye should do so even within the Land whither ye go to
possess it. Which Laws and Ordinances Positive, he plainly distinguished
afterward from the Laws of the Two Tables which were Moral. Verse. 12, 13, 14.
The Lord spoke unto you out of the midst of the fire; ye heard the voice of
the words, but saw no similitude, only a voice. Then he declared unto you his
Covenant which he commanded you to do, the Ten Commandments, and wrote them
upon Two Tables of Stone. And the Lord commanded me that same time, that I
should teach you Ordinances and Laws which ye should observe in the Land,
whither ye go to possess it. The same difference is again set down in the next
Chapter following. For rehearsal being made of the Ten Commandments, it
follows immediately. Deuteronomy. 5. 22.
These words the Lord spoke unto all your multitude in the Mount, out of the
midst of the fire, the cloud and the darkness, with a great voice, and added no
more, and wrote them upon two Tables of Stone, and delivered them unto me. But
concerning other Laws, the people give their consent to receive them at the
hands of Moses. Verse. 27.
Go thou nearer, and hear all that the Lord our God says, and declare thou
unto us all that the Lord our God says unto thee, and we will hear it, and do
it. The peoples alacrity herein God highly commends with most effectual and
hearty speech; Verse. 28, 29, 30, 31.
I have heard the voice of the words of this people; they have spoken well. O
that there were such an heart in them to fear me, and to keep all my
Commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with their Children
for ever! Go, say unto them, Return you to your Tents: But stand thou here with
me, and I will tell thee all the Commandments and the Ordinances, and the Laws
which thou shall teach them, that they may do them in the Land which I have
given them to possess. From this latter kind the former are plainly
distinguished in many things. They were not both at one time delivered, neither
both after one sort, nor to one end. The former uttered by the voice of God
himself in the hearing of Six hundred thousand men; the former written with the
Finger of God; the former termed by the name of a Covenant; the former given to
be kept without either mention of time how long, or of place where. On the
other side, the latter given after, and neither written by God himself, nor
given unto the whole multitude immediately from God, but unto Moses, and from
him to them both by word and writing; Finally, The latter termed Ceremonies,
Judgments, Ordinances, but no where Covenants. The observation of the latter
restrained unto the Land where God would establish them to inhabit. The Laws
Positive are not framed without regard had to the place and persons, for the
which they are made. If therefore Almighty God in framing their Laws, had an
eye unto the nature of that people, and to the Country where they were to
dwell; if these peculiar and proper considerations were respected in the making
of their Laws, and must be also regarded in the Positive Laws of all other
Nations besides; then seeing that Nations are not all alike, surely the giving
of one kind of Positive Laws unto one only people, without any liberty to
alter them, is but a slender proof, that therefore one kind should in like
sort be given to serve everlastingly for all. But that which most of all makes
for the clearing of this point, is, T. C. lib. 1. p. 35. Whereas you say, That
they (the Jews) had nothing, but was determined by the Law, and we have many
things undetermined and left to the Order of the Church. I will offer for one
that you shall bring that we have lest ^o the Order of the Church, to show you
they that had twenty which were undecided of by the express Word of God.
That the Jews who had Laws, so particularly determining and so fully
instructing them in all affairs what to do, were notwithstanding continually
inured with causes exorbitant, and such as their Laws had not provided for. And
in this point much more is granted us then we ask, namely, that for one thing
which we have left to the Order of the Church, they had twenty which were
undecided by the express Word of God; and that as their Ceremonies and
Sacraments were multiplied above ours, even so grew the number of those cases
which were not determined by any express word. So that if we may devise one
Law, they by this reason might devise twenty; and if their devising so many,
were not forbidden, shall their example prove us forbidden to devise as much as
one Law for the ordering of the Church? We might not devise, no not one, if
their example did prove, that our Savior has utterly forbidden all alteration
of his Laws, in as much as there can be no Law devised; but needs it must
either take away from his, or add thereunto more or less, and so make some
kind of alteration: But of this so large a grant, we are content not to take
advantage. T. C. In the Table to his Second Book. T. C. lib. 1. p. 446. If he
will needs separate the Worship of God from the External Polity; yet as the
Lord set forth the one, so he left nothing undescribed in the other. Levit. 24
31.
Men are oftentimes in a sudden passion more liberal, then they would be, if
they had leisure to take advice: And therefore so bountiful words of course and
frank speeches, we are contented to let pass, without turning them to advantage
with too much rigor. It may be they had rather be listened unto, when they
commend the Kings of Israel, which attempted nothing in the Government of the
Church, without the express Word of God; and when they urge, that God left
nothing in his Word undescribed, whether it concerned the Worship of God, or
outward Polity, nothing unset down, and therefore charged them strictly to keep
themselves unto that, without any alteration. Howbeit seeing it cannot be
denied, but that many things there did belong unto the course of their Public
Affairs, wherein they had no express word at all, to show precisely what they
should do; the difference between their condition and ours in these cases, will
bring some light unto the truth of this present Controversy. Before the fact
of the son of Shelomith, there was no Law which did appoint any certain
punishment for Blasphemers: That wretched creature being therefore deprehended
in that impiety, was held in Ward, till the mind of the Lord was known
concerning his case. The like practice is also mentioned upon occasion of a
breach of the Sabbath day. They find a poor silly creature gathering sticks in
the Wilderness; they bring him unto Moses and Aaron, and all the Congregation;
they lay him in hold, because it was not declared what should be done with him,
till God had said unto Moses, Numb. 15. 3^.
This man shall die the death. The Law requires to keep the Sabbath day; but
for the breach of the Sabbath what punishment should be inflicted, it did not
appoint. Such occasions as these, are rare: And for such things as do fall
scarce once in many ages of men, it did suffice to take such order as was
requisite when they fell. But if the case were such, as being not already
determined by Law, were notwithstanding likely oftentimes to come into
question, it gave occasion of adding Laws that were not before. Thus it fell
out in the case of those men polluted, and of the daughters of Zelophehad,
whose causes Moses having brought before the Lord, received Laws to serve for
the like in time to come. Numb. 9. Numb. 27.
The Jews to this end had the Oracle of God, they had the Prophets. And by such
means, God himself instructed them from Heaven, what to do in all things that
did greatly concern their state, and were not already set down in the Law.
Shall we then hereupon argue even against our own experience and knowledge?
Shall we seek to persuade men, that of necessity it is with us, as it was with
them, that because God is ours in all respects, as much as theirs, therefore
either no such way of direction has been at any time; or if it has been, it
does still continue in the Church; or if the same do not continue, that yet it
must be at the least supplied by some such mean as pleases us to account of
equal force? A more dutiful and religious way for us, were to admire the Wisdom
of God, which shines in the beautiful variety of all things? But most in the
manifold and yet harmonious dissimilitude of those ways, whereby his Church
upon Earth is guided from age to age throughout all Generations of Men. Genesis
18. 18.
The Jews were necessarily to continue till the coming of Christ in the flesh,
and the gathering of Nations unto him. So much the Promise made unto Abraham
did import. Genesis 48. 16.
So much the Prophecy of Jacob at the hour of his death did foreshew. Upon the
safety therefore of their very outward state and condition for so long, the
after good of the whole World, and the Salvation of all did depend. Unto their
so long safety, for two things it was necessary to provide, namely, the
preservation of their state against foreign resistance, and the continuance of
their peace within themselves. Touching the one, as they received the Promise
of God to be the Rock of their Defense, against which, who so did violently
rush, should but bruise and batter themselves; so likewise they had his
Commandment in all their affairs that way, to seek direction and counsel from
him. Men's Consultations are always perilous. And it falls out many times,
that after long deliberation, those things are by their wit even resolved on,
which by trial are found most opposite to public safety. It is no impossible
thing for States, be they never so well established, yet by oversight in some
one act or treaty between them, and their potent opposites, utterly to cast
away themselves for ever. Wherefore lest it should so fall out to them, upon
whom so much did depend; they were not permitted to enter into War, not
conclude any League of Peace, nor to wade through any act of moment between
them and foreign States, unless the Oracle of God, or his Prophets, were first
consulted with. And lest domestical disturbance should waste them within
themselves, because there was nothing unto this purpose more effectual, then if
the Authority of their Laws and Governors were such, as none might presume to
take exception against it, or to show disobedience unto it, without incurring
the hatred and detestation of all men that had any spark of the fear of God;
therefore he gave them even their Positive Laws from Heaven, and as often as
occasion required, chose in like sort Rulers also to lead and govern them.
Notwithstanding some desperately impious there were, which adventured to try
what harm it could bring upon them, if they did attempt to be Authors of
Confusion, and to resist both Governors and Laws. Against such Monsters God
maintained his own, by fearful execution of extraordinary judgment upon them.
By which means it came to pass, that although they were a people infested and
mightily hated of all others throughout the World, although by Nature
hard-hearted, querulous, wrathful, and impatient of rest and quietness; yet was
there nothing of force, either one way or other, to work the ruin and
subversion of their State, till the time before mentioned was expired. Thus we
see that there was no cause of dissimilitude in these things, between that one
only People before Christ, and the Kingdoms of the World since. And whereas it
is further alleged, T. C. lib. 2. p. 440.
That albeit in Civil Matters and things pertaining to this present life, God
has used a greater particularity with them, then amongst us, framing Laws
according to the quality of that People and Country; yet the leaving of us at
greater liberty in things civil, is so far from proving the like liberty in
things pertaining to the Kingdom of Heaven, that it rather proves a straiter
bond. For even as when the Lord would have his favor more appear by Temporal
Blessings of this life, toward the people under the Law, then toward us, he
gave also Politic Laws most exactly, whereby they might both most easily come
into, and most steadfastly remain in possession of those earthly benefits: Even
so at this time, wherein he would not have his favor so much esteemed by those
outward commodities, it is required, That as his care inprescribing Laws for
that purpose has somewhat fallen, in leaving them to men's Consultations, which
may be deceived; so his care for Conduct and Government of the life to come,
should (if it were possible) rise, in leaving less to the order of men then in
times past. These are but weak and feeble Disputes for the Inference of that
Conclusion which is intended. For saving only in such consideration as has
been showed, there is no cause wherefore we should think God more desirous to
manifest his savor by Temporal Blessings toward them, then toward us.
Godliness had unto them, and it has also unto us, the promises both of this
life, and the life to come. That the care of God has fallen in earthly things,
and therefore should rise as much in Heavenly; that more is left unto men's
consultations in the one, and therefore less must be granted in the other; that
God having used a greater particularity with them then with us, for matters
pertaining unto this life, is to make us amends by the more exact delivery of
Laws for Government of the life to come. These are proportions, whereof if
there be any rule, we must plainly confess that which truth is, we know it not.
God which spoke unto them by his Prophets, has unto us by his only begotten
Son; those Mysteries of Grace and Salvation which were but darkly disclosed
unto them, have unto us more clearly shined. Such differences between them and
us, the Apostles of Christ have well acquainted us withal. But as for matter
belonging to the outward Conduct or Government of the Church; seeing that even
in sense it is manifest, that our Lord and Savior has not by Positive Laws
descended so far into particularities with us, as Moses with them; neither does
by extraordinary Means, Oracles, and Prophets, direct us, as them he did, in
those things which rising daily by new occasions, are of necessity to be
provided for; does it not hereupon rather follow, that although not to them,
yet to us there should be freedom and liberty granted to make Laws? Yea, but
the Apostle St. Paul does fearfully charge Timothy, 1 Timothy 6. 14. Job. 18. 37.
Even in the sight of God who quickneth all, and of Christ Jesus who witnessed
that famous Confession beforePontius Pilate, to keep what was commanded him,
safe and sound till the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ. This does exclude
all liberty or changing the Laws of Christ, whether by abrogation or addition,
or howsoever: For in Timothy the whole Church of Christ receives charge
concerning her duty. And that charge is to keep the Apostles Commandment; and
his Commandment did contain the Laws that concerned Church Government: And
those Laws he straightly requires to be observed without breach or blame, till
the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ. In Scripture we grant every one Man's
lesson, to be the common instruction of all men, so far forth as their cases
are like, and that religiously to keep the Apostles Commandments in whatsoever
they may concern us, we all stand bound. But touching that Commandment which
Timothy was charged with, we swerve undoubtedly from the Apostles precise
meaning, if we extend it so largely that the Arms thereof shall reach unto all
things which were commanded him by the Apostle. The very words themselves do
restrain themselves unto some special Commandment among many. And therefore it
is not said, Keep the Ordinances, Laws, and Constitutions which thou have
received; but (...) that great Commandment, which does principally concern thee
and thy calling: That Commandment which Christ did so often inculcate unto
Peter; Job. 21. 1^. Acts 22. 18.
that Commandment unto the careful discharge whereof they of Ephesus are
exhorted, Attend to your selves, and to all the flock, wherein the Holy Ghost
has placed you Bishops, to Feed the Church of God, which he has purchased by
his own blood: Finally, that Commandment which unto the same Timothy is by the
same Apostle, even in the same form and manner afterward again urged, 2 Timothy 4.
1.
I charge thee in the sight of God and the Lord Jesus Christ, which will judge
the quick and dead at his appearance, and in his Kingdom, Preach the Word of
God. When Timothy was instituted in that Office, then was the credit and trust
of this duty committed unto his faithful care. 1 Timothy 5. 20. (...)
The Doctrine of the Gospel was then given him, As the precious Talent or
Treasure of Jesus Christ; then received he for performance of this duty, 1 Timothy
4. 24.
The special Gift of the Holy Ghost. To keep this Commandment immaculate and
blameless, Was to teach the Gospel of Christ without mixture of corrupt and
unsound Doctrine; such as a number, even in those times, intermingled with the
Mysteries of Christian Belief. Till the appearance of Christ to keep it so,
does not import the time wherein it should be kept, but rather the time
whereunto the final reward for keeping it was reserved; according to that of
St. Paul concerning himself, 2 Timothy 4. 7.
I have kept the Faith; for the residue, there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge, shall in that day render
unto me. If they that labor in this Harvest, should respect but the present
fruit of their painful Travel, a poor encouragement it were unto them, to
continue therein all the days of their life. But their reward is great in
Heaven; the Crown of Righteousness which shall be given them in that day, is
honorable. The fruit of their industry then shall they reap with full
contentment and satisfaction, but not till then. Wherein the greatness of their
reward is abundantly sufficient to countervail the tediousness of their
expectation. Wherefore till then, they that are in labor, must rest in hope. O
Timothy, keep that which is committed unto thy charge; that great Commandment
which thou have received, keep, till the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ.
In which sense, although we judge the Apostles words to have been uttered; yet
hereunto we do not require them to yield, that think any other construction
more sound. If therefore it be rejected, and theirs esteemed more probable,
which hold, That the last words do import perpetual observation of the Apostles
Commandment, imposed necessarily for ever upon the Militant Church of Christ:
Let them withal consider, That then his Commandment cannot so largely be taken,
to comprehend whatsoever the Apostle did command Timothy. For themselves do not
all bind the Church unto some things, whereof Timothy received charge, as
namely, unto that Precept concerning the choice of Widows. So as they cannot
hereby maintain, that all things positively commanded concerning the affairs of
the Church, were commanded for perpetuity. And we do not deny that certain
things were commanded to be, though positive, yet perpetual in the Church. They
should not therefore urge against us places that seem to forbid change, but
rather such as set down some measure of alteration; which measure, if we have
exceeded, then might they therewith charge us justly: Whereas now they
themselves both granting, and also using liberty to change, cannot in reason
dispute absolutely against all change. Christ delivered no inconvenient, or
unmeet Laws: Sundry of ours they hold inconvenient. Therefore such Laws they
cannot possibly hold to be Christ's. Being not his, they must of necessity grant
them added unto his. Yet certain of those very Laws so added, they themselves
do not judge unlawful; as they plainly confess, both in matter of Prescript
Attire, T. C. lib 3. p. 241. My Reasons do never conclude the unlawfulness of
these Ceremonies of Burial, but the inconvenience and inexpedience of them. And
in the Table. Of the inconvenience, nor of the unlawfulness of Popish Apparel
and Ceremonies in Burial. T. C. lib. 1. page 32. Upon the indefinite speaking
of Mr. Calvin, saying, Ceremonies and External Disciple, without adding all or
some, you go about subtly to make men believe, That Mr. Calvin had placed the
wh^le External Discipline in the Power and Arbitrament of the Church. For it
all External Discipline were Arbitrary, and in the choice of the Church.
Excommunication also. (Which is a part of it) might be cast away; which I think
you will not say. And in the very next words before. Where you will give to
understand, that Ceremonies and External Discipline are not prescribed
particularly by the Word of God; and therefore lest to the Order of the Church:
You must understand, that all External Discipline is not lest to the Orders of
the Church, being particularly prescribed in the Scriptures, no more then all
Ceremonies are less to the Order of the Church, as the Sacraments of Baptism,
and the Supper of the Lord.
and of Rites appertaining to Burial. Their own Protestations are, that they
plead against the inconvenience, not the unlawfulness of Popish Apparel; and
against the inconvenience, not the unlawfulness of Ceremonies in Burial.
Therefore they hold it a thing not unlawful to add to the Laws of Jesus Christ;
and so consequently they yield, That no Law of Christ forbids Addition unto
Church Laws. The Judgment of Calvin being alleged against them, to whom, of
all men, they attribute most; whereas his words be plain, That for Ceremonies
and External Discipline, the Church has power to make Laws: The answer which
hereunto they make, is, That indefinitely the speech is true, and that so it
was meant by him; namely, That some things belonging unto External Discipline
and Ceremonies, are in the Power and Arbitrament of the Church; but neither was
it meant, neither is it true generally, That all External Discipline, and all
Ceremonies, are left to the Order of the Church, in as much as the Sacraments
of Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord are Ceremonies, which yet the Church may
not therefore abrogate. Again, Excommunication is a part of External
Discipline, which might also be cast away; if all External Discipline were
Arbitrary, and in the choice of the Church. By which their answer it does
appear, that touching the names of Ceremony and External Discipline, they
gladly would have us so understood, as if we did herein contain a great deal
more then we do. The fault which we find with them, is, That they overmuch
abridge the Church of her power in these things. Whereupon they recharge us, as
if in these things we gave the Church a liberty, which has no limits or
bounds; as if all things which the name of Discipline contains, were at the
Churches free choice. So that we might either have Church Governors and
Government, or want them; either retain or reject Church Censures as we lift.
They wonder at us as at men which think it so indifferent what the Church does
in Matter of Ceremonies, that it may be feared lest we judge the very
Sacraments themselves to be held at the Churches pleasure. No, the name of
Ceremonies we do not use in so large a meaning, as to bring Sacraments within
the compass and reach thereof; although things belonging unto the outward form
and seemly Administration of them, are contained in that name, even as we use
it. For the name of Ceremonies we use as they themselves do, when they speak
after this sort: T. C. lib. 3. p. 171.
The Doctrine and Discipline of the Church, as the weightiest things, ought
especially to be looked unto; but the Ceremonies also, as Mint and Cummin,
ought not to be neglected. Besides, in the Matter of External Discipline, or
Regiment it self, we do not deny but there are some things whereto the Church
is bound till the Worlds end. So as the question is only, how far the bounds
of the Churches Liberty do reach. We hold, that the power which the Church has
lawfully to make Laws and Orders for it self, does extend unto sundry things of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and such other Matters, whereto their opinion is,
That the Churches Authority and Power does not reach. Whereas therefore in
Disputing against us about this point, they take their compass a great deal
wider then the truth of things can afford, producing Reasons and Arguments by
way of generality, to prove, that Christ has set down all things belonging any
way unto the Form of ordering his Church, and has obsolutely forbidden change
by Addition or Diminution, great or small (for so their manner of disputing
is:) We are constrained to make our Defense, by showing, That Christ has not
deprived his Church so far of all Liberty, in making Orders and Laws for it
self, and that they themselves do not think he has so done. For are they able
to show that all particular Customs, T C. lib. 1. p. 27. We deny not but
certain things are lest to the Order of the Church, because they are of the
Nature of those which are varied by times, places, persons, and other
circumstances, and so could not at once be set ^^wn and established forever.
Rites, and Orders of Reformed Churches, have been appointed by Christ himself?
No; They grant, that in Matter of Circumstance they alter that which they have
received; but in things of Substance, they keep the Laws of Christ without
change. If we say the same in our own behalf (which surely we may do with a
great deal more truth) then must they cancel all that has been before
alleged, and begin to enquire afresh, Whether we retain the Laws that Christ
has delivered concerning Matters of Substance, yea, or no. For our constant
persuasion in this point is as theirs, That we have no where altered the Laws
of Christ, further then in such Particularities only, as have the nature of
things changeable according to the difference of times, places, persons, and
other the like circumstances. Christ has commanded Prayers to be made,
Sacraments to be ministered, his Church to be carefully taught and guided.
Concerning every of these, somewhat Christ has commanded, which must be kept
till the Worlds end. On the contrary side, in every of them, somewhat there may
be added, as the Church shall judge it expedient. So that if they will speak to
purpose, all which hitherto has been disputed of, they must give over, and
stand upon such particulars only, as they can show we have either added or
abrogated, otherwise then we ought in the Matter of Church Poli^y. Whatsoever
Christ has commanded for ever to be kept in his Church, the same we take not
upon us to abrogate; and whatsoever our Laws have thereunto added besides, of
such quality we hope it is, as no Law of Christ does any where condemn.
Wherefore, that all may be laid ^sa^. ^^ 14.
to make any kind of Law for her self, inclined (as it should seem) thereunto;
Col. 2.^2.
for that they imagined all things which the Church does without commandment of
holy Scripture, subject to that reproof which the Scripture it self uses in
certain cases, when Divine Authority ought alone to be followed. Hereupon they
thought it enough for the cancelling of any kind of Order whatsoever to say,
August. Epist. ^^
The Word of God teaches it not, it is a device of the Brain of Man, away with
it therefore out of the Church. St. Augustine was of another mind, who
speaking of Fasts on the Sunday, says, That he which would choose out that day
to fast on, should give thereby no small offense to the Church of God, which
had received a contrary Custom. For in these things, whereof the Scripture
appoints no certainty, the use of the People of God, or the Ordinances of our
Fathers, must serve for a Law. In which case, if we will dispute, and condemn
one sort by another custom, it will be but matter of endless contention;
where, for as much as the labor of reasoning, shall hardly be at into men's
heads any certain or necessary truth, surely it stands us upon to take heed,
lest with the Tempest of Strife, the Brightness of Charity and Love be darkened.
If all things must be commanded of God, which may be practiced of his Church, I
would know what commandment the Gileadites had to erect that Altar which is
spoken of in the Book of Joshua. Josh. 12.
Did not congruity of Reason enduce them thereunto, and suffice for defense of
their Fact? I would know what commandment the Women of Israel had yearly to
mourn and lament in the memory of Ieph^hahs daughter; Jude. 11. 4^.
what commandment the Jews had to celebrate their Feast of Dedication never
spoken of in the Law, J^^ ^^. 3^.
yet solemnized even by our Savior himself; what commandment, finally, they
had for the Ceremony of Odors used about the Bodies of the Dead, after which
custom notwithstanding since it was their custom) our Lord was contented, Ioh.
12. 4^.
that his own most precious Body should be intombed. Wherefore to reject all
Orders of the Church which Men have established, is to think worse of the Laws
of Men in this respect, then either the judgment of wise men allows, or the
Law of God it self will bear. Howbeit, they which had once taken upon them to
condemn all things done in the Church, and not commanded of God to be done, saw
it was necessary for them (continuing in defense of this their opinion) to
hold, that needs there must be in Scripture set down a complete particular Form
of Church Polity, a Form prescribing how all the affairs of the Church must be
ordered, a Form in no respect lawful to be altered by Mortal Men. For
Reformation of which oversight and error in them, there were that thought it a
part of Christian love and charity to instruct them better, and to open unto
them the difference between Matters of perpetual necessity to all Men's
salvation, and Matters of Ecclesiastical Polity: The one both fully and plainly
taught in holy Scripture; the other not necessary to be in such sort there
prescribed: The one not capable of any Diminution or Augmentation at all by
Men, the other apt to admit both. Hereupon the Authors of the former opinion
were presently seconded by other wittier and better learned, who being loath
that the Form of Church Polity which they sought to bring in, should be
otherwise then in the highest degree accounted of, took first an exception
committed them to Sacred Scripture, Man by Abrogation, Addition, or any way,
should presume to alter and change them; it was of necessity to be examined,
Whether the Authority of God in making, or his care in committing those his
Laws unto Scripture, be sufficient Arguments to prove, That God does in no case
allow they Moses, or not Nisi Reip. suae statu in omnem constitu (...),
Magistratus ordinary, singulorum m^nera potes^^tem que de cripse ^it, quae
judi cio^um fer^q: ratio habenda^ quomodo civium finiendae ^ieris? ^^a solum
minus Ecclesiae Christianae provi lit, quam Moses olim Judaicae, sed quam a
Lycurgo Solone, Numa. Civitati^, suis prospectum si^. ^ib. de Ecclesiast.
Discip.
so wise as Lycurgus and Solon) must needs have set down in holy Scripture,
some certain, complete, and unchangeable Form of Polity; and partly a colored
show of some evidence, where change of that sort of Laws may seem expressly
forbidden, although in truth nothing less be done. I might have added hereunto
their more familiar and popular disputes, as, The Church is a City, yea, the
City of the Great King, and the life of a City, is Polity: The Church is the
House of the Living God; and what house can there be without some order for the
government of it? In the Royal House of a Prince, there must be Officers for
Government, such as not any Servant in the House but the Prince, whose the
House is, shall judge convenient: So the House of God must have Orders for the
Government of it, such as not any of the Household, but God himself has
appointed. It cannot stand with the Love and Wisdom of God, to leave such Order
untaken, as is necessary for the due Government of his Church. The numbers,
degrees, orders, and attire of Solomon's servants, did show his Wisdom;
therefore he which is greater then Solomon, has not failed to leave in his
House such Orders for Government thereof, as may serve to be as a Looking-glass
for his providence, care, and wisdom to be seen in. That little spark of the
Light of Nature which remains in us, may serve us for the affairs of this
life: But as in all other Matters concerning the Kingdom of Heaven, so
principally in this which concerns the very Government of that Kingdom,
needful it is we should be taught of God. As long as Men are persuaded of any
Order, that it is only of Men, they presume of their own understanding, and
they think to devise another, not only as good, but better then that which
they have received. By severity of punishment, this presumption and curiosity
may be restrained. But that cannot work such cheerful Obedience as is yielded,
where the Conscience has respect to God as the Author of Laws and Orders. This
was it which countenanced the Laws of Moses, made concerning outward Polity for
the Administration of holy things. The like some Lawgivers of the Heathens did
pretend, but falsely; yet wisely discerning the use of this persuasion. For the
better obedience sake therefore it was expedient, that God should be Author of
the Polity of his Church. But to what issue does all this come? A man would
think that they which hold out with such discourses, were of nothing more fully
persuaded then of this, That the Scripture has set down a complete Form of
Church Polity, Universal, Perpetual, altogether Unchangeable. For so it would
follow, if the premises were sound and strong to such effect as is pretended.
Notwithstanding, they which have thus formally maintained Argument in defense
of the first oversight, are by the very evidence of Truth, themselves
constrained to make this in effect their conclusion, That the Scripture of God
has many things concerning Church Polity; that of those many, some are of
greater weight, some of less; that what has been urged as touching
Immutability of Laws, it extends in Truth no further then only to Laws
wherein things of greater moment are prescribed. Now these things of greater
moment, what are they? The Defense of godly Ministers against Dr. Bridges, 133.
Forsooth, Doctors, Pastors, Lay Elders, Elderships compounded of these three:
Synods, consisting of many Elderships, Deacons, Women Church-servants, or
Widows; free consent of the people unto actions of greatest moment, after they
be by Churches or Synods orderly resolved. All this Form of Polity (if yet we
may term that a form of building, when men have laid a few Rafters together,
and those not all of the foundest neither) but howsoever, all this Form they
conclude is prescribed in such sort, that to add to it any thing as of like
importance (for so I think they mean) or to abrogate of it any thing at all, is
unlawful. In which resolution, if they will firmly and constantly persist, I
see not but that concerning the points which hitherto have been disputed of,
they must agree, that they have molested the Church with needless opposition;
and henceforward, as we said before, betake themselves wholly unto the trial of
particulars, whether every of those things which they esteem as principal, be
either so esteemed of, or at all established for perpetuity in holy Scripture;
and whether any particular thing in our Church Polity be received other then
the Scripture allows of, either in greater things, or in smaller. The Matters
wherein Church Polity is conversant, are the Public Religious Duties of the
Church, as the Administration of the Word and Sacraments, Prayers, Spiritual
Censures, and the like. To these the Church stands always bound. Laws of
Polity, are Laws which appoint in what manner these duties shall be performed.
In performance whereof, because all that are of the Church cannot jointly and
equally work, the first thing in Polity required, is, A difference of Persons
in the Church, without which difference those Functions cannot in orderly sort
be executed. Hereupon we hold, That Gods Clergy are a State, which has been
and will be, as long as there is a Church upon Earth, necessarily by the plain
Word of God himself; a State whereunto the rest of Gods people must be subject,
as touching things that appertain to their Souls health. For where Polity is,
it cannot but appoint some to be Leaders of others, and some to be led by
others. Luke 6. 39.
If the blind lead the blind, they both perish. It is with the Clergy, if
their persons be respected, even as it is with other men; their quality many
times far beneath that which the dignity of their place requires. Howbeit,
according to the Order of Polity, they being The lights of the World, Matthew. 4.
14.
others (though better and wiser) must that way be subject unto them. Again,
for as much as where the Clergy are any great multitude, order does necessarily
require that by degrees they be distinguished; we hold, there have ever been,
and ever ought to be in such case, at leastwise, two sorts of Ecclesiastical
Persons, the one subordinate unto the other; as to the Apostles in the
beginning, and to the Bishops always since, we find plainly both in Scripture,
and in all Ecclesiastical Records, other Ministers of the Word and Sacraments
have been. Moreover, it cannot enter into any Man's conceit to think it lawful,
that every man which lists, should take upon him charge in the Church; and
therefore a solemn admittance is of such necessity, that without it there can
be no Church Polity. A number of Particularities there are, which make for the
more convenient Being of these Principal and Perpetual parts in Ecclesiastical
Polity, but yet are not of such constant use and necessity in Gods Church. Of
this kind are, times and places appointed for the Exercise of Religion;
Specialties belonging to the Public Solemnity of the Word, the Sacraments and
Prayer; the Enlargement or Abridgement of Functions Ministerial, depending upon
those two Principals beforementioned. To conclude, even whatsoever does by way
of Formality and Circumstance concern any Public Action of the Church. Now
although that which the Scripture has of things in the former kind be for
ever permanent; yet in the latter, both much of that which the Scripture
teaches, is not always needful; and much the Church of God shall always need
which the Scripture teaches not. So as the Form of Polity by them set down for
perpetuity, is three ways faulty. Faulty in omitting some things which in
Scripture are of that nature, as namely, the difference that ought to be of
Pastors, when they grow to any great multitude: Faulty in requiring Doctors,
Deacons, Widows, and such like, as things of perpetual necessity by the Law of
God, which in Truth are nothing less: Faulty also in urging some things by
Scripture Immutable; as their Lay Elders, which the Scripture neither makes
Immutable, nor at all teaches, for any thing either we can as yet find, or
they have hitherto been able to prove. But hereof more in the Books that
follow. As for those mavelous Discourses, whereby they adventure to argue,
That God must needs have done the thing which they imagine was to be done: I
must confess, I have often wondered at their exceeding boldness herein. When the
question is, Whether God have delivered in Scripture (as they affirm he has) a
complete particular Immutable Form of Church Polity; why take they that other,
both presumptuous and superfluous labor, to prove he should have done it; there
being no way in this case to prove the Deed of God, saving only by producing
that evidence wherein he has done it? But if there be no such thing apparent
upon Record, they do as if one should demand a Legacy by force and virtue of
some Written Testament, wherein there being no such thing specified, he
pleads, That there it must needs be, and brings arguments from the love or
good will which always the Testator bore him, imagining, that these or the like
proofs will convict a Testament to have that in it, which other men can no
where by reading find. In matters which concern the Actions of God, the most
dutiful way on our part, is to search what God has done, and with meekness to
admire that, rather then to dispute what he in congruity of Reason ought to do.
The ways which he has whereby to do all things for the greatest good of his
Church, are more in number then we can search, other in Nature, then that we
should presume to determine which of many should be the fittest for him to
choose, till such time as we see he has chosen of many some one; which one, we
then may boldly conclude to be the fittest, because he has taken it before the
rest. When we do otherwise, surely we exceed our bounds; who, and where wear,
we forget. And therefore needful it is, that our Pride in such cases be
contrould, and our Disputes beaten back with those Demands of the blessed
Apostle, Romans 11. 13.
How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out? Who has
known the Mind of the Lord, or who was his Counselor?

OF THE LAWS OF Ecclesiastical Polity.
BOOK IV. Concerning their Third Assertion, That our Form of Church-Politie is
corrupted with Popish Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies, banished out of certain
Reformed Churches, whose example therein we ought to have followed.
The Matter contained in this Fourth Book.
1. HOw great use Ceremonies have in the Church. 2. The First thing they blame
in the kind of our Ceremonies, is, that we have not in them ancient
Apostolical simplicity, but a greater pomp and stateliness. 3. The second, that
so many of them are the same which the Church of Rome uses, and the Reasons
which they bring to prove them for that cause blameworthy. 4. How when they go
about to expound what Popish Ceremonies they mean, they contradict their own
Argument against Popish Ceremonies. 5. An Answer to the Argument, whereby they
would prove, that since we allow the customs of our Fathers to be followed, we
therefore may not allow such customs as the Church of Rome has, because we
cannot account of them which are in that Church as of our Fathers. 6. To their
Allegation, that the course of Gods own wisdom does make against our conformity
with the Church of Rome in such things. 7. To the example of the eldest Church
which they bring for the same purpose. 8. That it is not our best Polity (as
they pretend it is) for establishment of sound Religion, to h^ve in these
things no agreement with the Church of Rome being unsound. 9. That neither the
Papists upbraiding us as furnished out of their store, nor any hope which in
that respect they are said to conceive, does make any more against our
Ceremonies then the former Allegations have done. 10. The grief, which they
say, godly Brethren conceive, at such Ceremonies as we have c^^^men with the
Church of Rome. 11. The third thing, for which they reprove a great part of our
Ceremonies is, for that as we have them from the Church of Rome, so that Church
had them from the Jews. 12. The fourth, for that sundry of them have been (they
say) abused unto I^^aery, and ar^ by that mean become scandalous. 13. The
fifth, for that we retain them still, notwithstanding the example of certain
Churches reformed before us, which have cast them out. 14. A Declaration of the
proceedings of the Church of England, ^or the establisement of things as they
are.


Now great use Ceremonies have in the Church.
SUch was the ancient simplicity and softness of spirit, which sometimes
prevailed in the World, that they whose words were even as Oracles amongst men,
seemed evermore loath to give sentence against any thing publicly received in
the Church of God, except it were wonderful apparently evil; for that they did
not so much incline to that seventy, which delights to reprove the least
things in sees amiss; as to that Charity, which is unwilling to behold any
thing that duty binds it to reprove. The state of this present Age, wherein
Zeal has drowned Charity, and Skill Meekness, will not now suffer any man to
marvel, whatsoever he shall hear reproved, by whomsoever. Those Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church therefore, which are the self-same now, that they
were, when Holy and Virtuous men maintained them against profane and deriding
Adversaries, her own children have at this day in de^ision. Whether justly or
no, it shall then appear, when all things are heard, which they have to allege
against the outward received Orders of this Church. Which inasmuch as
themselves do compare unto Mint and Cummin, Matthew. 23. 23. The Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church, as the weighiust things, ought especially to be
looked unto: but the Ceremonies also, as Mint and Cummin ought not to be
neglected. T.C. l p. 1^1.
granting them to be no part of those things, which in the matter of Polity are
weightier, we hope that for small things their strife will neither be earnest
no^ long. The fifting of that which is objected against the Orders of the
Church in particular, does not belong unto this place. Here we are to discuss
only those general exceptions, which have been taken at any time against them.
First, therefore to the end that their nature and use, whereunto they serve may
plainly appear, and so afterward their quality the better be discerned; we are
to note, that in every grand or main public duty, which God requires at the
hands of his Church, there is, besides that matter and form wherein the essence
thereof consists, a certain outward fashion, whereby the same is in decent
sort administered. The substance of all religious actions is delivered from God
himself in few words. For example sake in the Sacraments, Unto the Element let
the Word be added; and they both do make a Sacrament, says S. Augustine.
Baptism is given by the Element of Water, and that prescript form of words,
which the Church of Christ does use; the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
Christ is administered in the Elements of Bread and Wine, if those mystical
words be added thereunto. But the due and decent form of administering those
holy Sacraments, does require a great deal more. The end which is aimed at in
setting down the outward form of all religious actions, is the edification of
the Church. Now men are edified, when either their understanding is taught
somewhat whereof in such actions it behooves all men to consider, or when their
hearts are moved with any affection suitable thereunto; when their minds are
in any sort stirred up unto that reverence, devotion, attention, and due
regard, which in those cases seems requisite. Because therefore unto this
purpose not only speech, but sundry sensible means besides have always been
thought necessary, and especially those means which being object to the eye,
the liveliest and the most apprehensive sense of all other, have in that
respect seemed the sit to make a deep and strong impression; from hence
have risen not only a number of Prayers, Readings, Questionings, Exhortings,
but even of visible signs also, which being used in perfomance of holy actions,
are undoubtedly most effectual to open such matter, as men when they know and
remember carefully, must needs be a great deal the better informed to what
effect such duties serve. We must not think but that there is some ground of
Reason even in Nature, whereby it comes to pass, that no Nation under Heaven
either does or ever did suffer public actions which are of weight, whether
they be Civil and Temporal, or else Spiritual and Sacred, to pass without some
visible solemnity: The very strangeness whereof, and difference from that which
is common does cause Popular eyes to observe and to mark the same. Words, both
because they are common, and do not so strongly move the fancy of man, are
for the most part but slightly heard; and therefore with singular wisdom it
has been provided, that the deeds of men which are made in the presence of
Witnesses, should pass not only with words, but also with certain sensible
actions, the memory whereof is far more easy and durable then the memory of
speech can be. The things which so long experience of all Ages has confirmed
and made profitable, let not us presume to condemn as follies and toys, because
we sometimes know not the cause and reason of them. A wit disposed to scorn
whatsoever it does not conceive, might ask wherefore Abraham should say to his
servant, Genesis 24. 2.
Put thy hand under my thigh, and swear: was it not sufficient for his servant
to show the Religion of an Oath, by naming the Lord God of Heaven and Earth,
unless that strange Ceremony were added? In Contracts, Bargains and
Conveyances, a man's word is a token sufficient to express his will. Ruth 4. 7.
Yet this was the ancient manner in Israel concerning redeeming and exchanging,
to establish all things; A man did pluck off his shoe, and gave it to his
neighbor; and this was a sure witness in Israel. Amongst the Romans in their
making of a Bondsman free, was it not wondered wherefore so great a do should be
made? The Master to present his Slave in some Court, to take him by the hand,
and not only to say in the hearing of the public Magistrate, I will that this
man become free; but after these solemn words uttered, to strike him on the
cheek, to turn him round, the hair of his head to be shaved off, the Magistrate
to touch him thrice with a rod, in the end a cap and a white garment to be
given him: To what purpose all this circumstance? Among the Hebrews how strange
and in outward appearance almost against reason, Exodus 21. 6.
that he which was minded to make himself a perpetual servant, should not only
testify so much in the presence of the Judge, but for a visible token thereof
have also his ear bored through with an awl? It were an infinite labor to
prosecute these things so far as they might be exemplified both in Civil and
Religious actions. For in both they have their necessary use and force. Dionys.
p. 121. (...).
These sensible things which Religion has allowed, are resemblances framed
according to things spiritually understood, whereunto they serve as a hand to
lead, and a way to direct. And whereas it may peradventure be objected, that to
add to Religious duties, such Rites and Ceremonies as are significant, is to
institute new Sacraments: sure I am they will not say, that Numa Pompilius did
ordain a Sacrament; a significant Ceremony he did ordain, in commanding the
Priests Live. lib. ^. Maru ad digitor usque, involuta^ rem divinam facere,
significantes fidem in^andam, sedemque ej^s etiam indexivis sucratam esse.
to execute the work of their Divine Service with their hands as far as to the
fingers covered; thereby signifying that fidelity must be defended, and that
men's right hands are the sacred seat thereof. Again, we are also to put them in
mind, that themselves do not hold all significant Ceremonies, for Sacraments,
inasmuch as Imposition of hands they deny to be a Sacrament, and yet they give
thereunto a forcible signification. For concerning it their words are these,
Eccles. disc. fol. 51.
The party ordained by this ceremony, was put in mind of his separation to the
work of the Lord, that remembering himself to be taken as it were with the hand
of God from amongst others, this might teach him not to account himself now his
own, nor to do what himself lists; but to consider that God has set him
about a work, which if he will discharge and accomplish, he may at the hands of
God assure himself of reward; and, if otherwise, of revenge. Touching
significant Ceremonies, some of them are Sacraments, some as Sacaments only.
Sacraments are those, Fol. 32.
which are signs and tokens of some general promised grace, which always really
descends from God unto the soul that duly receives them: Other significant
tokens are only as Sacraments, yet no Sacraments: Which is not our distinction,
but theirs. For concerning the Apostles Imposition of hands, these are their
own words, Magnum signum hoc and quasi Sacramentum usurparunt; They used this
sign, or as it were Sacrament.

Concerning Rites and Ceremonies, The first thing they blame in the kind of
our Ceremonies, is, that we have not in them ancient Apostolical simplicity,
but a greater pomp and stateliness. Lib. Eccles. disc. and T. C. l. 3. p. 181.
there may be fault, either in the kind or in, the number and multitude of
them. The First thing blamed about the kind of ours, is, That in many things
we have departed from the ancient simplicity of Christ and his Apostles; we
have embraced more outward stateliness, we have those Orders in the exercise of
Religion, which they who best pleased God, and served him most devoutly never
had. For it is out of doubt, that the first state of things was best, that in
the prime of Christian Religion faith was foundest, the Scriptures of God were
then best understood by all men, all parts of godliness did then most abound;
and therefore it must needs follow, that Customs, Laws, and Ordinances devised
since, are not so good for the Church of Christ; but the best way is to cut off
later inventions, and to reduce things unto the ancient state wherein at the
first they were. Which Rule or Canon we hold to be either uncertain, or at
least wise unsufficient, if not both. For in case it be certain, hard it cannot
be for them to show us, where we shall find it so exactly set down, that we may
say without all controversy, These were the Orders of the Apostles times,
these wholly and only, neither fewer nor more then these. True it is that many
things of this nature be alluded unto, yea many things declared, and many
things necessariy collected out of the Apostles writings. But is it necessary
that all the Orders of the Church which were then in use, should be contained
in their Books? Surely no. For if the tenor of their Writings be well observed,
it shall unto any man easily appear, that no more of them are there touched,
then were needful to be spoken of sometimes by one occasion, and sometimes by
another. Will they allow then of any other Records besides? Well assured I am
they are far enough from acknowledging that the Church ought to keep any thing
as Apostolical, which is not found in the Apostles Writings, in what other
Records soever it be found. And therefore whereas St. Augustine affirms, that
those things which the whole Church of Christ does hold, may well be thought to
be Apostolical, although they be not found written; T^m. 7. de hapt. ^atra
Donatist. lib. ^. a^. 23. T. C. l. 1. p. 31. If this judgment of S. Augustine
be a good judgment ^^ found; than there he some things commanded of God, which
are not in the scripture; and therefore there is no sufficient Doctrine
contained in Scripture, whereby we may be saved. For all the Commandments of
God, and of the Apostles, are needful for our salvation. Vide Ep ^^a.
this his judgment they utterly condemn. I will not here stand in defense of
S. Augustines opinion, which is, that such things are indeed Apostolical; but
yet with this exception, unless the Decree of some General Council have happily
caused them to be received; for of Positive Laws and Orders received throughout
the whole Christian world, S. Augustine could imagine no other Fountain save
these two. But to let pass S. Augustine, they who condemn him herein, must
needs confess it a very uncertain thing what the Orders of the Church were in
the Apostles times, seeing the Scriptures do not mention them all, and other
Records thereof besides they utterly reject. So that in tying the Church to the
Orders of the Apostles times, they tie it to a mavelous uncertain rule;
unless they require the observation of no Orders but only those which are known
to be Apostolical by the Apostles own Writings. But then is not this their rule
of such sufficiency, that we should use it as a touchstone to try the Orders of
the Church by for ever? Our end ought always to be the same; our ways and means
thereunto not so. The glory of God, and the good of the Church was the thing
which the Apostles aimed at, and therefore ought to be the mark whereat we also
level. But seeing those Rites and Orders may be at one time more, which at
another are less available unto that purpose: what reason is there in these
things to urge the state of our only age, as a pattern for all to follow? It is
not, I am right sure, their meaning, that we should now assemble our People to
serve God in close and secret Meetings; or that common Brooks or Rivers should
be used for places of Baptism; or that the Eucharist should be ministered after
meat; or that the custom of Church-feasting should be renewed: or that all kind
of standing provision for the Ministry should be utterly taken away, and their
Estate made again dependent upon the voluntary devotion of men. In these things
they easily perceive how unfit that were for the present, which was for the
first Age convenient enough. The Faith, Zeal, and Godliness of former times is
worthily had in honor; but does this prove that the Orders of the Church of
Christ must be still the self-same with theirs, that nothing may be which was
not then, or that nothing which then was may lawfully since have ceased? They
who recall the Church unto that which was at the first, must necessarily set
bounds and limits unto their speeches. If any thing have been received
repugnant unto that which was first delivered, the first things in this case
must stand, the last give place unto them. But where difference is without
repugnancy, that which has been can be no prejudice to that which is. Let the
state of the People of God when they were in the House of Bondage, and their
manner of serving God in a strange Land, be compared with that which Canaan and
Jerusalem did afford, and who sees not what huge difference there was between
them? In Egypt it may be, they were right glad to take some corner of a poor
Cottage, and there to serve God upon their knees, peradventure covered in dust
and straw sometimes. Neither were they therefore the less accepted of God; but
he was with them in all their afflictions, and at the length by working of
their admirable deliverance, did testify that they served him not in vain.
Notwithstanding in the very desert they are no sooner possessed of some little
thing of their own, but a Tabernacle is required at their hands. Being planted
in the land of Canaan, and having David to be their King, when the Lord had
given him rest from all his Enemies, it grieved his religious mind to consider
the growth of his own estate and dignity, the Affairs of Religion continuing
still in the former manner: (...). 7. 2.
Behold, now I dwell in the house of Cedar trees, and the Ark of God remains
still within Curtains. What he did purpose, it was the pleasure of God that
Solomon his Son should perform, and perform it in manner suitable unto their
present, not their ancient estate and condition. 2 Chronicles. 2. 5.
For which cause Solomon writes unto the King of Tyrus: The House which I
build is great and wonderful; for great is our God above all gods. Whereby it
clearly appears, that the Orders of the Church of God may be acceptable unto
him, as well being framed suitable to the greatness and dignity of latter, as
when they keep the reverend simplicity o^ antienter times. Such dissimilitude
therefore between us and the Apostles of Christ, in the order of some outward
things, is no argument of default.

3. Yea, but we have framed our selves to the customs of the Church of Rome,
our Orders and Ceremonies are Papistical. Our Orders and Ceremonies blamed, in
that so many of them are the same which the Church of Rome uses. Eccles.
Discipl. sol. 12. T. C. lib. 1. p. 131. T. C. l. 1. p. 20. T.C.l.1. p 25.
It is espied that our Church-founders were not so-careful as in this matter
they should have been, but contented themselves with such discipline as they
took from the Church of Rome. Their Error we ought to reform by abolishing all
Popish Orders. There must be no communion nor fellowship with Papists, neither
in Doctrine, Ceremonies, nor Government. It is not enough that we are divided
from the Church of Rome by the single wall of Doctrine, retaining as we do part
of their Ceremonies, and almost their whole Government: but Government or
Ceremonies, or whatsoever it be which is Popish, away with it. This is the
thing they require in us, the uttter relinquishment of all things Popish.
Wherein, to the end we may answer them according to their plain direct meaning,
and not take advantage of doubtful speech, whereby Controversies grow always
endless; their main Position being this, that nothing should be placed in the
Church, but what God in his word has commanded, they must of necessity hold
all for Popish, which the Church of Rome has over and besides this. By Popish
Orders, Ceremonies, and Government they must therefore mean in every of these so
much, as the Church of Rome has embraced without commandment of Gods word: so
that whatsoever such thing we have, if the Church of Rome has it also, it
goes under the name of those thing that are Popish, yea, although it be
lawful, although agreeable to the word of God. For so they plainly affirm,
saying: T. C. lib. 1 p. 13^.
Although the Forms and Ceremonies which they (the Church of Rome) used were
not unlawful, and that they contained nothing which is not agreeable to the
Word of God, yet notwithstanding neither the Word of God, nor reason, nor the
examples of the eldest Churches, both Jewish and Christian, do permit us to use
the same Forms and Ceremonies, being neither commanded of God, neither such as
there may not as good as they, and rather better be established. The question
therefore is, whether we may sollow the Church of Rome in those Orders, Rites
and Ceremonies, wherein we do not think them blameable, or else ought to devise
others, and to have no conformity with them, no not so much as in these things?
In this sense and construction therefore as they affirm, so we deny, that
whatsoever is Popish we ought to abrogate. Their Arguments to prove that
generally all Popish Orders and Ceremonies ought to be clean abolished, are in
sum these: First, whereas we allow the judgment of S. Augustine, T. C. l. 1. p.
30.
that touching those things of this kind which are not commanded or sorbidden
in the Scripture, we are to observe the Custom of the People of God, and the
Decrees of our Forefathers: how can we retain the Customs and Constitutions of
the Papists in such things, who were neither the People of God nor our
Forefathers? Secondly, T. C. l. 1. p 131.
although the Forms and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome were not unlawful,
neither did contain any thing which is not agreeable to the Word of God, yet
neither the Word of God, nor the example o^ the eldest Churches of God, nor
reason, do permit us to use the same, they being Heretics and so near about
us, and their Orders being neither commanded of God, not yet such, but that as
good or rather better may be established. It is against the Word of God, to
have conformity with the Church of Rome in such things, as appears, in that
the wisdom of God has thought it a good way to keep his People from infection
o^ Idolaty and Superstition by severing them from Idolaters in outward
Ceremonies, and therefore has forbidden them to do things which are in
themselves very lawful to be done. And ^urther, where as the Lord was careful
to sever them by Ceremonies from other Nations, yet was he not so careful to
sever them from any, as from the Egyptians amongst whom they lived, and from
those Nations which were next Neighbors to them, because from them was the
greatest fear of infection. So that following the course which the wisdom of
God does teach, T. C. l. 1 p. 132.
it were more safe for us to conform our indifferent Ceremonies to the Turks
which are far off, then to the Papists which are so near. Tom. 2. Graca. ^3.
Touching the example of the eldest Churches of God, in one Council it was
decreed, that Christians should not deck their houses with Bay Leaves and green
boughs, because the Pagans did use so to do; and that they should not rest from
their labors those days that the Pagans did, that they should not keep the
first day of every month as they did. Con. Africa. cap. 27. Lib. de Idolat. He
seems to mean the feast of Easter day, celebrated in the memory of our
Saviors resurrection, and for that cause earned the Lords day. Lib. de Anima.
Another Council decreed that Christians should not celebrate Feasts on the
Birth-dayes of the Martyrs, because it was the manner of the Heathen. O, says
Tertullian, better is the Religion of the Heathen: for they use no solemnity of
the Christians, neither the Lords day, neither the Pentecost, and if they knew
them, they would have nothing to do with them: for they would be afraid lest
they should seem Christians: but we are not afraid to be called Heathens. The
same Tertullian would not have Christians to sit after they had paid, because
the Idolaters did so. Whereby it appears, that both of Particular men and of
Counsels, in making or abolishing of Ceremonies, heed had been taken that the
Christians should not be like the Idolaters, no not in those things which of
themselves are most indifferent to be used or not used. The same conformity is
not less opposite unto reason, first inasmuch as contraries must be cured by
their contraries, and therefore Popery being Antichristianity, is not healed
but by establishment of Orders thereunto opposite. The way to bring a drunken
man to sobriety, it to carry him as far from excess of drink as may be. To
rectify a crooked stick, we bend it on the contrary side, as far as it was at
the first on that side from whence we draw it: and so it comes in the end to a
middle between both, which is perfect straightness. Utter inconformity
therefore with the Church of Rome in these things, is the best and surest
Policy which the Church can use. While we use their Ceremonies, they take
occasion to blaspheme, saying that our Religion cannot stand by it self, unless
it lean upon the staff of their Ceremonies. T. C. l.3. p. 178.
They hereby conceive great hope of having the rest of their Popery in the end,
which hope causes them to be more frozen in their wickedness. Neither is it
without cause that they have this hope, considering that which M. Bucer notes
upon the eighteenth of S. Matthew, that where these things have been left,
Popery has returned; but on the other part, in places which have been cleansed
of these things, it has not yet been seen that it has had any entrance. T. C.
l. 3. p. 179.
None make such clamours for these Ceremonies, as the Papists, and those whom
they suborn; a manifest token how much they triumph and joy in these things.
They breed grief of mind in a number that are godly minded, and have
Antichristianity in such detestation, that their minds are Martyred with the
very sight of them in the Church. T. C. l. 3. p. 180.
Such godly Brethren we ought not thus to grieve with unprofitable Ceremonies,
yea Ceremonies wherein there is not only no profit, but also danger of great
hurt that may grow to the Church by infection, which Popish Ceremonies are
means to breed. This in effect is the sum and substance of that which they
bring by way of opposition against those Orders which we have common with the
Church of Rome; these are the reasons wherewith they would prove our Ceremonies
in that respect worthy of blame.

That whereas they who blame us in this behalf, when reason evicteth that all
such Ceremonies are not to be abolished, make answer, that when they condemn
Popish Ceremonies, their meaning is of Ceremonies unprofitable, or Ceremonies,
instead whereof as good or better may be devised: they cannot hereby get out of
the briars, but contradict and gainsay themselves: in as much as their usual
manner is to prove, that Ceremonies uncommanded in the Church of God, and yet
used in the Church of Rome, are for this very cause unprofitable to us, and not
so good as others in their place would be.
4. Before we answer unto these things, we are to cut off that, whereunto they
from whom these Objections proceed, do oftentimes fly for defense and succor,
when the force and strength of their Argument is elided. For the Ceremonies in
use amongst us, being in no other respect retained, saving only for that to
retain them is to our seeming, good and profitable, yea so profitable and so
good, that if we had either simply taken them clean away, or else removed them
so as to place in their stead others, we had done worse: the plain and direct
way against us herein had been only to prove, that all such Ceremonies as they
require to be abolished, are retained by us to the hurt of the Church, or with
less benefit then the abolishment of them would bring. But forasmuch as they
saw how hardly they should be able to perform this; they took a more
compendious way, traducing the Ceremonies of our Church under the name of being
Popish. The cause why this way seemed better unto them, was, for that the name
of Popery is more odious then very Paganism amongst diverse of the more simple
sort; so whatsoever they hear named Popish, they presently conceive deep hatred
against it, imagining there can be nothing contained in that name, but needs it
must be exceeding detestable. The ears of the People they have therefore filled
with strong clamours. The Church of England is fraught with Popish Ceremonies:
they that favor the cause of Reformation, maintain nothing but the sincerity
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: All such as withstand them, fight for the Laws
of his sworn enemy, uphold the filthy relics of Antichrist; and are defenders
of that which is Popish. These are the notes wherewith are drawn from the
hearts of the multitude so many sighs; with these tunes their minds are
exasperated against the lawful Guides and Governors of their souls; these are
the voices that fill them with general coffeehouse, as though the bosom of
that famous Church wherein they live, were more noysom then any dungeon. But
when the Authors of so scandalous incantations are examined and called to
account, how can they justify such their dealings; when they are urged
directly to answer, T. C. l. 3. p. 171. What an open untruth is it, that this
is one of our principles not to be lawful to use the same Ceremonies which the
Papists did, when as I have both before declared the contrary, and even here
have expressly added, that they are not to be used when as good or better may be
established? Eccles. discip. sol. 100.
whether it be lawful for us to use any such Ceremonies as the Church of Rome
uses, although the same be not commanded in the Word of God; being driven to
see that the use of some such Ceremonies must of necessity be granted lawful,
they go about to make us believe that they are just of the same Opinion, and
that they only think such Ceremonies are not to be used when they are
unprofitable, or when as good or better may be established. Which Answer is
both idle in regard of us, and also repugnant to themselves. It is, in regard
of us, very vain to make this answer, because they know that what Ceremonies we
retain common unto the Church of Rome, we therefore retain them, for that we
judge them to be profitable, and to be such that others instead of them would
be worse. So that when they say that we ought to abrogate such Romish
Ceremonies as are unprofitable, or else might have other more profitable in
their stead, they trisle and they beat the Air about nothing which touches us,
unless they mean that we ought to abrogate all Romish Ceremonies, which in
their judgment have either no use, or less use than some other might have. But
then must they show some commission, whereby they are authorized to sit as
Judges, and we required to take their judgment for good in this case.
Otherwise, their sentences will not be greatly regarded, when they oppose their
Me thinks, unto the Orders of the Church of England: as in the Question about
Surplesses one of them does; If we look to the color, black methinks is the
more decent; if to the form, a garment down to the foot has a great deal more
comeliness in it. If they think that we ought to prove the Ceremonies
commodious which we have retained, they do in this Point very greatly deceive
themselves. For in all right and equity, that which the Church has received
and held so long for good, that which public approbation has ratified, must
carry the benefit of presumption with it to be accounted meet and convenient.
They which have stood up as yesterday to challenge it of defect, must prove
their challenge. If we being Defendents do answer, that the Ceremonies in
question, are godly, comely, decent, profitable for the Church; their reply is
childish and unorderly to say, T. C. l. 3. p. 176. As for your often repeating
that the Ceremonies in question are godly, comely, and decent: It is your old
wont of demanding the thing in question, and an undoubted Argument of your
extreme poverty. T. C. l. 3. p. 176.
that we demand the thing in question, and show the poverty of our cause, the
goodness whereof we are fain to beg that our Adversaries would grant. For on
our part this must be the Answer, which orderly proceeding does require. The
burden of proving does rest on them. In them it is frivolous to say, we ought
not to use bad Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, and presume all such bad, as
it pleases themselves to dislike, unless we can persuade them the contrary.
Besides, they are herein opposite also to themselves. For what one thing is so
common with them, as to use the custom of the Church of Rome for an Argument
to prove, that such and such Ceremonies cannot be good and profitable for us,
inasmuch as that Church uses them? Which usual kind of disputing, shows that
they do not disallow only those Romish Ceremonies which are unprofitable, but
count all unprofitable, which are Romish, that is to say, which have been
devised by the Church of Rome, or which are used in that Church, and not
prescribed in the Word of God. For this is the only limitation which they can
use suitable unto their other Positions. And therefore the cause which they
yield, why they hold it lawful to retain in Doctrine and in Discipline some
things as good, which yet are common to the Church of Rome, is, for that those
good things are perpetual Commandments, in whose place no other can come: but
Ceremonies are changeable. So that their judgment in truth, is, that
whatsoever by the Word of God is not changeable in the Church of Rome, that
Churches using is a cause why Reformed Churches ought to change it, and not to
think it good or profitable. And lest we seem to father any thing upon them
more then is properly their own, let them read even their own words, where they
complain, That we are thus constrained to be like unto the Papists in any their
Ceremonies; yea, they urge that this cause, although it were alone, ought to
move them to whom that belongs, to do them away, T. C. l. 3. p. 177. And that
this complaint of ours is just, in that we are thus constrained to be like unto
the Papists in any their Ceremonies; and that this cause only ought to move
them to whom that belongeh, to do their, away, forasmuch as they are their
Ceremonies, the ^eal ^^r may further see in the Bishop of Salisbury, who brings
diverse pro^is thereof.
forasmuch as they are their Ceremonies; and that the Bishop of Salisbury, does
justify this their complaint. The clause is untrue which they add concerning
the Bishop of Salisbury; but the sentence does show, that we do them no wrong
in setting down the state of the question between us thus: Whether we ought to
abolish out of the Church of England, all such Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies as
are established in the Church of Rome, and are not prescribed in the Word of
God. For the Affirmative whereof we are now to answer such proofs of theirs as
have been before alleged.

That our allowing ^he customs of our fathers to be followed is no proof that
we may not allow some customs which the Church of Rome has, alth ^i^h we do
not account of them as of our fathers.
5. Let the Church of Rome be what it will, let them that are of it be the
people of God, and our Fathers in the Christian Faith, or let them be
otherwise; hold them for Catholics, or hold them for Heretics, it is not a
thing either one way or other in this present question greatly material. Our
conformity with them in such things as have been proposed, is not proved as yet
unlawful by all this. S. Augustine has said, yea and we have allowed his
saying, That the custom of the people of God, and the decrees of our
forefathers are to be kept, touching those things whereof the Scripture has
neither one way nor other given us any charge. What then? Does it here
therefore follow, that they, being neither the people of God, nor our
Forefathers, are for that cause in nothing to be followed? This Consequent were
good, if so be it were granted, that only the custom of the people of God, and
the Decrees of our forefathers are in such case to be observed. But then should
no other kind of latter Laws in the Church be good, which were a gross
absurdity to think. S. Augustines speech therefore does import, that where we
have no divine Precept, if yet we have the custom of the people of God, or a
Decree of our forefathers, this is a Law and must be kept. Notwithstanding it
is not denied, but that we lawfully may observe the positive constitutions of
our own Churches, although the same were but yesterday made by our selves
alone. Nor is there any thing in this to prove, that the Church of England
might not by Law receive Orders, Rites, or Customs from the Church of Rome,
although they were neither the people of God, nor yet our forefathers. How much
less, when we have received from them nothing but that which they did
themselves receive from such, as we cannot deny to have been the people of God,
yea such as either we must acknowledge for our own forefathers, or else disdain
the race of Christ?

That the ^^u^e which the wisdom of God does ^^ach, makes not against our ^^^u
^ity with the Church of Rome in such things.
6. The Rites and Orders wherein we follow the Church of Rome, are of no other
kind that such as the Church of Geneva it self does follow them in. We follow
the Church of Rome in mo things; yet they in some things of the same nature
about which our present controversy is: so that the difference is not in the
kind, but in the number of Rites only, wherein they and we do follow the
Church of Rome. The use of Wafercakes, the custom of Godfathers and Godmothers
in Baptism, are things not commanded nor forbidden in the Scripture, things
which have been of old, and are retained in the Church of Rome, even at this
very hour. Is conformity with Rome in such things a blemish unto the Church of
England, and unto Churches abroad an ornament? Let them, if not for the
reverence they owe unto this Church, in the bowels whereof they have received I
trust that precious and blessed vigor, which shall quicken them ^^ eternal
life; yet at the least wise for the singular affection which they do bear
toward others, take heed how they strike, lest they wound whom they would not.
For undoubtedly it cutteth deeper then they are aware of, when they plead that
even such Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, as contain in them nothing which is
not of it self agreeable to the Word of God, ought nevertheless to be
abolished, and that neither the Word of God, nor reason, nor the examples of
the eldest Churches, do permit the Church of Rome to be therein followed.
Heretics they are, and they are our Neighbors. By us and amongst us, they
lead their lives. But what then? therefore is no ceremony of theirs lawful for
us to use? We must yield and will, that none are lawful if God himself be a
Precedent against the use of any. But how appears it that God is so? Hereby,
they say, it does appear, T. C. l. ^. p. 25. and 131.
in that God severed his people from the Heathens, but specially from the
Egyptians, and such Nations as were nearest Neighbors unto them, by forbidding
them to do those things, which were in themselves very lawful to be done, yea
very profitable some, and incommodious to be sorburn; such things it pleased
God to forbid them, only because those Heathens did them, with whom conformity
in the same thing might have bred infection. Thus in shaving, cutting,
apparel-wearing, Levit. 19. 27. and 19. 19. Deuteronomy 22 ^^ and 14. 7. and Levit.
11. Ephesians. 2. 14.
yea in sundry kinds of meats also, Swines-flesh, Conies, and such like, they
were forbidden to do so and so, because the Gentiles did so. And the end why
God forbade them such things, wa^, to sever them, for fear of infection, by a
great and an high wall from other Nations, as S. Paul teaches. The cause of
more careful separation from the nearest Nations, was, the greatness of danger
to be especially by them infected. Now, Papists are to us as those Nations were
unto Israel. Therefore if the wisdom of God be our Guide, we cannot allow
conformity with them, no not in any such indifferent Ceremonies. Our direct
answer hereunto is, that for any thing here alleged we may still doubt,
whether the Lord in such indifferent Ceremonies as those whereof we dispute,
did frame his People of set purpose unto any utter dissimilitude, either with
Egyptians, or with any other Nation else. And if God did not forbid them all
such indifferent Ceremonies, then our conformity with the Church of Rome in
some such is not hitherto as yet disproved, although Papists were unto us as
those Heathens were unto Israel. Levit. 1^. 3.
After the doings of the Land of Egypt, wherein you dwelt, ye shall not do,
says the Lord; and after the manner of the land of Canaan, whither I will
bring you, shall ye not do, neither walk in their Ordinances: Do after my
judgments, and keep my Ordinances to walk therein; I am the Lord your God. The
Speech is indefinite, ye shall not be like them: It is not general, ye shall
not be like them in anything, or like unto them in any thing indifferent, or
like unto them in any indifferent ceremony of theirs. Seeing therefore it is
not set down how far the bounds of his speech concerning dissimilitude should
reach, how can any man assure us, that it extends farther than to those
things only wherein the Nations there mentioned were Idolatrous, or did against
that which the Law of God commands? Nay, does it not seem a thing very
probable, that God does purposely add, Do after my judgment, as giving thereby
to understand that his meaning in the former sentence was but to bar similitude
in such things as were repugnant unto the Ordinances, Laws, and Statutes, which
he had given? Egyptians and Canaanites are for example sake named unto them,
because the Customs of the one they had been, and of the other they should be
best acquainted with. But that wherein they might not be like unto either of
them, was such peradventure as had been no whit less unlawful, although those
Nations had never been. So that there is no necessity to think that God for
fear of infection by reason of nearness, forbad them to be like unto the
Canaanites or the Egyptians, in those things which otherwise had been lawful
enough. For I would know what one thing was in those Nations, and is here
forbidden, being indifferent in it self, yet forbidden only because they used
it? In the Laws of Israel we find it written, Levit. 15. 17
Ye shall not cut round the corners of your Heads, neither shall thou tear the
tafis of thy Board. These things were usual amongst those Nations, and in
themselves they are indifferent. But are they indifferent being used as signs
of immoderate and hopeless lamentation for the dead? In this sense it is that
the Law forbids them. For which cause the very next words following are,
Levit. 21. 3.
Ye shall not cut your Flesh for the dead, nor make any print of a mark upon
you, I am the Lord. The like in Leviticus, where speech is of mourning for the
dead, They shall not make bald parts upon their Head, nor shave off the locks
of their Beard, nor make any cutting in their Flesh. Again, Deuteronomy. 14. 1.
in Deuteronomy. Ye are the Children of the Lord your God; ye shall not cut your
selves, nor make you Baldness between your eyes for the Dead. What is this but
in effect the same which the Apostle does more plainly express, saying, 1 These.
4. 13.
Sorrow not as they do who have no hope? The very light of Nature it self was
able to see herein a fault; that which those Nations did use, having been also
in use with others, the ancient Roman laws do forbid. That shaving therefore
and cutting which the Law does mention, was not a matter in it self
indifferent, and forbidden only because it was in use amongst such Idolaters as
were Neighbors to the people of God; but to use it had a been crime, though no
other people or Nation under Heaven should have done it saving only themselves.
As for those Laws concerning attires, Levit. 19. 19. Deuteronomy. 2. 11.
There shall no garment of Linen and VVollen come upon thee; as also those
touching food and diet, wherein Swines-flesh together with sundry other meats
are forbidden, the use of these things had been indeed of it self harmless and
indifferent: so that hereby it does appear, how the Law of God forbad in some
special consideration, such things as were lawful enough in themselves. Deuteronomy.
14. 7. Levit. 11.
But yet even here they likewise fail of that they intend. For it does not
appear that the consideration in regard whereof the Law forbids these
things, was because those Nations did use them. Likely enough it is that the
Canaanites used to feed as well on Sheep as on Swines-flesh; Levit. 19. 19.
and therefore if the forbidding of the latter had no other reason then
dissimilitude with that people, they which of their own heads allege this for
reason, can show I think some reason more then we are able to find, why the
former was not also forbidden. Might there not be some other mystery in this
Prohibition then they think of? Yes, Deuteronomy. 14. Levit. 11.
some other mystery there was in it by all likelihood. For what reason is
there, which should but induce, and therefore much less enforce us to think,
that care of dissimilitude between the People of God and the Heathen Nations
about them, was any more the cause of forbidding them to put on Garments of
sundry stuff, then of charging the^ withal not to sow their Fields with Meslin;
or that this was any more the cause of forbidding them to eat Swines-flesh,
than of charging them withal not to eat the flesh of Eagles, Hawks, and the
like, wherefore although the Church of Rome were to us, as to Israel the
Egyptians and Canaanites were of old; yet does it not follow that the wisdom of
God without respect does teach us to erect between us and them a partition wall
of difference, Ephesians. 2. 14.
in such things indifferent as have been hitherto disputed of.

That the example of the eldest Churches is not herein against us.
7. Neither is the example of the eldest Churches a whit more available to this
purpose. Notwithstanding some fault undoubtedly there is in the very
resemblance of Idolaters. Were it not some kind of blemish to be like unto
Infidels and Heathens, it would not so usually be objected; men would not think
it any advantage in the causes of Religion, to be able therewith justly to
charge their Adversaries as they do. T. C. l. 1. p. 132. The Councels although
they did not observe themselves always in making of Decrees this Rule, ye^ have
kept this consideration continually in taking of their Laws, that they would
have the Christians differ from others in their Ceremonies.
Wherefore to the end that it may a little more plainly appear, what force this
has, and how far the same extends, we are to note how all men are naturally
desirous, that they may seem neither to judge, nor to do amiss, because every
Error and Offense is a stain to the beauty of Nature, for which cause it
blusheth thereat, but glories in the contrary; from whence it rises, that
they which disgrace or depress the credit of others, do it either in both or in
one of these. To have been in either directed by a weak and unperfect rule,
argues imbecility and imperfection. Men being either led by reason, or by
imitation of other men's examples; if their Persons be odious whose example we
choose to follow, as namely, if we frame our opinions to that which condemned
Heretics think, or direct our Actions according to that which is practiced and
done by them; it lies as an heavy prejudice against us, unless somewhat
mightier then their bare example, did move us to think or do the same things
with them. Christian men therefore having besides the common light of all men,
so great help of heavenly direction from above, together with the Lamps of so
bright examples at the Church of God does yield, it cannot but worthily seem
reproachful for us, to leave both the one and the other, to become Disciples
unto the most hateful sort that live, to do as they do, only because we see
their example before us, and have delight to follow it. Thus we may therefore
safely conclude, that it is not evil simply to concur with the Heathens either
in opinion or in action: and that conformity with them is only then a disgrace,
when either we follow them in that they think and do amiss, or follow them
generally in that they do, without other reason than only the liking we have to
the pattern of their example: which liking does intimate a more universal
approbation of them than is allowable. Faustus the Manichee therefore objecting
against the Jews, that they forsook the Idols of the Gentiles; but their
Temples, and Oblations, and Altars, and Priest hoods and all kind of Ministry
of holy things, they exercised even as the Gentiles did, yea more
superstituosly a great deal; against the Catholic Christians likewise, that
between them and the Heathens there was in many things little difference; Tom.
^. ^sal. Faust. Manich. lib. 30. cap. 4.
From them (says Faustus) ye have learned to hold that one only God is the
Author of all, their Sacrifices you have turned in Feasts of charity, their
Idols into Martyrs, whom ye honor with the like Religious offices unto theirs;
The Ghosts of the dead ye appease with Wine and Delicates, the Festival days of
the Nations ye celebrate together with them, and of their kind of life ye have
utterly changed nothing. S. Augustines defense in behalf of both, is, that
touching the matters of Action, Jews and Catholic Christians were free from
the Gentiles faultiness, even in those things which were objected as tokens of
their agreement with the Gentiles, and concerning their consent in opinion,
they did not hold the same with the Gentiles, because Gentiles had so taught,
but because Heaven and Earth had so witnessed the same to be truth, that
neither the one sort could err in being fully persuaded thereof, T. C. l. 1.
p. 132 Also it was decreed in another Council that they should not deck their
houses with Bay leaves and green Houghs, because the Pagangs did use so; and
that they should not rest their labor those days that the Pagans did, that
they should not keep the first day of every month as they did.
nor the other but err in case they should not consent with them. In things of
their own nature indifferent, if either Councils or particular men have at any
time with sound judgment misliked conformity between the Church of God and
Infidels, the cause thereof has been somewhat else then only affectation of
dissimilitude. They saw it necessary so to do, in respect of some special
accident, which the Church being not always subject unto, has not still cause
to do the like. For example, in the dangerous days of trial, wherein there was
no way for the truth of Jesus Christ to triumph over Infidelity, but through
the constancy of his Saints, whom yet a natural desire to save themselves from
the flame might peradventure cause to join with Pagans in external Customs, too
far using the same as a cloak to conceal themselves in, and a mist to darken
the eyes of Insidels withal: for remedy hereof those Laws it might be were
provided, which forbad that Christians should deck their houses with Boughs, as
the Pagans did use to do, or rest those Festival days whereon the Pagans
rested, or celebrate such Feasts as were, though not Heathenish, yet such that
the simpler sort of Heathens might be beguiled in so thinking them. T. C. l. 3
p.132. Tertul. says, O, says he, better is the Religion of the Heathen: for
they use no solemnity of the Christians, neither the Lords day, neither, etc.
but are not afraid to called Hea.
As for Tertullians judgment concerning the Rites and Orders of the Church; no
man, having judgment, can be ignorant how just exceptions may be taken against
it. His opinion touching the Catholic Church was as un-indifferent, as
touching our Church the opinion of them that favor this pretended Reformation
is. He judged all them who did not Montanize, to be but carnally minded; he
judged them still over-abjectly to fawn upon the Heathens, and to curry favor
with In^idels; Which as the Catholic Church did well provide that they might
not do indeed, so Tertullian over-often through coffeehouse carpeth
injuriously at them, as though they did it even when they were free from such
meaning. But if it were so that either the judgment of those Councils before
alleged, or of Tertullian himself against the Christians, are in no such
consideration to be understood as we have mentioned; if it were so, T. C. l. 1.
p. 133. But having she wed this in general to be the God first, and of his
People afterward, to pue as much difference as can be commodiously between the
People of God and others which are not, I shall not, etc.
that men are condemned as well of the one as of the other, only for using the
Ceremonies of a Religion contrary unto their own, and that this cause is such
as ought to prevail no less with us than with them; shall it not follow, that
seeing there is still between our Religion and Paganism the self-same
contrariety, therefore we are still no less rebukeable, if we now deck our
Houses with Boughs, or send New Years gifts unto our Friends, or seast on those
days which the Gentiles then did, or sit after Prayer as they were accustomed?
For so they infer upon the premises, that as great difference as commodiously
may be, there should be in all outward Ceremonies between the People of God,
and them which are not his People. Again, they teach as has been declared,
that there is not as great a difference as may be between them, except the one
do avoid whatsoever Rites and Ceremonies uncommanded of God the other does
embrace. So that generally they teach, that the very difference of Spiritual
condition it self between the Servants of Christ and others, requires such
difference in Ceremonies between them, although the one be never so far
disjoined in time or place from the other. But in case the People of God and
Belial do chance to be Neighbors; then as the danger of infection is greater,
so the same difference they say, is thereby made more necessary. In this
respect as the Jews were severed from the Heathen, so most especially from the
Heathen nearest them. And in the same respect we, which ought to differ
howsoever from the Church of Rome, are now, they say, by reason of our nearness
more bound to differ from them in Ceremonies then from Turks. A strange kind of
speech unto Christianeus, and such, as I hope, they themselves do acknowledge
unadvisedly uttered. We are not so much to fear infection from Turks as from
Papists. What of that? we must remember that by conforming rather our selves in
that respect to Turks, we should be spreaders of a worse infection into others,
then any we are likely to draw from Papists by our conformity with them in
Ceremonies. If they did ^ate, as Turks do, the Christian; or as Canaanites did
of old the Jewish Religion even in gross; the circumstance of local nearness in
them unto us, might happily enforce in us a duty of greater separation from them
then from those other mentioned. But forasmuch as Papists are so much in Christ
nearer unto us then Turks, is there any reasonable man, now you, but will judge
it meeter that our Ceremonies of Christian Religion should be Popish, then
Turkish or Heathenish? Especially considering that we were not brought to dwell
amongst them (as Israel in Canaan) having not been of them. For even a very
part of them we were. And when God did by his good Spirit put it into our
hearts, first to reform our selves (whence grew our separation) and then by all
good means to seek also their Reformation; had we not only cut off their
corruptions, but also estranged our selves from them in things indifferent; who
sees not how greatly prejudicial this might have been to so good a cause, and
what occasion it had given them to think (to their greater obduration in evil)
that through a froward or wanton desire of Innovation, we did unconstrainedly
those things for which conscience was pretended? Howsoever the case does stand,
as Judah had been rather to choose conformity in things indifferent with Israel,
when they were nearest opposites, then with the farthest removed Pagans: So we
in like cases, much rather with Papists than with Turks. I might add further
for a more full and complete Answer, so much concerning the large odds between
the case of the eldest Churches inregard of those Heathens, and ours in respect
of the Church of Rome, that very cavillation it self should be satisfied, and
have no shift to fly unto.

That ^^ is not ou^^est policy for the establishment of found Religion, to have
in these things no agreement with the Church of Rome being unfound.
8. But that no one thing may detain us overlong, I return to their Reasons
against our conformity with that Church. That extreme dissimilitude which they
urge upon us, is now commended as our best and safest policy for establishment
of sound Religion. The ground of which politic Position is, That Evils must be
cured by their contraries; and therefore the cure of the Church infected with
the poison of Antichristianity, must be done by that which is thereunto as
contrary as may be. A meddled estate of the Orders of the Gospel, and the
Ceremonies of Popery, is not the best way to banish Popery. We are contrariwise
of opinion, that he which will perfectly recover a sick, and restore a diseased
body unto health, must not endeavor so much to bring it to a state of simple
contrariety, as of fit proportion in cont^ariety unto those evils which are to
be cured. He that will take away extreme heat, T. C. l. 1 p. 13. Comment reason
also does ^each that contraries are cured by their contraries. Now Christianity
and Antichristianity, the Gospel and Popery, be contraries: and therefore
Antichristianity must be cured, not by it self, but by that which is (as much
as may be) contrary unto it.
by setting the body in extremity of cold, shall undoubtedly remove the
disease, but together with it the diseased too. The first thing therefore in
skilful cures, is the knowledge of the part affected; the next is of the evil
which does affect it; the last is not only of the kind, but also of the
measure of contrary things whereby to remove it. They which measure Religion by
dislike of the Church of Rome, think every man so much the more sound, by how
much he can make the corruptions thereof to seem more large. And therefore some
there are, namely the Arrians in reformed Churches of Poland, which imagine the
Canker to have eaten so far into the very Bones and Marrow of the Church of
Rome, as if it had not so much as a sound belief; no, not concerning God
himself, but that the very belief of the Trinity, were a part of Antichristian
corruption; and that the wonderful providence of God did bring to pass, that
the Bishop of the Sea of Rome should be famous for his tripple Crown; a
sensible mark whereby the world might know him to be that Mystical Beast spoken
of in the Revelation, to be that great and notorious Antichrist in no one
respect so much as in this, that he maintains the Doctrine of the Trinity.
Wisdom therefore and skill is requisite to know, what parts are sound in that
Church, and what corrupted. Neither is it to all men apparent, which complain
of unsound parts, with what kind of unsoundness every such part is possessed.
They can say, that in Doctrine, in Discipline, in Prayers, in Sacraments, the
Church of Rome has (as it has indeed) very foul and gross corruptions: the
nature whereof notwithstanding because they have not for the most part exact
skill and knowledge to discern, they think that amiss many times which is not,
and the salve of Reformation they mightily call for; but where and what the
sores are which need it, as they wot full little, so they think it not greatly
material to search; such men's contentment must be wrought by stratagem: the
usual method of Art is not for them. But with those that profess more than
ordinary and common knowledge of good from evil, with them that are able to put
a difference between things naught, and things indifferent in the Church of
Rome, we are yet at controversy about the manner of removing that which is
naught: whether it may not be perfectly helped, unless that also which is
indifferent be cut off with it, so far till no Rite or Ceremony remain which
the Church of Rome has, being not found in the Word of God. If we think this
too extreme, they reply, that to draw men from great excess, it not amiss
though we use them unto somewhat less then is competent; and that a crooked
stick is not straightned, T. C. l. 1. p. 132. If a man would bring a drunken
man to sobriety, the best and necceest way is to carry him as far from his
excess in drink as may be: and if a man could not keep a mean, it were better
to fault in prescribing thing le^e then he should drink, then to fault in
giving him more then he ought. As we see, to bring a stick which is crooked to
be straight^ we do not only bow it so far until it come to be straight, but we
bend it so far until we make it to be so crooked on the other side, as it was
before of the first side, to this end that ^^ the last it may bend straight,
and as it were in the midway be^ with hoth the crooks.
unless it be bent as far on the clean contrary side, that so it may settle it
self at the length in a middle estate of evenness between both. But how can
these comparisons stand them in any stead? When they urge us to extreme
opposition against the Church of Rome, do they mean we should be drawn unto it
only for a time, and afterward return to a mediocrity? Or was it the purpose
of those Reformed Churches, which utterly abolished all Popish Ceremonies, to
come in the end back again to the middle point of evenness, and moderation?
Then have we conceived amiss of their meaning. For we have always thought their
Opinion to be, that utter inconformity with the Church of Rome, was not an
extremity whereunto we should be drawn for a time; but the very mediocrity it
self wherein they meant we should ever continue. Now by these comparisons it
seems clean contrary, that howsoever they have bent themselves at first to an
extreme contrariety against the Romish Church, yet therein they will continue
no longer, then only till such time as some more moderate course for
establishment of the Church may be concluded. Yea, albeit this were not at the
first their intent, yet surely now there is great cause to lead them unto it.
They have seen that experience of the former Policy; which may cause the
Authors of it to hang down their heads. When Germany had stricken off that
which appeared corrupt in the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, but seemed
nevertheless in Discipline still to retain therewith very great conformity:
France, by that rule of policy, which has been before mentioned, took away the
Popish Orders which Germany did retain. But process of time has brought more
light into the world; whereby men perceiving that they of the Religion in
France, have also retained some Orders which were before in the Church of Rome,
and are not commanded in the Word of God; there has arisen a Sect in England,
which following still the very self-same Rule of policy, seeks to reform even
the French Reformation, and purge out from thence also dregs of Popery. These
have not taken as yet such root that they are able to establish any thing. But
if they had, what would spring out of their stock, and how far the unquiet wit
of man might be carried with rules of such policy, God does know. The trial
which we have lived to see, may somewhat teach us what posterity is to fear.
But our Lord, of his infinite mercy, avert whatsoever evil our swervings on the
one hand, or on the other may threaten unto the state of his Church.

9. That the Church of Rome does hereby take occasion to blaspheme, That we are
not to abol^sh our Ceremonies either because Papists upbraid us as having taken
from them or for that they are said hereby to conceive I know not what great
hopes.
and to say our Religion is not able to stand of it self, unless it lean upon
the staff of their Ceremonies, is not a matter of so great moment, that it did
need to be objected, or does deserve to receive answer. The name of blasphemy
in this place, is like the shoo of Hercules on a child's foot. If the Church of
Rome do use any such kind of silly exprobration, it is no such ugly thing to
the eat, that we should think the honor and credit of our Religion to receive
thereby any great wound. They which hereof make so perilous a matter, do seem
to imagine, that we have erected of late a frame of some new Religion; the
furniture whereof we should not have borrowed from our Enemies, lest they
relieving us, might afterward laugh and gibe at our poverty: whereas in truth
the Ceremonies which we have taken from such as were before us, T. C. l. 3. p.
1^8. By using of these Ceremonies, the Papists take occasion to blaspheme,
saying that one Religion cannot stand by it self, unless it lean upon the staff
of their Ceremonies.
are not things that belong to this or that Sect, but they are the ancient
Rites and Customs of the Church of Christ; whereof our selves being a part, we
have the self-same interest in them which our Fathers before us had, from whom
the same are descended unto us. Again, in case we had been so much beholden
privately unto them, does the reputation of one Church stand by saying unto
another, I need thee not? If some should be so vain and impotent, as to mar a
benefit with reproachful upbraiding, where at the least they suppose themselves
to have bestowed some good turn; yet surely a wise bodies part it were not, ^o
put out his fire, because his fond and foolish Neighbor, from whom he borrowed
peradventure wherewith to kindle it, might happily cast him therewith in the
teeth, saying, Were it not for me thou would freez, and not be able to heat
thy self. As for that other Argument derived from the secret affection of
Papists, T^^^. 3. p. 179. To prove the Papists triumph and joy in these things
I alleged further that there are none which make such clamours for these
Ceremonies, as the Papists and those which they suborn.
with whom our conformity in certain Ceremonies is said to put them in great
hope, that their whole Religion in time will have re-entrance; and therefore
none are so clamorous amongst us for the observation of these Ceremonies, as
Papists and such as Papists suborn to speak for them: whereby it clearly
appears how much they rejoice, how much they triumph in these thi^ our answer
hereunto is still the same, that the benefit we have by such Ceremon^
over-weigheth even this also. No man that is not exceeding partial can well d^,
but that there is most just cause wherefore we should be offended greatly at
the Church of Rome. Notwithstanding at such times as we are to deliberate for
our selves, the freer our minds are from all cistempered affections, the
sounder and better is our judgment. When we are in a fretting mood at the
Church of Rome, and with that angry disposition enter into any cogitation of
the Orders and Rites of our Church; taking particular survey of them, we are
sure to have always one eye fixed upon the countenance of our Enemies, and
according to the blithe or heavy aspect thereof, our other eye shows some
other suitable token either of dislike or approbation toward our own Orders.
For the rule of our Judgment in such case being only that of Homer, This is
the thing which our Enemies would have; (...)
what they seem contented with, even for that very cause we reject; and there
is nothing but it pleases as much the better, if we espy that is galleth them.
Miserable were the state and condition of that Church, the weighty affairs
whereof should be ordered by those deliberations wherein such an humor as this
were predominant. We have most heartily to thank God therefore, that they
amongst us, to whom the first consultations of causes of this kind fell, were
men, which aiming at another mark, namely, the glory of God and the good of
this his Church, took that which they judged thereunto necessary, not rejecting
any good or convenient thing, only because the Church of Rome might perhaps
like it. If we have that which is meet and right, although they be glad, we are
not to envy them this their solace; we do not think it a duty of ours, to be in
every such thing their Tormentors. And wherein it is said, T.C. 1.3. p. 179.
Thus they conceiving hope of having the rest of their Popery in the end, it
causes them to be more frozen in their wickedness, etc. For not the cause but
the occasion also ought to be taken away, etc. Although let the Reader judge,
whether they have cause given to hope, that the tale of Popery yet remaining,
they shall the easilier hale in the whole body after: considering also that
Master Bucer notes, that where these things which have been lest, there Popery
has returned: but on the other part^ in places which have been cleansed of
these ^lreg^, it has not been seen that it has has any entrance.
that Popery for want of this utter extirpation has in some places takenroot
and flourished again, but has not been able to re-establish it self in any
place, after provision made against it by utter evacuation of all Romish
Ceremonies, and therefore as long as we hold any thing like unto them, we put
them in some more hope, than if all were taken away, as we deny not but this
may be true; so being of two evils to choose the less, we hold it better that
the Friends and Favorers of the Church of Rome, should be in some kind of hope
to have a corrupt Religion restored, then both we and they conceive just fear,
lest under color of rooting out Popery, the most effectual means to bear up
the state of Religion be removed, and so a way made either for Paganism, or for
extreme Barbarity to enter. If desire of weakening the hope of others should
turn us away from the course we have taken; how much more the care of
preventing our own fear, withold us from that we are urged unto? Especially
seeing that our own fear we know, but we are not so certain what hope the Rites
and Orders of our Church have bred in the hearts of others. Fort it is no
sufficient Argument therefore to say, that in maintaining and urging these
Ceremonies, none are so clamorous as Papists, and they whom Papists suborn;
this speech being more hard to justify than the former, and so their proof
more doubtful then the thing it self, which they prove. He that were certain
that this is true, must have marked who they be that speak for Ceremonies, he
must have noted, who amongst them does speak oftenest, or is most earnest, he
must have been both acquainted thoroughly with the Religion of such, and also
privy to what conferences or compacts are passed in secret between them and
others; which kind of notice are not wont to be vulgar and common. Yet they
which allege this, would have it taken as a thing that needs no proof, a
thing which all men know and see. And if so be it were granted them as true,
what gain they by it? Sundry of them that be Popish, are eager in maintenance
of Ceremonies. Is it so strange a matter to find a good thing furthered by ill
men of a smister intent and purpose, whose forwardness is not therefore a
bridle to such as favor the same cause with a better and sincerer meaning?
They that seek, as they say, the removing of all Popish Orders out of the
Church, and reckon the state of Bishops in the number of those Orders, do (I
doubt not) presume that the cause which they prosecute, is holy.
Notwithstanding it is their own ingenuous acknowledgement, that even this very
cause which they term so often by an excellency, Eccl. ^. dis. ^ 54.
The Lords Cause, is, gratissima, most acceptable unto some which hope for prey
and spoil by it, and that our Age has store of such, and that such are the
very Sectaries of Dionysius the famous Atheist. Now if hereupon we should
upbraid them with Irreligious, as they do us with Superstitious favorers; if
we should follow them in their own kind of Pleading, and say, that the most
clamorous for this pretended Reformation, are either Atheists or else Proctors
suborned by Atheists; the Answer which herein they would make unto us, let them
apply unto themselves, and there an end. For they must not forbid us to presume
our cause in defense of our Church-orders to be as good as theirs against them,
till the contrary be made manifest to the World.

10. In the mean while sorry we are, The ^rief which, they say, godly Brethren
conceive in regard of such Ceremonies as we have common with the Church of
Rome. T.C.^. 1. p. 180. There be numbers which have Antichristianity in such
de^^station, that they cannot without grief of mind behold them. And afterward,
such godly Brethren are not easily to be grieved, which they seem to be, when
they are thou Marryred in their minds, for Ceremonies, which, (to speak the
best of them) are unprofitable.
that any good and godly mind should be grieved with that which is done. But to
remedy their grief, lies not so much in us as in themselves. They do not wish
to be made glad with the hurt of the Church: and to remove all out of the
Church, whereat they show themselves to be sorrowful, would be, as we are
persuaded, hurtful, if not pernicious thereunto. Till they be able to persuade
the contrary, they must and will, I doubt not, find out some other good mean to
cheer up themselves. Amongst which means the example of Geneva may serve for
one. Have not they the old Popish custom of using Godfathers and Godmothers
in Baptism? the old Popish custom of administering the blessed Sacrament of the
holy Eucharist with Wafer-cakes? These things then the Godly there can digest.
Wherefore should not the Godly here learn to do the like, both in them, and in
therest of the like nature? Some further mean peradventure it might be to
assuage their grief, if so be they did consider the revenge they take on them,
which have been, as they interpret it, the workers of their continuance in so
great grief so long. For if the maintenance of Ceremonies be a corrosive to
such as oppugn them; undoubtedly to such as maintain them, it can be no great
pleasure, when they behold how that which they reverence is oppugned. And
therefore they that judge themselves Martyrs, when they are grieved, should
think withal what they are whom they grieve. For we are still to put them in
mind, that the cause does make no difference, for that it must be presumed as
good at the least on our part as on theirs, till it be in the end decided, who
have stood for Truth, and who for Error, So that till then the most effectual
medicine, and withal the most sound, to ease their grief, must not be (in our
opinion) the taking away of those things whereat they are grieved, but the
altering of that persuasion which they have concerning the same. For this we
therefore both pray and labor; the more because we are also persuaded, that it
is but conceit in them to think, that those Romish Ceremonies, whereof we have
hitherto spoken, are like T.C l. 3. p. 171. Although the corruptions in them
strike no: straight to the heart, yet or gentle Poisons they consume by little
and little.
leprous Clothes, infectious to the Church; or like soft and gentle Poisons,
the venom whereof being insensibly penicious, works death, and yet is never
felt working. Thus they say: but because they say it only, and the World has
not as yet had so great experience of their Art, in curing the Diseases of the
Church, that the bare authority of their word should persuade in a cause so
weighty, they may not think much if it be required at their hands to show;
First, by what means so deadly Infection can grow from similitude between us
and the Church of Rome, in these things indifferent: Secondly, for that it were
infinite, if the Church should provide against every such Evil as may come to
pass, it is not sufficient that they show possibility of dangerous Event,
unless there appear some likelihood also of the same to follow in us, except
we prevent it. Nor is this enough, unless it be moreover made plain, that there
is no good and sufficient way of prevention, but by evacuating clean, and by
emprying the Church of every such Rite and Ceremony, as is presently called in
question. Till this be done, their good affection toward the safety of the
Church is acceptable, but the way they prescribe us to preserve it by, must
rest in suspense. And lest hereat they take occasion to turn upon us the speech
of the Prophet Jeremy used against Babylon, Rebold we have done our endeavor
to cure the Discases of Babylon, but she through her wilfulness does rest
uncured: let them consider into what straits the Church might drive it self, in
being guided by this their counsel. Their axiom is, that the sound believing
Church of Jesus Christ, may not be like Heretical Churches in any of those
indifferent things, which men make choice of, and do not take by prescript
appointment of the Word of God. In the word of God the use of Bread is
prescribed, as a thing without which the Eucharist may not be celebrated: but
as for the kind of Bread, it is not denied to be a thing indifferent. Being
indifferent of it self, we are by this axiom of theirs to avoid the use of
unleavened Bread in their Sacrament, because such bread the Church of Rome
being Heretical uses. But does not the self-same axiom bar us even from
leavened Bread also, which the Church of the Grecians uses, the opinions
whereof are in a number of things the same, for which we condemn the Church of
Rome; and in some things erroneous, where the Church of Rome is acknowledged to
be found; as namely in the Article of the Holy Ghosts proceeding? and lest here
they should say that because the Greek Church is farther off, and the Church of
Rome nearer, we are in that respect rather to use that which the Church of Rome
uses not; let them imagine a reformed Church in the City of Venice, where a
Greek Church and Popish both are. And when both these are equally near, let
them consider what the third shall do. Without leavened or unleavened Bread, it
can have no Sacrament: the word of God does tie it to neither; and their axiom
does exclude it from both. If this constrain them, as it must, to grant that
their axiom is not to take any place, save in those things only where the
Church has larger scope; it rests that they search out some stronger reason
then they have as yet alleged; otherwise they constrain not us to think that
the Church is tied unto any such rule axiom, not then when she has the widest
field to walk in, and the great: store of choice.

Their exception against such Ceremonies a, we have received from the Church of
Rome, that Church having taken them from the Jews.
11. Against such Ceremonies generally as are the same in the Church of England
and of Rome, we see what has been hitherto alleged. Albeit therefore we do
not find the one Churches having of such things, to be sufficient cause why the
other should not have them: Nevertheless in case it may be proved, that amongst
the number of Rites and Orders common unto both, there are Particulars, the use
whereof is utterly unlawful, in regard of some special bad and noysom quality;
there is no doubt but we ought to relinquish such Rites and Orders, what
freedom soever we have to retain the other still. As therefore we have heard
their general exception against all those things, which being not commanded in
the Word of God, were first received in the Church of Rome, and from thence
have been derived into ours, Eccles. Dis^i sol ^8. and T C l. 3 p. 181. Many of
these Popish Ceremonies fault by reason of the pomp in them: where they should
be agreeable to the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ crucified. T.C.l. 1. p.
132. ^^seb. 1. 3. ^. 17. Sae^ ^^. ^.3. ^^ 1 C^^^il. and (...).
so it follows that now we proceed unto certain kinds of them, as being
excepted against, not only for that they are in the Church of Rome, but are
besides either Jewish or abused unto Idolatry, and so grown scandalous. The
Church of Rome they say, being ashamed of the simplicity of the Gospel, did
almost out of all Religions take whatsoever had any fair and gorgeous show,
borrowing in that respect from the Jews sundry of their abolished Ceremonies.
Thus by foolish and tidiculous imitation, all their Massing furniture almost
they took from the Law, lest having an Altar and a Priest, they should want
Vestments for their Stage; so that whatsoever we have in common with the Church
of Rome, if the same be of this kind, we ought to remove it. Constantine the
Emperor speaking of the keeping of the Feast of Easter, says, That it is an
unworthy thing to have any thing common with that most spiteful company of the
Jews. And a little after he says, That it is most absurd and against reason,
that the Jews should vann^ and glory that the Christians could not keep those
things without their Doctrine. And in another place it is said after this sort;
It is convenient so to order the matter, that we have nothing common with that
Nation. This Council of Laodicea, which was afterward confirmed by the first
General Council, decreed that the Christians should not take anleavened Briad
of the Jews, or communicate with their impiety. For the easier manifestation of
truth in this point, two things there are which must be considered, namely the
causes wherefore the Church should decline from Jewish Ceremonies; and how far
it ought so to do. One cause is, that the Jews were the deadliest and
spitefullest Enemies of Christianity that were in the world, and in this
respect their Orders so far forth to be shunned, as we have already set down in
handling the Matter of Heathenish Ceremonies. For no enemies being so venomous
against Christ as Jews, they were of all other, most odious, and by that mean,
least to be used as ^it Church Patterns for Imitation. Another cause is, the
Solemn Abrogation of the Jews Ordinances; which Ordinances, for us to resume,
were to chock our Lord himself which has disannulled them. But how far this
second cause does extend, it is not on all sides, fully agreed upon. And
touching those things whereunto it reaches not, although there be small cause,
wherefore the Church should frame it self to the Jews example, in respect of
their persons which are most hateful; yet God himself having been the Author of
their Laws, herein they are (notwithstanding the former consideration) still
worthy to be honored, and to be followed above others, as much as the state of
things will bear. Jewish Ordinances had some things Natural, and of the
perperuity of those things no man doubts. That which was Positive, we
likewise know to have been by the coming of Christ, partly necessary not to be
kept, and partly indifferent to be kept, or not. Of the former kind,
Circumcision and Sacrifice were. For this point, Stephen was accused, and the
Evidence which his Accusers brought against him in judgment, was, This man
cease not to speak blasphemous words against this holy Place, and the Law;
Acts 6. 13, 14.
for we have heard him say, That this Jesus of Nazareth, shall destroy this
place, and shall change the Ordinances that Moses gave us. True it is, that
this Doctrine was then taught, which Unbelievers condemning for Blasphemy, did
therein commit that which they did condemn. The Apostles notwithstanding, from
whom Stephen had received it, did not so ^each the Abrogation, no not of those
things which were necessarily to cease, but that even the Jews, being
Christian, might for a time continue in them. And therefore in Jerusalem, the
first Christian Bishop not circumcised, was Mark; Vi^le Nicep^. lib. p. cap.
25. and Sulpie. S^ver. p. 149. in Eli^. ^lan^.
and he not Bishop till the days of Adrian the Emperor; after the overthrow of
Jerusalem, there having been Fifteen Bishops before him, which were all of the
Circumcision. The Christian Jews did think at the first, not only themselves,
but the Christian Gentiles also bound, and that necessarily, to observe the
whole Law. Acts 15.
There went forth certain of the Sect of Pharisees which did believe; and they,
coming unto Antioch, taught, that it was necessary for the Gentiles to be
circumcised, and to keep the Law of Moses. Whereupon there grew dissension,
Paul and Barnabas disputing against them. Acts 21.25.
The determination of the Council held at Jerusalem, concerning this Matter,
was finally this; Touching the Gentiles which believe, we have written and
determined, that they observe no such thing: Their Protestation by Letters, is,
For as much as we have heard, that certain which departed from us, have
troubled you with words, and cumbred your minds, saying, Ye must be
circumcised and keep the Law; know, that we gave them no such Commandment. Paul
therefore continued still teaching the Gentiles, not only that they were not
bound to observe the Laws of Moses, but that the observation of those Laws
which were necessarily to be abrogated, was in them altogether unlawful. In
which point, his Doctrine was mis-reported, as though he had every where
Preached this, not only concerning the Gentiles, but also touching the Jews.
Wherefore coming unto James, and the rest of the Clergy at Jerusalem, they told
him plainly of it, saying, Acts. 21. 20.
Thou see, Brother, how many thousand Jews there are which believe, and they
are all zealous of the Law. Now they are informed of thee, that thou reachest
all the Jews which are amongst the Gentiles, to forsake Moses, and say, that
they ought not to circumcise their children, neither to live after the Customs.
And hereupon they gave him counsel to make it apparent in the eyes of all men,
that those flying reports were untrue, and they himself being a Jew, kept the
Law, even as they did. In some things therefore we see the Apostles did teach,
That there ought not to be Conformity between the Christian Jews and Gentiles.
How many things this Law of Inconformity did comprehend, there is no need we
should stand to examine. This general is true, That the Gentiles were not made
conformable unto the Jews, in that which was necessarily to cease at the coming
of Christ. Touching things Positive, Acts. 19. 20.
which might either cease or continue as occasion should require, the Apostles
tendering the zeal of the Jews, thought it necessary to bind even the Gentiles
for a time, to abstain as the Jews did, from things offered unto Idols, from
Blood, from Strangled. Acts 16.4.
These Decrees were every where delivered unto the Gentiles, to be straightly
observed and kept. In the other Matters where the Gentiles were free, and the
Jews in their own opinion, still tied, the Apostles Doctrine unto the Jews,
was, Condemn not the Gentile; unto the Gentile, Despise not the Jew: The one
sort, Romans 14. 10.
they warned to take heed, that scrupulosity did not make them rigorous, in
giving unadvised sentence against their Brethren which were free; the other,
that they did not become scandalous, by abusing their liberty and freedom to
the offense of their weak Brethren which were scrupulous. From hence therefore,
two Conclusions there are, which may evidently be drawn; the first, That
whatsoever Conformity of Positive Laws, the Apostles did bring in between the
Churches of Jews and Gentiles, it was in those things only, which might either
cease or continue a shorter or a longer time, as occasion did most require; the
second, That they did not impose upon the Churches of the Gentiles, any part of
the Jews Ordinances with Bond of necessary and perpetual observation (as we
all, both by doctrine and practice, acknowledge) but only in respect of the
convenience and fitness for the present state of the Church, as then it stood.
The words of the Councils Decree, concerning the Gentiles, are, It seemed good
to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no more burden, saving only
these things of necessity; Abstinence from Idol-off rings, from strangled, and
Blood, and from Fornication. So that in other things Positive, which the coming
of Christ did not necessarily extinguish, the Gentiles were left altogether
free. Neither ought it to seem unreasonable, that the Gentiles should
necessarily be bound and tied to Jewish Ordinances, so far forth as that Decree
imports. For to the Jew, who knew, that their difference from other Nations,
which were Aliens and Strangers from God, did especially consist in this, That
Gods People had Positive Ordinances given to them of God himself; it seemed
mavelous hard, that the Christian Gentiles should be incorporated into the
same Commonwealth with Gods own chosen People, and be subject to no part of his
Statues, more then only the Law of Nature, which Heathens count themselves
bound unto. It was an opinion constantly received amongst the Jews, Lib. qui
Seder Olam inscribitur.
that God did deliver unto the sons of Noah seven Precepts: Namely, To live in
some Form of Regiment under; First, (...) 1
Public Laws: Secondly, (...) 2
To serve and call upon the Name of God: Thirdly, (...) 3
to shun Idolatry: Fourthly, (...) 4
Not to suffer effusion of the Blood: Fifthly, (...) 5
to abhor all unclean knowledge in the Flesh: Sixthly, (...) 6
To commit no Rapine: Seventhly, (...) 7
and finally, Not to eat of any living Creature, whereof the Blood was t first
let out. If therefore the Gentiles would be exempted from the Law of Moses, yet
it might seem hard, they should also cast off, even those things Positive which
were observed before Moses, and which were not of the same kind with Laws that
were necessarily to cease. And peradventure hereupon, the Council saw it
expedient to determine, that the Gentiles should according unto the third, the
seventh, and the fifth of those Precepts, abstain from things sacrificed unto
Idols, from Strangled and Blood, and from Fornication. The rest, the Gentiles
did of their own accord observe, Heb. 13. 4. 1 Cor. 5. 11. Gal. 5. 19.
Nature leading them thereunto. And did not Nature also teach them to abstain
from Fornication^ No doubt it did. Neither can we with reason think, That as
the former two are Positive; so likewise this, being meant as the Apostle does
otherwise usually understand it. But very Marriage, within a number of degrees,
being not only by the Law of Moses, but also by the Law of the sons of Noah
(for so they took it) an unlawful Lev^e. 18.
discovery of nakedness: This discovery of nakedness by unlawful Marriages,
such as Moses in the Law reckons up, I think it for mine own part more
probable to have been meant in the words of that Canon, then Fornication
according unto the scase of the Law of Nature. Words must be taken, according
to the matter whereof they are uttered. The Apostles command to abstain from
Blood. Construe this according to the Law of Nature, and it will seem that
Homicide only is forbidden. But construe it in reference to the Law of the
Jews, about which the question was, and it shall easily appear to have a clean
other sense, and in any man's judgment, a truer, when we expound it of eating,
and not of shedding blood: So it we speak of Fornication, he that knows no
Law, but only the Law of Nature, must needs make thereof a narrower
construction, then he which measures the same by a Law, wherein sundry kinds,
even of Conjugal Copulation are prohibited as impure, unclean, unhonest. 1 Cor.
5.1.
St. Paul himself does term Incestuous Marriage, Fornication. If any do rather
think, that the Christian Gentiles themselves, through the loose and corrupt
Custom of those times, took simple Fornication for no Sin, and were in that
respect offensive unto believing Jews, which by the Law had been better taught;
Our proposing of another conjecture, is unto theirs no prejudice. Some things
therefore we see there were, wherein the Gentiles were forbidden to be like
unto the Jews; some things wherein they were commanded not to be unlike. Again,
some things also there were, wherein no Law of God did let, but that they might
be either like or unlike; as occasion should require. And unto this purpose Leo
says, Leo in Jejun. men's. sept. Ser. 9.
Apostolical Ordinance (beloved) knowing that our Lord Jesus Christ came not
into this world to undo the Law, has in such sort distinguished the Mysteries
of the Old Testament, that certain of them it has chosen one to benefit
Evangelical knowledge withal, and for that purpose appointed, that those things
which before were Jewish, might now be Christian Customs. The cause why the
Apostles did thus conform the Christians as much as might be, according to the
pattern of the Jews, was to rein them in by this mean the more, and to make
them cleave the better. The Church of Christ, has had in no one thing, so many
and so contrary occasions of dealing, as about Judaism; some having thought the
whole Jewish Law wicked and damnable in it self; some not condemning it as the
Former sort absolutely, have notwithstanding judged it, either sooner necessary
to be abrogated, or further unlawful to be observed then truth can bear; some
of scrupulous simplicity urging perpetual and universal observation of the Law
of Moses necessary, as the Christian Jews at the first in the Apostles times;
some as Heretics, holding the same no less even after the contrary
determination set down by consent of the Church at Jerusalem; finally, some
being herein resolute through mere infidelity; and with open professed enmity
against Christ, as unbelieving Jews. To control slanderers of the Law and
Prophets, such as Marcionites and Manichees were, the Church in her Liturgies
has intermingled with Readings out of the New Testament, Lessons taken out of
the Law and Prophets; whereunto Tertullian alluding, says of the Church of
Christ, Tertul. de prascript advers. haeret. T.C. lib. 3. p. 171. What an
abusing also is it to affirm, the mangling of the Gospels and Epistles to have
been brought into the Church by godly and learned Men? T. C. lib. 1. p. 216.
Seeing that the office and function of Priests was after our Savior Christ's
Ascension naught and ungodly; the name whereby they were called, which did
exercise that ungodly function, cannot be otherwise taken, then in the evil
part.
It intermingleth with Evangelical and Apostolical Writings, the Law and the
Prophets; and from thence it drinks in that Faith which with Water is
seals, cloatheth with the Spirit, nourishes with Eucharist, with Martyrdom
sets forward. They would have wondered in those times to hear, that any man
being not as Favorer of Heresy, should term this by way of disdain, Mangling
of the Gospels and Epistles. They which honor the Law as an Image of the Wisdom
of God himself, are notwithstanding to know that the same had an end in Christ.
But what? Was the Law so abolished with Christ, that after his Ascension the
Office of Priests, became immediately wicked, and the very name hateful, as
importing the exercise of an ungodly function? No, as long as the glory of the
Temple continued, and till the time of that final desolation was accomplished,
the very Christian Jews did continue with their Sacrifices, and other parts of
Legal Service. That very Law therefore which our Savior was to abolish, did
not so soon become unlawful to be observed as some imagine; nor was it
afterward unlawful so far, that the very name of Altar, of Priests, of
Sacrifice it self, should be banished out of the World. For though God do now
hate Sacrifice, whether it be Heathenish or Jewish, so that we cannot have the
same things which they had, but with impiety; yet unless there be some greater
let then the only evacuation of the Law of Moses, the names themselves may (I
hope) be retained without sin, in respect of that proportion, which things
established by our Savior have unto them which by him are abrogated. And so
throughout all the writings of the Ancient Fathers, we see that the words which
were, do continue; the only difference it, that whereas before they had a
literal, they now have a metaphorical use; and are as so many notes of
remembrance unto us, that what they did signify in the Letter, is accomplished
in the Truth. And as no man can deprive the Church of this liberty, to use
names whereunto the Law was accustomed; so neither are we generally forbidden
the use of things which the Law has, though it neither command us any
particularity, as it did the Jews a number; and the weightiest which it did
command them, are unto us in the Gospel prohibited. Touching such, as through
simplicity of error, did urge universal and perpetual observation of the Law of
Moses at the first, we have spoken already. Against Jewish Heretics and false
Apostles teaching afterward the self-same, St. Paul in every Epistle commonly
either disputes or gives warning. Jews that were zealous for the Law but
withal Infidels in respect of Christianity, and to the name of Jesus Christ
most spightful enemies, did while they flourished, no less persecute the Church
then Heathens; and after their Estate was overthrown, they were not that way so
much to be feared. Howbeit, because they had their Synagogues in every famous
City almost throughout the World. and by that means great opportunity to
withdraw from the Christian Faith, which to do, they spared no labor; this gave
the Church occasion to make sundry Laws against them. As, in the Council of
Laodicea, Council. Laod. Can. 37, 3^. T. C. lib. 1. p. 131.
The Festival Presents which Jews or Heretics use to send, must not be
received, nor Holidays solemnized in their company. Again, From the Jews, Men
ought not to receive their Unlevened [Bread] nor to communicate with their
Impieties. T. C. lib. 3. p. 176.^
Which Council was afterward indeed confirmed by the Sixth General Council.
But what was the true sense or meaning, both of the one, and the other? Were
Christians here forbidden to communicate in Unleavened Bread, because the Jews
did so, being Enemies of the Church? He which attentively shall weigh the
words, will suspect that they rather forbid communion with Jews, then imitation
of them; much more, Council. Constantinop. 6. cap. 11.
if with these two Decrees be compared a third in the Council of
Constantinople: Let no man, either of the Clergy or Laity, eat the Unleavened
of the Jews, nor enter into any familiarity with them, nor send for them in
sickness, nor take Physic at their hands, nor as much as go into the ^ath with
them. If any do otherwise, being a Clergyman, let him be deposed; if being a
Lay-person, let Excommunication be his punishment. If these Canons were any
Argument, that they which made them, did utterly condemn similitude between the
Christians and Jews, in things indifferent appertaining unto Religion, either
because the Jews were enemies unto the Church, or else for that their
Ceremonies were abrogated; these Reasons had been as strong and effectual
against their keeping the Feast of Easter on the same day the Jews kept theirs,
and not according to the Custom of the West Church. For so they did from the
first beginning till Constantine's time. For in these two things, the East and
West Churches did interchangeably both confront the Jews, and concur with them;
the West Church using Unleavened Bread, as the Jews in their Passover did, but
differing from them in the day whereon they kept the Feast of Easter;
contrariwise, the East Church celebrating the Feast of Easter on the same day
with the Jews, but not using the same kind of Bread which they did. Now ^ so
be the East Church in using Leavened Bread had done well, either for that the
Jews were enemies to the Church, or because Jewish Ceremonies were abrogated;
How should we think but that Victor, the Bishop of Rome, (whom all judicious
men do in that behalf disallow) did well to be so vehement and fierce in
drawing them to the like dissimilitude for the Feast of Easter? Again, If the
West Churches had in either of those two respects affected dissimilitude with
the Jews in the Feast of Easter, What reason had they to draw the Eastern
Church herein unto them, which reason did not enforce them to frame themselves
unto it in the ceremony of Leavened Bread? Difference in Rites should breed no
controversy, between one Church and another; but if controversy be once bred,
it must be ended. The Feast of Easter being therefore litigious in the days of
Constantine, who honored of all other Churches most, the Church of Rome; which
Church was the Mother, from whose Breasts he had drawn that food which gave him
nourishment to eternal life; fith Agreement was necessary, and yet impossible,
unless the one part were yielded unto; his desire was, that of the two, the
Eastern Church should rather yield. And to this end he uses sundry persuasive
speeches. When Stephen, Bishop of Rome, going about to show what the Catholic
Church should do, had alleged what the Heretics themselves did, namely, That
they received such as came unto them; and offered not to Baptize them anew; St.
Cyprian, being of a contrary mind to him, about the matter at that time in
question, which was, Whether Heretics converted, ought to be rebaptized, yea,
or no; answered the Allegation of Pope Stephen with exceeding great stomach,
saying, Cypr. ad Pompei. lib. cont. Epist. Stephani.
To this degree of wretchedness, the Church of God, and Spouse of Christ is now
come, that her ways she frames to the example of Heretics; that to celebrate
the Sacraments, which Heavenly Instruction has delivered, light it self does
borrow from darkness, and Christians do that which Antichrists do. Now albeit
Constantine have done that, to further a better cause, which Cyprian did to
countenance a worse, namely, the Rebaptization of Heretics; and have taken
advantage at the odiousness of the Jews, as Cyprian of Heretics, because the
Eastern Church kept their Feast of Easter, always the Fourteenth day of the
Month, as the Jews did, what day of the week soever it fell; or howsoever
Constantine did take occasion in the handling of that cause, to say, Sur.
Eccle. first. hist. lib 5. cap. 21. Flerique in Asia minore, antiqui^us 14 die
mensis, (...) ratione dict Sahbati habit^ hoc festum observaruar. Quod dum
facitbeur cum alu^s qui aliam rationem in codem festo agendo sequehaneur, usque
to nequaquam dissenseruat, quoud Victor Episcopus Romanus supra modum iracundi^
inflamnaths, om^cs in Asia^ quetant (...) appella^i, excommunicaverit. Ob quod
^ictum Ire^^no Episcopus Lugdunt in Victorem per Epelosem graviter invectus
est. Eusebius. de vira Constant. lib. 3. cap. 19. Quid preslabilias, quidve
augustius esse poterat, quam u^ hoc sestum per quod shem immortalicatis noble
essentar^m h^bemu^, uno moilo and ratione apud omnes integre slace^eque
observaretur? Ac primum omnium indignum plane videbettir ut ritum and
con^erudinem imicantes Iurizoruin (qui quoniam su^s ipsorum manus im^^al
scelete polluerua^r, me^iro, ut seele^stos ^ecet, caeco animorum errore
tenent^r irretiti) islud s^slum sanctissimum ageremus. In nostra enim situt^
est poteflare ut, illorum more rejec^o, verio^e ac m^gi^ ^^ncero institute
(quod quidem usque a passionis die hactenus recoluimus) hujus festi
celebrationem ad posterorum seculorum memoriam propagemus. Nistil igitur si^
nobis cum Judeorum turba; omne^^^ odlusa maxim.
It is unworthy to have any thing common with that spightful Nation of the
Jews: Shall every Motive Argument used in such kind of Conferences, be made a
rule for others still to conclude the like by, concerning all things of like
nature, when as probable enducements may lead them to the contrary? Let both
this and other Allegations suitable unto it, cease to bark any longer idly
against that truth, the course and passage whereof, it is not in them to hinder.

12. But the weightiest Exception, Their Exception against such Ceremonies as
have been abused by the Church of Rome, and are said in that respect to be
scandalous.
and of all the most worthy to be respected, is against such kind of
Ceremonies, as have been so grossly and shamefully abused in the Church of Rome,
that were they remain they are scandalous, yea, they cannot choose but be
stumbling blocks, and grievous causes of offense. Concerning this point
therefore we are first to note, What properly it is, to be scandalous or
offensive. Secondly, What kind of Ceremonies are such. And thirdly, When they
are necessarily for remedy thereof, to be taken away, and when not. The common
conceit of the vulgar sort is, Whenever they see any thing which they mislike
and are angry at, to think that every such thing is scandalous, and that
themselves in this case are the men concerning whom our Savior spoke in so
fearful manner, saying, Matthew. 18. 6.
Whosoever shall scandalize or offend any one of these little ones which
believe in me, (that is, as they construe it, Whosoever shall anger the meanest
and simplest Artizan which carries a good mind, by not removing out of the
Church, such Rites and Ceremonies as displease him) better he were drowned in
the bottom of the Sea. But hard were the case of the Church of Christ, if this
were to scandalize. 1 Pet. 2. 8. 2 Samuel 12. 13. Romans 2. 14. Ezekiel. 36. 20.
Tertul. lib. de Virgin. Veland.
Men are scandalized when they are moved, led, and provoked unto sin. At good
things evil men may take occasion to do evil; and so Christ himself was a Rock
of Offense in Israel, they taking occasion at his poor estate, and at the
ignominy of his Cross, to think him unworthy the Name of that Great and
Glorious Mesias, whom the Prophets describe in such ample and stately terms.
But that which we therefore term offensive, because it inviteth men to offend,
and by a dumb kind of provocation, encourages, moves, or any way leads
unto sin, must of necessity be acknowledged actively scandalous. Now some
things are so even by their very essence and nature, so that wheresoever they
be found, they are not, neither can be without this force of provocation unto
evil; of which kind, all examples of sin and wickedness are. Thus David was
scandalous, in that bloody act, whereby he caused the enemies of God to be
blasphemous: Thus the whole state of Israel was scandalous; when their public
disorders caused the Name of God to be ill spoken of amongst the Nations: It is
of this kind that Tertullian means: Offense or scandal, if I be not
deceived, says he, is when the example not of a good, but of an evil thing,
does set men forward to ^^^ sin. Good things can scandalize none, save only
evil minds: Good things have no scandalizing Nature in them. Yet that which is
of it own nature, either good, or at least not evil; may by some accident
become scandalous at certain times, and in certain places, and to certain men;
the open use thereof, nevertheless, being otherwise without danger. The very
Nature of some Rites and Ceremonies therefore is scandalous, as it was in a
number of those which the Manichees did use, and is in all such as the Law of
God does forbid. Some are offensive only through the Agreement of Men to use
them unto evil, and not else; as the most of those things indifferent, which
the Heathens did to the service of their false gods; which another, in heart
condemning their Idolatry, could not do with them in show and token of
Approbation, without being guilty of scandal given. Ceremonies of this kind,
are either devised at the first unto evil; as the Eunomian Heretics in
dishonor of the Blessed Trinity, brought in the laying on of Water but once, to
cross the custom of the Church, which in Baptism did it thrice: Or else having
had a profitable use, they are afterward interpreted and wrested to the
contrary; as those Heretics which held the Trinity to be three distinct, not
Persons, but Natures, abused the Ceremony of three times laying on Water in
Baptism, unto the strengthening of their Heresy. The Element of Water is in
Baptism necessary; once to lay it on, or twice, is indifferent. For which
cause, Gregory making mention thereof, says, Epist. a^ Le^ndrum Hisp.
To dive an Insant, either thrice, or but once in Baptism, can be no way a
thing reproveable; seeing that both in three times washing, the Trinity of
Persons; and in one, the Unity of the Godhead may be signified. So that of
these two Ceremonies, neither being hurtful in it self, both may serve unto
good purpose; yet one was devised, and the other converted unto evil. Now
whereas in the Church of Rome, certain Ceremonies are said to have been
shamefully abused unto evil, as the ceremony of Crossing at Baptism, of
Kneeling at the Eucharist, of using Wafer-Cakes, and such like; the question
is, Whether for remedy of that evil, wherein such Ceremonies have been
scandalous, and perhaps may be still unto some, even amongst ourselves, whom
the presence and sight of them may confirm in that ^ormer error, whereto they
served in times past, they are of necessity to be removed. Are these, or any
other Ceremonies we have common with the Church of Rome, scandalous and wicked
in their very nature? This no man objecteth. Are any such as have been polluted
from their very birth, and instituted, even at the first, unto that thing which
is evil? That which has been ordained impiously at the first, may wear out
that impiety in tract of time; and then, what does let, but that the use
thereof may stand without offense? The names of our Months and of our Days, we
are not ignorant from whence they came, and with what dishonor unto God, they
are said to have been devised at the first. What could be spoken against any
thing more effectual to stir hatred, then that which sometime the Ancient
Fathers in this case speak? Yet those very names are at this day in use
throughout Christendom, without hurt or scandal to any. Clear and manifest it
is, that things devised by Heretics, yea, devised of a very heretical purpose,
even against Religion, Hon. 11. de Pasch. Idolatriae consuetudo in rantum
homini^ occoec^verat; ut Solis, Lunae, Martis atque Mercurii, Jovis, Veneris,
Saturni, and divers^s Elementorum ac Daemonum appellationibus dies voci^a^ent,
and luci tenebrarum nomen imp^nerent. ^^da de ratione temp. cap. 4. Octavus
dits Idem primus est. ad quem reditur, indeque rutius Hehdemada incho^tur. His
nomina ^ planetis Gentilitas indidi^, ha bear se credentes a Sole Spiritum, a
Luna corpus. a Mart sangulnem, a Mercurlo ingenium and linguam a ^o^e
temperanuam, a Venere voluptatem, a Saturno ^ardita^em. Isid. Hisp. lib. 5.
Reymol. cap. 32. Dies dicti a Diis, quorum nomina Romani quibuscam syderibus
sactave^uni.
and at their first devising worthy to have been withstood, may in time grow
meet to be kept; as that Custom, the inventers whereof were the Eunomian
Heretics. So that customs once established and confirmed by long use, being
presently without harm, are not in regard of their corrupt original to be held
scandalous. But concerning those our Ceremonies which they reckon for most
Popish, they are not able to avouch that any of them was otherwise instituted,
then unto good; yea, so used at the first. It follows then, that they all are
such as having served to good purpose, were afterward converted unto the
contrary. And since it is not so much as objected against us, that we retain
together with them, the evil wherewith they have been infected in the Church of
Rome: I would demand, Who they are whom we scandalize, by using harmless things
unto that good end, for which they were first instituted. Amongst our selves
that agree in the approbation of this kind of good use, no man will say, that
one of us is offensive and scandalous unto another. As for the favorers of the
Church of Rome, they know how far we herein differ and dissent from them; which
thing neither we conceal, and they by their public writings also profess
daily, how much it grieveth them: So that of them, there will not many rise up
against us, as witnesses unto the Indictment of Scandal, whereby we might be
condemned and cast, as having strengthened them in that evil, wherewith they
pollute themselves in the use of the same Ceremonies. And concerning such as
withstand the Church of England herein, and hate it because it does not
sufficiently seem to hate Rome; they (I hope) are far enough from being by this
mean drawn to any kind of Popish Error. The multitude therefore of them, unto
whom we are scandalous through the use of abused Ceremonies, is not so
apparent, that it can justly be said in general of any one sort of men or
other, we cause them to offend. If it be so, that now or then some few are
espied, who having been accustomed heretofore to the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church of Rome, are not so scoured of their former rust, as to forsake
their ancient persuasion which they have had, howsoever they frame themselves
to outward obedience of Laws and Orders; because such may misconster the
meaning of our Ceremonies, and so take them, as though they were in every sort
the same they have been, Shall this be thought a reason sufficient whereon to
conclude, that some Law must necessarily be made to abolish all such
Ceremonies? They answer, that there is no Law of God which does bind us to
retain them. And St. Paul's rule is, that in those things from which without
hurt we may lawfully abstain, we should frame the usage of our Liberty, with
regard to the weakness and imbecility of our Brethren. Wherefore unto them
which stood upon their own defense, saying, All things are lawful unto me; he
replieth, 1 Cor. 6. 12.
But all things are not expedient in regard of others. All things are clean,
all Meats are lawful; but evil unto that man that eats offensively. If for
thy meats sake, thy Brother be grieved, thou walk no longer according to
Charity. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. Dissolve not for
foods sake the work of God. We that are strong, must bear the imbecility of
the impotent, and not please ourselves. It was a weakness in the Christian
Jews, and a maim of judgment in them, that they thought the Gentiles polluted
by the eating of those meats, which themselves were afraid to touch, for fear
of transgressing the Law of Moses; yea, hereat their hearts did so much rise,
that the Apostle had just cause to fear, lest they would rather forsake
Christianity, then endure any fellowship with such, as made no conscience of
that which was unto them abominable. Romans 14. and 19. ^.
And for this cause mention is made of destroying the weak by meats, and of
dissolving the work of God, which was his Church, a part of the Living Stones
whereof, were believing Jews. Now those weak Brethren before mentioned are said
to be as the Jews were, and our Ceremonies which have been abused in the Church
of Rome, to be as the scandalous Meats, from which the Gentiles are exhorted to
abstain in the presence of Jews, for fear of averting them from Christian
Faith. Therefore as Charity did bind them to refrain from that, for their
Brethrens sake, which otherwise was lawful enough for them; so it binds us
for our Brethrens sake likewise, to abolish such Ceremonies, although we might
lawfully else retain them. But between these two cases there are great odds.
For neither are our weak Brethren as the Jews, nor the Ceremonies which we use
as the meats which the Gentiles used. The Jews were known to be generally weak
in that respect; whereas contrariwise the imbecility of ours is not common
unto so many, that we can take any such certain notice of them. It is a chance,
if here and there some one be found; and therefore seeing we may presume men
commonly otherwise, there is no necessity, that our practice should frame it
self, by that which the Apostle does prescribe to the Gentiles. Again, their
use of meats was not like unto our Ceremonies; Vile Harm. nop. lib. 1. cit. 1.
sect. 28.
that being a matter of private action in common life, where every man was free
to order that which himself did; but this a public constitution for the
ordering of the Church: And we are not to look, that the Church should change
her public Laws and Ordinances, made according to that which is judged
ordinarily and commonly fittest for the whole, although it chance that for some
particular men, the same be found inconvenient, especially when there may be
other remedy also against the sores of particular incoveniences. In this case
therefore, where any private harm does grow, we are not to reject instruction,
as being an unmeet plaster to apply unto it; neither can we say, that he which
appoints Teachers for Physicians in this kind of evil, is, T. C. lib. 3. p.
178.
As if a man would set one to watch a child all day long, lest he should hurt
himself with a Knife, whereas by taking away the Knife from him, the danger is
avoided, and the service of the man better employed. For a Knife may be taken
from a child, without depriving them of the benefit thereof which have years
and discretion to use it. But the Ceremonies which Children do abuse, if we
remove quite and clean, as it is by some required that we should; then are they
not taken from Children only, but from others also; which is as though,
because Children may perhaps hurt themselves with Knives, we should conclude,
that therefore the use of Knives is to be taken quite and clean even from men
also. Those particular Ceremonies which they pretend to be so scandalous, we
shall in the next Book have occasion more thoroughly to sift, where other things
also traduced in the public duties of the Church, whereunto each of these
appertains, are together with these to be touched, and such Reasons to be
examined as have at any time been brought, either against the one, or the
other. T. C. lib. 3. p. 177. It is not so convenient, that the Minister having
so many necessary points to bestow his time in, should be driven to spend it in
giving warning of not abusing them, of which (although they were used to the
best) there is no probe.
In the mean while, against the convenience of curing such evils by
instruction, strange it is, that they should object the multitude of other
necessary Matters, wherein Preachers may better bestow their time, then in
giving men warning not to abuse Ceremonies: A wonder it is, that they should
object this, which have so many years together, troubled the Church with
quarrels, concerning these things; and are even to this very hour so earnest in
them, That if they write or speak publicly but five words, one of them is
lightly about the dangerous estate of the Church of England, in respect of
abused Ceremonies. How much happier had it been for this whole Church, if they
which have raised contention therein, about the abuse of Rites and Ceremonies,
had considered in due time that there is indeed store of Matters, fitter and
better a great deal, for Teachers to spend time and labor in? It is through
their importunate and vehement Asteve^ations, more then through any such
experience which we have had of our own. that we are enforced to think it
possible for one or other, now and then, at leastwise, in the prime of the
Reformation of our Church, to have stumbled at some kind of Ceremonies.
Wherein, for as much as we are contented to take this upon their credit, and to
think it may be; since also, they further pretend the same to be so dangerous a
Snare to their Souls, that are at any time taken therein; they must give our
Teachers leave, for the saving of those Souls (be they never so few) to
intermingle sometime with other more necessary things, Admonition concerning
these not unnecessary. Wherein they should in reason more easily yield this
leave, considering, that hereunto we shall not need to use the hundredth part
of that time, which themselves think very needful to bestow, in making most
bitter Invectives against the Ceremonies of the Church.

Our Ceremonies excepted against, for that some Churches, Reformed before ours,
have cast cut those things, which we, notwithstanding their example to the
contrary, do retain still.
13. But to come to the last point of all; The Church of England is grievously
charged with forgetfulness of her duty, which duty had been to train her self
unto the Pattern of their Example, that went before her in the Work of
Reformation. T. C. lib 1. p. 133.
For as the Churches of Christ ought to be most unlike the Synagogue of
Antichrist in their indifferent Ceremonies; so they ought to be most like one
unto another, and for preservation of Unity, to have as much as possible may
be, all the same Ceremonies. And therefore St. Paul to establish this order in
the Church of Corinth 1 Cor. 16. 1.
, that they should make their gatherings for the Poor upon the first day of the
Sabbath (which is our Sunday) alleges this for a Reason, That he had so
ordained in other Churches. Again, As children of one Father, and Servants of
one Family; so all Churches should not only have one Diet, in that they have
one Word, but also wear, as it were, one Livery in using the same Ceremonies.
Thirdly, Can. ^^. The Canon of that Council which is here cic^^, does provide
against ^neeling as Prayer on Sundays, or for fifty days after Easter, on any
day, and not at the Feast of Pentecost only.
This Rule did the Great Council of Nice follow, when it ordained, That where
certain at the Feast of Pentecost did pray Kneeling, they should pray Standing:
The reason whereof is added, which is, That one Custom ought to be kept
throughout all Churches. It is true, That the diversity of Ceremonies ought not
to cause the Churches to dissent out with another: But yet it makes most to
the avoiding of Dissension, that there be amongst them an Unity, not only in
Doctrine, but also in Ceremonies. T. C. lib 1. ^^. 182. 183.
And therefore our Form of Service is to be amended, not only for that it
comes too near that of the Papists, but also because it is so different from
that of the Reformed Churches. Being asked to what Churches ours should conform
it self? and why other Reformed Churches should not as well frame themselves to
ours? Their answer is, That if there be any Ceremonies which we have better
then others, they ought to frame themselves to us: If they have better then we,
then we ought to frame ourselves to them: If the Ceremonies be alike
commodious, tha latter Churches should conform themselves to the first, as the
younger Daughter to the Elder. Romans 15.5.7
For as St. Paul in the Members, where all other things are equal, notes it
for a mark of honor above the rest, that one is called before another to the
Gospel; so is it, for the same cause, amongst the Churches. 1 Cor. 14. 37.
And in this respect he pincheth the Corinths, that not being the first which
received the Gospel, yet they would have their several manners from other
Churches. Moreover, where the Ceremonies are alike commodious, the fewer ought
to conform themselves unto the more. For as much therefore as all the Churches
(so far as they know which plead after this manner) of our Confession in
Doctrine, agree in the Abrogation of diverse things which we retain: Our Church
ought, either to show that they have done evil, or else she is found to be in
fault that does not conform her self in that, which she cannot deny to be well
abrogated. In this Axiom, that Preservation of Peace and Unity amongst
Christian Churches should be by all good means procured, we join most willingly
and gladly with them. Neither deny we, but that, to the avoiding of Dissension,
it avails much, that there be amongst them an Unity as well in Ceremonies as
in Doctrine. The only doubt is, about the manner of their Unity; How far
Churches are bound to be Uniform in their Ceremonies, and what way they ought
to take for that purpose. Touching the one, the Rule which they have set down,
is, That in Ceremonies indifferent, all Churches ought to be, one of them unto
another, as like as possibly they may be. Which possibly, we cannot otherwise
conster, then that it does require them to be, even as like as they may be,
without breaking any Positive Ordinance of God. For the Ceremonies whereof we
speak, being Matter of Positive Law; they are indifferent, if God have neither
himself commanded nor forbidden them, but left them unto the Churches
discretion; so that if as great Uniformity be required as is possible in these
things, seeing that the Law of God forbids not any one of them; it
follows, that from the greatest unto the least, they must be in every
Christian Church the same, except mere impossibility of so having it, be the
hindrance. To us this Opinion seems over-extream and violent: We rather
incline to think it a just and reasonable cause for any Church, the State
whereof is free and independent; if in these things it differ from other
Churches, only for that it does not judge it so fit and expedient, to be
framed therein by the pattern of their example, as to be otherwise framed then
they. That of Gregory unto Leander, is a charitable Speech, and a peaceable; In
una side, nil officit Ecclesiae sancta consuetudo diversa. Where the Faith of
the Holy Church is one, a difference in Customs of the Church does no harm.
That of St. Augustine to Cassulanus, is somewhat particular, and touches, what
kind of Ceremonies they are, wherein one Church may vary from the example of
another, without hurt. Let the Faith of the whole Church, how wide soever it
has spread it self, be always one, although the Unity of Belief be famous for
variety of certain Ordinances, whereby that which is rightly believed,
suffers no kind of let or impediment. Calvin goes further, Respon. ad Med.
As concerning Rites in particular, let the sentence of Augustine take place,
which leaves it free unto all Churches to receive their own Custom. Yea,
sometime it profits, and is expedient that there be difference, lest men
should think that Religion is tied to outward Ceremonies. Always provided, that
there be not any emulation, nor that Churches, delighted with novelty, affect
to have that which others have not. They which grant it true, That the
diversity of Ceremonies in this kind, ought not to cause dissension in
Churches, must either acknowledge, that they grant in effect nothing by these
words; or, if any thing be granted, there must as much be yielded unto, as we
affirm against their former strict Assertion. For, if Churches be urged by way
of duty, to take such Ceremonies as they like not of, How can dissension be
avoided? Will they say, that there ought to be no dissension, because such as
are urged, ought to like of that whereunto they are urged? If they say this,
they say just nothing. For how should any Church like to be urged of duty, by
such as have no authority or power over it, unto those things which being
indifferent, it is not of duty bound unto them? Is it their meaning, that there
ought to be no dissension, because, that which Churches are not bound unto, no
man ought by way of duty to urge upon them? And if any man do, he stands in
the sight both of God and Men most justly blameable, as a needless Disturber of
the Peace of Gods Church, and an Author of Dissension. In saying this, they
both condemn their own practice, when they press the Church of England with so
strict a bond of duty in these things; and they overthrow the ground of their
practice, which is, That there ought to be in all kind of Ceremonies
Uniformity, unless impossibility hinder it. For Proof whereof, it is not enough
to allege what St. Paul did about the Matter of Collections, or what Noblemen
do in the Liveries of their Servants, or what the Council of Nice did for
Standing in time of Prayer on certain days: Because, though St. Paul did will
them of the Church of Corinth T. C. lib. 1. p. 133. And therefore St. Paul, to
establish this order in the Church of Corinth, that they should make their
Gatherings for the Poor upon the first day of the Sabbath (which is our
Sunday,) alleges this for a Reason, that he had so ordained in other Churches.
, every man to lay up somewhat by him upon the Sunday, and to reserve it in
store, till himself did come thither, to send it unto the Church of Jerusalem
for relief of the Poor there; signifying withal, that he had taken the like
order with the Churches of Galatia; yet the reason which he yields of this
order taken, both in the one place and the other, shows the least part of his
meaning to have been that, whereunto his words are writhed. 1 Cor. 16. 1.
Concerning Collection for the Saints (he means them of Jerusalem) as I have
given order to the Church of Galatia, so likewise do ye (says the Apostle,)
that is, In every first day of the week, let each of you lay aside by himself;
and reserve according to that which God has blessed him with, that when I
come, collections be not then to make; and that when I am come, whom you shall
choose, them I may forthwith send away by Letters, to carry your beneficence
unto Jerusalem. Out of which words, to conclude the duty of Uniformity
throughout all Churches in all manner of indifferent Ceremonies, will be very
hard, and therefore best to give it over. But perhaps they are by so much the
more loath to forsake this Argument, for that it has, though nothing else, yet
the name of Scripture, to give it some kind of countenance more then the
pretext of Livery-coats affords them. For neither is it any man's duty to
cloth all his children, T. C. lib. 3. p. 133. So that as children of one
Father, and servants of one Master, he will have all the Churches, not only
have one ^ict, In that they have one word, but also wear as it were one Livery,
in using the same Ceremonies. T. C. lib. 1. p. 133. This Rule did the Great
Council of Nice f^llow, etc. Die Domini ^ and per omnem Pentecestem; nec de
genien be adorare, and jejunium solvere, etc. De Cir^ Milu^s.
or all his servants with one weed; nor theirs to cloth themselves so, if it
were left to their own judgments, as these Ceremonies are left of God, to the
judgment of the Church. And seeing Churches are rather in this case like diverse
Families, then like diverse servants of one Family, because every Church, the
state whereof is independent upon any other, has authority to appoint orders
for it self in things indifferent; therefore of the two, we may rather infer,
That as one Family is not abridged of liberty to be clothed in Friars Gray,
for that another does wear Clay color; so neither are all Churches bound to
the self-same indifferent Ceremonies which it likes sundry to use. As for that
Canon in the Council of Nice, let them but read it, and weigh it well. The
ancient use of the Church throughout all Christendom, was, for fifty days after
Easter (which fifty days were called Pentecost, though most commonly the last
day of them, which is Whitsunday, he so called) in like sort, on all Sundays
throughout the whole year, their manner was to stand at Prayer: Whereupon their
meetings unto that purpose on those days, had the name of Stations given them.
Of which Custom Tertullian speaks in this wise, It is not with us thought
sit, either to fast on the Lords day, or to pray kneeling. The same immunity
from Fasting and Kneeling, we keep all the time which is between the Feasts of
Easter and Pentecost. This being therefore an order generally received in the
Church; when some began to be singular and different from all others, and that
in a Ceremony which was then judged very convenient for the whole Church, even
by the whole, those few excepted which break out of the common Pale; the
Council of Nice thought good to enclose them again with the rest, by a Law made
in this sort: Because there are certain which will needs kneel at the time of
Prayer on the Lords day, and in the fifty days after Easter; the holy Synod
judging it meet, that a convenient custom be observed throughout all Churches,
has decreed, That Standing we make our Prayers to the Lord. Whereby it plainly
appears, that in things indifferent, what the whole Church does think
convenient for the whole, the same if any part do wilfully violate, it may be
reformed and inraised again by that general authority whereunto each particular
is subject, and that the Spirit of singularity in a few, ought to give place
unto public judgment; this does clearly enough appear, but not that all
Christian Churches are bound in every indifferent Ceremony to be uniform;
because where the whole Church has not tied the parts unto one and the same
thing, they being therein left each to their own choice, may either do as
others do, or else otherwise, without any breach of duty at all. Concerning
those indifferent things, wherein it has been heretofore thought good, that
all Christian Churches should be uniform, the way which they now conceive to
bring this to pass was then never thought on. For till now it has been judged,
that seeing the Law of God does not prescribe all particular Ceremonies which
the Church of Christ may use, and in so great variety of them as may be found
out; it is not possible, That the Law of Nature and Reason should direct all
Churches unto the same things, each deliberating by it self, what is most
convenient: The way to establish the same things indifferent throughout them
all, must needs be the judgment of some Judicial authority drawn into one only
sentence, which may be a rule for every particular to follow. And because such
authority over all Churches, is too much to be granted unto any one mortal man;
there yet remains that which has been always followed, as the best, the
safest, the most sincere and reasonable way; namely, the Verdict of the whole
Church orderly taken, and set down in the Assembly of some General Council. But
to maintain, That all Christian Churches ought for Unities sake to be uniform
in all Ceremonies, and then to teach, that the way of bringing this to pass,
must be by mutual imitation, so that where we have better Ceremonies then
others, they shall be bound to follow us, and we them, where theirs are better:
How should we think it agreeable and consonant unto reason? For since in things
of this nature, there is such variety of particular inducements, whereby one
Church may be led to think that better, which another Church led by other
inducements judges to be worse: (For example, the East Church did think it
better to keep Easter day after the manner of the Jews; the West Church better
to do otherwise; the Greek Church judges it worse to use Unleavened Bread in
the Eucharist, the Latin Church leavened: One Church esteems it not so good,
to receive the Eucharist sitting as standing, another Church not so good
standing as sitting, there being on the one side probable Motives, as well as
on the other) unless they add somewhat else, to define more certainly what
Ceremonies shall stand for best, in such sort, That all Churches in the World
shall know them to be the best, and so know them, that there may not remain any
question about this point, we are not a whit the nearer for that they have
hitherto said, They themselves although resolved in their own judgments what
Ceremonies are best, foreseeing that such as they are addicted unto, be not all
so clearly and so incomparably best; but others there are, or may be, at
leastwise, when all things are well considered, as good; knew not which way
smoothly to rid their hands of this matter, without providing some more certain
rule to be followed for establishment of Uniformity in Ceremonies, when there
are diverse kinds of equal goodness: And therefore in this case they say, That
the latter Churches, and the fewer, should conform themselves unto the elder,
and the more. Hereupon they conclude, T. C. lib. 3. p. 133. If the Ceremonies be
alike commodious, the latter Churches should conform themselves to the first,
etc. And again, The fewer ought to conform themselves unto the more.
that for as much as all the Reformed Churches (so far as they know) which are
of our Confession in Doctrine, have agreed already in the Abrogation of diverse
things which we retain: Our Church ought either to show, that they have done
evil, or else she is found to be in fault for not conforming her self to those
Churches, in that which she cannot deny to be in them well abrogated. For the
authority of the first Churches, (and those they account to be the first in
this cause which were first Reformed) they bring the comparison of younger
Daughters conforming themselves in attire to the example of their elder
Sisters; wherein there is just as much strength of Reason, as in the Livery
Coats beforementioned. St. Paul, they say, notes it for a mark of special
honor, that Epanetus was the first man in all Athaia, which did embrace the
Christian Faith; after the same sort, he touches it also as a special
pre-eminence of Iunius and Andronicus, that in Christianity they were his
Ancients. The Corinthians he pincheth with this demand, Romans 16 5. 1 Cor. 14 35.
Has the Word of God gone out from you, or has it lighted on you alone? But
what of all this? If any man should think that alacrity and forwardness in good
things, does add nothing unto men's commendation; the two former speeches of St.
Paul might lead him to reform his judgment. In like sort to take down the
stomach of proud conceited men, that glory, as though they were able to set all
others to School, there can be nothing more fit, then some such words as the
Apostles third sentence does contain; wherein he teaches the Church of Corinth
to know, that there was no such great odds between them, and the rest of their
Brethren, that they should think themselves to be Gold, and the rest to be but
Copper. He therefore uses speech unto them to this effect: Men instructed in
the knowledge of Jesus Christ there both were before you, and are besides you
in the world; ye neither are the Fountain from which first, nor yet the River
into which alone, the Word has flowed. But although as Epanetus was the first
man in all Achaia, so Corinth had been the first Church in the whole World that
received Christ; the Apostle does not show, that in any kind of things
indifferent whatsoever, this should have made their example a Law unto all
others. Indeed, the example of sundry Churches for approbation of one thing
does sway much; but yet still as having the force of an example only, and not
of a Law. They are effectual to move any Church, unless some greater thing do
hinder; but they bind none, no not, though they be many; saving only when
they are the major part of a General Assembly, and then their voices being more
in number, must over-sway their judgments who are fewer, because in such cases
the greater half is the whole. But as they stand out single, each of them by it
self, their number can purchase them no such authority, that the rest of the
Churches being fewer, should be therefore bound to follow them, and to
relinguish as good Ceremonies as theirs for theirs. Whereas therefore it is
concluded out of these so weak Premises, T. C. lib. 3. p. 183. Our Church
ought either to show that they have done evil, or else she is sound to be
insault, that does not conform her self in that which she cannot deny to be
well abrogated.
that the retaining of diverse things in the Church of England, which other
Reformed Churches have cast out, must needs argue that we do not well, unless
we can show that they have done ill, what needed this wrest to draw out from us
an accusation of foreign Churches? It is not proved as yet, that if they have
done well, our duty is to follow them; and to forsake our own course, because
it differs from theirs, although indeed it be as well for us every way, as
theirs for them. And if the proofs alleged for confirmation hereof had been
sound, yet seeing they lead no further then only to show, that where we can
have no better Ceremonies, theirs must be taken; as they cannot with modesty
think themselves to have found out absolutely the best, which the wit of men
may devise; so liking their own somewhat better then other men's, even because
they are their own, they must in equity allow us to be like unto them in this
affection: Which if they do, they ease us of that uncourteous burden, whereby
we are charged, either to condemn them, or else to follow them. They grant we
need not follow them, if our own ways already be better. And if our own be but
equal, the Law of Common Indulgence allows us to think them, at the least,
half a thought the better, because they are our own, which we may very well do,
and never draw any Indictment at all against theirs, but think commendably even
of them also.

A Declaration of the proceedings of the Church of England, for establishment
of things as they are.
14. To leave Reformed Churches therefore, and their Actions, for Him to judge
of, in whose sight they are, as they are, and our desire is, that they may even
in his sight, be found such, as we ought to endeavor by all means, that our own
may likewise be: Somewhat we are enforced to speak by way of Simple
Declaration, concerning the proceedings of the Church of England in these
affairs, to the end, that men whose minds are free from those partial
constructions, whereby the only name of Difference from some other Churches,
is thought cause sufficient to condemn ours, may the better discern, whether
that we have done, be reasonable, yea or no. The Church of England being to
alter her received Laws, concerning such Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies, as had
been in former times an hinderance unto Piety and Religious Service of God, was
to enter into consideration first, That the change of Laws, especially
concerning matter of Religion, must be warily proceeded in. Laws, as all other
things humane, are many times full of imperfection, and that which is supposed
behoveful unto men, proves oftentimes most pernicious. The wisdom which is
learned by tract of time, finds the Laws that have been in former ages
established, needful in latter to be abrogated. Besides, that which sometime is
expedient, does not always so continue; and the number of needless Laws
unabolished, does weaken the force of them that are necessary. But true withal
it is, that Alteration, though it be from worse to better, has in it
inconveniences, and those weighty; unless it bein such Laws as have been made
upon special occasions, which occasions ceasing, Laws of that kind do abrogate
themselves. But when we abrogate a Law, as being ill made, the whole cause for
which it was made still remaining; Do we not herein revoke our very own deed,
and upbraid our selves with folly, yea, all that were makers of it, with
oversight and with error? Further, if it be a Law which the custom and
continual practice of many ages or years, has consumed in the minds of men;
to alter it, must needs be troublesome and scandalous. It amazeth them, it
causes them to stand in doubt, whether any thing be in it self by nature,
either good or evil; and not all things rather such as men at this or that time
agree to account of them, when they behold even those things disproved,
disannulled, rejected, which use had made in a manner natural. What have we to
induce men unto the willing obedience and observation of Laws, but the weight
of so many men's judgments, as have with deliberate advice assented thereunto;
the weight of that long Experience, which the World has had thereof, with
consent and good liking? So that to change any such Law, must needs with the
common sort impair and weaken the force of those Grounds, whereby all Laws are
made effectual. Notwithstanding, we do not deny alteration of Laws to be
sometimes a thing necessary; as when they are unnatural, or impious, or
otherwise hurtful unto the Public Community of Men, and against that good for
which Humane Societies were instituted. When the Apostles of our Lord and
Savior were ordained to alter the Laws of Heatherish Religion, received
throughout the whole World; chosen I grant, they were ( Paul excepted) the rest
ignorant, poor, simple, unschooled altogether, and unlettered men; howbeit,
extraordinarily endued with ghostly Wisdom from above, before they ever
undertook this Enterprise, yea, their authority confirmed by Miracle, to the
end; it might plainly appear, that they were the Lords Ambassadors, unto whose
Sovereign power for all flesh to stoop, for all the Kingdoms of the Earth to
yield themselves willingly conformable in whatsoever should be required, it was
their duty. In this case therefore, their oppositions in maintenance of Public
Superstition against Apostolic endeavors, as that they might not condemn the
ways of their ancient Predecessors, that they must keep Religiones Traditas,
the Rites which from age to age had descended, that the Ceremonies of Religion
had been ever accounted by so much holier as elder; these, and the like
Allegations in this case, were vain and frivolous. Not to stay longer therefore
in speech concerning this point, we will conclude, That as the change of such
Laws, as have been specified is necessary, so the evidence, that they are such,
must be great. If we have neither voice from Heaven, that so pronounces of
them; neither sentence of men grounded upon such manifest and clear proof, that
they in whose hands it is to alter them, may likewise infallibly even in heart
and conscience judge them so, upon necessity to urge alteration, is to trouble
and disturb without necessity. As for Arbitrary Alterations; when Laws in
themselves not simply bad or unmeet, are changed for better and more expedient,
if the benefit of that which is newly better devised, be but small, since the
custom of easiness to alter and change, is so evil, no doubt, but to bear a
tolerable sore, is better then to venture on a dangerous remedy. Which being
generally thought upon, as a matter that touched nearly their whole enterprise,
whereas change was notwithstanding concluded necessary, in regard of the great
hurt which the Church did receive by a number of things then in use, whereupon
a great deal of that which had been, was now to be taken away and removed out
of the Church; yet since there are diverse ways of abrogating things established,
they saw it best to cut off presently such things, as might in that sort be
extinguished without danger, leaving the rest to be abolished by disusage
through tract of time. And as this was done for the manner of Abrogation; so
touching the stint or measure thereof, Rites and Ceremonies, and other external
things of like nature being hurtful unto the Church, either in respect of their
quality, or in regard of their number; in the former, there could be no doubt
or difficulty, what should be done; their deliberation in the latter was more
hard. And therefore in as much as they did resolve to remove only such things
of that kind as the Church might best spare, retaining the residue, their
whole Counsel is in this point utterly condemned, as having either proceeded
from the blindness of those times, or from negligence, or from desire of honor
and glory, or from an erroneous opinion, that such things might be tolerated
for a while; or if it did proceed (as they which would seem most favorable, are
content to think it possible) from a purpose, partly the easilier to draw
Papists unto the Gospel, T. C. lib. 2. p. 29. It may well be, their purpose was
by that temper of Popish Ceremonies with the Gospel, partly the easilier to
drew the Papists to the Gospel, etc partly to redeem Peace thereby
by keeping so many orders still the same with theirs, and partly to redeem
peace thereby, the breach whereof they might fear, would ensue upon more through
alteration; or howsoever it came to pass, the thing they did is judged evil.
But such is the lot of all that deal in Public Affairs, whether of Church or
Commonwealth, that which men list to surmise of their doings, being it good or
ill, they must beforehand, patiently aim their minds to endure. Wherefore to
let go private surmises, whereby the thing in it self is not made, either
better or worse; if just and allowable Reasons might lead them to do as they
did, then are all these censures frustrate. Touching Ceremonies harmless
therefore in themselves, and hurtful only in respect of number: Was it amiss
to decree, That those things which were least needful, and newliest come,
should be the first that were taken away; as in the abrogating of a number of
Saints days, and of other the like custom it appears they did, till
afterward the Form of Common Prayer being perfected, Articles of sound
Religion and Discipline agreed upon, Catechisms framed for the needful
instruction of Youth, Churches purged of things that indeed were but thensom to
the people, or to the simple offensive and scandalous, all was brought at the
length unto that wherein now we stand? Or was it amiss, that having this way
eased the Church, as they thought of superfluity, they went not on till they
had plucked up even those things also, which had taken a great deal stronger
and deeper root, those things, which to abrogate without constraint of manifest
harm thereby arising, had been to alter unnecessarily (in their judgments) the
ancient received custom of the whole Church, the universal practice of the
people of God, and those very decrees of our Fathers, which were not only set
down by agreement of General Councils, T.C. lib. 3. p. 33.
but had accordingly been put in ure, and so continued in use till that very
time present? True it is, That neither Councils nor Customs, be they never so
ancient and so general, can let the Church from taking away that thing which is
hurtful to be retained. Where things have been instituted, which being
convenient and good at the first, do afterward in process of time wax
otherwise; we make no doubt, but they may be altered, yea, though Councils or
Customs General have received them. And therefore it is but a needless kind of
opposition which they make, who thus dispute, T.C. lib. 3. p. 33.
If in those things which are not expressed in the Scripture, that is to be
observed of the Church, which is the custom of the people of God, and decree of
our Forefathers; then how can these things at any time be varied, which
heretofore have been once ordained in such sort? Whereto we say, that things so
ordained are to be kept, howbeit not necessarily, any longer then till there
grow some urgent cause to ordain the contrary. For there is not any Positive
Law of Men, whether it be general or particular, received by formal express
consent, as in Councils; or by secret approbation, as in Customs it comes to
pass; but the same may be taken away if occasion serve. Even as we all know,
that many things generally kept heretofore, are now in like sort generally
unkept and abolished every where. Nothwithstanding till such things be
abolished, what exception can there be taken against the judgment of St.
Augustine, who says, August. Epist. 118.
That of things harmless, whatsoever there is which the whole Church does
observe throughout the World, to argue for any man's immunity from observing the
same, it were a point of most insolent madness? And surely, odious it must
needs have been for one Christian Church, to abolish that which all had
received and held for the space of many ages, and that without any detriment
unto Religion, so manifest, and so great, as might in the eyes of unpartial
men, appear sufficient to clear them from all blame of rash and inconsiderate
proceeding, if in servor of zeal they had removed such things. Whereas
contrariwise so reasonable Moderation herein used, has freed us from being
deservedly subject unto that bitter kind of obloquy, whereby as the Church of
Rome does under the color of love toward those things which be harmless,
maintain extremely most hurtful corruptions; so we peradventure might be
upbraided, that under color of hatred toward those things that are corrupt,
we are on the other side as extreme, even against most harmless Ordinances; and
as they are obstinate to retain that, which no man of any conscience is able
well to defend: So we might be reckoned fierce and violent, to tear away that
which if our own mouths did condemn, our consciences would storm and repine
thereat. The Romans having banished Tarquinius the Proud, and taken a Solemn
Oath, that they never would permit any man more to reign, could not herewith
content themselves, or think that Tyranny was thoroughly extinguished, till they
had driven one of their Consuls to depart the City, against whom they found not
in the world what to object saving only that his name was Tarquine, and that
the Commonwealth could not seem to have recovered perfect freedom, as long as a
man of so dangerous a name was left remaining. T. C. lib. 3. p. 131. For indeed
it were more sase for us to conform our indifferent Ceremonies to the Turks
which are far off, then to the Papish which are so near.
For the Church of England to have done the like, in casting out Papal Tyranny
and Superstition, to have showed greater willingness of accepting the very
Ceremonies of the Turk, Christ's professed enemy, then of the most indifferent
things which the Church of Rome approves: To have left not so much as the
names which the Church of Rome does give unto things innocent: To have ejected
whatsoever that Church does make account of, be it never so harmless in it
self, and of never so ancient continuance, without any other crime to charge it
with, then only that it has been the hap thereof to be used by the Church of
Rome, and not to be commanded in the Word of God. This kind of proceeding
might happily have pleased some few men, who having begun such a course
themselves, must needs be glad to see their example followed by us. But the
Almighty which gives wisdom, and inspireth with right understanding whomsoever
it pleases him, he foreseeing that which man's wit had never been able to reach
unto; namely, what Tragedies the attempt of so extreme alteration would raise
in some parts of the Christian World, did for the endless good of his Church
(as we cannot choose but interpret it) use the Bridle of his Provident
restraining hand, to stay those eager affections in some, and to settle their
resolution upon a course more calm and moderate; lest as in other most ample
and heretofore most flourishing Dominions it has since fallen out, so likewise,
if in ours it had come to pass, that the adverse part being enraged, and
betaking it self to such practices, as men are commonly wont to embrace, when
they behold things brought to desperate extremities, and no hope left to see
any other end, them only the utter oppression and clean extinguishment of one
side: By this mean Christendom flaming in all parts of greatest importance at
once, they all had wanted that comfort of mutual relief, whereby they are now
for the time sustained (and not the least by this our Church, which they so
much impeach) till Mutual Combustions, Bloodsheds and Wastes (because no other
enducements will serve) may enforce them through very faintness, after the
experience of so endless miseries, to enter on all sides at the length into
some such consultation, as may tend to the best re-establishment of the whole
Church of Jesus Christ, To the singular good whereof, it cannot but serve as a
profitable direction, to teach men what is most likely to prove available, when
they shall quietly consider the trial that has been thus long had of both
kinds of Reformation; as well this moderate kind which the Church of England
has taken, as that other more extreme and rigorous, which certain Churches
elsewhere have better liked. In the mean while it may be, that suspense of
judgment and exercise of Charity were safer and seemlier for Christian men,
then the hot pursuit of these Controversies, wherein they that are more fervent
to dispute, be not always the most able to determine. But who are on his side,
and who against him, our Lord in his good time shall reveal. And since thus far
we have proceeded in opening the things that have been done, let not the
principal doers themselves be forgotten. When the ruins of the House of God
(that House which consisting of Religious Souls, is most immediately the
precious Temple of the Holy Ghost) were become not in his sight alone, but in
the eyes of the whole World so exceeding great, that very Superstition began
even to feel it self too far grown; the first that with us made way to repair
the decays thereof, by beheading Superstition, was King Henry the Eighth, the
Son and Successor of which famous King, as we know, was Edward the Saint: In
whom (for so, by the event we may gather) it pleased God Righteous and Just to
let England see, what a blessing sin and iniquity would not suffer it to enjoy.
Howbeit, that which the Wiseman has said concerning Enoch (whose days were,
though many in respect of ours, yet scarce, as three to nine in comparison of
theirs with whom he lived) the same to that admirable child most worthily may
be applied, Though he departed this world soon yet fulfilled be much time. But
what ensued? That work, which the one in such sort had begun, and the other so
far proceeded in, was in short space so overthrown, as if almost it had never
been: Till such time as that God, whose property is to show his mercies then
greatest when they are nearest to be utterly despaired of, caused in the depth
of discomfort and darkness a most glorious Star to arise, and on her head
settled the Crown, whom himself had kept as a Lamb from the slaughter of those
bloody times, that the experience of his goodness in her own deliverance, might
cause her merciful disposition, to take so much the more delight, in saving
others, whom the like necessity should press. What in this behalf has been
done toward Nations abroad, the parts of Christendom most afflicted can best
testify. That which especially concerns our selves in the present matter we
treat of, is, the state of Reformed Religion, a thing at her coming to the
Crown, even raised, as it were, by miracle from the dead; a thing which we so
little hoped to see, that even they which beheld it done, searcely believed
their own senses at the first beholding. Yet being then brought to pass, thus
many years it has continued standing by no other wordly mean, but that one
only hand which erected it, that hand, which as no kind of imminent danger
could cause at the first to withhold it self; so neither have the practices, so
many, so bloody, following since, been ever able to make weary. Nor can we say
in this case so justly, that Aaron and Hur, the Ecclesiastical and Civil
States, have sustained the hand which did lift it self to Heaven for them; as
that Heaven it self has by this hand sustained them, no aid or help having
thereunto been ministered for performance of the Work of Reformation, other then
such kind of help or aid, as the Angel in the Prophet Zechariah speaks of,
saying, Neither by an army, nor strength, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of
Hosts. Which Grace and Favor of Divine Assistance, having not in one thing or
two, showed it self, nor for some few days or years appeared, but in such sort
so long continued, our manifold sins and transgressions striving to the
contrary; What can we less thereupon conclude, then that God would at leastwise
by tract of time teach the World, that the thing which he blesses, defends,
keeps so strangely, cannot choose but be of him? Wherefore, if any refuse to
believe us disputing for the Verity of Religion established, let then believe
God himself thus miraculously working for it, and with life, even for ever and
ever, unto that Glorious and Sacred Instrument whereby he works.

OF THE LAWS OF Ecclesiastical Polity.
BOOK V. Concerning their Fourth Assertion, That touching several Public
Duties of Christian Religion, there is amongst us much Superstition retained in
them; and concerning Persons, which for performance of those Duties are endued
with the Power of Ecclesiastical Order, our Laws and Proceedings according
thereunto, are many ways herein also corrupted.
The Matter contained in this Fifth Book.
1. TRue Religion is the Root of all true Virtues, and the stay of all
Well-ordered Commonwealths. 2. The must extreme opposite to true Religion, is
affected Atheism. 3. Of Superstition, and the Rest thereof, either misguided
zeal, or Ignorant fear of Divine glory. 4. Of the Redress of Superstition in
Gods Church, and concerning the Question of this Book. 5. Four General
Propositions demanding that which may reasonably be granted, concerning Matters
of outward Form in the Exercise of true Religion. And fifthly, Of a Rule and
safe not reasonable in these Cases. 6. The first Proposition touching Judgment,
what things are convenient in the outward public ordering of Church affairs.
7. The second Proposition. 8. The third Proposition. 9. The fourth Proposition.
10. The Rule of Men's private spirit, not safe in these Cases to be followed.
11. Plans for the Public Service of God. 12. The Solemnity of Erecting
Churches, condemned; the Hallowing and Dedicating of them, scanned by the
Adversary. 13. Of the names, whereby we distinguish our Churches. 14. Of the
Fashion of our Churches. 15. The Sumptuousness of Churches. 16. What Holiness
and Virtue we ascribe to the Church, more than other places. 17. Their pretense
that would have Churches utterly vazed. 18. Of Public Teaching or Preaching,
and the first kind thereof, Catechizing. 19. Of Preaching, by reading
publicly the Books of holy Scripture, and concerning supposed Untruths in
those Translations of Scripture, which we allow to be read; as also of the
choice which we make in reading. 20. Of Preaching by the Public Reading of
other prositable Instructions; and concerning Books Ap^cryphal. 21. Of
Preaching by Sermons, and whether Sermons be the only ordinary way of
Teaching, whereby man are brought to the saving knowledge of Gods Truth. 22.
What they attribute to Sermons only, and what we to Reading also. 23. Of
Prayer. 24. Of Public Prayer. 25. Of the Form of Common Prayer. 26. Of them
which like not to have any Set Form of Common Prayer. 27. Of them, who allowing
a Set Form of Prayer, yet allow not ours. 28. The Form of our Liturgy too near
the Papists, too far different from that of other Reformed Churches as they
pretend. 29. Attire belonging to the Service of God. 30. Of gesture in Praying,
and of different places chosen to that purpose. 31. Easiness of Praying after
our Form. 32. The length of our Service. 33. Instead of such Prayers as the
Primitive Churches have used, and those that be Reformed now use; we have (they
say) diverse short cuts or shreaddings, rather Wishes them Prayers. 34. Lessons
intermingled with our Prayers. 35. The number of our Prayers for Earthly
things, and our often rehearsing of the Lords Prayer. 36. The People saying after
the Minister. 37. Our manner of Reading the Psalms, otherwise then the rest of
the Scripture. 38. Of Music with Psalms. 39. Of Singing or Saying Psalms, and
other parts of Common Prayer, wherein the People and the Minister answer one
another by course. 40. Of Magnificat, Benedictus, and Nune Dimittis. 41. Of the
Litany. 42. Of Athanasus Creed, and Gloria Patri. 43. Our want of particular
Thanksgiving. 44. In some things the Matter of our Prayer, as they affirm, is
unsound. 45. When thou have overcome the sharpness of Death, thou did open
the Kingdom of Heaven unto all Believers. 46. Touching Prayer for Deliverance
from Sudden Death. 47. Prayer for these things which we for our worthiness,
dare not ask; God, for the worthiness of his Sin, would vouchsafe to grant. 48.
Prayer to be evermore delivered from all Adversity. 49. Prayer that all Men may
find Mercy, and if the will of God, that all Men might be Saved. 50. Of the
Name, the Author, and the force of Sacraments, which force consists in this.
That God has ordained them as means to make us partakers of him in Christ, and
of life through Christ. 51. That God is in Christ by the Personal Incarnation
of the Son, who is very God. 52. The Misinterpretations which Heresit has made
of the manner, how God and Man are united in one Christ. 53. That by the union
of the one with the other Nature in Christ, there grows neither gain nor loss
of Essential Properties to either. 54. What Christ has obtained according to
the Flesh, by the union of his Flesh with D^iey. 55. Of the Personal presence
of Christ every where, and in what sense it may be granted, he is every where
present according to the Flesh. 56. The union or mutual Participation, which is
between Christ and the Church of Christ, in this present World. 57. The
necessity of Sacrament unto the Participation of Christ. 58. The Substance of
Baptism, the Rites or Solemnities thereunto belonging; and that the Substance
thereof being kept, other things in Baptism may give place to necessity. 59.
The Ground in Scripture, whereupon a necessity of outward Baptism has been
built. 60. What kind of necessity in outward Baptism has been gathered by the
words of our Savior Christ: and what the true necessity thereof indeed is. 61.
What things in Baptism have been dispensed with by the Father, respecting
necessity. 62. Whether Baptism by Women, be true Baptism, good, and affected to
them that receive it. 63. Of Interrogatories in Baptism, touching Faith, and
the purpose of a Christian life. 64. Interrogatories proposed unto Infants in
Baptism, and answered, a^ in their names by Godfathers. 65. Of the Cross in
Baptism. 66. Of Confirmation after Baptism. 67. Of the Sacrament of the Body
and Blood of Christ. 68. Of faults noted in the Form of Administering that holy
Sacrament. 69. Of Festival days, and the natural ceases of their convenient
Institution. 70. The manner of celebrating Festival days. 71. Exceptious
against our keeping of other Festival days, besides the Sabbath. 72. Of Days
appointed, as well for ordinary as for extraordinary Fasts in the Church of
God. 73. The Celebration of Matrimony. 74. The Churching of Woman. 75. The
Rites of Burial. 76. Of the Nature of that Ministry, which serves for
performance of Divine Duties in the Church of God, and how happiness, not
eternal only, but also Temporal, does depend upon it. 77. Of Power given unto
Men, to execute that Heavenly Office, of the Gift of the Holy Ghost is
Ordination: and whether conveniently the Power of Order may be sought or sued
for. 78. Of Degrees, whereby the Power of Order is distinguished, and
concerning the Attire of Ministers. 79. Of Oblations, Foundations, Endowments,
Tithes, all intended for Perpetuity of Religion; which purpose being chiefly
fulfilled by the Clerg^es certain and sufficient maintenance, must needs by
Alienation of Church Livings be made frustrate. 80. Of Ordinatious lawful
without Title, and without any Popular Election precedent, but in no case
without regard of due Information what their quality is that enter into holy
Orders. 81.Of the Learning that should be in Ministers, their Residence, and
the number of their Livings.


FEw there are of so weak capacity, but public evils they easily epsy; True
Religion is the Root of all true Virtues, and the stay of all wel-ordered
Commonweal^.
fewer so patient, as not to complain, when the grievous inconveniences
thereof, work sensible smart. Howbeit to see wherein the harm which they feel
consists, the Seeds from which it sprang, and the method of curing it,
belongs to a skill, the study whereof is so full of toil, and the practice so
beset with difficulties; that wary and respective men had rather seek quietly
their own, and wish that the World may go well, so it be not long of them, them
with pain and hazard, make themselves advisers for the common good. We which
thought it at the very first a sign of cold Affection toward the Church of
God, to prefer private case before the labor of appeasing public disturbance,
must now of necessity refer events to the gracious providence of Almighty God,
and in discharge of our duty toward him, proceed with the plain and unpartial
defense of a Common Cause. Wherein our endeavor is not so much to overthrow
them with whom we conted, as to yield them just and reasonable causes of those
things, which for want of due consideration heretofore, they misconceived,
accusing Laws for Men's over-sights, importing evils grown through personal
defects, unto that which is not evil, framing unto some Sores unwholesome
Plasters, and applying othersome where no sore is. To make therefore our
beginning that, which to both parts is most acceptable, We agree, That pure and
unstained Religion ought to be the highest of all cares appertaining to Public
Regiment; as well in regard of that Psalm. 144. 1. C. Th. lib. 16. lit. 2
Gaudere etc gioriare e^ fide semper volumus, scient ^ magio rel^gionibus quaim
officiio is labor corporis, ^el sudore sos^ram rempublicam concineri.
aid and protection, which they, who faithfully serve God, confess they receive
at his merciful hands; as also for the force which Religion has to qualify
all sorts of Men, and to make them in public affairs the more serviceable:
Governors, the apter to rule with Conscience; Inferiors, for Conscience sake
the willinger to obey. It is no peculiar conceit, but a matter of sound
consequence, that all duties are by so much the better performed, by how much
the Men are more Religious, from whose Abilities the same proceed. For if Est
(...) Arist. Mag^. Moral. lib. 1. cap. 1.
the course of Politic affairs, cannot in any good sort go forward without fit
Instruments, and that which sits them, be their Virtues: Let Polity
acknowledge it self indebted to Religion, Godliness being the chiefest top and
Wellspring of all true virtues, even as God is of all good things. So natural
is the Union of Religion with Justice, that we may boldly deem there is
neither, where both are not. For how should they be unseignedly just, whom
Religion does not cause to be such; or they Religious, which are not found such
by the proof of their just actions (...) Philo de Dec. Precept.
If they, which employ their labor and travel about the public administration
of Justice, follow it only as a trade, with unquenchable and unconscionable
thirst of gain, being not in heart persuaded that. 2 Chro. 1^.6.
Justice is Gods own Work, and themselves his Agents in this business; the
Sentence of Right, Gods own verdict, and themselves his Priests to deliver it;
Formalities of Justice do but serve to smother right, and that which was
necessarily ordained for the common good, is through shameful abuse made the
cause of common misery. The same Piety, which makes them that are in
authority, desirous to please and resemble God by Justice, inflameth every way,
Men of action, with Zeal to do good (as far as their place will permit) unto
all. (...) Arist. Ethic. lib. 1. cap. 2.
For that they know, is most Noble and Divine. Whereby, if no natural nor
casual inability cross their desires, they always delighting to inure
themselves with actions most beneficial to others, cannot but gather great
experience, and through experience, the more wisdom; because Conscience, and
the fear of swerving from that which is right, makes them diligent observers
of circumstances, the loose regard whereof is the Nurse of Vulgar Folly, no
less then Solomon's attention thereunto, was of natural furtherances, the most
effectual to make him eminent above others. Eccles. 12. 10.
For he gave good heed, and pierced every thing to the very ground, and by that
means became the Author of many Parables. Concerning Fortitude, since evils
great and unexpected (the true touchstone of constant minds) do cause
oftentimes even them to think upon Divine power with fearfullest suspicions,
Wisd. 17.13.
which have been otherwise the most secure despisers thereof, how should we
look for any constant resolution of mind, in such cases, saving only where
unfeigned affection to Godward, has bred the most assured confidence to be
assisted by his hand? For proof whereof, let but the Acts of the ancient Jews
be indifferently weighed, from whose magnanimity, in causes of most extreme
hazard, those strange and unwonted resolutions have grown; which for all
circumstances, no people under the Roof of Heaven did ever hitherto match. And
that which did always animate them, was their mere Religion. Without which, if
so be it were possible, that all other Ornaments of Mind might be had in their
full perfection, nevertheless, the mind that should possess them, divorced
from Piety, could be but a spectacle of commiseration; even as that Body is,
which adorned with sundry other admirable Beauties, wants Eyesight, the
chiefest Grace that Nature has in that kind to bestow. They which commend so
much the felicity of that innocent World, wherein it is said, That men of their
own accord did embrace fidelity and honesty, not for fear of the Magistrate, or
because revenge was before their eyes ^ if at any time they should do
otherwise, but that which held the people in aw was the shame of ill-doing, the
love of equity, and right it self, a bar against all oppressions, which
greatness of power causes: They which describe unto us any such estate of
happiness amongst men, though they speak not of Religion, do notwithstanding
declare that which is in truth her only working. For if Religion did possess
sincerely and sufficiently the hearts of all men, there would need no other
restraint from evil. This does not only give life and perfection to all
endeavors wherewith it concurreth; but what event soever ensues, it breeds,
if not joy and gladness always, yet always patience, satisfaction, and
reasonable contentment of mind. Whereupon it has been set down as an Axiom of
good experience, that all things religiously taken in hand, Psalm. 1. 3.
are prosperously ended: because, whether men in the end have that which
Religion did allow them to desire, or that which it teaches them contentedly
to suffer, they are in neither event unfortunate. (...)Arist. Ethic. lib. 1.
cap. 10.
But lest any man should here conceive, that it greatly skilleth not of what
sort our Religion be, in as much as Heathens, Turks, and Infidels, impute to
Religion a great part of the same effects, which our selves ascribe hereunto,
they having ours in the same detestation that we theirs: It shall be requisite
to observe well, how far forth there may be agreement in the effects of
different Religions. First, By the bitter strife which rises oftentimes from
small differences in this behalf, and is by so much always greater, as the
matters is of more importance; we see a general agreement in the secret opinion
of men, that every man ought to embrace the Religion which is true; and to
shun, as hurtful, whatsoever dissenteth from it, but that most, which does
farthest dissent. The generality of which persuasion argues, That God has
imprinted it by nature, to the end it might be a spur to our industry, in
searching and maintaining that Religion, from which as to swerve in the least
points, is error; so the capital enemies thereof, God hates as his deadly
foes, aliens, and without repentance, children of endless perdition. Such
therefore, touching man's immortal state after this life, are not likely to reap
benefit by their Religion, but to look for the clean contrary, in regard of so
important contrariety between it and the true Religion. Nevertheless, in as
much as the errors of the most seduced this way have been mixed with some
truths, we are not to marvel, that although the one did turn to their endless
woe and confusion, yet the other had many notable effects, as touching the
affairs of this present life. There were in these quarters of the World,
Sixteen hundred years ago, Cas. de Bell. G^^. lib. 6.
certain speculative Men, whose Authority disposed the whole Religion of those
times. By their means it became a received opinion, that the Souls of Men
departing this life, do slit out of one Body into some other. Which opinion,
though false, yet entwined with a true, that the Souls of Men do never perish,
abated the fear of death in them which were so resolved, and gave them courage
unto all adventures. The Romans had a vain superstitious custom, in most of
their enterprises, to conjecture before hand of the event, by certain tokens
which they noted in Birds, or in the Intrails of Beasts, or by other the like
frivolous Divinations. From whence notwithstanding as often as they could receive
any sign, which they took to be favorable, it gave them such hope, as if their
gods had made them more then half a promise of prosperous success. Which many
times was the greatest cause that they did prevail, especially being men of
their own natural inclination, hopeful and strongly conceited, whatsoever they
took in hand. But could their fond Superstition have furthered so great
attempts, without the mixture of a true persuasion, concerning the unresistable
force of Divine Power? Upon the wilful violation of Oaths, execrable
Blasphemies, and like contempts, offered by Deriders of Religion, even unto
false gods, fearful tokens of Divine Revenge have been know to follow. Which
occurrents the devouter sort did take for manifest Arguments, that the gods
whom they worshipped, were of power to reward such as sought unto them, and
would plague those that feared them not. In this they erred. For (as the Wise
man rightly notes conning such) it was not the power of them by whom they
swear, 2. Wisd. 14.13.
but the vengeance of them that sinned, which punished the offenses of the
ungodly. It was their hurt untruly to attribute so great power unto false gods.
Yet the right conceit which they had, that to perjury vengeance is due, was not
without good effect, as touching the course of their lives, who feared the
wilful violation of Oaths in that respect. And whereas we read so many of them
so much commended, some for their mild and merciful disposition, some for
their virtuous severity, some for integrity of life, all these were the fruits
of true and infallible principles delivered unto us in the World of God, as the
Axioms of our Religion, which being imprinted by the God of Nature in their
hearts also, and taking better root in some them in most others, grew, though
not from, yet with and amidst the heaps of manifold repugnant Errors; which
Errors of corrupt Religion, had also their suitable effects in the lives of the
self-same parties. Without all controversy, the purer and perfecter our
Religion is, the worthier effects it has in them, who steadfastly and sincerely
embraceit, in others not. They that love the Religion which they prosess, may
have failed in choice, but yet they are sure to reap what benefit the same is
able to afford, whereas the best and foundest professed by them that bear it
not the like affection, yields them, retaining it in that sort, no benefit.
David was a Man after Gods own heart, so termed, because his affection was
hearty toward God. Beholding the like disposition in, them which lived under
him, it was his Prayer to Almighty God, 1 Chro. 19. 17.
O keep this for ever in the purpose, and thoughts of the heart of this people.
But when, after that David had ended his days in peace, they who succeeded him
in place, for the most part followed him not in quality, when their Kings (some
few excepted) to better their worldly estate (as they thought) left their own,
and their peoples ghostly condition uncared for, by woeful experience they both
did learn, That to forsake the true God of Heaven, is to fall into all such
evils upon the face of the earth, as men either destitute of Grace Divine, may
commit, or unprotected from above, endure. Seeing therefore it does thus
appear, that the safety of all Estates depends upon Religion; that Religion
unfeignedly loved, perfecteth men's abilities unto all kinds of virtuous
Services in the Commonwealth; that men's desire in general is to hold no
Religion, but the true; and that whatsoever good effects do grow out of their
Religion, who embrace instead of the true, a false, the Roots thereof are
certain sparks of the Light of Truth, intermingled with the darkness of Error;
because no Religion can wholly and only consist of untruths, we have Reason to
think, That all true Virtues are to honor true Religion as their Parent, and
all well ordered Commonweals to love her as their chiefest stay.

The most extreme opposite to true Religion, is affected Atheism.
2. They of whom God is altogether unapprehended, are but few in number, and for
grosness of wit such, that they hardly and scarcely seem to hold the place of
Humane Being. These we should judge to be of all others most miserable, but
that a wretcheder sort there are, on whom, whereas nature has bestowed riper
capacity, their evil disposition seriously goes about therewith to apprehend
God, as being not God. Whereby it comes to pass, that of these two sorts of
men, both godless; the one having utterly no knowledge of God, the other study
how to persuade themselves that there is no such thing to be known. Wisd. 3.21.
Such things they imagine, and go astray, because their own wickedness has
blinded them. (...) Arist. Ethic. lib. 6. cap. 3.
The Fountain and Wellspring of which Impiety, is a resolved purpose of mind,
to reap in this World, what sensual profit or pleasure soever the World
yields, and not to be barred from any whatsoever means available thereunto.
And that is the very radical cause of their Atheism, no man (I think) will
doubt, which considers what pains they take to destroy those principal Spurs
and Motives unto all Virtue, the Creation of the World, the Providence of God,
the Resurrection of the Dead, the Joys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
endless pains of the wicked, yea, above all things, the Authority of the
Scripture, because on these Points it evermore beats, and the Souls
immortality, which granted, draws easily after it the rest, as a voluntary
train. Is it not wonderful, that base desires should so extinguish in men the
sense of their own excellency^ as to make them willing that their souls should
be like to the souls of beasts, mortal and corruptible with their bodies, till
some admirable or unusual accident happen (as it has in some) to work the
beginning of a better alteration in their minds, disputation about the
knowledge of God with such kind of persons commonly prevails little. Sus^n.
verse. 9. They turned away their mind, and cast down their eyes, that they
might not see Heaven, nor remember just Judgments.
For how should the brightness of Wisdom shine, where the windows of the soul
are of very se^ purpose closed? True Religion has many things in it, the only
mention whereof galleth and troubles their minds. Being therefore loath, that
enquiry into such matters should breed a persuasion in the end contrary unto
that they embrace, it is their endeavor to banish, as much as in them lies,
quite and clean from their cogitation whatsoever may sound that way. But it
comes many times to pass (which is their torment) that the thing they shun
does follow them; truth, as it were, even obtruding it self into their
knowledge, and not permitting them to be so ignorant as they would be.
Whereupon, inasmuch as the nature of man is unwilling to continue doing that
wherein it shall always condemn it self, they continuing still obstinate, to
follow the course which they have begun, are driven to devise all the shifts
that wit can invent for the smothering of this light, all that may but with any
the least show of possibility stay their minds from thinking that true, which
they heartily wish were false, but cannot think it so, Hat est summa delicti,
nolle agnoscere quim ignorare non possi^. Cy^^. de Idol. Vanit.
without some scruple and fear of the contrary. Now because that judicious
learning, for which we commend most worthily the ancient Sages of the World,
does not in this case serve the turn, these trenchermates (for such the most of
them be) frame to themselves a way more pleasant, a new method they have of
turning things that are serious into mockery, an Art of Contradiction by way
of scorn, a learning wherewith we were long sithence forewarned, 2 Pet. 3.8.
Jude, verse. 38.
that the miserable times whereinto we are fallen should abound. This they
study, this they practice, this they grace with a wanton superfluity of wit,
too much insulting over the patience of more virtuously disposed minds. For
toward these so forlom creatures we are (it must be confessed) too patient. In
zeal to the glory of God, Babylon has exceeded Sion. ^^^. 3. 29.
We want that decree of Nebuchodonosor, the fury of this wicked brood has the
reins too much at liberty, their tongues walk at large, the spit-venom of their
poisoned hearts breaks out to the annoyance of others, what their untamed
lust suggesteth, the same their licentious mouths do every where set abroach.
With our contentions their irreligious humor also is much strengthened. Nothing
pleases them better, than these manifold oppositions about the Matter of
Religion, as well for that they have hereby the more opportunity to learn on
one side how another may be oppugned, and so to weaken the credit of all unto
themselves; as also because by this not pursuit of lower controversies amongst
men professing Religion, and agreeing in the principal foundations thereof,
they conceive hope that about the higher principles themselves time will cause
alteration to grow. For which purpose, when they see occasion, they stick not
sometime in other men's persons, yea, sometime without any vizard at all,
directly to try, what the most religious are able to say in defense of the
highest points, whereupon all Religion depends. Now for the most part it so
falls out, touching things which generally are received, that although in
themselves they be most certain; yet because men presume them granted of all,
we are hardliest able to bring such proof of their certainty as may satisfy
gainsayers, when suddenly and besides expectation they require the same at our
hands. Which impreparation and unreadiness when they find in us, they turn it
to the soothing up of themselves in that cursed fancy, whereby they would fain
believe that the hearty devotion of such as indeed fear God, is nothing else
but a kind of harmless error, bred and confirmed in them by the sleights of
wiser men. For a politic use of Religion they see there is, and by it they
would also gather that Religion it self is a mere politic device, forged
purposely to serve for that use. Men fearing God, are thereby a great deal more
effectually, then by Positive Laws, restrained from doing evil; in as much as
those Laws have no farther power then over our outward actions only, whereas
unto men's inward cogitations, unto the privy intents and motions of their
hearts, Vos ^relera ^^m sli puustis (...) nos etc cogitare p^ecor^ est ^ vos
conscios rimetis, nos etiam co^^cientiam sol^m, sine qua esse non possumus.
Minu. Fell. in Or^av.
Religion serves for a bridle. What more savage, wild, and cruel then Man, if
he see himself able either by fraud to over-teach, or by power to over-bear the
Laws whereunto he should he subject? Wherefore in so great boldness to offend,
it behooves that the World should be held in aw, not by a vain surmise, but a
true apprehension of somewhat, which no man may think himself able to
withstand. This is the politic use of Religion. In which respect, there are of
these wise malignants, some who have vouchsafed it their mavelous favorable
countenance and speech, very gravely affirming, That Religion honored, adds
greatness; and contemned, brings ruin unto Commonwea^s: Summum presidium
regni est justi^io ob apertos tumaltus, and religio o^ occultos. Carda. de
Sapien. lib. 3.
That Princes and States which will continue, are above all things to uphold
the reverend regard of Religion, and to provide for the same, by all means, in
the making of their Laws. But when they should define what means are best for
that purpose, behold, they extol the wisdom of Paganisin, they give it out as a
mystical precept of great importance, that Princes, and such as are under them
in most authority or credit with the people, should take all occasions of rare
events, and from what cause soever the same do proceed, yet wrest them to the
strengthening of their Religion, and not make it nice for so good a purpose to
use, if need be, plain forgeries. Thus while they study to bring to pass, that
Religion may seem but a matter made, they lose themselves in the very maze of
their own discourses, as if Reason did even purposely forsake them, who of
purpose forsake God, the Author thereof: For surely, a strange kind of madness
it is, that those men, who though they be void of Piety, yet, because they have
wit, cannot choose but know, that treachery, guile, an deceit, are things which
may for a while, but do not use long to go unespied, should teach, that the
greatest honor to a State, is perpetuity; and grant, that alterations in the
Service of God, for that they impair the credit of Religion, are therefore
perilous in Commonweals, which have no continuance longer then Religion has
all reverence done unto it, and withal acknowledge (for so they do) that when
people began to epsy the falsehood of Oracles, whereupon all Gentilism was
built, their hearts were utterly averted from it; and notwithstanding Counsel,
Princes, in sober earnest, for the strengthening of their States, to maintain
Religion, and for the maintenance of Religion, not to make choice of that which
is true, but to authorize that they make choice of, by those false and
fraudulent means, which in the end, must needs overthrow it. Such are the
counsels of men godless, when they would show themselves politic devisers,
able to create God in Man by art.

3. Wherefore to let go this exec^able crew, Of Superstition and the Roo^
thereof, either misguided Zeal or ignorant Feat of Divine glory.
and to come to extremities on the contrary hand, two affections there are, the
forces whereof, as they bear the greater or lesser sway in man's heart, frame
accordingly to the stamp and character of his Religion, the one Zeal, the other
Fear. Zeal, unless it be rightly guided, when it endeavoreth most busily to
please God, forces upon him those unseasonable offices which please him not.
For which cause, if they who this way swerve, be compared with such sincere,
found, and discreet, as Abraham was in Matter of Religion; the service of the
one, is like unto slattery; the other, like the faithful sedulity of
friendship. Zeal, 2 Chronicles. 20. 7. Abraham thy friend.
except it be ordered aright, when it bends it self unto conflict with all
things, either in deed, or but imagined to be opposite unto Religion, uses the
Razor many times with such eagerness, that the very life of Religion it self is
thereby hazarded, through hatred of Tares, the Corn in the Field of God is
plucked up. So that, Zeal needs both ways a sober guide, Fear, on the other
side, if it have not the light of true understanding concerning God, wherewith
to be moderated, breeds likewise Superstition. It is therefore dangerous,
that in things Divine, we should work too much upon the spur, either of zeal or
fear. Fear is a good Solicitor to Devotion. Howbeit, since fear in this kind
does grow from an apprehension, of Deity endued with irresistible power to
hurt, and is of all affections (anger excepted) the unaptest to admit any
conference with Reason, for which cause the Wise man does say of Fear, that it
is a betrayer of Wisd. 19. 11.
the forces of reasonable understanding; therefore, except men know beforehand
what manner of service pleases God, while they are fearful, they try all
things which fancy offers. Many there are who never think on God, but when
they are in extremity of fear; and then because, what to think, or what to do,
they are uncertain, perplexity not suffering them to be idle, they think and
do, as it were in a frenzy, they know not what. Superstition neither knows
the right kind, nor observes the due measure of actions belonging to the
Service of God, but is always joined with a wrong opinion touching things
Divine. Superstition is, when things are either abhorred or observed, with a
zealous or fearful, but erroneous relation to God. By means whereof, the
superstitious do sometimes serve, though the true God, yet with needless
offices, and defraud him of duties necessary; sometime load others then him
with such honors as properly are his. The one, their over sight who miss in the
choice of that wherewith they are affected; the other, theirs who fail in the
election of him toward whom they show their devotion: This, the crime of
Idolatry; that, the fault of voluntary, either niceness or superfluity in
Religion. The Christian World it self being divided into two grand parts, it
appears by the general view of both, that with Master of Heresy the West
has been often and much troubled; but the East part never quiet, till the
deluge of misery, wherein now they are, overwhelmed them. The chiefest cause
whereof does seem to have lien in the restless wits of the Grecians, evermore
proud of their own curious and subtle inventions; which when at any time they
had contrived; the great facility of their Language served them readily to make
all things fair and plausible to men's understanding. Those grand Heretical
Impieties therefore, which most highly and immediately touched God, and the
glorious Trinity, were all in a manner the Monsters of the East. The West bred
fewer a great deal, and those commonly of a lower nature, such as more nearly
and directly concerned rather men then God, the Latins being always to capital
Heresies less inclined, yet unto gross Superstition more. Superstition, Mark
7.5.
such as that of the Pharisees was, by whom Divine things indeed were less,
because other things were more divinely esteemed of, then Reason would; the
Superstition that rises voluntarily, and by degrees, which are hardly
discerned, mingling it self with the Rites, even of very Divine Service, done
to the only true God, must be considered of, as a creeping and incroaching
evil; an evil, the first beginnings whereof are commonly harmless, so that it
proves only then to be an evil, when some farther accident does grow unto it,
or it self come unto farther growth. For in the Church of God, sometimes it
comes to pass, as in over-battle grounds, the Fertile disposition whereof is
good; yet because it exceeds due proportion, it brings forth abundantly,
through too much rankness, things less profitable; whereby, that which
principally it should yield, being either prevented in place, or defrauded of
nourishment, fails. This (if so large a discourse were necessary) might be
exemplified even by heaps of Rites and Customs, now superstitious in the
greatest part of the Christian World; which in their first original beginnings,
when the strength of virtuous, devout, or charitable affection bloomed them, no
man could justly have condemned as evil.

Of the Redress of Superstition in Gods Church and concerning the question of
this Book.
4. But howsoever Superstition does grow; that wherein unsounder times have done
amiss, the better ages ensuing must rectify as they may. I now come therefore
to those accusations brought against us by Pretenders of Reformation; the first
in the rank whereof, is such, That if so be the Church of England did at this
day, therewith as justly deserve to be touched as they in this cause have
imagined it does; rather would I exhort all sorts to seek pardon, even with
tears, at the hands of God, then meditate words of defense for our doings, to
the end, that men might think favorably of them. For as the case of this World,
especially now, does stand, what other stay or succor have we to lean unto,
saving the testimony of our Conscience, and the comfort we take in this, that
we serve the living God (as near as our Wits can reach unto the knowledge
thereof) even according to his own will, and do therefore trust, that his mercy
shall be our safeguard against those enraged Powers abroad, which principally
in that respect are become our Enemies? But, since no man can do ill with a good
Conscience, the consolation which we herein seem to find, is but a mere
deceitful pleasing of our selves in error, which at the length must needs turn
to our greater grief, if that which we do to please God most, be for the
manifold defects thereof offensive unto him. For so it is judged, our Prayers,
our Sacraments, our Fasts, our Times and Places of Public meeting together for
the worship and service of God; our Marriages, our Burials, our Functions,
Elections, and Ordinations Ecclesiastical, almost whatsoever we do in the
exercise of our Religion according to Laws for that purpose established, all
things are some way or other thought faulty, all things stained with
Superstition. Now, although it may be the wiser sort of men are not greatly
moved hereat, considering how subject the very best things have been always
unto cavil, when Wits possessed either with disdain or dislike thereof, have
set them up as their mark to shoot at: safe notwithstanding it were not,
therefore to neglect the danger which from hence may grow, and that especially
in regard of them, who desiring to serve God as they ought, but being not so
skilful as in every point to unwinde themselves where the shares of glosing
speech do lie to entangle them, are in mind not a little troubled, when they
hear so bitter invectives against that which this Church has taught them to
reverence as holy, to approve as lawful, and to observe as behoveful, for the
exercise of Christian duty. It seems therefore, at least for their sakes,
very meet, that such as blame us in this behalf, be directly answered, and they
which follow us, informed plainly in the Reasons of that we do. On both sides,
the end intended between us, is to have Laws and Ordinances, such as may
rightly serve to abolish Superstition, and to establish the service of God with
all things thereunto appertaining, in some perfect form. There is an inward (
Romans 12. 1
)reasonable, and there is a ( Luke 1. 23.
)solemn outward serviceable Worship, belonging unto God. Of the former kind
are all manner of virtuous Duties, that each man in reason and conscience to
Godward owes. Solemn and serviceable Worship we name for Distinction sake,
whatsoever belongs to the Church or Public Society of God by way of External
adoration. It is the later of these two, whereupon our present question
grows. Again, this later being ordered, partly, and as touching Principal
matters, by none but Precepts Divine only; partly, and as concerning things of
Inferior regard, by Ordinances as well Human as Divine, about the substance of
Religion, wherein Gods only Law must be kept, there is here no controversy:
the Crime now intended against us is, that our Laws have not ordered those
inferior things as behooves, and that our Customs are either Superstitious, or
otherwise amiss, whether we respect the exercise of Public duties in Religion,
or the Functions of Persons authorized thereunto.

5. It is with Teachers of Mathematical Sciences usual, Four general
Propositions demanding what which may reasona^ly be granted concerning matters
of Outward form in the exercise of true Religion. And fifthly, of a Rule not use
nor reasonable in those cases.
for us in this present question necessary, to lay down first certain
reasonable demands, which in most Particulars following are to serve as
Principles whereby to work, and therefore must be beforehand considered. The
men whom we labor to inform in the truth, perceive that so to proceed is
requisite. For to this end they also propose, touching Customs and Rites
indifferent, their general Axioms, some of them subject unto just Exceptions,
and, as we think, more meet by them to be farther considered, than assented
unto by us. As that, In outward things belonging to the Service of God,
Reformed Churches ought by all means to shun conformity with the Church of
Rome; that, The first Reformed should be a Pattern whereunto all that come
after, might to conform themselves; that, Sound Religion may not use the
things, which being not commanded of God, have been either devised or abused
unto Superstition. These and the rest of the same consort we have in the Book
going before examined. Other Canons they allege, and Rules not unworthy of
approbation; as, That in all such things the glory of God, and the edification
or ghostly good of his People must be sought; that nothing should be undecently
or murderly done. But forasmuch as all the difficulty is, in discerning what
things do glorify God, and edify his Church, what not; when we should think
them decent and fit, when otherwise: because these Rules being too general,
come not near enough unto the matter which we have in hand; and the former
Principles being nearer the purpose, are too far from Truth; we must propose
unto all men certain Petitions incident and very material in Causes of this
nature, such as no man of moderate judgment has cause to think unjust or
unreasonable.

The First Proposition touching Judgment, what things are convenient in the
outward public ordering of Church Affairs.
6. The first thing therefore which is of force to cause Approbation with good
conscience toward such Customs or Rites, as publicly are established, is,
when there arises from the due consideration of those Customs and Rites in
themselves apparent reason, although not always to prove them better than any
other that might possibly be devised, (for who did ever require this in man's
Ordinances?) yet competent to show their convenience and fitness, in regard of
the use for which they should serve. Now touching the nature of religious
Services, and the manner of their due performance, thus much generally we know
to be most clear, that whereas the greatness and dignity of all manner of
Actions is measured by the worthiness of the Subject from which they proceed,
and of the Object whereabout they are conversant, we must of necessity in both
respects acknowledge, that this present World affords not any thing
comparable unto the public Duties of Religion. For if the best things have the
perfectest and best operations; it will follow, that seeing Man is the
worthiest Creature upon earth, and every Society of Men more worthy than any
Man; and of Societies that most excellent which we call the Church; there can
be in this World no work performed equal to the exercise of true Religion, the
proper operation of the Church of God. Again, forasmuch as Religion works
upon him, who in Majesty and Power is infinite, as we ought we account not of
it, unless we esteem it even according to that very height of Excellency which
our hearts conceive, John. 4. 24. Wisd. 6. 10. 1 Chronicles. 29. 19.
when Divine sublimity it self is rightly considered. In the powers and
faculties of our Souls God requires the uttermost which our unfeigned
affection toward him is able to yield: So that if we affect him not far above
and before all things, our Religion has not that inward perfection which it
should have, neither do we indeed worship him as our God. That which inwardly
each man should be, the Church outwardly ought to testify. And therefore the
Duties of our Religion which are seen, must be such as that affection which is
unseen ought to be Signs must resemble the Things they signify. If Religion
bear the greatest sway in our Hearts, our outward religious Duties must show it
as far as the Church has outward Ability. Duties of Religion, performed by
whole Societies of men, ought to have in them, 1 Chronicles. ^. 5.
according to our power, a sensible Excellency, correspondent to the Majesty of
Him whom we worship. Yea, then are the public Duties of Religion best ordered,
when the Militant Church does resemble by sensible means, as it may in (...)
Delectatio Domini in Ecclesia est. Ecclesia ver^ est imago Coelestium Ambros.
de interpel Dan. Faci^ in terris opera coelorum, Sidon Apol. Epist. lib. 6.
such cases, that hidden Dignity and Glory wherewith the Church Triumphant in
Heaven is beautified. Howbeit, even as the very heat of the Sun it self, which
is the life of the whole World, was to the people of God in the Desert a
grievous annoyance, for ease whereof his extraordinary Providence ordained a
Cloudy Pillar to over-shadow them: So things of general use and benefit (for in
this world, What is so perfect, that no Inconvenience does ever follow it^) may
by some accident be incommodious to a few. In which case, for such private
Evils, remedies thereare of like condition, though public Ordinances wherein
the Common good is respected, be not stirred. Let our first Demand be
therefore, That in the External Form of Religion such things as are apparently,
or can be sufficiently proved effectual and generally fit to setforward
Godliness, either as betokening the greatness of God, or as beseeming the
Dignity of Religion, or as concurring with Celestial Impressions in the minds
of men, may be reverently thought of; some few, rare, casual, and tolerable,
or otherwise curable Inconveniences notwithstanding.

The Second Proposition.
7. Neither may we in this Case lightly esteem what has been allowed as fit in
the judgment of Antiquity, and by the long continued practice of the whole
Church; from which unnecessarily to swerve, Experience never as yet has found
it safe. For Wisdom's sake we reverence them no less that are young, or not
much less, then if they were stricken in years. And therefore of such it is
rightly said, That the ripeness of Understanding is gray Hair, and their
Virtues old Age. But because Wisdom Wisdom 4. 9.
and Youth are seldom joined in one, and the ordinary course of the World is
more according to Job's Observation, who gives men advice to seek Wisdom Job
10 12.
amongst the Ancient, and in the length of Days Understanding; therefore if
the Comparison do stand between Man and Man, which shall hearken unto other,
since the Aged for the most part are best experienced, least subject to rash and
unadvised Passions, it has been ever judged reasonable, That their Sentence in
matter of Counsel should be better trusted, and more relied upon than other
men's. The goodness of God having furnished men with two chief Instruments, both
necessary for this life, Hands to execute, and a Mind to devise great things;
the one is not profitable longer than the vigor of Youth does strengthen it;
nor the other greatly, till Age and Experience have brought it to Perfection.
In whom therefore Time has not perfected Knowledge, such must be contented to
follow them in whom it has. For this Cause none is more attentively heard,
than they whose Speeches are, as David's were, I have been Young, and now am
Old, much I have seen and observed in the World. Sharp and subtle discourses
of Wit procure many times very great applause; but being laid in the Balance
with that which the habit of sound Experience plainly delivers, they are
over-weighed. God may endue Men extraordinarily with Understanding as it
pleases him: But let no Man presuming thereupon neglect the Instructions, or
despite the Ordinances of his Elders, since he, whose gift Wisdom is, has said,
Ask thy Father, and he will show thee, thine Ancients, Deuteronomy ^2.7.
and they shall tell thee. It is therefore the Voice both of God and Nature,
not of Learning only, that, especially in matters of Action and Policy, Arist.
Eth. 6. cep. 1^.
The sentences and judgments of Men experienced, aged and wise, yea though
they speak without any proof or demonstration, are no less to be hearkened unto,
than as being Demonstrations in themselves, because such Men's long Observation
is as an Eye, wherewith they presently and plainly behold those Principles
which sway over all Actions. Whereby we are taught both the Cause wherefore
Wise-mens Judgments should be credited, and the Mean how to use their Judgments
to the increase of our own Wisdom. That which shows them to be Wise, is, the
gathering of Principles out of their own particular Experiments. And the
framing of our particular Experiments according to the Rule of their
Principles, shall make us such as they are. If therefore, even at the first, so
great account should be made of Wise men's Counsels touching things that are
Publicly done; as time shall add thereunto continuance and approbation of
succeeding Ages, their Credit and Authority must needs be greater. They which
do nothing but that which men of Account did before them, are, although they do
amiss, (...) Greger. N^z. (...) Bas^ de Spirit. Sanct. cap. 7.
yet the less faulty, because they are not the Authors of harm. And doing well,
their Actions are freed from prejudice and novelty. To the best and wisest,
while they live, the World is continually a froward Opposite, a curious
Observer of their Defects and Imperfections; their Virtues, it afterward as
much admireth. And ^or this cause many times that which most deserves
approbation, would hardly be able to find favor, if they which propose it,
were not content to profess themselves therein Scholars and Followers of the
Ancients. For the World will not endure to hear that we are wiser than any have
been which went before. In which consideration there is cause why we should be
slow and unwilling to change, without very urgent necessity, the ancient
Ordinances, Rites, and long approved Customs of our venerable Predecessors. The
love of things Ancient does argue( (...) Bas^ de Spirit Sanct. cap 7.
) stayedness, but levity and want of Experience makes apt auto Innovations.
That which Wisdom did first begin, and has been with Good men long continued,
challenges allowance of them that succeed, although it plead for it self
nothing. That which is new, if it promise not much, does fear Condemnation
before Trial; till Trial, no man does acquit or trust it, what good soever it
pretend and promise. So that in this kind, there are few things known to be
Good, till such time as they grow to be Ancient, The vain pretense of those
glorious Names, where they could not be with any truth, neither in reason ought
to have been so much alleged, has wrought such a prejudice against them in
the minds of the Common sort, as if they had utterly no force at all; whereas
(especially for these Observances which concern our present Question)
Antiquity, Custom, and Consent in the Church of God, making with the which Law
does establish, (...) Arist. Ethie. 2. c 9. Modici nulla sere ratio haberi
soler. Tiraquel de jud. in reb. exig cap. 10.
are themselves most sufficient reasons to uphold the same, unless some notable
public inconvenience enforce the contrary. For a small thing in the eye of Law
is as nothing. We are therefore bold to make our second Petition this, That in
things, the fitness whereof is not of it self apparent, nor easy to be made
snfficiently manifest unto all, yet the Judgment of Antiquity concurring with
that which is received, may induce them to think it not unfit, who are not able
to allege any known weighty Inconvenience which it has, or to take any strong
Exception against it.

The Third Proposition.
8. All things cannot be of ancient continuance; which are expedient and needful
for the ordering of Spiritual Affairs: but the Church being a Body which dies
not, has always power, as occasion requires, no less to ordain that which
never was, than to ratify what has been before. To prescribe the Order of
doing in all Things, (...) Philo. page 31.
Is a peculiar Prerogative which Wisdom has, as a Queen or sovereign
Commandress over other Virtues. This in every several Man's Actions of Common
Life appertains unto Moral; in Public and Politic secular Affairs unto
Civil Wisdom. In like manner, to devise any certain Form for the outward
Administration of Public Duties in the Service of God, or Things belonging
thereunto, and to find out the most convenient for that use, is a point of
Wisdom Ecclesiastical. It is not for a Man, which does know, or should know
what Order is, and what Peaceable Government requires, T. C. lib. 3. page 191.
to ask, Why we should hang our Judgment upon the Churches Sleeve, and, why in
Matters of Order, more than in Matters of Doctrine. The Church has Authority
to Establish That for an Order at one time, which at another time it may
Abolish, and in both do well: But, That which in Doctrine the Church does now
deliver rightly as a Truth, no Man will say that it may hereafter recall, and
as rightly avouch the contrary. Laws touching Matter of Order are changeable,
by the Power of the Church; Articles concerning Doctrine, not so. We read often
in the Writings of Catholic and Holy men rouching Matters of Doctrine, This we
believe, This we bold, This the Prophets and Evangelists have declared, This
the Apostles have delivered, This Martyrs have sealed with their Blood, and
confessed in the midst of Torments, to This We cleave, as to the Anchor of Our
Souls, against This, though an Angel from Heaven should Preach unto us, We
would not believe. But, did we ever in any of Them read touching Matters of
mere Comcliness, Order, and Decency, neither Commanded nor Prohibited by any
Prophet, any Evangelist, any Apostle, Although the Church wherein we live do
ordain them to be kept, although they be never so generally observed, though
all the Churches in the World should Command them, though Angels from Heaven
should require our Subjection thereunto: I would hold him accursed that does
obey? Be it in Matter of the one kind or of the other, what Scripture does
plainly deliver, to that the First place both of Credit and Obedience is due;
The Next whereunto is, whatsoever any Man can necessarily conclude by Force of
Reason; After These, the Voice of the Church succeeds. That which the Church
by her Ecclesiastical Authority shall probably think and define to be True or
Good, must in congruity of Reason overruled all other Inferior Judgments
whatsoever. To them which ask, Why we thus hang our Judgment on the Churches
Sleeve, I answer with Solomon, Because ( Eccles. 4. 9.
) Two are better than One. Yea Simply (says ( Basil. Ep. 68. ^. 8. c. Quae
Contra. Turpis est omnis pa^s u^iverio suo non congraca^.
) Basil) and Universally, whether it be in Works of Nature, or of Voluntary
Choice and Counsel, I see not any thing done as it should be, is it be wrought
by an Agent singling it self from Consorts. The Jews have a Sentence of good
advice, ( R. Ismael in Cap. Pa^.
) Take not upon Thee to be a Judge alone, there is no sole Judge but One only;
Say not to Others, Receive my Sentence, when their Authority is above thine.
The bare consent of the whole Church should it self in These things stop their
Mouths, who living under it, dare presume to bark against it. There is (says (
Cassian de Incarn. l. 2. c. ^.
) Cassianus) no Place of Audience left for them, by whom Obedience is not
yielded to that which all have agreed upon. Might we not think it more than
wonderful, that Nature should in all Communities appoint a Predominant Judgment
to sway and overrule in so many things; or that God himself should allow so
much Authority and Power unto every Poor Family, for the ordering of All which
are in it; and the City of the Living God, which is his Church, be able neither
to Command, nor yet to Forbid any thing, which the Meanest shall in that
respect, and for her sole Authorities sake be bound to obey? We cannot hide or
dissemble that Evil, the grievous inconvenience whereof we feel. Our dislike of
them, by whom too much heretofore has been attributed unto the Church, is
grown to an Error on the contrary hand, so that now from the Church of God too
much is derogated. By which removal of one Extremity with another, the World
seeking to procure a Remedy, has purchased a mere Exchange of the Evil which
before was felt. Suppose we, that the Sacred Word of God can at their hands
receive due honor, by whose Incitement the Holy Ordinances of the Church
endure every where open contempt? No, it is not possible they should observe as
they ought the One, who from the Other withdraw unnecessarily their Own, or
their Brethrens Obedience. Surely the Church of God in this Business is neither
of Capacity, I trust, so weak, no^ so unstrengthened, I know, with Authority
from Above; but that her Laws may exact Obedience at the hands of her own
Children, and enjoin Gainsayers silence, giving them roundly to understand,
That where our Duty is Submission, weak Oppositions betoken Pride. We therefore
crave, Thirdly, to have it granted, That where neither the Evidence of any Law
Divine, nor the Strength of any Invincible Argument otherwise found out by the
Light of Reason, not any Notable Public Inconvenience does make against that
which our own Laws Ecclesiastical have, although but Newly instituted, for the
Ordering of these Affairs, the very Authority of the Church it self, at the
least in such Cases, may give so much Credit to her own Laws, as to make their
Sentence touching Fitness and Convenience, weightier than any bare or naked
Conceit to the contrary; especially in them, who can owe no less than
Childe-like obedience to her that has more than Motherly Power. The Fourth
Proposition.


9. There are Ancient Ordinances, Laws (which on all sides are allowed to be
Just and Good, yea Divine and Apostolic Constitutions) which the Church, it
may be, does not always keep, nor always justly deserve blame in that respect.
For in Evils that cannot be removed^ without the manifest danger of Greater to
succeed in their rooms; Wisdom (of necessity) must give place to Necessity. All
it can do in those Cases, is, to devise, how that, which must be endured, may
be mitigated, and the Inconveniences thereof countervailed as near as may be;
that when the Best things are not possible, the best may be made of Those that
are. Nature, than which there is nothing more constant, Numb. 31.^^.
nothing more uniform in all her ways, does notwithstanding stay her Hand, yea,
and change her Course, when That, which God by Creation did command, he does at
any time by Necessity countermand. It has therefore pleased himself sometime
to unloose the very Tongues even of Dumb Creatures, and to teach them to plead
This in their Own Defense, lest the Cruelty of Man should persist to afflict
them for not keeping their wonted Course, when some invincible Impediment has
hindered. If we leave Nature, and look into Art, the Workman has in his Heart
a Purpose, he carries in mind the whole Form which his Work should have; there
wants not him Skill and Desire to bring his Labor to the best effect, only
the Matter which he has to work on is unframable. This Necessity excuses him;
so that nothing is derogated from his Credit, although much of his Work's
perfection be found wanting. Touching Actions of Common Life, there is not any
Defense more favorably heard than theirs, who allege sincerely for
themselves. That they did as Necessity constrained them. For when the Mind is
rightly ordered and affected as it should be, in case some external Impediment
crossing well-advised Desires, shall potently draw Men to leave what they
principally wish, and to take a Course which they would not, Necessitas,
quicqaul coegit defen^it ^ence. Con^ro^. lib. 2.
if their Choice were free; what Necessity forces Men unto, the same in This
Case it maintains, as long as nothing is committed simply in it self evil,
nothing absolutely sinful or wicked, nothing repugnant to that Immetable Law,
whereby, whatsoever is condemned as Evil, can never any way be made Good. The
casting away of Things profitable for the sustenance of Man's Life, is an
unthankful Abuse of the Fruits of God's good Providence toward Mankind. Acts
27. 30.
Which Consideration, for all that, did not hinder Saint Paul from throwing
Corn into the Sea, when care of saving Men's Lives made it necessary, to loose
that which else had been better saved. Neither was this to do Evil, to the end
that Good might come of it; For of Two such Evils, being not both evitable, the
choice of the Less is not Evil. And Evils must be in our constructions judged
inevitable, if there be no apparent ordinary way to avoid them; Because, where
Counsel and Advice bear rule, of God's extraordinary Power, without
extraordinary Warrant, we cannot presume. In Civil Affairs, to declare what
sway Necessity has ever been accustomed to bear, were labor infinite. The
Laws of all States and Kingdoms in the World have scarcely of any thing more
common use: Should then only the Church show it self inhuman and stern,
absolutely urging a rigorous observation of Spiritual Ordinances, without
relaxation or exception, what Necessity soever happen? We know the contrary
Practice to have been commended by him, Luke 6. 4.
upon the warrant of whose Judgment the Church, most of all delighted with
merciful and moderate courses, does the ostner condescend unto like equity,
permitting in cases of Necessity that, which otherwise it disalloweth and
forbids. Cases of Necessity being sometime but urgent, sometime extreme, the
consideration of Public Utility is with very good advice judged at the least
equivalent with the easier kind of Necessity. Cause necessitatis and (...)
aequipa. ^^n^ur injure. Ab Paner. ad ^^w super. nu. 15 de^ eb. Eccles. non
a^^cu.
Now that which causes numbers to storm against some necessary tolerations,
which they should rather let pass with silence, considering that in Polity, as
well Ecclesiastical as Civil, there are and will be always Evils, which no art
of man can cure, breaches and leaks more than man's wit has hands to stop; that
which makes odious unto them many things, wherein notwithstanding the truth
is, that very just regard has been had of the Public good; that which in a
great part of the weightiest Causes belonging to this present Controversy,
has ensnared the Judgments both of sundry good, and of some well learned men,
is the manifest truth of certain general Principles, whereupon the Ordinances
that serve for usual practice in the Church of God are grounded. Which
Principles men knowing to be most sound, and that the ordinary practice
accordingly framed is good, whatsoever is over and besides that ordinary, the
same they judge repugnant to those true Principles. The cause of which Error is
Ignorance, what restraints and limitations all such Principles have, in regard
of so manifold varieties, (...) Arist. Each. l. 1. c. 7.
as the matter whereunto they are applyable, does commonly afford. These
varieties are not known but by much experience, from whence to draw the true
bounds of all Principles, to discern how far forth they take effect, to see
where and why they fail, to apprehend by what degrees and means they lead to
the practice of things in show, though not indeed repugnant and contrary one to
another, requires more sharpness of Wit, more intricate circuitions of
Discourse, more industry and depth of Judgment, than common Ability does yield.
So that general Rules, til their limits be fully known, (especially in matter
of Public and Ecclesiastical affairs) are, by reason of the manifold secret
Exceptions which lie hidden in them, no other to the eye of man's
understanding, than Cloudy mists cast before the eye of Common sense. They that
walk in darkness know not whither they go. And even as little is their
certainty, whose opinions Generalities only do guide. With gross and popular
Capacities nothing does more prevail, than unlimited Generalities, because of
their plainness at the first fights nothing less with men of Exact Judgment,
because such Rules are not safe to be trusted over-farr. General Laws are like
general Rules of Physic, according whereunto, as no Wise man will desire
himself to be cured, if there be joined with his Disease some special Accident,
in regard whereof that whereby others in the same Insirmity, but without the
like Accident, recover health, would be to him either hurtful, or at the least
unprofitable: So we must not, under a colorable commendation of holy
Ordinances in the Church, and of reasonable causes whereupon they have been
grounded for the Common good, imagine that all men's cases ought to have one
measure. Not without singular wisdom therefore it has been provided, That as
the ordinary course of Common affairs is disposed of by General Laws, so
likewise men's rarer incident Necessities and utilities should be with special
equity considered. From hence it is, that so many Privileges, Immunities,
Exceptions, and Dispensations have been always with great equity and reason
granted, not to turn the edge of Justice, not to make void at certain times,
and in certain men, through mere voluntary grace or benevolence, that which
continually and universally should be of force (as some men understand it) but
in very truth to practice General Laws according to their right meaning. We see
in Contracts, and other dealings which daily pass between man and man, that, to
the utter undoing of some, many things by strictness of Law may be done, which
equity and honest meaning forbids. Not that the Law is unjust, but
unperfect; nor Equity against, but above the Law; binding men's Consciences in
things which Law cannot reach unto. Will any man say, That the virtue of
private Equity is opposite and repugnant to that Law, the silence whereof it
supplieth in all such private Dealing? No more is public Equity against the
Law of public Affairs; albeit the one permit unto some, in special
Considerations, that which the other, agreeably with general Rules of Justice,
does in general sort forbid. For, since all good Laws are the Voices of right
Reason, which is the Instrument wherewith God will have the World guided; and
impossible it is, that Right should withstand Right; it must follow, that
Principles and Rules of Justice, be they never so generally uttered, do no less
effectually intend, then if they did plainly express an Exception of all
Particulars, wherein their literal Practice might any way prejudice Equity. And
because it is natural unto all men to wish their own extraordinary Benefit,
when they think they have reasonable Inducements so to do; and no man can be
presumed a competent Judge what Equity does require in his own Case: the
likeliest Mean whereby the wit of man can provide, that he which uses the
benefit of any special benignity above the common course of others, may enjoy
it with good Conscience, and not against the true purpose of Laws, which in
outward show are contrary, must needs be to arm with Authority some fit both
for Quality and Place to administer that, which in every such particular shall
appear agreeable with Equity: wherein, as it cannot be denied, but that
sometimes the practice of such Jurisdiction may swarve through error even into
the very best, and for other respects, where less Integrity is. So the
watchfullest Observers of Inconveniences that way growing, and the readiest to
urge them in disgrace of authorized Proceedings, do very well know, that the
disposition of these things rests not now in the hands of Popes, who live in
no Worldly awe or subjection, but is committed to them whom Law may at all
times bridle, and Superior power control; yea to them also in such sort, that
Law it self has set down, to what Persons, in what Causes, with what
Circumstances, almost every faculty or favor shall be granted, leaving in a
manner nothing unto them, more than only to deliver what is already given by
Law. Which makes it by many degrees less reasonable, that under pretense of
inconveniences so easily stopped, if any did grow, and so well prevented, that
none may, men should be altogether barred of the liberty that Law with equity
and reason grants. These things therefore considered, we lastly require, That
it may not seem hard, if in Cases of Necessity, or for Common utilities sake,
certain profitable Ordinances sometimes be released, rather than all men,
always, strictly bound to the general rigor thereof.

10. Now where the Word of God leaves the Church to make choice of her own
Ordinances, The Rule of Men's in state spirits not safe in these Cases to be
followed.
if against those things which have been received with great reason, or against
that which the Ancient practice of the Church has continued time out of mind,
or against such Ordinances as the Power and Authority of that Church under
which we live has in it self devised, for the Public good, or against the
discretion of the Church in mitigating sometimes with favorable Equity, that
rigor which otherwise the literal generality of Ecclesiastical Laws has
judged to be more convenient and meet, if against all this it should be free
for men to reprove, to disgrace, to reject at their own liberty what they see
done and practiced according to Order set down; if in so great variety of
ways, as the wit of man is easily able to find out toward any purpose; and in
so great liking as all men especially have unto those Inventions, whereby some
one shall seem to have been more enlightened from above than many thousands, the
Church did give every man license to follow what himself imagines that Gods
Spirit does reveal unto him, or what he supposes that God is likely to have
revealed to some special Person, whose Virtues deserve to be highly esteemed.
What other effect could hereupon ensue, but the utter confusion of his Church,
under pretense of being taught, led, and guided by his Spirit? the gifts and
graces whereof do so naturally all tend unto Common peace, that where such
singularity is, they, whose Hearts it possesses, ought to suspect it the more,
in as much as if it did come of God, and should for that cause prevail with
others, the same God which reveals it to them, would also give them power of
confirming it unto others, either with miraculous operation, or with strong and
invincible remonstrance of sound Reason, such as whereby it might appear that
God would indeed have all men's Judgments give place unto it; whereas now the
error and unsufficience of their Arguments does make it on the contrary side
against them a strong presumption, that God has not moved their hearts to
think such things, as he has not enabled them to prove. And so from Rules of
general Direction it rests, that now we descend to a more distinct
explication of Particulars, wherein those Rules have their special efficacy.

Places for the Public service of God.
11. Solemn Duties of Public Service to be done unto God, must have their
places set and prepared in such sort, as beseems actions of that regard.
Adam, even during the space of his small continuance in Paradise, had ( Genesis 3.
8.
)where to present himself before the Lord. Adam's Sons had out of Paradise in
like sort ( Genesis 4.3.
)whither to bring their Sacrifices. The Patriarks used ( Genesis 13.4
)Altars, and ( 22. 1.
)Mountains, and ( 21.33.
)Groves, to the self-same purpose. In the vast Wilderness, when the People of
God had themselves no settled Habitation, yet a movable ( Exodus 2^.
)Tabernacle they were commanded of God to make. The like Charge was given them
against the time they should come to settle themselves in the Land which had
been promised unto their Fathers, ( Deuteronomy. 12. 5.
) Te shall seek that Place which the Lord your God shall choose. When God had
chosen Jerusalem, and in Jerusalem Mount ( 2 Chronicles. 3.1.
) Moriah there to have his standing Habitation made, it was in the chiefest of
( 2 Chronicles. ^.7. Psalm 132. 5.
) David's desires to have performed so good a work. His grief was no less, that
he could not have the honor to build God a Temple, than their anger is at
this day, who bite asunder their own tongues with very wrath, that they have
not as yet the Power to pull down the Temples which they never built, and to
level them with the ground. It was no mean thing which he purposed. To perform
a work so majestical and stately was no small Charge. Therefore he incited all
men unto bountiful Contribution, 1 Chronicles. 25.5.
and procured toward it with all his Power, Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, Wood,
Precious Stones, in great abundance. 1 Chronicles. 29.3.
Yea moreover, Because I have (says David) a joy in the House of my God, I
have of my own Gold and Silver, besides all that I have prepared for the House
of the Sanctuary, given to the House of my God three thousand Talents of Gold,
even the Gold of Ophir, seven thousand Talents of fined Silver. After the
overthrow of this first House of God, a second was instead thereof erected, but
with so great odds, Ier. ^. 14. Agg^ 2. 4.
that they went which had seen the former, and beheld how much this later came
behind it, the beauty whereof notwithstanding was such, that even This was
also the wonder of the whole World. Besides which Temple, there were both in
other parts of the Land, and even in Jerusalem, by process of time, no small
number of Synagogues for men to resort unto. Our Savior himself, and after him
the Apostles frequented both the one and the other. The Church of Christ which
was in Jerusalem, and held that Profession which had not the Public allowance
and countenance of Authority, could not so long use the exercise of Christian
Religion but in private only. Act. ^. 19. and 8. ^. and 9. 46.
So that as Jews they had access to the Temple and Synagogues, where God was
served after the Custom of the Law, but for that which they did as Christians,
they were of necessity forced other where to assemble themselves. And as God
gave increase to his Church, they sought out both there and abroad for that
purpose not the fittest (for so the times would not suffer them to do) but the
safest places they could. In process of time, some while^ by sufferance, some
whiles by special leave and favor, they began to erect to themselves
Oratories, not in any sumptuous or stately manner; which neither was possible,
by reason of the poor estate of the Church, and had been perilous in regard of
the World's envy toward them. At length, when it pleased God to raise up Kings
and Emperors favoring sincerely the Christian Truth, that which the Church
before either could not, or durst not do, was with all alacrity performed.
Temples were in all Places erected, No cost was spared, nothing judged too dear
which that way should be spent. The whole World did seem to exult, that it had
occasion of pouring out Gifts to so blessed a purpose. That cheerful Devotion
which David this way did exceedingly delight to behold, and wish that the same
in the Jewish People might be perpetual, 1 Chronicles. 29. 17. 18.
was then in Christian People every where to be seen. Their Actions, till this
day always accustomed to be spoken of with great honor, are now called openly
into question. They, and as many as have been followers of their Example in
That thing; we especially that worship God, either in Temples which their hands
made, or which other men sithence have framed by the like pattern, are in that
respect charged no less then with the sin of Idolatry. Our Churches in the foam
of that good spirit, which directs such fiery tongues, they term spitefully
the Temples of Baal, idle Synagogues, abominable Styes.

12. Wherein the first thing which moves them thus to cast up their poisons,
The solemnity of erecting Churches condemned by ^a^. p. 130. The hollowing and
dedicating of them scorned, p. 141.
are certain Solemnities usual at the first erection of Churches. Now although
the same should be blameworthy, yet this Age (thanks be to God) has
reasonably well for-born to incurr the danger of any such blame. It cannot be
laid unto many men's charge at this day living, either that they have been so
curious, as to trouble the Bishops with placing the first Stone in the Churches
they built; or so scrupulous, as after the erection of them, to make any great
ado for their Dedication. In which kind notwithstanding as we do neither allow
unmeet, nor purpose the stiff defense of any unnecessary, Dur^n^ l. rational.
lib. 1. cap. 6. and de conseer. d. 1. c. tabernaculum Greg. Mog. lib. 10.
epist. 12. and lib. ^. epist. 71. and 1. ^ epist. 63.
Custom heretofore received, so we know no reason wherefore Churches should be
the worse, if at the first erecting of them, at the making of them public, at
the time when they are delivered, as it were, into God's own possession, and
when the use whereunto they shall ever serve is established, Ceremonies sit to
betoken such intents, and to accompany such Actions be usual, as ( (...) Greg.
Nazia^. orat. (...).
)in the purest times they have been. When ( Vide Eusebius. de vitu Constant. l. 1.
c. 41. 13 64. 44
) Constantine had finished an House for the Service of God at Jerusalem, the
Dedication he judged a matter not unworthy, about the solemn performance
whereof, the greatest part of the Bishops in Christendom should meet together.
Which thing they did at the Emperors motion, each most willingly setting forth
that Action to their power, some with Orations, some with Sermons, some with
the sacrifice of Prayers unto God for the peace of the World, for the Churches
safety, for the Emperor's and his Childrens good. ( Athanasius Apol ad
Constanti^^.
)By Athanasius the like is recorded concerning a Bishop of Alexandria, in a
work of the like devout magnificence. So that whether Emperors or Bishops in
those days were Church-founders, the solemn Dedication of Churches they thought
not to be a work in it self either vain, or superstitious. Can we judge it a
thing seemly for any man to go about the building of an House to the God of
Heaven with no other appearance, than if his end were to rear up a Kitchen, or
Parlour, for his own use? Or when a work of such nature is finished, remains
there nothing but presently to use it; and so an end? It behooves that the
place where God shall be served by the whole Church, be a public place, for
the avoiding of Privy Conventicles, which, covered with pretense of Religion,
may serve unto dangerous practices. Yea, though such Assemblies be had indeed
for Religions sake; hurtful nevertheless they may easily prove, as well in
regard of their fitness to serve the turn of Heretics, and such as privily
will soonest adventure to instill their poison into men's minds; as also for the
occasion, which thereby is given to malicious persons, both of suspecting, and
of traducing with more colorable show those Actions, which in themselves being
holy, should be so ordered, that no man might probably otherwise think of them.
Which considerations have by so much the greater weight, for that of these
inconveniences the Church heretofore had so plain experience when Christian men
were driven to use Secret Meetings, because the liberty of Public places was
not granted them. There are which hold, that the presence of a Christian
multitude, and the Duties of Religion performed amongst them, do make the place
of their Assembly public; even as the presence of the King and his Retinue
makes any man's House a Court. But this I take to be an error, in as much as
the only thing which makes any Place public, is the public assignment
thereof unto such Duties. As for the Multitude there assembled, or the Duties
which they perform, it does not appear how either should be of force to insuse
any such Prerogative. Not does the solemn Dedication of Churches serve only to
make them public, but farther also to surrender up that right which otherwise
their Founders might have in them, and to make God himself their Owner. For
which cause, Exodus 40.34. 1 ^eg. 8. 11.
at the Erection and Consecration as well of the Tabernacle, as of the Temple,
it pleased the Almighty to give a manifest sign that he took possession of
both. Finally, Exodus 40. 9.
it not fi^th in solemn manner the Holy and Religious use whereunto it is
intended such Houses shall be put. 1 Reg. 8.
These things the wisdom of Solomon did not account superfluous. He knew how
easily that which was meant should be holy and sacred, might be drawn from the
use whereunto it was first provided; he knew how bold men are to take even from
God himself, how hardly that House would be kept from impious profanation, he
knew; and right wisely therefore endeavored by such Solemnities to leave in
the minds of men that impression, Levit. 16. 2. The place named holy.
which might somewhat restrain their boldness, and nourish a reverend affection
toward the House of God. For which cause when the first House was destroyed,
and a new in the stead thereof erected by the Children of Israel after their
return from captivity, they kept the dedication even of this House also with
joy. Ezr. 6. 16.


Matthew. 21. 13.
The Argument which our Savior uses against Prophaners of the Temple, he
takes from the use whereunto it was with Solemnity consecrated. And as the
Prophet Jeremy forbids the carrying of Burdens on the Sabbath, Ier. ^^. 24.
because that was a Sanctified day: So because the Temple was a Place
sanctified, our Lord would not suffer, Mark. 11. 16.
no not the carriage of a Vessel through the Temple: These two Commandments
therefore are in the Law conjoined, Levit. 29. ^.
Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Santuary. 1 Cor. 11. 22.
Out of those the Apostles words, Have ye not Houses to eat and drink in?
albeit Temples, such as now, were not then erected for that exercise of
Christian Religion, Per ^unia^
it has been nevertheless not absurdly conceived, that he teaches what
difference should be made between House and House, that what is fit for the
Dwelling Place of God, and what for Man's Habitation be sheweth^ requires that
Christian men at their Own home take Common food, and in the House of the Lord
none but that food which is heavenly; he instructs them, that as in the one
place they use to refresh their Bodies, so they may in the other learn to seek
the nourishment of their Souls; and as there they sustain Temporal life, so
here they would learn to make provision for Eternal. Christ could not suffer
that the Temple should serve for a place of Mart, not the Apostle of Christ,
that the Church should be made an Inn. When therefore we sanctify or hallow
Churches, that which we do as ooly to testify that we make them Places of
public resort, that we invest God himself with them, that we sever them from
Common uses. In which action, other Solemnities than such as are decent and fit
for that purpose we approve none. Indeed we condemn not all as unmeet, the like
whereunto have either been devised or used happily amongst Idolaters. For why
should conformity with them in matter of Opinion be lawful, when they think
that which is true, if in action, when they do that which is meet, it be uot
lawful to be like unto them? Are we to forsake any true Opinion, because
Idolaters have maintained it? or to shun any requisite action, only because we
have in the practice thereof been prevented by Idolaters. It is no impossible
thing, but that sometimes they may judge as tightly what is decent about such
external affairs of God, as in greater things what is true. Not therefore
whatsoever Idolaters have either thought or done, but let whatsoever they have
either thought or done idolatrously, be so far forth abhorred. For of that
which is good even in evil things, God is Author.

Of the names whereby we distinguish our Churches.
13. Touching the names of Angels and Saints, whereby the most of our Churches
are called; as the custom of so naming them is very ancient, so neither was
the cause thereof at the first, nor is the use and continuance with us at this
present hurtful. That Churches were consecrated unto none but the Lord only,
the very General name it self does sufficiently show, ^ From K^^^n and Kyre,
and by adding letters of aspiration, Chyich.
is as much as by plain Grammatical construction, Church does signify no other
thing than the Lords House. And because the multitude, as of Persons, so of
things particular causes variety of Proper names to be devised for Distinction
sake, Founders of Churches did herein that which best liked their own conceit
at the present time; yet each intending, that as often as those Buildings came to
be mentioned, the name should put men in mind of some memorable thing or
person. Thus therefore it comes to pass, that all Churches have had their
names, Vid. Sac. l 1 c. 16. Ecclis. 4. 6. 30 Mist. Trip. l. 41. 11.
some as memorials of peace, some of wisdom, some in memory of the Trinity it
self, some of Christ under sundry Titles; of the blessed Virgin not a few, many
of one Apostle, Saint, or Martyr, many of all. In which respect their
commendable purpose being not of every one understood, they have been in latter
ages, construed as though they had superstitiously meant, either that those
places which where denominated of Angels and Saints, should serve for the
worship of so glorious Creatures, or else those glorified Creatures, for
defense, protection, and patronage of such places. A thing which the Ancients
do utterly disclaim. To them says St. Augustine, V. Aug. l ^. de civ. Dei, c.
27. l. 12 c. 10. Epi. 49. at Deogr^. The duty which Christian men performed in
keeping ^^stvaldodicariuns S. Basil terms (...) acknowledging the sense to
have been withal (...) Basil. in Pi^. 114.
appoint no Churches, because they are not to us as Gods. Again, The Nations to
their Gods erected Temples, we not Temples unto our Martyrs as unto Gods, but
Memorials as unto dead men, whose spirits with God are still living. Diverse
considerations there are, for which Christian Churches might first take their
names of Saints: as either because by the Ministry of Saints it pleased God
there to show some rare effect of his power; or else in regard of death, which
those Saints having suffered for the testimony of Jesus Christ, did thereby
make the places where they dyed venerable; or thirdly, for that it liked good
and virtuous men to give such occasion of mentioning them often, to the end
that the naming of their Persons might cause enquiry to be made, and meditation
to be had of their virtues. Wherefore, seeing that we cannot justly account it
Superstition, to give unto Churches those sore-reheased names, as memorials
either of holy Persons or Things; if it be plain that their Founders did with
such meaning name them, shall not we, in otherwise taking them, offer them
injury? Or if it be obscure or uncertain what they meant, yet this construction
being more favorable, Charity (I hope) constrains no man which stands
doubtful of their minds, to lean to the hardest and worst interpretation that
their words can carry. Yea, although it were clear, that they all (for the
error of some is manifest in this behalf) had therein a supertitious intent,
Wherefore should their fault prejudice us, who (as all men know) do use by way
of mere Distinction the names which they of Superstition gave? In the use of
those names whereby we distinguish both days and months, are we culpable of
Superstition, because they were, who first invented them? The sign Castor and
Pallux superstitiously given unto that Ship wherein the Apostle sailed,
polluteth not the Evangelists pen, Acts 28. 11.
who thereby does but distinguish that Ship from others. If to Daniel there had
been given no other name, but only Beltisbazzar, Dan. 4. 5. Vide Scal. de
emendar. temp. l. 6. p. 277.
given him in honor of the Babylonian Idol Belti, Should their Idolatry, which
were the Authors of that Name, cleave unto every man which had so termed him by
way of personal difference only? Were it not to satisfy the minds of the
simpler sort of men, these nice curiosities are not worthy the labor which we
bestow to answer them.

14. The like unto this is a fancy, Of the fashion of our Churches.
which they have against the fashion of our Churches, as being framed according
to the pattern of the Jewish Temple. A fault no less grievous, if so be it were
true, than if some King should build his Mansionhouse by the model of Solomon's
Palace. So far forth as our Churches and their Temple have one end, What should
let, but that they may lawfully have one from? The Temple was for Sacrifice,
and therefore had Rooms to that purpose, such as ours have none. Our Churches
are places provided, that the people might there assemble themselves in due and
decent manner, according to their several degrees and orders. Which thing being
common unto us with Jews, we have in this respect our Churches divided by
certain partitions, although not so many in number as theirs. They had their
several for Heathen Nations, their several for the people of their own Nation,
their several for Men, their several for Women, their several for their
Priests, and for the High Priest alone their several. There being in ours for
local distinction between the Clergy and the rest (which yet we do not with any
great strictness or curiosity observe neither) but one partition, the cause
whereof at the first (as it seems) was, that as many as were capable of the
holy Mysteries, might there assemble themselves, and no other creep in amongst
them; this is now made a matter so heinous, as if our Religion thereby were
become even plain Judaism, and as though we retained a Most Holy Place,
whereinto there might not any but the High Priest alone enter, accouling to the
custom of the Jews.

15. Some it highly displeases, that so great expenses this way are employed:
The sumptuousness of Churches.
The Mother of such Magnificence (they think) is but only a proud ambitious
desire to be spoken of far and pride. Suppose we that God himself delights to
dwell sumptuously? or takes pleasure in chargeable p^mp? No; Then was the Lord
most acceptably served, when his Temples were rooms borrowed within the houses
of poor men. This was suitable unto the nakedness of Jesus Christ, and the
simplicity of his Gospel. What thoughts or cogitations they had which were
Authors of those things, the use and benefit whereof has descended unto our
selves, as we do not know, so we need not search. It comes (we grant) may
times to pass, that the works of men being the same, their drifts and purposes
therein are diverse. The charge of Herod about the Temple of God was ambitious;
yet Solomon's virtuous, Constantine's holy. But howsoever their hearts are
disposed by whom any such thing is done in the World, shall we think that it
baneth the work which they leave behind them, or taken away from others the use
and benefit thereof? Touching God himself, has he any where revealed, that it
is his delight to dwell beggarly? and that he takes no pleasure to be
worshipped, saving only in poor Cottages? Even then was the Lord at acceptably
honored of his people as ever, when the statelyest places and things in the
whole World were sought out to adorn his Temple. (...) Arist. Eth. l 4. c 2.
(...) Philo. Jud.
This is most suitable, decent, and fit for the greatness of Jesus Christ, for
the sublimity of his Gospel, except we think of Christ and his Gospel as (
Folis, ^hesaari im perialis quarto^, compica^us sacrorum vasorum pr^^la; En
inqui^ qualibus vasis ministrative Ha ^i^ alios The^^a er. h^l. Eccles l. 3. c.
12.
)the Officers of Julian did. As therefore the Son of Syrach gives verdict
concerning those things, which God has wrought, ( Eccles. 39. 34.
) A man need not say, This is worse than that, this more acceptable to God,
that less; for in their season they are all worthy praise: the like we may also
conclude, as touching these two so contrary ways of providing, in meaner or in
costlier sort, for the honor of Almighty God, A man need not say, This is
worse than that, this more acceptable to God, that less; for with him they are
in their season both allowable; the one, when the state of the Church is poor;
the other, when God has enriched it with plenty. When they, which had seen the
beauty of the first Temple, built by Solomon in the days of his great
prosperity and peace, beheld how far it excelled the second, which had not
Builders of like ability, the tears of their grieved eyes the Prophets ( ^gge.
2.5. 10
)endeavored with comforts to wipe away. Whereas if the House of God were by so
much the more perfect, by how much the glory thereof is less, they should have
done better to rejoice than weep, their Prophets better to reprove than
comfort. It being objected against the Church in the times of universal
persecution, that her Service done to God was not solemnly performed in Temples
fit for the honor of Divine Majesty, their most convenient answer was, that (
Minu^. ^^^ in Oc^a^.
) The best Temples which we can dedicate to God, are our sanctified Souls and
Bodies. Whereby it plainly appears, how the Fathers, when they were upbraided
with that defect, comforted themselves with the meditation of Gods most
gracious and merciful nature, Who did not therefore the less accept of their
hearty affection and zeal rather, than took any great delight, or imagined any
high perfection in such their want of external Ornaments, which when they
wanted, the cause was their only lack of ability; ability serving, they wanted
them not. Before the Emperor Constantines time, Eusebius. l. 8. c. ^.
under Severus, Guardian, Philip, and Galienus, the state of Christian affairs
being tolerable, the sonner Buildings which were but of mean and small estate
contented them not; spacious and ample Churches they erected throughout every
City. No Envy was able to be their hindrance, no practice of Satan or fraud of
men available against their proceedings herein, while they continued as yet
worthy to feel the aid of the arm of God extended over them for their safety.
Eusebius. l. 8. c. 8.
These Churches Dioclesian caused by solemn Edict to be afterward overthrown.
Maximinus with like authority giving leave to erect them, the hearts of all men
were even rapt with Divine joy, to see those places, which tyrannous impiety
had laid waste, recovered, as it were, out of mortal calamity, Eusebius. l. 10. c.
^.
Churches reared up to an height immeasurable, and adorned with far more beauty
in their restoration than their Founders before had given them. Whereby we
see, how most Christian minds stood then affected, we see how joyful they were
to behold the sumptuous stateliness of Houses built unto Gods glory. If we
should, over and besides this, allege the care which was had, that all things
about the Tabernacle of Moses might be as beautiful, gorgeous, and rich, as Art
could make them; or what travel and cost was bestowed, that the goodliness of
the Temple might be a Spectacle of admiration to all the world; this, they will
say, was figurative, and served by Gods appointment but for a time, to shadow
out the true everlasting glory of a more Divine Sanctuary; whereinto Christ
being long fithence entered, it seems that all those curious exornations
should rather cease. Which thing we also our selves would grant, if the use
thereof had been meetly and only mystical. But, since the Prophet David does
mention a natural convenience which such kind of bounteous Expenses have, as
well for that we do thereby give unto God a testimony of our cheerful
affection, 1 Chronicles. 28. 14.
which thinks nothing too dear to be bestowed about the furniture of his
Service, as also because it serves to the world for a witness of his
Almightiness, 2 Chronicles. 2. ^.
whom we outwardly honor with the chiefest of outward things, as being of all
things Himself incomparably the greatest. Besides, were it not also strange, if
God should have made such store of glorious Creatures on Earth, and leave them
all to be consumed in Secular vanity, allowing none but the baser sort to be
employed in his own service? Matthew 6. 29.
To set forth the Majesty of Kings, his Vicegerents in this world, the most
gorgeous and rare treasures which the world has, are procured. We think,
belike, Malac. ^. 8.
that he will accept what the meanest of them would disdain. If there be great
care to build and beautify these corruptible Sanctuaries, little or none, that
the living Temples of the Holy Ghost, the dearly redeemed Souls of the people
of God may be edified; huge expenses upon Timber and Stone, but toward the
relief of the poor, small devotion; Cost this way infinite, and in the mean
while Charity cold: we have in such case just occasion to make complaint as
Saint Ierom did, Ad Nepotian. de vira Cle^^.
The walls of the Church there are ^now contented to build, and to underset it
with goodly Pillars, the Marbles are polished, the Roofs shine with Gold, the
Altar has Precious Stones to adorn it; and of Christ's Ministers no choice at
all. Ad Demetr. Epist. 12. ad Gaudentium.
The same Ierom, both in that place and elsewhere, debaseth with like intent
the glory of such Magnificence (a thing whereunto men's affections in those
times needed no spu^r) thereby to extol the necessity sometimes of Charity and
Alms, sometimes of other the most principal Duties belonging unto Christian
men; which Duties were neither so highly esteemed as they ought, and being
compared with that in question, the directest Sentence we can give of them
both, as unto me it seems, is this, God who requires the one as necessary,
accepts the other also as being an honorable work.

16. Our opinion concerning the force and virtue which such Places have, What
Holiness and Virtue we ascribe to the Church, more than other places.
is, I trust, without any blemish or stain of Heresy. Churches receive, as
every thing else, their chief perfection from the end whereunto they serve.
Which end being the public worship of God, they are, in this consideration,
Houses of greater Dignity, than any provided for meaner purposes. For which
cause they seem after a sort even to mourn, as being injured and defrauded of
their right, when places, not sanctified as they are, prevent them
unnecessarily in that pre-eminence and honor. Whereby also it does come to
pass, that the Service of God has not then it self such perfection of grace
and comeliness, as when the dignity of place which it wishes for does concur.
Again, albeit the true worship of God be to God in it self acceptable, who
respects not so much in what place, as with what affection he is served; and
therefore Moses in the midst of the Sea, Job on the Dunghill, Ezechias in Bed,
Jeremy in Mire, Jonas in the Whale, Daniel in the Den, the Children in the
Furnace, the Thief on the Cross, Peter and Paul in Prison, calling unto God,
were heard, Exhort. ad bap^. ^ p^enitent.
as S. Basil notes: manifest notwithstanding it is, that the very majesty and
holiness of the place where God is worshipped, has in regard of us great
virtue, force and efficacy, for that it serves as a sensible help to stir up
devotion, and in that respect, no doubt, bettereth even our holiest and best
actions in this kind. As therefore we every where exhort all men to worship
God; even so, for performance of this Service by the people of God assembled,
we think not any place so good as the Church, neither any exhortation so sit as
that of David, O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. Psalm. 96.9.


17. For of our Churches thus it becomes us to esteem, Their pretense that
would have Churches utterly rozed.
howsoever others rapt with the pang of a furious zeal, do pour out against
them devout blasphemies, crying, ( Psalm. 137. 7.
) Down with them, down with them, even to the very ground; For to Idolatry they
have been abused. And the places where Idols have been worshipped, are by (
Deuteronomy. 12.2.
) the Law of God devote to utter destruction. For extentions of which Law, the
( 2 Chronicles. 17. 6. 2 Chronicles. 29. 2. Chron. 3.
) Kings that were godly, as Asa, Jehosaphat, Ezechia, Josia, destroyed all the
High places, Altars, and Groves, which had been erected in Juda and Israel. He
that said, Thou shall have no other gods before my face, has likewise said,
Thou shall utterly deface and destroy all these Synagogues and places where
such Idols have been worshipped. This Law contains the Temporal punishment
which God has set down, and wills that men execute, for the breach of the
other Law. They which spare them therefore, do but reserve, as the Hypocrite
Saul did, exterable things, to worship God withal. The truth is, that as no
man serves God, and loves him not; so neither can any man sincerely love God,
and not extremely abhor that sin, which is the highest degree of Treason
against the Supreme Guide and Monarch of the whole world, with whose Divine
Authority and Power it investeth others. By means whereof the state of
Idolaters is two ways miserable. First, In that which they worship, ( Isa. 8.
21.4. 20. Hos. 14.4. Isa. 41. 24.
)they find no succor; and secondly, At his hands whom they ought to serve,
there is no other thing to be looked for, but the effects of most just
displeasure, the ( Psalm. 115. ^. ^1. 13. Romans 1. 24.
)withdrawing of Grace, ( Judic. 6.13.
)dereliction in this world, and in the world to come ( Apoc. 21.8. Isa. ^. 21.
)confusion. ( Acts 14. 14.
) Paul and Barnabas, when Infidels admiring their virtues went about to
sacrifice unto them, rent their Garments in token of horror, and, as frighted
persons, run crying through the press of the people, O men, wherefore doy^ these
things? They knew the force of that dreadful ( Deuteronomy. 28. 20.
)Curse whereunto Idolatry makes subject. Nor is there cause why the guilty
sustaining the same, should grudge or complain of Injustice. For, whatsoever
Evil befalls in that respect, ( Jer. 2. 17.
)themselves have made themselves worthy to suffer it. As for those things
either whereon, or else wherewith Superstition works, polluted they are by
such abuse, and deprived of that Dignity which their Nature delights in. For
there is nothing which does not grieve, and, as it were, even loath it self,
whenever iniquity causes it to serve unto vile purposes Idolatry therefore
makes, whatsoever it touches, the worse. Howbeit since Creatures which have no
understanding can show no will; and where no will is, there is no sin; and only
that which sins, is subject to punishment; Which way should any such
Creature be punishable by the Law of God? There may be cause sometime to
abolish or to extiguish them, But surely, never by way of punishment to the
things themselves. Yea farther, howsoever the Law of Moses did punish
Idolaters, we find not that God has appointed for us any definite or certain
temporal judgment, which the Christian Magistrate is of necessity for ever
bound to execute upon Offenders in that kind, much less upon things that way
abused as mere instruments. For what God did command touching Canaan, the same
concerns not us any otherwise than only as a fearful pattern of his just
displeasure and wrath against sinful Nations. It teaches us, how God thought
good to plague and afflict them; it does not appoint in what form and manner we
ought to punish the sin of Idolaty in all others. Unless they will say, that
because the Israelites were commanded to make no Covenant with the people of
that Land, therefore Leagues and Truces made between Superstitious Persons, and
such as serve God aright, are unlawful altogether; or, because God commanded
the Israelites to smite the Inhabitants of Canaan, and to root them out, that
therefore reformed Churches are bound to put all others to the edge of the
sword. Now whereas Commandment was also given to destroy all places where the
Canaanites had served their gods, Deuteronomy. 12. 2.
and not to convert any one of them to the honor of the true God: this Precept
had reference unto a special intent and purpose, which was, that there should
be but one only Place in the whole Land, whereunto the People might bring such
Offerings, Gifts, and Sacrifices, as their Levitical Law did require. By which
Law, severe charge was given them in that respect, not to convert those places
to the worship of the living God, where Nations before them had served Idols,
Deuteronomy. 1^. 4, 5.
But to seek the place which the Lord their God should choose out of all their
Tribes. Besides, it is reason we should likewise consider how great a
difference there is between their proceedings, who erect a new Commonwealth,
which is to have neither People nor Law, neither Regiment nor Religion the same
that was, and theirs, who only reform a decayed estate, by reducing it to that
perfection from which it has swarved. In this case we are to retain as much,
in the other as little of former things as we may. Since therefore Examples have
not generally the force of Laws which all men ought to keep, but of Counsels
only and Persuasions not amiss to be followed by them whose Case is the like,
surely where Cases are so unlike as theirs and ours, I see not how that which
they did, should induce, much less any way enforce us to the same practice,
especially considering that Groves and Hill-altars were, while they did remain,
both dangerous in regard of the secret access, which People, superstitiously
given, might have always thereunto with ease; neither could they remaining
serve with any fitness unto better purpose: whereas our Temples (their former
abuse being by order of Law removed) are not only free from such peril, but
withal so conveniently framed for the people of God to serve and honor him
therein; that no man beholding them, can choose but think it exceeding great
pity they should be ever any otherwise employed. Yea but the Cattle of Amalek
(you will say) were fit for sacrifice; and this was the very conceit which
sometime deceived Soul. It was so. Nor do I any thing doubt, but that Saul upon
this conceit might even lawfully have offered to God those reserved spoils, had
not the Lord in that particular case given special charge to the contrary. And
therefore notwithstanding the commandment of Israel to destroy Canaanites,
Idolaters may be converied and live: So the Temples which have served Idolatry
as Instruments, may be sanctified again and continue, albeit, to Israel
commandment have been given that they should destroy all Idolatrous places in
their Lead; and to the good Kings of Israel commendation for fulfilling, to the
evil for disobeying the same Commandment, sometimes punishment, always sharp
and severe reproof has even from the Lord himself befallen. Thus much it may
suffice to have written in defense of those Christian Oratories, the overthrow
and ruin whereof is desired, not now by Infidels, Pagans, or Turks, but by a
special refined Sect of Christian Believers; pretending themselves exceedingly
grieved at our Solemnities in erecting Churches, at the Names which we suffer
them to hold, at their form and fashion, at the stateliness of them and
costliness, at the opinion which we have of them, and at the manifold
supertitious abuses whereunto they have been put.

18. Places of public resort being thus provided for, Of public teaching, or
preaching, and the first kind thereof, Catechizing.
our repair thither is especially for mutual conference, and as it were
commerce to be had between God and us. Because therefore want ( Contraria for^a
in quibut homines sibi intecem oppunannar secundum exercitia and desideria and
opiniones ^unla provenlunt exignoranth: sicut c^cus ex p^^vatione sui visu^
vagatur ubique and laeditur. Scientio veriratis rollit hominum iaimidria^ and
adlum. He promisit sancte Theologia dicens, Habitabit agnus cum lupo. Et
olsig^at rarionem, ^eple^a est terra sapiendo Domini. ^^set AEgpt, in Mo^.
Honnebuch. lib. 3. cap. 12.
) of the knowledge of God is the cause of all iniquity amongst men, as
contrariwise, the ground of all our happiness, and the seed of whatsoever
perfect virtue grows from us, is a right opinion touching things divine, this
kind of knowledge we may justly set down for the first and chiefest thing which
God imparteth unto his People, and our duty of receiving this at his merciful
hands, for the first of those religious Offices wherewith we publicly honor
him on earth. For the instruction therefore of all sorts of men to eternal
life, it is necessary, that the sacred and saving truth of God be openly
published unto them. Which open publication of heavenly mysteries, is by an
excellency termed preaching. For otherwise there is not any thing publicly
notified, but we may in that respect, rightly and properly say it is preached.
So that when the School of God does use it as a word of Art, Luc. 8.39.
we are accordingly to understand it with restraint to such special matter as
that School is accustomed to publish. We find not in the World any People that
have lived altogether without Religion. And yet this duty of Religion, which
provideth that publicly all sorts of men may be instructed in the fear of God,
is to the Church of God, and has been always so peculiar, that none of the
Heathens, how curious Vide Terrol. de praset. advers her.
soever in searching out all kinds of outward Ceremonies like to ours, could
ever once so much as endeavor to resemble herein the Churches care for the
endless good of her Children. Ways of teaching there have been sundry always
usual in Gods Church. The Jews, Catech. called Letach, Tob.
For the first introduction of youth, to the knowledge of God, the Jews even
till this day have their Catechisms. With Religion it fares as with other
Sciences, the first delivery of the Elements thereof must, for like
consideration, ( Inciplen^ibus brev. us. ac simplicias tradi praecepra ^^gs
convenit. Aut enim difficaltate institutionis tam numeros^ at que per^lexe
dete^reri solenu aureo rempore quo praecipue alenda ingenia atque indulgentis
quadam enutrienda sunt, asperiorum rerum tractaru atter antur. Fab. proam l. 1.
Inci^ienrihon no^^is exponers in^o populi Romani, i^a videntur posse ^r adi
commodissum^, si primo leri aesimplici vi^, post deinde ^digentissima arque
exoctissima interpretatione singula tralantar. Alinqui si station ah laitio
rudem ad huc and infermu^ ^ni^^g^o lahore ej^, supe etiam dissien^ia (quae
pletumque juvenes averti^) ^en^^ ad ^^^ perdutemus, ad quod leviore via ductus
sine magno lahore and sine ulla diffidentia me^rius perduci pornif^et.
Institus. Impur. l. ^. ^it 1.
)be framed according to the weak and slender capacity of young Beginners: unto
which manner of teaching Principles in Christianity, the Apostle in the sixth
to the Hebrews is himself understood to allude. For this cause therefore, as
the Decalogue of Moses declares summarily those things which we ought to do;
the Prayer of our Lord, whatsoever we should request or desire: Vide ^^uff. in
Symb.
so either by the Apostles, or at the leastwise out of their Writings, we have
the substance of Christian Belief compendiously drawn into few and short
Articles, to the end that the weakness of no man's wit might either hinder
altogether the knowledge, or excuse the utter ignorance of needful things. Such
as were trained up in these Rudiments, and were so made fit to be afterward by
Baptism received into the Church, the Fathers usually in their Writings do term
Hearers; as having no farther communion or fellowship with the Church, Tert. de
poeniteur. A^ alius est ti^ctis Christus? Alius audientibus? Audientes optare
intinctionem (...) pr^^sumere apor^^re. Cyprian. Epist. 17. l. 3. Audientibus
vigilantia vestea non di sit. Rupert de divin. offic. lib. 4. cap. 18. Audiens
quisqueregulam filei. Catechumenus dicitur. Catechumenus namque Auditor
interpretatur.
than only this, that they were admitted to hear the Principles of Christian
Faith made plain unto them. Catechizing may be in Schools, it may be in private
Families; But when we make it a kind of Preaching, we mean always the public
performance thereof in the open hearing of men, because things are preached not
in that they are taught, but in that they are published.

Of Preaching, by reading publicly the Books of holy Scripture; and concerning
supposed untru hs in those Translations Scripture which we allow to be read, as
also of the choice which we make in reading.
19. Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, were in their times all
Preachers of Gods Truth; some by Word, some by Writing, some by both. This they
did partly as faithful Witnesses, making mere relation what God himself had
revealed unto them; and partly as careful Expounders, Teachers, Perswaders
thereof. The Church in like case Preaches still, first publishing by way of
Testimony or relation, the truth which from them she has received, even in
such sort as it was received, written in the sacred volumes of Scripture;
Secondly, by way of explication, discovering the mysteries which lie hid
therein. The Church as a Witness, preaches his mere revealed Truth, by reading
publicly the Sacred Scripture. So that a second kind of preaching is the
reading of holy Writ. For thus we may the boldlier speak, being strengthened(
Acts 15. 21.
) with the examples of so reverend a Prelate as says, that Moses from the time
of ancient Generations and Ages long since past, had amongst the Cities of the
very Gentiles them that preached him, in that he was read every Sabbath day.
For so of necessity it must be meant, in as much as we know, that the Jews have
always had their weekly Readings of the Law of Moses; but that they always had
in like manner their weekly Sermons upon some part of the Law of Moses, we no
where find. Howbeit still we must here remember, that the Church; by her
public reading of the Book of God, preaches only as a Witness. Now the
principal thing required in a Witness, is Fidelity. Wherefore as we cannot
excuse that Church, which either through corrupt translations of Scripture,
delivers, instead of divine Speeches, any thing repugnant unto that which God
speaks; or, through falsified additions, proposes that to the people of God
as Scripture, which is in truth no Scripture: So the blame, which in both these
respects has been laid upon the Church of England, is surely altogether
without cause. Touching Translations of Holy Scripture, albeit we may not
disallow of their painful travels herein, who strictly have tied themselves to
the very Original letter; yet the judgment of the Church, as we see by the
practice of all Nations, Greeks, Latins, Persians, Syrians, AEthiopians,
Arabians, has been ever, That the fittest for public Audience are such, as
following a middle course between the rigor of literal Translators, and the
liberty of Paraphrasts, do with greatest shortness and plainness deliver the
meaning of the Holy Ghost. Which being a labor of so great difficulty, the
exact performance thereof we may rather wish than look for. So that, except
between the words of translation and the mind of Scripture it self, there be
Contradiction, every little difference should not seem an intolerable blemish
necessarily to be spunged out. Psalm. 105 28.
Whereas therefore the Prophet David in a certain Psalm does say concerning
Moses and Aaron, that they were obedient to the word of God, and in the
self-same place ^or allowed Translation says, they were not obedient, we are
for this cause challenged as manifest Gainsayers of Scripture, even in that
which we read for Scripture unto the people. But for as much as words are
resemblances of that which the mind of the Speaker conceives, and Conceits are
Images representing that which is spoken of; it follows that they who will
judge of words, should have recourse to the things themselves from whence they
rise. In setting down that Miracle, at the sight whereof Peter fell down
astonished before the feet of Jesus, and cried, Depart, Lord, I am a Sinner,
the( Luke 5. 6, 7.
) Evangelist St. Luke says, the store of the Fish which they took was such,
that the Net they took it in brake, and the Ships which they loaded therewith
sunk; ( John 1^. 21.
)St. John recording the like Miracle, says, That albeit the Fishes in number
were so many, yet the Net with so great a weight was not broken. Suppose they
had written both of one Miracle. Although there be in their Words a manifest
show of jar; yet none, if we look upon the difference of matter, with regard
whereunto they might both have spoken even of one Miracle, the very same which
they spoke of diverse, the one intending thereby to signify that the greatness
of the burden exceeded the natural ability of the instruments which they had to
bear it; the other, that the weakness thereof was supported by a supernatural
and miraculous addition of strength. The Nets, as touching themselves, brake,
but through the power o^ God they held. Are not the words of the Matthew. 5 1.
)Prophet Micheas touching Bethleem, Thou Bethleem the least? and does not the
very ( Matthew. 3. 6.
Evangelist translate these words, Thou Bethleem not the least? the one
regarding the quantity of the Place, the other the dignity. Micheas attributes
unto it smallness, in respect of circuit; Matthew greatness, in regard of honor
and estimation, by being the native soil of our Lord and Savior Christ. Since
therefore Speeches, which gainsay one another, must of necessity be applied
both unto one and the self-same Subject; since they must also the one affirm,
the other deny the self-same thing: what necessity of contradiction can there
be between the Letter of the Prophet David, and our authorized Translation
thereof, if he understanding Moses and Aaron do say, They were not disobedient;
we applying our speech to Pharaoh and the Egyptians, do say of them, They were
not obedient? Or (which the matter it self will easily enough likewise suffer)
if the Egyptians being meant by both, it be said that they in regard of Exodus
10. 24.
their offer to let go the People, when they saw the fearful darkness,
disobeyed not the Word of the Lord; and yet that they did not obey his Word, in
as much as the Sheep and Cattle at the self-same time they withheld. Of both
Translations, the better I willingly acknowledge that which comes nearer to
the very letter of the Original verity: yet so, that the other may likewise
safely enough be read, without any per^l at all of gainsaying, as much as the
least jot or syllable of God's most sacred and precious Truth. Which Truth, as
in this we do not violate, so neither is the same gain-sayed or crossed, no not
in those very Preambles placed before certain readings, wherein the steps of
the Latin Service Book have been somewhat too nearly followed. As when we say,
Christ spoke ( The Gospel as the second Sunday after Easter, and on the
twentieth after Trinity.
) to his Disciples, That which the Gospel declares he spoke ( John 10.1^.
Matthew. 21 1.
) unto the Pharisees. For does the Gospel affirm, he spoke to the Pharisees
only? does it mean that they, and besides them, no man else was at that time
spoken unto by our Savior Christ? If not, then is there in this diversity no
contrariety. I suppose it somewhat probable, that St. John and St. Matthew,
which have recorded those Sermons, heard them, and being Hearers, did think
themselves as well respected as the Pharisees in that which their Lord and
Master taught, concerning the Pastoral care he had over his own Flock, and his
offer of Grace made to the whole World, which things are the matter whereof he
treats in those Sermons. Wherefore as yet there is nothing found, wherein we
read for the Word of God that which may be condemned as repugnant unto his
Word. Furthermore, somewhat they are displeased, in that we follow not the
method of Reading, which T. C. l. 2. p. 381. Although it be very convenient
which is used in some Churches, where before Preaching time the Church
assembled has the Sorpreres read; yet neither is this, nor any other O^ler^^
bare Public reading in the Church necessary had.
in their judgment is most commendable, the method used in some foreign
Churches, where Scriptures are read before the time of Divine Service, and
without either choice or stint appointed by any determinate Order,
Nevertheless, till such time as they shall vouchsafe us some just and
sufficient reason to the contrary, we must by their patience, if not allowance,
retain the Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 22. c. 8. F^^o silentio, Scriprorarum suat
lecta divine solennia. That for several times several pieces of Scripture were
read as part of the Service of the Greek Church and Fathers thereof in their
sundry Homilles and other Writings do all testify the like Order in the Syrian
Churches, is clear by the very inscriptions of Chapters throughout their
Translation of the New Testament. See the Edition at Vienna, Part and A^thrup.
ancient received Custom which we now observe. For with us the reading of the
Scripture in the Church is a part of our Church-Liturgy, a special Portion of
the Service which we do to God, and not an exercise to spend the time when one
does wait for another coming, till the assembly of them which shall afterward
worship him be comple^. Wherefore, as the form of our Public Service is not
voluntary, so neither are the parts thereof left uncertain, but they are all
set down in such order, and with such choice, as has in the wisdom of the
Church seemed best to concur as well with the special occasions, as with the
general purpose which we have to glorify God.

Of Preaching by the Public reading of other profitable instructions; and
concerning Books Apocryphal.
20. Other Public readings there are of Books and Writings not Canonical,
whereby the Church does also preach, or openly make known, the Doctrine of
virtuous conversation; whereupon, besides those things, in regard whereof we
are thought to read the Scriptures of God amiss, it is thought amiss, that we
read in our Churches any thing at all besides the Scriptures. To exclude the
reading of any such profitable instruction, as the Church has devised for the
better understanding of Scripture, or for the easier trayning up of the People
in holiness and righteousness of life, they T. C. l. 1. p 196. Neither the
Homiles nor the Apocrypha are at all to be read in the Church. Wherein, first,
it is good to consider the Order which the Lord kept with his People in times
past, when he commanded, Exodus 30. 25. that no Vessel nor no instrument, either
Besome or Flesh-hook, or Pan, should once come into the Temple, but those only
which were sanctified and set apart for that use. And in the Book of Numbers he
will have no other Trumpets blown to call the People together, but those only
which were set apart for that purpose. Numb. 10.2.
plead, that God in the Law would have nothing brought into the Temple, neither
Besomes, nor Flesh-hooks, nor Trumpets, but those only which were sanctified,
that for the expounding of darker places, we ought to follow the Jews T. C. l.
1 p. 157. Besides this, the Policy of the Church of God is times past is to be
followed, etc.
Polity, who under Antiochus, where they had not the commodity of Sermons,
appointed always at their Meetings somewhat out of the Prophets to be read
together with the Law, and so by the one made the other plainer to be
understood; That before and after our Saviors coming they neither read
Onkelos nor Ionathan's Paraphrase, though having both, but contented themselves
Acts 13. 15. Acts 15. 21.
with the reading only of Scriptures, that if in the Primitive Church there had
been any thing read besides the Monuments of the Prophets and Apostles, (
Justin Apol. 2. Origin. Hom. 1. super Exodus ^ in Judie.
Justin Martyr and Origin, who mention these, would have spoken of the other
likewise; that ( Council. La^d. c. ^9.
the most ancient and best Councels forbid any thing to be read in Churches,
saving Canonical Scripture only; that when Council. Vasens. 2.
other things were afterward permitted Concl. Co^on. par. 2.
fault was found with it, it succeeded but ill, the Bible it self was thereby
in time quite and clean thrust out. Which Arguments, if they be only brought in
token of the Authors good will and meaning toward the cause which they would
set forward, must accordingly be accepted of by them, who already are persuaded
the same way. But if their drift and purpose be to persuade others, it would be
demanded, by what Rule the legal hallowing of Besomes and Flesh-hooks must
needs exclude all other readings in the Church save Scripture. Things
sanctified were thereby in such sort appropriated unto God, as that they might
never afterward again be made common. For which cause, the Lord, to sign and
mark them as his own, Ex. 30. 25. 32.
appointed oil of holy ointment, the like whereunto it was not lawful to make
for ordinary and daily uses. Thus the Exodus 40.15
anointing of Aaron and his Sons tied them to the Office of the Priesthood for
ever; the anointing not of those Silver Trumpets (which Numb. 10.2.
Moses as well for Secular as Sacred uses was commanded to make, not to
sanctify) but the Unction of the Exodus 27. 3. and 30. 36,27, 28.
Tabernacle, the Table, the Laver, the Altar of God, with all the instruments
appertaining thereunto, this made them for ever holy unto him, in whose service
they were employed. But what of this? Does it hereupon follow, that all things
now in the Church, from the greatest to the least, are unholy, which the Lord
has not himself precisely instituted? for so T. C. l. 1. p. 197. The Lord
would by these Rudiments and P^dagogies teach, that he would have nothing
brought into the Church but that which he had appointed.
those Rudiments, they say, do import. Then is there nothing holy, which the
Church by her Authority has appointed; and consequently all positive
Ordinances that ever were made by Ecclesiastical Power, touching Spiritual
affairs, are profane, they are unholy. I would not with them to undertake a
Work so desperate as to prove, that for the Peoples instruction no kind of
Reading is good, but only that which the Jews devised under Antiochus,
although, even that he also mistaken. For according to Esias Thesh. in veron
Pat^r.
Elius the Levite (out of whom it does seem borrowed) the thing which Antiochus
forbad, was the Public reading of the Law, and not Sermons upon the Law.
Neither did the Jews read a Portion of the Prophets together with the Law, to
serve for an interpretation thereof, because Sermons were not permitted them;
But, instead of the Law, which they might not read openly, they read of the
Prophets that, which in likeness of matter came nearest to each Section of
their Law. Whereupon, when afterward the liberty of reading the Law Acts 15.21.
was restored, the self-same Custom Acts 13. 15
as touching the Prophets did continue still. If neither the Jews have used
publicly to read their Paraphrasts, nor T. C. l. 1. 197. This Practice
continued still in the Churches of God after the Apostles times, as may appear
by the second Apology of Justin Martyr. Idem, p. 198. It was decreed in the
Council of Laodicea, that nothing should be read in the Church but the
Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament. Afterward, as corruptions grew
in the Church, the reading of Homilies and of Martyrs lives was permitted. But,
besides the evil success thereof, that Use and Custom was controlled, as may
appear by the Council of Collin, albeit otherwise Popish. The bringing in of
Homilies and Martyrs lives, has thrust the Bible clean out of the Church, or
into a Corner.
the Primitive Church for a long time any other Writings than Scripture, except
the Cause of their not doing it, were some Law of God, or Reason forbidding
them to do that which we do, why should the latter Ages of the Church be
deprived of the Liberty the former had? Are we bound while the World stands,
to put nothing in practice, but only that which was at the very first?
Concerning the Council of Laodicea, is it forbids the reading of those
things which are not Canonical, so it makes some things not Canonical which
are. The Apocalypse.
Their Judgment in this we may not, and in that we need not follow. We have by
thus many years experience found, that exceeding great good, not encumbered with
any notable inconvenience, has grown by the Custom which we now observe. As
for the harm whereof judicious men have complained in former times; it came not
of this, that other things were read besides the Scripture, but that so evil
choice was made. With us there is never any time bestowed in Divine Service,
without the reading of a great part of the holy Scripture, which we acount a
thing most necessary. We dare not admit any such Form of Liturgy, as either
appoints no Scripture at all, or very little to be read in the Church. And
therefore the thrusting of the Bible out of the House of God, is rather there
to be feared, where men esteem it a matter T. C. l. 2. p. 381. It is untrue,
that simple reading is necessary in the Church. A number of Churches which have
no such Order of simple reading, cannot be in this point charged with the
breach of God's Commandment, which they might be, if simple reading were
necessary. [By simple reading he means the Custom of bare Reading more than
the Preacher at the same time expounds unto the People.]
so indifferent, whether the same be by solemn appointment read publicly, or
not read, the bare Text excepted, which the Preacher happily chooses out to
expound. But let us here consider what the Practice of our Fathers before us
has been, and how far-forth the same may be followed. We find, that in ancient
times there was publicly read first the Colmus ad divinarum literarum
commemorationem. Tertul. Apol. p. 692.
Scripture, as namely, something out of the Books of the Judaicorum Historiarum
libri readiri sunt ab Apostolis legendi in Ecclestis. Orig. in Jos. Hom. 15.
Prophets of God, which were of old, something out of (...) Justin. Apol. 2. p.
162. Factum est ut iste die Dominica, Prophetica lectione jam lecta, ante
astate adslance, qui lectionem S. Pauli proferret, be^isimus Autistes
Ambrestus, etc. Sulp^. Sever. l. 3. de vita S. Mart.
the Apostles Writings, and lastly out of the holy Vide Council. V^s. ^. habitum
an. Dom. 444. tom. Council. 2. p. 19. Item Synod. La^d. c. 16. Cypr. l. 2.
epist. 5. and l. 4. epist. 5. Amb. l. 1. Offic c. ^. and epist. 75. and lib. de
Helio arque jejunio, cap. 20.
Evangelists, some things which touched the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ
himself. The cause of their reading first the old Testament, then the New, and
always somewhat out of both, is most likely to have been that which Justin
Martyr and Saint August. observe in comparing the two Testaments. Just. quaest.
101.
The Apostles (says the one) has taught us as themselves did learn, first the
Precepts of the Law, and then the Gospels. For what else is the Law, but the
Gospel foreshewed? What other the Gospel, than the Law fulfilled? In like sort
the other, August. quaest. 33. in Number.
What the Old Testament has, the very same the New contains; but that which
lies there at under a shadow, in here brought forth into the open Sun. Things
there prefigured, are here performed. Again, In the Old Testament there is a
close comprehension of the New; in the New, an open discovery of the Old. To be
short, the method of their Public readings either purposely did tend, or at
the leastwise does fitly serve, Was. St^ab. de rebes Ecsiast. cap. 22.
That from smaller things the minds of the Hearers, may go forward to the
Knowledge of greater, and by degrees climb up from the lowest to the highest
things. Now, besides the Scripture, the Books which they called Ecclesiastical,
were thought not unworthy sometime to be brought into public audience, and
with that Name they entitled the Books which we term Apocryphal. Under the
self-same Name they also comprised certain, no otherwise annexed unto the New,
than the former unto the Old Testament, as a Book of Hermes, Epistles of
Clement, and the like. According therefore to the Phrase of Antiquity, these we
may term the New, and the other the Old Ecclesiastical Books or Writings. For
we being directed by a Sentence (I suppose) of Saint Ierom, who says, ^eron.
in ^rol^g. Galeat.
That All Writings not Canonical are Apocryphal, use not now the Title
Apocryphal, as the rest of the Fathers ordinarily have done, whose Custom is so
to name for the most part only, such as might not publicly be read or
divulged. Ruffinus therefore having rehearsed the self-same Books of Canonical
Scripture, which with us are held to be alone Canonical, Ruffinus in Symbol.
Apost. apud Cypr.
adds immediately, by way of caution, We must know that other Books there are
also, which our Forefathers have used to name not Canonical, but
Ecclesiastical Books, as the Book of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Toby, Judith, the
Macchabees, in the Old Testament; in the New, the Book of Hermes, and such
others: All which Books and Writings they willed to be read in Churches, but
not to be alleged, as if their authority did bind us to build upon them our
Faith. Other Writings they named Apocryphal, which they would not have read in
Churches. These things delivered unto us from the Fathers, we have in this
place thought good to set down. So far Ruffinus. He which considers
notwithstanding what store of false and forged Writings, dangerous unto
Christian Belief, and yet bearing V^le Gelas. decree. non. Council. 2. p. 532.
glorious Inscriptions, began soon upon the Apostles times to be admitted into
the Church, and to be honored as if they had been indeed Apostolic, shall
easily perceive what cause the Provincial Synod of Cires An. Dom. 366.
Laodicea might have as then to prevent, especially the danger of Books made
newly Ecclesiastical, and, for feat of the fraud of Heretics, to provide, that
such Public readings might be altogether taken out of Canonical Scripture.
Which Ordinance, respecting but that abuse which grew through the intermingling
of Lessons Human with Sacred at such time as the one both affected the Credit,
and usurped the Name of the other (as by the Canon of Council Car^^ag. 3. c. 47.
Prae^e^ S^ip^^ as Cano^^ c^s nihil in Ecclesis ligatur su^ nomine Divinarum
scriprerarum Cire^ An. Dom. 401.
a later Council providing remedy for the self-same Evil, and yet allowing the
old Ecclesiastical Books to be read, it does more plainly and clearly appear)
neither can be construed, nor should be urged utterly to prejudice our use of
those old Ecclesiastical Writings; much less of Homilies, which were a third
kind of Readings usual in former times, a most commendable Institution, as
well then Council. Vasen. ^ habitum An. Dom. 444. tom. Council. p. 19. Si
Presbyter, ali qua infirmiraprehibente, pee se^psum non potuerit praeli^are:
^anctorum Partum Homilly a Diaconibus recitentur.
to supply the casual, as now the necessary defect of Sermons.

In the heat of general Persecution whereunto Christian Belief was subject,
upon the first promulgation thereof throughout the World, it much confirmed the
courage and constancy of weaker minds, when public relation was made unto
them, after what manner God had been glorified through the sufferings of
Martyrs, famous amongst them for Holiness during life, and at the time of their
death admirable in all men's eyes, through miraculous evidence of Grace divine
assisting them from above. For which cause the Virtues of some being thought
expedient to be annually had in remembrance above the rest, this brought in
Council. Car^tlug. 3. Can. 13. and Greg. Tu^on de gloris in^e^. ca. 16. and
^adria epist. ad Coral. Magu.
a fouth kind of Public Reading, whereby the lives of such Saints and Martyrs
had at the time of their yearly Memorials, solemn recognition in the Church of
God. The fond imitation of which laudible Custom being in later Ages resumed,
where there was neither the like cause to do as the Fathers before had done;
nor any Care, Conscience, or Wit, in such as undertook to perform that Work,
some brainless men have by great labor and travel brought to pass, that the
Church is now ashamed of nothing more than of Saints. If therefore Pope Gelas.
c^e^ An. Do. 432. to Council. p. 451.
Gelasim did, so long sithence, see those defects of Judgment even then, for
which the reading of the Acts of Martyrs should be, and was at that time,
forborne in the Church of Rome; we are not to marvail, that afterward Legends
being grown in a manner to be nothing else but heaps of frivolous and
scandalous vanities, they have been even with disdain thrown out, the Council.
Co^on. celebra^. An. Dom. 1535 pa^^a. cap. 5. Melch. Can. ^ocor. theol. lib.
1^. Vir. de tr^d. ^^se. lib. 5.
very Nests which bred them abhorring them. We are not therefore to except only
Scripture, and to make confusedly all the residue of one suit, as if they, who
abolish Legends could not without incongruity retain in the Church either
Homilies, or those old Ecclesiastical Books: Which Books in case my self did
think, as some others do, safer and better to be left publicly unread;
nevertheless as in other things of like nature, even so in this, In cremum
^ar^a^heum sicliterrum^ qui conceptus propitus ^atrum desiai^i onibus
antepodunt. c. ^nde Relig^o. In Extra.
my private Judgment I should be loath to oppose against the force of their
Reverend Authority, who rather considering the Divine excellency of some things
in all, and of all things in certain of those Apocrypha which we publicly
read, have thought-it better to let them stand as a lift or marginal border
unto the Old Testament, and, though with Divine, yet as Human compositions, to
grant at the least unto certain of them public audience in the House of God.
For in as much as the due estimation of heavenly Truth depends wholly upon
the known and approved authority of those famous Oracles of God, it greatly
behooves the Church to have always most especial care, lest through confused
mixture at any time Human usurp the room and Title of Divine Writings. Hieron.
praes. ad libros ^alom. Aug de p^^^d. Sanct.
Wherefore albeit for the Peoples more plain instruction (as the ancient use
has been) we read in our Churches certain Books, besides the Scripture, yet as
the Scripture we read them not. All men know our professed opinion touching the
difference whereby we sever them from the Scripture. l. 1. c. 14. Praefat.
gloss. ord. and Lyr. ad pr^^. Hieron. in Job.
And if any where it be suspected that some one or other will happily mistake a
thing so manifest in every man's eye, there is no let, but that as often as
those Books are read, and need so requires, the style of their difference may
expressly be mentioned, to bar even all possiblity of Error. It being then
known, that we hold not the Apocrypha for sacred (as we do the holy Scripture)
but for human compositions, the subject whereof are sundry Divine matters; let
there be reason showed, why to read any part of them publicly, it should be
unlawful or hurtful unto the Church of God. I hear it said, that many things in
them are very frivolous, and unworthy of public audience; T. C. l. 2. p. 400,
401.
yea, many contrary, plainly contrary, to the holy Scripture. Which hitherto is
neither sufficiently proved by him who says it, and, if the proofs thereof
were strong, yet the very allegation it self is weak. Let us therefore suppose
(for I will not demand to what purpose it is, that against our Custom of
reading Books not Canonical, they bring exceptions of matter in those Books
which we never use to read) suppose (I say) that what faults soever they have
observed throughout the passages of all those Books, the same in every respect
were such as neither could be construed, nor ought to be censured otherwise,
than even as themselves pretend: Yet as men, through too much haste, oftentimes
forget the Errand whereabout they should go; so here it appears, that an
eager desire to take together whatsoever might prejudice or any way hinder the
credit of Apocryphal Books, has caused the Collector's Pen so to run as it
were on Wheels, that the mind which should guide it, had no leisure to think,
whether that which might happily serve to withold from giving them the
Authority which belongs unto Sacred Scripture, and to cut them off from the
Canon, would as effectually serve to shut them altogether out of the Church,
and to withdraw from granting unto them that public use, wherein they are only
held as profitable for instruction. Is it not acknowledged, that those Books
are Holy, that they are Ecclesiastical and Sacred, ^^arm. Conses. sect. 1. ^d.
con. art. 6. Lubert. de pincip. Christ. doug^. L^^^ ^.
that to term them Divine, as being for their excellency next unto them which
are properly so termed, is no way to honor them above desert; yea, even that
the whole Church of Christ, as well at the first as sithence has most worthily
approved their fitness for the public informations of Life and manners: Is not
thus much, I say, acknowledged, and that by them, who notwithstanding receive
not the same for any part of Canonical Scripture, by them who deny not but that
they are Faulty, by them who are ready enough to give instances, wherein they
seem to contain matter scarce agreeable with holy Scripture? So little does
such their supposed Faultiness in moderate men's Judgments enforce the removal
of them out of the House of God, that still they are judged to retain worthily
those very Titles of Commendation, than which, there cannot greater be given to
Writings, the Authors whereof are Men. As in truth, if the Scripture it self,
ascribing to the Persons of Men Righteousness, in regard of their manifold
virtues, may not rightly be construed, as though it did thereby clear them, and
make them quite free from all faults, no reason we should judge it absurd to
commend their Writings as Reverend, Holy, and Sound, wherein there are so many
singular Perfections, only for that the exquisite Wits of some few peradventure
are able dispersedly here and there to find now a word and then a sentence,
which may be more probably suspected than easily cleared of Error by as which
have but conjectural knowledge of their meaning. Against immodest Invectives
therefore whereby they are charged as being fraught with The Lib^^ of Metaphys.
School p. art. 34.
outrageous Lies, we doubt not but their more allowable censure will prevail,
who without so passionate terms of disgrace, do note a difference great enough
between Apocryphal and other Writings, a difference such as Joseph. cent. App.
lib. 1.
Josephus and Epiphanius observe: the one declaring, that amongst the Jews,
Books written after the days of Artaxerxe, were not of equal credit with them
which had gone before, in as much as the Jews sithence that time had not the
like exact succession of Prophets; the Epist. in An^y^or. (...)
other acknowledging that they are profitable, although denying them to be
Divine, in such construction and sense as the Scripture it self is so termed.
With what intent they were first published, Prael. ad lib. Eccles.
those words of the Nephew of Jesus do plainly enough signify, After that my
Grandfather, Jesus, had given himself to the reading of the Law and the
Prophets, and other Books of our Fathers, and had gotten therein sufficient
judgment, he purposed also to write something pertaining to Learning and
Wisdom, to the intent, that they which were desirous to learn, and would give
themselves to these things, might profit much more in living according to the
Law. Their end in writing, and ours in reading them, is the same. The Books of
Judith, Toby, Baruch, Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus we read, as serving most unto
that end. The rest we leave unto men in private. Neither can it be reasonably
thought, because upon certain solemn occasions, some Lessons are chosen out of
those Books, and of Scripture it self some Chapters not appointed to be read at
all, that we thereby do offer disgrace to the Word of God, or lift up the
Writings of men above it. For in such choice we do not think, but that Fitness
of Speech may be more respected than Worthyness. If in that which we use to
read, there happen by the way any Clause, Sentence, or Speech that sounds
toward Error; should the mixture of a little dross constrain the Church to
deprive herself of so much Gold, rather than learn how by Art and Judgment to
make separation of the one from the other? To this effect very fitly, from the
counsel that St. Ierem gives Lata, of taking heed how she read the Apocrypha,
as also by the help of other learned men's Judgments delivered in like case, we
may take direction. But surely, the Arguments that should bind us not to read
them, or any part of them publicly at all, must be stronger than as yet we
have heard any.

Of Preaching by Sermons^ and whether Sermons be the only u^^llnary way of
Teaching, whereby men are brought to the saving knowledge of Gods Truth.
21. We marvel the less that our reading of Books not Canonical, is so much
impugned, when so little is attributed unto the reading of Canonical Scripture
it self; that now it has grown to be a question, whether the Word of God be
any ordinary mean to save the Souls of men, in that it is either privately
studied, or publicly read, and so made known; or else only as the same is
preached, that is to say, explained by a lively voice, and applied to the
People's use, as the Speaker in his Wisdom thinks meet. For this alone is it
which they use to call Preaching. The public reading of the Apocrypha they
condemn altogether, as a thing effectual unto Evil; the bare reading in like
sort of whatsoever, yea even of Scriptures themselves, they mislike, as a thing
uneffectual to do that good, which we are persuaded may grow by it. Our desire
is in this present Controversy, as in the rest, not to be carried up and down
with the waves of uncertain Arguments, but rather positively to lead on the
minds of the simpler sort by plain and easy degrees, till the very nature of
the thing it self do make manifest what is Truth. First therefore, because
whatsoever is spoken concerning the efficacy or necessity of God's Word, the
same they tie and restrain only unto Sermons, howbeit not Sermons read neither
(for such they also abhor in the Church) but Sermons without Book, Sermons
which spend their life in their birth, and may have public audience but once:
For this cause, to avoid ambiguities, wherewith they often entangle themselves,
not marking what does agree to the Word of God in it self, and what in regard
of outward accidents which may befall it, we are to know that the Word of God
is his Heavenly Truth, touching matters of eternal life revealed and uttered
unto Men, unto Prophets and Apostles by immediate Divine Inspiration, from them
to us by their Books and Writings. We therefore have no Word of God but the
Scripture. Apostolic Sermons were, unto such as heard them, his Word, even as
properly as to us their Writings are. Howbeit not so our own Sermons, the
exposition which our discourse of Wit does gather and minister out of the Word
of God. For which cause, in this present question we are, when we name the Word
of God, always to mean the Scripture only. The end of the Word of God is to
save, and therefore we term it the Word of Life. The way for all men to be
saved, is by the knowledge of that Truth which the Word has taught. And since
Eternal life is a thing of it self communicable unto all, it behooved that the
Word of God, the necessary mean thereunto, be so likewise. Wherefore the Word
of Life has been always a Treasure, though precious, yet easy, as well to
attain, as to find; lest any man desirous of life should perish through the
difficulty of the way. To this and the Word of God no otherwise serves, than
only in the nature of a Doctrinal Instrument. It saves, because it makes wise
unto Salvation. Wherefore the ignorant it saves not, they which live by the
Word, must know it. And being it self the Instrument which God has purposely
framed, thereby to work the knowledge of Salvation in the hearts of men, what
cause is there wherefore it should not of it self be acknowledged a most apt
and a likely mean, to leave an apprehension of things Divine in our
understanding, and in the mind an assent thereunto? For touching the one, since
God, who knows and discloseth best the rich tresures of his own Wisdom, has,
by delivering his Word, made choice of the Scriptures, as the most effectual
means, whereby those treasures might be imparted unto the World, it follows,
That no man's understanding the Scripture must needs be even of it self,
intended as a full and perfect discovery, sufficient to imprint in us the
lively Character of all things necessarily required for the attainment of
Eternal Life. And concerning our assent to the Mysteries of Heavenly truth,
seeing that the Word of God, for the Author's sake, has credit with all that
confess it (as we all do) to be his Word, every Proposition of holy Scripture,
every Sentence being to us a Principle; if the Principles of all kinds of
Knowledge else have that virtue in themselves, whereby they are able to procure
our Assent unto such Conclusions, as the industry of right Discourse does
gather from them; we have no reason to think the Principles of that Truth,
which tends unto man's everlasting happiness, less forcible than any other,
when we know, that, of all other, they are for their certainty the most
infallible. But as every thing of price, so this does require travel. We bring
not the knowledge of God with us into the World. And the less our own
opportunity or ability is that way, the more we need the help of other men's
Judgments, to be our direction herein. Nor does any man ever believe, into whom
the doctrine of Belief is not instilled by instruction, some way received at the
first from others. Wherein whatsoever fit means there are to notify the
Mysteries of the Word of God, whether Publicly (which we call Preaching) or in
Private, howsoever, the Word by every such mean even ordinarily does save, and
not only by being delivered unto men in Sermons. Sermons are not the only
Preaching which does save Souls. For, concerning the use and sense of this word
Preaching, which they shut up in so close a Prison, although more than enough
have already been spoken, to redeem the liberty thereof; yet because they
insist so much, and so proudly insult thereon, we must a little inure their
Ears with hearing, how others whom they more regard, are in this Case
accustomed to use the self-same language with us, whose manner of speech they
deride. ( Paraenet. ad Gent. p. 17.
) Justin Martyr doubts not to tell the Grecians, That even in certain of
their Writings the very Judgment to come is preached, not the ( Council Va^i^.
2. c 2.
)Council of Vaeus to insinuate, that Presbyters, absent through infirmity from
their Churches, might be said to preach by those Deputies, who in their stead
did but read Homilies; nor the ( Council. Tol. 4 cap. 11.
)Council of Toledo, to call the usual Public reading of the Gospels in the
Church, Preaching, nor ( Rupert. de Divin. Offic. l. 1. c. 12, 13. Isid. de
Eccles. Offic. l. 1. c. 10.
)others, long before these our days to write, that by him who but reads a
Lesson in the Solemn Assembly as part of Divine Service, the very Office of
Preaching is so far-forth executed. Such kind of speeches were then familiar,
those Phrases seemed not to them absurd, they would have marvelled to hear the
( The libel of School. part. 11 T. C. lib. 2. page 388. Saint Paul's Writing is
no more Preaching, than his Pen or his Hand is his Tongue: seeing they cannot
be the same, which cannot be made by the same Instruments.
)Outcries which we do, because we think, that the Apostles in writing, and
others in reading to the Church those Books which the Apostles wrote, are
neither untruly nor unfitly said to preach. For although men's Tongues and their
Pens differ, yet to one and the self-same general, if not particular effect,
they may both serve. It is no good Argument, St. Paul could not write with his
Tongue, therefore neither could he preach with his Pen. For Preaching is a
general end whereunto Writing and Speaking do both serve. Men speak not with
the Instruments of Writing, neither write with the Instruments of Speech; and
yet things recorded with the one, and uttered with the other, may be (
Evangelizo manu and scriptione. Rainol. de Romans Eccles. Idolola. praef. ad Co.
Essex.
) preached well enough with both. By their Patience therefore be it spoken, the
Apostles preached as well when they wrote as when they spoke the Gospel of
Christ; and our usual Public reading of the Word of God for the Peoples
instruction, is Preaching. Nor about words would we ever contend, were not
their purpose in so restraining the same, injurious to God's most Sacred Word
and Spirit. It is on both sides confessed, That the Word of God outwardly
administered (his ( John 6.46. Mat. 16 17. 2 Cor. 4. 6. 1 Cor. 12. 3^ Acts 16.
14.
)Spirit inwardly concurring therewith) converteth, edifieth, and saves Souls.
Now whereas the external Administration of his Word is as well by reading
barely the Scripture, as by explaining the same when Sermons thereon be made;
in the one, they deny That the Finger of God has ordinarily certain principal
operations, which we most steadfastly hold and believe that it has in both.

What they attribute to Sermons only, and what we to Reading also.
22. So worthy a part of Divine Service we should greatly wrong, if we did not
esteem Preaching as the blessed Ordinance of God, Sermons as Keys to the
Kingdom of Heaven, as Wings to the Soul, as Spurrs to the good Affections of
Man, unto the Sound and Healthy as Food, as Physic unto diseased Minds.
Wherefore how higly soever it may please them with words of Truth to extol
Sermons, they shall not herein offend us. We seek not to derogate from any
thing which they can justly esteem, but our desire is to uphold the just
estimation of that, from which it seems unto us they derogate more than
becomes them. That which offends us, is, first, the great disgrace which
they offer unto our Custom of bare reading the Word of God, and to his gracious
Spirit, the Principal virtue whereof thereby manifesting it self, for the
endless good of men's Souls, even the Virtue which it has to convert, to
edify, to save Souls; this they mightily strive to obscure: and, Secondly, The
shifts wherewith they maintain their opinion of Sermons, whereunto, while they
labor to appropriate the Saving power of the Holy Ghost, they separate from
all apparent hope of Life and Salvation, thousands whom the goodness of
Almighty God does not exclude. Touching therefore the use of Scripture even in
that it is openly read, and the inestimable good which the Church of God, by
that very mean, has reaped; there was, we may very well think, some cause
which moved the Apostle Saint Paul to require, 2 These. ^ 27. Colos. ^.16.
that those things which any one Churches affairs gave particular occasion to
write, might, for the Instruction of all, be published, and that by reading. 1.
When the very having of the Books of God was a matter of no small charge and
difficulty, in as much as they could not be had otherwise than only in written
Copies, it was the necessity not of Preaching things agreeable with the Word,
but of reading the Word it self at large to the People, which caused Churches
throughout the World to have public care, that the sacred Oracles of God being
procured by Common charge, might with great sedulity be kept both entire and
sincere. If then we admire the providence of God in the same continuance of
Scripture, notwithstanding the violent endeavors of Infidels to abolish, and
the fraudulence of Heretics always to deprave the same, shall we set light by
that Custom of Reading, from whence so precious a benefit has grown? 2. The
Voice and Testimony of the Church acknowledging Scripture to be the Law of the
Living God, is for the truth and certainty thereof no mean Evidence. For if
with Reason we may presume upon things which a few men's depositions do
testify, suppose we that the minds of men are not both at their first access
to the School of Christ exceedingly moved, yea and for ever afterward also
confirmed much, when they consider the main consent of all the Churches in the
whole World witnessing the Sacred Authority of Scriptures, ever sithence the
first publication thereof, even till this present day and hour? And that they
all have always so testified, I see not how we should possibly wish a proof
more palpable, than this manifest received, and every where continued Custom of
Reading them publicly as the Scriptures. The Reading therefore of the Word of
God, as the use has ever been, in open Audience, is the plainest evidence we
have of the Churches assent and acknowledgement that it is his Word. 3. A
further commodity this Custom has, which is, to furnish the very simplest and
rudest sort with such infallible Axioms and Precepts of Sacred Truth, delivered
even in the very letter of the Law of God, as may serve them for Rules whereby
to judge the better all other Doctrins and Instructions which they hear. John.
5. 39. Isa. 8. 22.
For which end and purpose, I see not how, the Scripture could be possibly made
familiar unto all, unless far more should be read in the Peoples hearing, than
by a Sermon can be opened. For whereas in a manner the whole Book of God is by
reading every year published, a small part thereof, in comparison of the whole,
may hold very well the readiest Interpreter of Scripture occupied many years.
4. Besides, wherefore should any man think, but that Reading it self is one of
the ordinary means, whereby it pleases God of his gracious goodness to instill
that Celestial Verity, which being but so received is nevertheless effectual to
save Souls? Thus much therefore we ascribe to the Reading of the Word of God as
the manner is in our Churches. And because it were odious, if they on their
part should altogether despise the same, they yield that Reading may set
forward, but not begin the work of Salvation; That T. C. l. 2. p. 376, 377, 395.
Faith may be nourished therewith, but not bred; That Page 3. 8.
herein men's attention to the Scriptures, and their speculation of the
Creatures of God have like efficacy, both being of power to augment, but
neither to effect Belief without Sermons; That if Page 383.
any believe by Reading alone, we are to account it a miracle; an extraordinary
work of God. Wherein that which they grant, we gladly accept at their hands,
and with that patiently they would examine how little cause they have to deny
that which as yet they grant not. The Scripture witnesses, 2 Chro. ^^.16
that when the Book of the Law of God had been sometime missing, and was after
found; the King, which heard it but only read, tare his Clothes, and with tears
confessed, 2 Chro. 34.3.
Great is the wrath of the Lord upon us, because our Fathers have not^ kept his
Word, to do after all things which are written in this Book. This does argue,
that by bare reading (for of Sermons at that time there is no mention) true
Repentance may be wrought in the hearts of such as fear God, and yet incurr his
displeasure, the deserved effect whereof is Eternal death. So that their
Repentance (although it be not their first entrance) is notwithstanding the
first step of their re-entrance into Life, and may be in them wrought by the
Word, only read unto them. Besides, it seems that God would have no man stand
in doubt, but that the reading of Scripture is effectual, as well to lay even
the first foundation, as to add degrees of farther perfection in the fear of
God; And therefore the Law says, Deuteronomy. 31. 13.
Thou shall read this Law before all Israel, that Men, Women, and Children may
hear, yea, even that their Children, which as yet have not known it, may hear
it, and by hearing it so read, may learn to fear the Lord. Our Lord and Savior
was himself of opinion, Luke 16. 29.
That they which would not be drawn to amendment of Life by the Testimony which
Moses and the Prophets have given, concerning the miseries that follow Sinners
after death, were not likely to be persuaded by other means, although God from
the very Dead should have raised them up Preachers. Many hear the Books of God,
and believe them not. Howbeit, their unbelief in that case we may not impute
unto any weakness or insufficiency in the mean which is used toward them, but
to the wilful bent of their obstinate hearts against it. With minds obdurate
nothing prevails. As well they that preach, as they that read unto such,
shall still have cause to complain with the Prophets which were of old, Who
will give credit unto our Teaching? But with whom ordinary means will prevail,
surely the power of the World of God, even without the help of Interpreters in
God's Church, works mightily, not unto their confirmation alone which are
converted, but also to their conversion which are not. It shall not boot them
who derogate from reading, to excuse it, when they see no other remedy, as if
their intent were only to deny, that Aliens and Strangers from the Family of
God are won, or that Belief does use to be wrought at the first in them,
without Sermons. For they know it is our Custom of simple Reading, not for
conversion of Infidels estranged from the House of God, but for instruction of
Men baptized, bred and brought up in the bosom of the Church, which they
despise as a thing uneffectual to save such Souls. In such they imagine that
God has no ordinary mean to work Faith without Sermons. The reason, why no man
can attain Belief by the bare contemplation of Heaven and Earth, is, for that
they neither are sufficient to give us as much as the least spark of Light
concerning the very principal Mysteries of our Faith; and whatsoever we may
learn by them, the same we can only attain to know, according to the manner of
natural Sciences, which mere discourse of Wit and Reason finds out; whereas
the things which we properly believe, be only such, as are received upon the
credit of Divine Testimony. Seeing therefore, that he which considers the
Creatures of God, finds therein both these defects, and neither the one nor
the other in Scriptures, because he that reads unto us the Scriptures,
delivers all the Mysteries of Faith, and not any thing amongst them all more
than the mouth of the Lord does warrant: It follows in those own respects,
that our consideration of Creatures, and attention unto Scriptures are not in
themselves, and without-Sermons, things of like disability to breed or beget
Faith. Small cause also there is, why any man should greatly wonder as at an
extraordinary work, if, without Sermons, Reading be sound to effect thus much.
For I would know by some special instance, what one Article of Christian Faith,
or what duty required unto all men's Salvation there is, which the very reading
of the Word of God is not apt to notify. Effects are miraculous and strange,
when they grow by unlikely means. But, did we ever hear it accounted for a
Wonder, that he which does read, should believe and live according to the will
of Almighty God? Exodus 14.7.
Reading does convey to the Mind that Truth, without addition or diminution,
which Scripture has derived from the Holy Ghost. And the end of all Scripture
is the same which Saint John proposes in the writing of that most Divine
Gospel, John 20. 31.
namely Faith, and through Faith Salvation. Yea, all Scripture is to this
effect in it self available, Prove. 1. 2,3,4. Romans 1. 16. 2 Timothy 3. 15.
as they which wrote it were persuaded; unless we suppose, that the
Evangelists, or others, in speaking of their own intent to instruct and to save
by writing, had a secret Conceit which they never opened to any, a Conceit that
no man in the World should ever be that way the better for any Sentence by them
written, till such time as the same might chance to be preached upon, or
alleged at the least in a Sermon. Otherwise, if he which writes, does that
which is forceable in it self, how should he which reads, be thought to do
that which in it self is of no force to work Belief, and to save Believers?
Now, although we have very just cause to stand in some jealousy and fear, lest
by thus overvaluing their Sermons, they make the price and estimation of
Scripture, otherwise notified, to fall: nevertheless, so impatient they are,
that being but requested to let us know what causes they leave for men's
encouragement to attend to the reading of the Scripture, if Sermons only be the
power of God to save every one which believes; that which we move for our
better learning and instruction-sake, turns unto anger and choler in them,
they grow altogether out of quietness with it, T. C. l. 2. p. 376.
they answer fumingly, that they are ashamed to defile their Pens with making
answer to such idle questions: yet in this their mood they cast forth somewhat,
wherewith under pain of greater displeasure we must rest contented. They tell
us, the profit of Reading is singular, in that it serves for a Preparative
unto Sermons; it helps prettily toward the nourishment of Faith, which
Sermons have once engendered; it is some stay to his mind which reads the
Scripture, when he finds the same things there which are taught in Sermons,
and thereby perceives how God does concur in opinion with the Preacher;
besides, it keeps Sermons in memory, and does in that respect, although not
feed the Soul of man, yet help the retentive force of that stomach of the
mind, which receives ghostly ^ood at the Preachers hands. But the principal
cause of writing the Gospel was, that it might be preached upon or interpreted
by public Ministers, apt and authorized thereunto. Is it credible that a
superstitious conceit (for it is no better) concerning Sermons, should in such
sort both darken their Eyes, and yet sharpen their Wits withal, that the only
true and weightly cause why Scripture was written, the cause which in Scripture
is so often mentioned, the cause which all men have ever till this present day
acknowledged, this they should clean exclude, as being no cause at all, and
load us with so great store of strange concealed causes, which did never see
light till now? In which number the rest must needs be of moment, when the very
chiefest cause of committing the Sacred Word of God unto Books, is surmised to
have been, lest the Preacher should want a Text whereupon to scholie. Men of
Learning hold it for a slip in Judgment, when offer is made to demonstrate
that as proper to one thing, which Reason finds common unto more. Whereas
therefore they take from all kinds of teachings, that which they attribute to
Sermons, it had been their part to yield directly some strong reason, why
between Sermons alone and Faith, there should be ordinarily that coherence
which causes have with their usual effects, why a Christian man's belief should
so naturally grow from Sermons, and not possibly from any other kind of
teaching. In belief there being but these two operations, Apprehension and
Assent. Do only Sermons cause Belief, in that no other way is able to explain
the mysteries of God, that the mind may rightly apprehend or conceive them as
behooveth? We all know, that many things are believed, although they be
intricate, obscure, and dark, although they exceed the reach and capacity of
our Wits, yea although in this World they be no way possible to be understood.
Many things believed are likewise so plain, that every Common Person may
therein be unto himself a sufficient Expounder. Finally, to explain even those
things which need and admit explication, many other usual ways there are
besides Sermons. Therefore Sermons are not the only ordinary means whereby we
first come to apprehend the Mysterys of God. Is it in regard then of Sermons
only, that apprehending the Gospel of Christ we yield thereunto our unfeigned
assent, as to a thing infallibly true: They which rightly consider after what
sort the heart of man hereunto is framed, must of necessity acknowledge, that
who so assenteth to the words of Eternal life, does it in regard of his
Authority whose words they are. This is in man's conversion unto God (...), the
first step whereat his race toward Heaven begins. Unless therefore, clean
contrary to our own experience, we shall think it a miracle if any man
acknowledge the Divine authority of the Scripture, till some Sermon have
persuaded him thereunto, and that otherwise neither conversation in the bosom
of the Church, nor religious Education, nor the reading of Learned men's Books,
nor Information received by conference, nor whatsoever pain and diligence in
hearing, studying, meditating day and night on the Law, is so far blessed of God,
as to work this effect in any man; how would they have us to grant, that Faith
does not come but only by heating Sermons? T. C. l. r. p. 375.
Fain they would have us to believe the Apostle Saint Paul himself to be Author
of this their Paradox, only because he has said, that it pleases God by the 1
Cor. 1.21.
foolishness of Preaching to save them which believe; and again, Romans 10.14.
How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? How shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? How shall they hear without a
Preacher? How shall men preach except they be sent? To answer therefore both
Allegations at once; The very substance of what they contain is in few but
this. Life and Salvation God will have offered unto all; his will is that
Gentiles should be saved as well as Jews. Salvation belongs unto none but
such as call upon the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Which Nations as yet
unconverted neither do not possibly can do till they believe. What they are to
believe, impossible it is they should know till they bear it. Their Hearing
requires our Preaching unto them. Apologet. c. 18. in finc.
Tertullian, to draw even Painyms themselves unto Christian Belief, wills the
Books of the Old Testament to be searched, which were at that time in Ptolemics
Library. And if men did not lift to travel so far, though it were for their
endless good, he adds that in Rome and other places the Jews had Synagogues,
whereunto every one which would, might resort; that this kind of Liberty they
purchased by payment of a standing Tribute; that there they did openly This
they did in a tongue which to all learned men amongst the Heathens, and to a
great part of the simplest was familiarly known: as appears by a supplication
offered unto the Emperor Justinian, wherein the Jews make request that it might
be lawful for them to read the Greek Translations of the 70. Interpreters in
their Synagogues, as their Custom before had been. Anthem. 145. Cel. 10.
incipit. AEqaum sanc.
read the Scriptures; and whosoever will bear, (says Tertullian) he shall
find God; whosoever will study to know, shall be also fain to believe. But
since there is no likelihood that ever voluntarily they will seek Instruction at
our hands, it remains that unless we will suffer them to perish, Salvation it
self must seek them, it behooveth God to send them Preachers as he did his
elect Apostles throughout the World. There is a Knowledge which God has always
revealed unto them in the works of Nature. This they honor and esteem highly
as profound Wisdom; howbeit this Wisdom saves them not. That which must save
Believers, is, the knowledge of the Cross of Christ, the only Subject of all
our Preaching. And in their Eyes what seems this but Folly? It pleases God
by the foolishness of Preaching to save. These Words declare how admirable
force those Mysteries have, which the World do deride as Follies; they show
that the Foolishness of the Cross of Christ is the Wisdom of True Believers;
they concern the Object of our Faith, the I^ the Apostle u^eth the went (...)
and (...).
Matter preached of and believed in by Christian men. This we know that the
Grecians or Gentiles did account Foolishness; but that they did ever think it a
fond or unlikely way to seek men's Conversion by Sermons, we have not heard.
Manifest therefore it is, that the Apostle applying the name of Foolishness in
such sort as they did, must needs, by the Foolishness of Preaching, mean the
Doctrine of Christ, which we learn that we may be saved, but that Sermons are
the only manner of teaching, whereby it pleases our Lord to save, he could not
mean. In like sort, where the same Apostle proves, that as well the sending of
the Apostles, as their preaching to the Gentiles, was necessary, dare we affirm
it was ever his meaning, that unto their Salvation, who even from their tender
Infancy never knew any other Faith or Religion that only Christian, no kind of
Teaching can be available, saving that which was so needful for the first
universal Conversion of Gentiles hating Christianity; neither the sending of
any sort allowable in the one case, except only of such as had been in the
other also most fit and worthy Instruments? Belief in all sorts does come by
harkening, and attending to the Word of Life. Which Word sometime proposes and
preaches it self to the Hearer; sometime they deliver it, whom privately Zeal
and Piety moves to be Instructors of others by conference; sometime of them it
is taught, whom the Church has called to the Public, either reading thereof,
or interpreting. All these tend unto one effect, neither does that which St.
Paul or other Apostles teach, concerning the necessity of such Teaching as
theirs was, or of sending such as they were, for that purpose unto the
Gentiles, prejudice the efficacy of any other way of Public instruction, or
enforce the utter disability of any other men's Vocation thought requisite in
this Church for the saving of Souls, where means more effectual are wanting.
Their only proper and direct proof of the thing in question had been to show,
in what sort, and how far man's Salvation does necessarily depend upon the
knowledge of the Word of God; what Conditions, Properties, and Qualities there
are, whereby Sermons are distinguished from other kinds of administering the
Word unto that purpose; and what special Property or Quality that is, which
being no where found but in Sermons, makes them effectual to save Souls, and
leaves all other Doctrinal means besides destitute of vital efficacy. These
pertinent Instructions, whereby they might satisfy us, and obtain the Cause it
self for which they contend, these things which only would serve they leave,
and (which needs not) sometime they trouble themselves with fretting at the
ignorance of such as withstand them in their Opinion; sometime they ^. c. ^. ^.
p. 373. This sail of Readers. The Bishops more than beggarly Prese^ts. Those
Rascal Ministers.
fall upon their poor Brethren which can but read, and against them they are
bitterly eloquene. If we allege what the Scriptures themselves do usually
speak for the saving force of the Word of God, not with restraint to any one
certain kind of delivery, but howsoever the same shall chance to be made
known, yet by one trick or other they always T C. l. a. p. 37.
restrain it unto Sermons. Our Lord and Savior has said, John 3. 39.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life. But they
tell us, he spoke to the Jews, which Jews before had heard his Sermons; and
that peradventure it was his mind they should search, not by reading, nor by
hearing them read, but by attending, whenever the Scriptures should happen to
be alleged in Sermons. Furthermore, having received Apostolical Doctrine, Gal.
1. 9.
the Apostle Saint Paul has taught us to esteem the same as the Supreme Rule,
whereby all other Doctrines must for ever be examined. Yea, but in as much as
the Apostle does there speak of that he had Preached, he flatly makes (as they
strangely affirm) his Preachings or Sermons the Rule whereby to examine all.
And then, I beseech you, what Rule have we whereby to judge or examine any?
For, if Sermons must be our Rule, because the Apostles Sermons were so to their
Hearers; then, since we are not as they were, Hearers of the Apostles Sermons,
it rests that either the Sermons which we hear should be our Rule, or (that
being absurd) therewill (which yet has greater absurdity) no Rule at all be
remaining for Trial, what Doctrines now are corrupt, what consonant with
heavenly Truth. 1. Tim. 3 16.
Again, let the same Apostle acknowledge all Scripture profitable to teach, to
improve, to correct, to instruct in Righteousness; Still notwithstanding we
err, if hereby we presume to gather, that Scripture read, will avail unto any
one of all these uses; they teach us the meaning of the words to be, that so
much the Scripture can do, if the Minister that way apply it in his Sermons,
otherwise not. Finally, they never hear Sentence which mentions the Word or
Scripture, but forthwith their Glosses upon it are, the Word preached, the
Scripture explained or delivered unto us in Sermons. Sermons they evermore
understand to be that Word of God, which alone has vital Operation; the
dangerous sequel of which Construction I wish they did more attentively weigh.
For, since Speech is the very Image, whereby the mind and soul of the Speaker
conveyeth it self into the bolom of him which hears, we cannot choose but see
great reason, wherefore the Word that proceeds from God, who is Himself very
Truth and Life, should be (as the Apostle to the Hebrews notes) lively and
mighty in operation, Heb. 4. 12.
sharper than any two-edged Sword. Now, if in this and the like Places we did
conceive, that our own Sermons are that strong and forcible Word, should we not
hereby impart even the most peculiar glory of the Word of God, unto that which
is not his word? For, touching our Sermons, that which gives them their very
being, is the wit of man, and therefore they oftentimes accordingly taste too
much of that over-corrupt Fountain from which they come. In our speech of most
holy things, our most frail affections many times are bewrayed. Wherefore when
we read or recite the Scripture, we then deliver to the People properly the
Word of God. As for our Sermons, be they never so sound and perfect, his Word
they are not, as the Sermons of the Prophets were; no, they are but ambiguously
termed his Word, because his Word is commonly the Subject whereof they treat,
and must be the Rule whereby they are framed. Notwithstanding, by these, and
the like shifts they derive unto Sermons alone, whatsoever is generally spoken
concerning the Word. Again, what seems to have been uttered concerning
Sermons, and their efficacy or necessity, in regard of Divine matter, and must
consequently be verified in sundry other kinds of teaching, if the Matter be
the same in all; their use is to fasten every such Speech unto that one only
manner of teaching, which is by Sermons, that still Sermons may be all in all.
T. C. l 2. p. 381.
Thus, because Solomon declares that the People decay or perish for want of
Knowledge, where Prove. 29.18.
no Prophesying at all is, they gather, that the hope of Life and Salvation is
cut off, where Preachers are not which prophecy by Sermons, how many soever
they be in number that read daily the Word of God, and deliver, though in other
sort, the self-same matter which Sermons do. The people which have no way to
come to the knowledge of God, no prophesying, no teaching, perish. But that
they should of necessity perish, where any one way of knowledge lacks, is
more then the words of Solomon import, T. C. l. a. p. 379.
Another usual point of their Art in this present question, is to make very
large and plentiful Discourses, how Christ is by Sermons 2 Cor. 2.16.
lifted up higher, and made more 2 Timothy 2 15.
apparent to the eye of Faith; how the Matthew 16.19.
savor of the Word is more sweet being brayed, and more able to nourish being
divided by Preaching, then by only reading proposed; how Sermons are the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, and do open the Scriptures, which being but read,
remain in comparison still clasped; how God 1 Cor. 3. 6.
gives richer increase of grace to the Ground that is planted and watered by
Preaching, than by bare and simple Reading. Out of which premises declaring how
attainment unto life is easier where Sermons are, they conclude an T. C. l. 2.
p. 380. No Salvation to be looked for, where no Preaching is
. impossibility thereof where Sermons are not. Alcidimas the Sophister has
many arguments, to prove that voluntary and extemporal far excels
premeditated speech. The like whereunto, and in part the same, are brought by
them, who commend Sermons, as having (which all men, I think, will acknowledge)
sundry ^ C. C. l. 2. p. 364.
peculiar and proper virtues, such as no other way of Teaching besides has.
Aptness to follow particular occasions presently growing, to put life into
words by countenance, voice and gesture, to prevail mightily in the sudden
affections of men, this Sermons may challenge. Wherein notwithstanding so
eminent properties whereof Lessons are happily destitute, yet Lessons being free
from some inconveniences, whereunto Sermons are more subject, they may in this
respect no less take, then in other they must give the hand, which betokens
preeminence. For there is nothing which is not some way excelled, even by that
which it does excel. Sermons therefore and Lessons may each excel other in
some respects, without any prejudice unto either, as touching that vital force
which they both have in the work of our Salvation. To which effect when we have
endeavored as much as in us does lie, to find out the strongest causes,
wherefore they should imagine that Reading is itself so unavailable; T. C. l.
2. p. 395.
the most we can learn at their hands, is, that Sermons are the Ordinance of
God, the Scriptures dark, and the labor of Reading easy. First, therefore, as
we know that God does aid with his grace, and by his special providence
evermore bless with happy success those things which himself appoints; so his
Church, we persuade our selves, he has not in such sort given over to a
reprobate sense, that whatsoever it devises for the good of the Souls of men,
the same he does still accurse and make frustrate. Or if he always did defeat
the Ordinances of his Church, Deuteronomy. 31. 13.
is not reading the Ordinance of God? Wherefore then should we think that the
force of his secret grace is accustomed to bless the labor of dividing his
Word, according unto each man's private discretion in public Sermons, and to
withdraw it self from concurring with the public delivery thereof by such
selected portions of Scriptures, as the whole Church has solemnly appointed to
be read for the Peoples good, either by ordinary course or otherwise, according
to the exigence of special occasions? Reading (says De Eccles. Offic l. 1. c.
10.
Isidore) is to the Hearers no small edifying. To them whose Psalm. 1. 2.
delight and meditation is in the Law, seeing that happiness and bliss
belongs, it is not in us to deny them the benefit of heavenly Grace. And I
hope we may presume, that a rare thing it is not in the Church of God, even for
that very Word which is read to be both presently their Psalm. 119. 16.
joy, and afterward their study that hear it. Aug. in Ps. ^6.
S. Augustine speaking of devout men, notes, how they daily frequented the
Church, how attentive ear they gave unto the Lessons and Chapters read, how
careful they were to remember the same, and to muse thereupon by themselves.
Cyprian, 1. 2. Epist. 5. Lector personat verba sublimia Evangelium Christi 1.
g's a frottibus conspieitur, cum giudio fraternitatis auditur.
St. Cyprian observes. that Reading was not without effect in the hearts of
men. Their joy and alacity was to him an argument, that there is in this
Ordinance a blessing, such as ordinarily does accompany the administration of
the Word of Life. It were much if there should be such a difference between the
hearing of Sermons preached, and of Lessons read in the Church, that he which
presents himself at the one, and makes his Prayer with the Prophet Psalm.
119. 33, 35.
David, Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy Statutes, direct me in the path of thy
commandments, might have the ground of usual experience whereupon to build his
hope of prevailing with God, and obtaining the Grace he seeks, they
contrariwise not so, who crave the like assistance of his Spirit, when they
give ear to the reading of the other. In this therefore Preaching and Reading
are equal, that both are approved as his Ordinances, both assisted with his
Grace. And if his Grace do assist them both to the nourishment of faith already
bred, we cannot, without some very manifest cause yielded, imagine that in
breeding or begetting faith, his grace does cleave to the one, and utterly
forsake the other. Touching hardness, which is the second pretended impediment,
T. C. l. 2. p. 383. 384, 392.
as against Homilies, being plain and popular instructions, it is no bar, so
neither does it infringe the efficacy, no not of Scriptures, although but read.
The force of reading, how small soever they would have it, must of necessity be
granted sufficient to notify that which is plain or easy to be understood.
And of things necessary to all men's salvation, we have been hitherto accustomed
to hold (especially sit hence the publishing of the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
whereby the simplest having now a Key unto Knowledge which the Eunuch in the
Acts did want, Acts. ^. 31.
our Children may of themselves by reading understand that, which he without an
Interpreter could not) they are in Scripture plain and easy to be understood.
As for those things which at the first are obscure and dark, when memory has
laid them up for a time, Judgment afterward growing explaineth them. Scripture
therefore is not so hard, but that the only reading thereof may give life unto
willing Hearers. The easy performance of which holy labor, is in like sort a
very cold Objection, to prejudice the virtue thereof. For what though an
Infidel; yes, though a Child may be able to read; there is no doubt, but the
meanest and worst amongst the People under the Law, had been as able as the
Priests themselves were to offer Sacrifice. Did this make Sacrifice of no
effect unto that purpose for which it was instituted? In Religion some duties
are not commended so much by the hardness of their execution, as by the
worthiness and dignity of that acceptance wherein they are held with God. We
admire the goodness of God in nature, when we consider how he has provided
that things most needful to preserve this life, should be most prompt and easy
for all living Creatures to come by. Is it not as evident a sign of his
wonderful providence over us, when that food of Eternal life, upon the utter
want whereof our endless death and destruction necessarily ensues, is prepared
and always set in such a readiness, that those very means, than which nothing
is more easy, may suffice to procure the same? Surely, if we perish, it is not
the lack of Scribes and learned Expounders that can be out just excuse. The
Word which saves our Souls is near us, we need for knowledge but to read and
live. Apoc. 1 3.
The man which reads the Word of God, the Word it self does pronounce
blessed, if he also observe the same. Now all these things being well
considered, it shall be no intricate matter for any man to judge with
indifferency on which part the good of the Church is most conveniently sought;
whether on ours, whose opinion is such as has been showed, or else on theirs,
who leaving no ordinary way of Salvation for them unto whom the T. C. l. 2. p.
353. p. 373.
Word of God is but only read, do seldom name them but with great disdain and
contempt who execute that Service in the Church of Christ. By means whereof it
has come to pass, that Churches, which cannot enjoy the benefit of usual
Preaching, are judged, as it were, even forsaken of God, forlorn, and without
either hope or comfort: Contrariwise, those places which every day for the most
part are at Sermons as the flowing sea, do both by their emptiness at times of
reading, and by other apparent tokens show, to the voice of the living God,
this way sounding in the ears of men, a great deal less reverence then were
meet. But if no other evil were known to grow thereby, who can choose but think
them cruel which does hear them so boldly teach, Page 364. 375. 382, 383, 384.
that if God (as to him there nothing impossible) do happily save any such as
continue where they have all other means of instruction, but are not taught by
continual preaching, yet this is miraculous, and more than the fitness of so
poor instruments can give any man cause to hope for; that Sacraments are not
effectual to Salvation, Page 392.
except men be instructed by Preaching before they be made Partakers of them;
yea, that both Sacraments and Prayers also, where Sermons are not, Page 364.
do not only not feed, but are ordinarily to further condemnation; What man's
heart does not rise at the mention of these things^ It is true, that the
weakness of our Wits and the dullness of our Affections do make us for the most
part, even as our Lords own Disciples were for a certain time, hard and slow to
believe what is written. For help whereof expositions and exhortations are
needful, and that in the most effectual manner. The principal Churches
throughout the Land, and no small part of the rest, being in this respect by
the goodness of God so abundantly provided for, they which want the like
furtherance unto knowledge, wherewith it were greatly to be desired that they
also did abound, are yet, we hope, not left in so extreme desticution, that
justly any men should think the ordinary means of Eternal life taken from them
because their teaching is in public for the most part but by Reading. For
which cause amongst whom there are not those helps that others have to set them
forward in the way of Life, such to dis-hearten with fearful Sentences, as
though their Salvation could hardly be hoped for, is not in our understanding
so consonant with Christian Charity. We hold it safer a great deal, and better
to give them Ecclus 51. 26.27. Matthew. 12. ^^.
encouragement; to put them in mind, that it is not the deepness of their
Knowledge, but the 1 Timothy 1. 3. Romans 14. 1. 1 These. 3. 10.
singleness of their Belief which God accepts; That they which Matthew. 5. 6.
hunger and thirst after Righteousness, shall be satisfied; That no Phil. 1. 6.
1 Pet. 5. 10. Matthew. 3. 9.
imbecility of Means can prejudice the truth of the promise of God herein;
That the weaker their helps are, the more their need is to sharpen the edge of
their own 1 These. 4. 18. Pet. 10. ^4. Jude verse. 20. 1 Per. 4. 10.
industry; And that Luke 11. 31.
painfulness by feeble means shall be able to gain that, which in the plenty
of more forcible instruments is through sloth and negligence lost. As for the
men, with whom we have thus fart taken pains to conferr, about the force of the
Word of God, either read by it self or opened in Sermons; their speeches
concerning both the one and the other are in truth such, as might give us very
just cause to think, that the reckoning is not great which they make of either.
For howsoever they have been driven to devise some odd kind of blind uses,
whereunto they may answer that reading does serve, yet the reading of the Word
of God in public more than their Preachers bare Text, who will not judge that
they deem needless? when if we chance at any time to term it necessary, as
being a thing which God himself did institute amongst the Jews for purposes
that touch as well us as them, a thing which the Apostles commend under the
Old, and ordain under the New Testament; a thing whereof the Church of God has
ever sithence the first beginning reaped singular Commodity; a thing which
without exceeding great detriment no Church can omit, they only are the men
that ever we heard of, by whom this has been crossed and gainsaid; they only
the men which have given their peremptory sentence to the contrary: T. C. l. 2.
p. 381.
It is untrue, that simple Reading is necessary in the Church. And why untrue?
Because, although it be very convenient which is used in some Churches, where
before Preaching-time the Church assembled has the Scriptures read in such
order, that the whole Canon thereof is oftentimes in one year run through: yet
a number of Churches which have no such order of simple Reading, cannot be in
this point charged with breach of Gods commandment, which they might be if
simple Reading were necessary. A poor, a cold and an hungry cavil! Shall we
therefore to please them change the Word Necessary, and say, that it has been
a commendable Order, a Custom very expedient, or an Ordinance most profitable
(whereby they know right well that we mean exceedingly behoovful) to read the
Word of God at large in the Church, whether it be, as our manner is, or as
theirs is whom they prefer before us? It is not this that will content or
satisfy their minds. They have against it a mavelous deep and profound
Axiom, T. C. l. 2. p. 372.
that Two things to one and the same end cannot but very improperly be said
most profitable. And therefore if Preaching be most profitable to man's
Salvation, then is not Reading; if Reading be, then Preaching is not. Are they
resolved then at the leastwise, if Preaching be the only ordinary mean whereby
it pleases God to save our Souls, what kind of Preaching it is which does
save? Understand they, how or in what respect there is that force or virtue in
Preaching? We have reason wherefore to make these Demands; for that, although
their Pens run all upon Preaching and Sermons, yet when themselves do practice
that whereof they write, they change their Dialect, and those words they shun,
as if there were in them some secret sting. It is not their phrase to say they
Preach, or to give to their own instructions and exhortations the name of
Sermons; the pain they take themselves in this kind is either opening or
Lecturing or Reading, or Exercising, but in no case Preaching. T. C. l. 2. p.
38.
And in this present Question, they also warily protest that what they ascribe
to the virtue of Preaching, they still mean it of good Preaching: Now one of
them says that a good Sermon Complaint of the Commin^ ^^.
must expound and apply a large portion of the Text of Scripture at one time.
Another gives us to understand, that sound Preaching Dr. Som^^, Painter. p.21.
is not to do as one did at London, who spent most of his time in Invectives
against good men, and told his Audience how the Magistrate should have an eye
to such as troubled the peace of the Church. The T. C. lib. 2. page 335.
best of them hold it for no good Preaching, when a man endeavors to make a
glorious show of Eloquence and Learning, rather than to apply himself to the
capacity of the simple. But let them shape us out a good Preacher by what
pattern soever pleases them best, let them exclude and enclose whom they will
with their definitions, we are not desirous to enter into any contention with
them about this, or to abate the conceit they have of their own ways, so that
when once we are agreed what Sermons shall currently pass for good, we may at
length understand from them, what that is in a good Sermon which does make it
the Word of Life unto such as hear. If substance of matter, evidence of things,
strength and validity of arguments and proofs, or if any other virtue else
which Words and Sentences may contain; of all this, what is there in the best
Sermons being uttered, which they lose by being read? But they utterly deny
that the reading either of Scriptures, or Homilies and Sermons can ever by the
ordinary grace of God save any Soul. So that although we had all the Sermons
word for word which James, Paul, Peter, and the rest of the Apostles made, some
one of which Sermons was of power to convert thousands of the Hearers unto
Christian Faith; yea, although we had all the instructions, exhortations,
consolations which came from the gracious lips of our Lord Jesus Christ
himself, and should read them ten thousand times over, to Faith and Salvation
no man could hereby hope to attain. Whereupon it must of necessity follow, that
the vigor and vital efficacy of Sermons does grow from certain accidents,
which are not in them, but in their Maker; his virtue, his gesture, his
countenance, his zeal, the motion of his body, and the inflexion of his voice,
who first utters them as his own, is that which gives them the form, the
nature, the very essence of instruments available to Eternal life. If they like
neither that nor this, what remains but that their final conclusion be,
Sermons we know are the only ordinary means to Salvation, but why or how we
cannot tell? Wherefore to end this tedious Controversy, wherein the too great
importunity of our over-eager Adversaries has constrained us much longer to
dwell, than the barrenness of so poor a Cause could have seemed at the first
likely either to require or to admit, if they which without partialities and
passions are accustomed to weigh all things, and accordingly to give their
sentence, shall here sit down to receive our Audit, and to cast up the whole
reckoning on both sides; the sum which Truth amounts unto will appear to be
but this, that as Medicines provided of Nature, and applied by Art for the
benefit of bodily health, take effect sometime under and sometime above the
natural proportion of their virtue, according as the mind and fancy of the
Patient does more or less concur with them: So, whether we barely read unto
men the Scriptures of God; or by Homilies concerning matter of Belief and
Conversation seek to lay before them the duties which they owe unto God and
Man; whether we deliver them Books to read and consider of in private at their
own best leisure, or call them to the hearing of Sermons publicly in the House
of God; albeit every of these and the like unto these means do truly and daily
effect that in the hearts of men for which they are each and all meant; yet the
operation which they have in common, being most sensible and most generally
noted in one kind above the rest, that one has in some men's opinions drowned
altogether the rest, and injuriously brought to pass that they have been
thought not less effectual than the other, but without the other uneffectual to
save souls. Whereas the cause why Sermons only are observed to prevail so much
while all means else seem to sleep and do nothing, is in truth but that
singular affection and attention which the people shows every where toward
the one, and their cold disposition to the other; the reason hereof being
partly the Art which our Adversaries use for the credit of their Sermons, to
bring men out of conceit with all other Teaching besides; partly, a custom
which men have to let those things carelessly pass by their ears which they have
oftentimes heard before, or know they may hear again whenever it pleases
themselves; partly, the especial advantages which Sermons naturally have to
procure attention, both in that they come always new, and because by the Hearer
it is still presumed, that if they be let slip for the present, what good
soever they contain, is lost, and that without all hope of recovery. This is
the true cause of odds between Sermons, and other kinds of wholesome
Instruction. As for the difference which has been hitherto so much defended on
the contrary side, making Sermons the only ordinary means unto Faith and
eternal Life, since this has neither evidence of Truth; nor proof sufficient to
give it warrant, a cause of such quality may with fart better grace and
convenience ask that pardon which common humanity does easily grant, than
claim in challenging manner that assent which is as unwilling when reason
guides it to be yielded where it is not, as withheld where it is apparently
due. All which notwithstanding, as we could greatly wish that the rigor of
this their opinion were allayed and mittigated; so, because we hold it the part
of religious ingenuity to honor virtue in whomsoever, therefore it is our most
hearty desire, and shall be always our Prayer unto Almighty God, that in the
self-same fervent zeal wherewith they seem to effect the good of the Souls of
men; and to thirst after nothing more than that all men might by all means be
directed in the way of life, both they and we may constantly persist to the
Worlds end. For in this we are not their Adversaries, though they in the other
hitherto have been ours.

23. Between the Throne of God in Heaven, Of Prayer.
and his Church upon Earth here militant, if it be so that Angels have their
continual intercourse, where should we find the same more verified than in
those two ghostly Exercises, the one Doctrine, the other Prayer? For what is
the Assembling of the Church to learn, but the receiving of Angels descended
from above? What to pray, but the sending of Angels upwards? His Heavenly
Inspirations, and our holy Desires are as so many Angels of intercourse and
commerce between God and us. As Teaching brings us to know that God is our
supreme Truth; so Prayer, testifies that we acknowledge him our sovereign
Good. Besides, since on God, as the most High, all inferior Causes in the World
are dependant; and the higher any Cause is, the more it coveteth to impart
virtue unto things beneath it, how should any kind of service we do or can do,
find greater acceptance than Prayer, which shows our concurrence with him,
in desiring that wherewith his very Nature does most delight? Is not the name
of Prayer usual to signify even all the service that ever we do unto God? And
that for no other cause, as I suppose, but to show that there is in Religion no
acceptable Duty which devout Invocation of the name of God does not either
presuppose or infer. Prayers are those Ose. 14. 3.
Calves of Men's lips; those most gracious and sweet Revel. 5. 8.
odours; those rich Presents and Gifts, which being Acts. 10. 4.
carried up into Heaven, do best restifie our dutiful affection, and are, for
the purchasing of all favor at the hands of God, the most undoubted means we
can use. On others what more easily, and yet what more fruitfully bestowed than
our Prayers? If we give Counsel, they are the simpler only that need it; if
Alms, the poorer only are relieved; but by Prayer we do good to all. And
whereas every other Duty besides, is but to show it self as time and
opportunity require, for this all times are convenient: Romans 1. 9. 1 These. 5.
17. Luke 18. 1.
when we are not able to do any other things for men's behoof, when through
maliciousness or unkindness they vouchsafe not to accept any other good at our
hands, Prayer is that which we always have in our power to bestow, and they
never in theirs to refuse. Wherefore God fotbid, says Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. 23.
speaking unto a most unthankful People, a People weary of the benefit of his
most virtuous Government over them, God forbid that I should sin against the
Lord, and cease to pray for you. It is the first thing wherewith a righteous
life begins, and the last wherewith it does end. The knowledge is small
which we have on Earth concerning things that are done in Heaven.
Notwithstanding, thus much we know even of Saints in Heaven, that they pray.
And therefore Prayer being a work common to the Church as well Triumphant as
Militant, a work common unto Men with Angels, what should we think, but that so
much of our Lives is celestial and divine as we spend in the exercise of
Prayer? For which cause we see that the most comfortable Visitations, Dan. 9.
20. Acts 10. 13.
which God has sent men from above, have taken especially the times of Prayer
as their most natural opportunities.

Of Public Prayer.
24. This holy and religious duty of Service toward God concerns us one way
in that we are men, and another way in that we are joined as parts to that
visible Mystical Body, Psalm. 55. 18. Dan. 9. 3. Acts 10. 9.
which is his Church. As men, we are at our own choice, both for time, and
place, and form, according to the exigence of our own occasions in private: But
the service, which we do as Members of a Public Body, is public, and for that
cause must needs be accounted by so much worthier than the other, as a whole
society of such condition exceeds the worth of any one. In which
consideration unto Christian Assemblies, Matthew. 18. 20. 2 Cor. 1. 11.
there are most special Promises made. St. Paul, though likely to prevail with
God as much as any one, did notwithstanding think it much more, both for God's
glory, and his own good, if Prayers might be made and thanks yielded in his
behalf by a number of men. The Prince and People of Niniveh, Jonah 4. 11.
assembling themselves, as a main Army of Supplicants, it was not in the power
of God to withstand them. I speak no otherwise concerning the force of Public
Prayer in the Church of God, Apolog. 1. 39. Ambros. l. de Poen. Multi minimi
dum congregantur unanimes, sunt magni. and multorum preces impossibilest
contemni.
than before me Tertullian has done, We come by Troops to the Place of
Assembly, that being banded as it were together, we may be Sapplicants enough
to besiege God with, our Prayers: These Forces are unto him acceptable. When we
publicly make our Prayers, it cannot be but that we do it with much more
comfort than in private, for that the things we ask publicly are approved as
needful and good in the Judgment of all, we hear them sought for and desired
with common consent. Again, thus much help and furtherance is more yielded, in
that, if so be our zeal and devotion to Godward be slack, the alacrity and
fervor of others serves as a present spurt. Psalm. 12. ^.
For even Prayer it self (says Saint Basil) when it has not the consort of
many voices to strengthen it, (...) Basil. Epist. ^^
is not it self. Finally, the good which we do by Public Prayer, is more than
in private can be done, for that besides the benefit which is here, is no less
procured to our selves, the whole Church is much bettered by our good example;
and consequently whereas secret neglect of our duty in this kind is but only
our own hurt, one man's contempt of the Common Prayer of the Church of God may
be and oftentimes is most hurtful unto many. Psalm. 26. 12. 34. 18. Ps. 30 4.
and 96. 5.
In which considerations the Prophet David so often voweth unto God the
Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving in the Congregation, so earnestly
exhorts others to sing Praises unto the Lord in his Courts, in his Sanctuary,
before the memorial of his Holiness; and so much complains of his own
uncomfortable exile, wherein although he sustained many most grievous
indignities, and endured the want of sundry both pleasures and honors before
enjoyed; yet as if this one were his only grief, Psalm. 27. 4. and 42. 4. and
84. 1.
and the rest not felt, his speeches are all of the heavenly benefit of Public
Assemblies, and the happiness of such as had free access thereunto.

Of the form of Common Prayer.
25. A great part of the Cause, wherefore religious minds are so inflamed with
the love of Public devotion, is that virtue, force and efficacy, which by
experience they find that the very form and reverend solemnity of Common
Prayer duly ordered has, to help that imbecility and weakness in us, by means
whereof we are otherwise of our selves the less apt to perform unto God so
heavenly a service, with such affection of heart, and disposition in the powers
of our Souls as is requisite. To this end therefore all things hereunto
appertaining, have been ever thought convenient to be done with the most
solemnity and majesty that the wisest could devise. Matthew. 6. 5, 6.
It is not with Public as with Private Prayer. In this, rather secrecy is
commanded than outward show, whereas that being the public act of a whole
Society, requires accordingly more care to be had of external appearance. The
very assembling of men therefore unto this service has been ever solemn. And
concerning the place of assembly, although it serve for other uses as well as
this, yet seeing that our Lord himself has to this, as to the chiefest of all
other, plainly sanctified his own Temple, Mat. 21. 13.
by entituling it the House of Prayer, what preeminence of dignity soever has
been either by the Ordinance, or through the special favor and providence of
God annexed unto his Sanctuary, the principal cause thereof must needs be in
regard of Common Prayer. Chrysostom. Hom. 14. ad Hebra and 24. in Act.
For the honor and furtherance whereof, if it be as the gravest of the ancient
Fathers seriously were persuaded, and do oftentimes plainly teach, affirming
that the House of Prayer is a Court, beautified with the presence of Celestial
powers, that there we stand, we pray, we sound forth Hymns unto God, having
his Angels intermingled as our Associates; and that with reference hereunto the
Apostle does require so great care to be had of decency for the Angels sake; 1
Cor. 11. 10.
how can we come to the House of Prayer, and not be moved with the very glory
of the place it self, so to frame our affections Praying, as does best beseem
them, Psalm. 96. 6. Power and Beauty are in his Sanctuary.
whose Suits the Almighty does there sit to hear, and his Angels attend to
further; When this was ingrafted in the minds of men, there needed no penal
Statutes to draw them unto public Prayer. The warning sound was no sooner
heard, Ad domos sletim Dominicas currimus corpora humisternimus, mixtis cum
sletu gaudija supplicamus. Salvia de Prove. l. 7.
but the Churches were presently filled, the pavements covered with bodies
prostrate, and washed with their tears of devout joy. And as the place of
public Prayer is a Circumstance in the outward form thereof, which has moment
to help devotion; so the Person much more with whom the People of God do join
themselves in this Action, as with him that stands and speaks in the
presence of God for them. The authority of his Place, the fervor of his Zeal,
the piety and gravity of his whole Behavior, must needs exceedingly both grace
and set forward the service he does. The authority of his Calling is a
furtherance, because if God have so far received him into favor, as to impose
upon him by the hands of men that Office of blessing the People in his Name,
and making intercession to him in theirs; which Office he has sanctified with
his own most gracious Promise, Number. 6. 23. 2 Chronicles. 30, 27.
and ratified that promise by manifest actual performance thereof, when others
before in like place have done the same, is not his very Ordination a seal, as
it were to us, that the self-same Divine love which has chosen the instrument
to work with, will by that instrument effect the thing whereto he ordained it,
in blessing his People, and accepting the Prayers which his Servant offers up
unto God for them? It was in this respect a comfortable Title which the
Ancients used to give unto God's Ministers, Col. l. ^ ^^^ 3. de Epi. and Cler.
43 and 44. saepe.
terming them usually God's most beloved, which were ordained to procure by
their Prayers his love and favor toward all. Again, if there be not zeal and
fervency in him which proposes for the rest those suits and supplications,
which they by their joyful Acclamations must ratify; if he praise not God with
all his might, if he pour not out his Soul in Prayer; if he take not their
Causes to heart, and speak not as Moses, Daniel, and Ezra, did for their
People; how should there be but in them frozen coldness, when his affections
seem benumbed from whom theirs should take fire? Virtue and godliness of life
are required at the hands of the Minister of God, not only in that he is to
teach and instruct the People, who for the most part are rather led away by the
ill example, then directed aright by the wholesome instruction of them, whose
Life swarveth from the rule of their own Doctrine; but also much more in regard
of this other part of his Function; whether we respect the weakness of the
People, apt to loathe and abhor the Sanctuary, when they which perform the
service thereof are such as the Sons of Heli were; 1. Tim. 2. 8. John 9. 31.
Jer. 11. 11. Ezech. 8. 18.
or else consider the inclination of God himself, who requires the lifting up
of pure hands in Prayers, and has given the World plainly to understand, that
the Wicked, although they cry, shall not be heard. They are not fit Supplicants
to seek his mercy on the behalf of others, whose own un-repented sins provoke
his just indignation. Psalm. 132. 9.
Let thy Priests therefore, O Lord, be evermore clothed with Righteousness,
that thy Saints may thereby with more devotion rejoice and sing. But of all
helps for due performance of this Service, the greatest is that very set and
standing order it self, which, framed with common advice, has both for matter
and form prescribed whatsoever is herein publicly done. No doubt, from God it
has proceeded, and by us it must be acknowledged a Work of singular care and
providence, that the Church has evermore held a Prescript form of Common
Prayer, although not in all things every where the same, yet for the most part
retaining still the same analogy. So that if the Liturgies of all ancient
Churches throughout the World be compared amongst themselves, it may be easily
perceived they had all one original mold, and that the public Prayer of the
People of God in Churches thoroughly settled, did never use to be voluntary
Dictates, proceeding from any man's extemporal wit. To him which considers
the grievous and scandalous Inconveniences, whereunto they make themselves
daily subject, with whom any blind and secret Corner is judged a fit House of
Common Prayer; the manifold confusions which they fall into, where every man's
private Spirit and Gift (as they term it) is the only Bishop that ordains him
to this Ministry; the irksome deformities whereby through endless and senseless
effusions of indigested Prayers, they oftentimes disgrace in most unsufferable
manner, the worthiest part of Christian duty toward God, who herein are
subject to no certain Order, but pray both what and how they list; to him, I
say, which weighs duly all these things, the reasons cannot be obscure, 2 Chronicles. 6. 20. Joel. 2. 17. 2 Chronicles. 29. 30.
why God does in Public Prayer so much respect the Solemnity of Places where,
the Authority and calling of Persons by whom, and the precise Appointment even
with what Words or Sentences his Name should be called on amongst his People.

Of them which like not to have any set form of Common Prayer.
26. No man has hitherto been so impious, as plainly and directly to condemn
Prayer. The best stratagem that Satan has, who knows his Kingdom to be no
one way more shaken, than by the Public devout Prayers of God's Church, is by
traducing the form and manner of them, to bring them into contempt, and so to
shake the force of all men's devotion toward them. From this, and from no
other forge, has proceeded a strange conceit, that to serve God with any set
form of Common Prayer, is superstitious. As though God himself did not frame to
his Priests the very speech, Number. 6. 23.
wherewith they were charged to bless the People; or as if our Lord, even of
purpose to prevent this fancy of extemporal and voluntary Prayers, had not left
us of his own framing one, which might both remain as a part of the
Church-Liturgy, and serve as a Pattern whereby to frame all other Prayers with
efficacy, yet without superfluity of words. If Prayers were no otherwise
accepted of God, then being conceived always new, according to the exigence of
present occasions; if it be right to judge him by our own Bellies, and to
imagine that he does loath to have the self-same supplications often iterated,
even as we do to be every day fed without alteration or change of diet; if
Prayers he Actions which ought to waste away themselves in the making; if being
made to remain that they may be resumed and used again as Prayers, they be but
instruments of Superstition; surely, we cannot excuse Moses, who gave such
occasion of scandal to the World, by not being contented to praise the Name of
Almighty God, according to the usual naked simplicity of God's Spirit, for that
admirable victory given them against Pharaoh, unless so dangerous a President
were lest for the casting of Prayers into certain Poetical moulds, and for the
framing of Prayers which might be repeated often, although they never had again
the same occasions which brought them forth at the first. For that very Hymn
of Moses grew afterward to be a part of the ordinary Jewish Liturgy; not only
that, but sundry other sithence invented. Their Books of Common Prayer
contained partly Hymns taken out of the^ Holy Scripture, partly Benedictions,
Thanksgivings, Supplications, penned by such as have been, from time to time,
the Governors of that Synagogue. These they sorted into their several times
and places, some to begin the service of God with, and some to end, some to go
before, and some to follow, and some to be interlaced between the Divine
Readings of the Law and Prophets. Unto their custom of finishing the Passover
with certain Psalms, there is not any thing more probable, then that the holy
Evangelist does evidently allude, saying, That after the Cup delivered by our
Savior unto his Apostles, Mat. 25. 30. (...) having sung the Psalms which
were unto at that Feast those Psalms which the Jews call the great Hallelujah
beginning at the 113 and conti^^^^ing to the ^a. l. of the ll8. S^e Paul
Bar^^^s. in Ps. 112 ^ ^^^^^^ and (...) de (...).
they sung, and went forth to the Mount of Olives. As the Jews had their Songs
of Moses, and David, and the rest; so the Church of Christ from the very
beginning has both used the same, and besides them other also of like nature,
the Song of the Virgin Mary, the Song of Zachary, the Song of Simeon, such
Hymns as the Apostle does often speak of, saying, 1 Cor. 14. 15. Eph^s. 5. 19.
I will pray and sing with the Spirit. Again, in Psalms, Hymns, and Songs,
making melody unto the Lord, and that heartily. Hymns and Psalms are such
kinds of Prayer as are not wont to be conceived upon a sudden; but are framed
by Meditation before hand, or else by Prophetical illumination are inspired, as
at that time it appears they were, when God by extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit, enabled men to all parts of service necessary for the edifying of his
Church.

27. Now, albeit the Admonitioners did seem at the first to allow no Prescript
form of Prayer at all, Of them who allowing a set form Prayer yet allow ^er^^^.
but thought it the best that their Minister should always be left at liberty
to pray, as his own discretion did serve, yet because this opinion upon better
advice they afterward retracted, their Defender and his Associates have
sithence proposed to the World a form, such as themselves like, and, to show
their dislike of ours, have taken against it those exceptions, which, whosoever
does measure by number, must needs be greatly out of love with a thing that
has so many faults; whosoever by weight, cannot choose but esteem very highly
of that, wherein the wit of so scrupulous Adversaries has not hitherto
observed any defect which themselves can seriously think to be of moment. Gross
Errors and manifest Impiety they grant we have taken away. Yet T. C. l. 1. p.
^31 afterward, p. 135. Whereas ^^ Do^^er ^^^^meth that the^e can ^e nothing
showed in the whole Book which is not agreeable unto the Word of God: I am very
^^^^h etc. Notwithstanding, my duty of defening the Truth and Love which I have
first toward God, and then toward my Country constable. (...) an^ be in^t^u^^
pro^e^^^ speak a few words more particularly of the form of Prayer, that when
the blemishes thereof do appear, it may please the Queens Majesty, and her
Honorable Council, with ^ho^c of the Parliam^nt, etc.
many things in it they say are amiss; many instances they give of things in
our Common Prayer, not agreeable as they pretend with the word of God. It has
in their eye too great affinity with the form of the Church of Rome; it
differs too much from that which Churches elsewhere reformed allow and
observe; our Attire disgraceth it; it is not orderly read nor gestured as
beseems; it requires nothing to be done, which a Child may not lawfully do;
it has a number of short cutts or shreddings, which may be better called
Wishes than Prayers; it intermingleth Prayings and Readings in such manner, as,
if Supplicants should use in proposing their Suits unto mortal Princes, all the
World would judge them madd; it is too long, and by that mean abridgeth
Preaching; it appoints the People to say after the Minister; it spends time
in singing and in reading the Psalms by course, from side to side; it uses the
Lord's Prayer too often, the Songs of Magnificat, Benedictus, and Nune Dimittis,
it might very well spare; it has the Letany, the Creed of Athanasius, and
Gloria Patri, which are superfluous; it craveth Earthly things too much; for
deliverance from those Evils against which we pray, it gives no Thanks; some
things it asks unseasonably, when they need not to be prayed for, as
deliverance from Thunder and Tempest, when no Danger is nigh; some in too
abject and diffident manner, as that God would give us that which we for our
unworthiness dare not ask; some which ought not to be desired, as the
deliverance from sudden Death, riddance from all Adversity, and the extent of
saving Mercy toward all men. These and such like are the Imperfections,
whereby our form of Common Prayer is thought to swerve from the Word of God. A
great favourer of that part, but yet (his Error that way excepted) a learned,
painful, a right virtuous and good man, did not fear sometime to undertake,
against Popish Detractors, the general maintenance and defense of our whole
Church Service, as having in it nothing repugnant to the Word of God. And even
they which would file away most the largeness of that Offer, do notwithstanding
in more sparing terms acknowledge little less. For when those opposite
judgments which never are wont to construe things doubtful to the better,
those very tongues which are always prone to aggravate whatsoever has but the
least show whereby it may be suspected to savor of, or to sound toward any
evil, do by their own voluntary sentence clearly free us from gross Errors,
and from manifest Impiety herein; who would not judge us to be discharged of
all blame, which are confessed to have no great fault, even by their very word
and testimony, in whose eyes no fault of ours has ever hitherto been
accustomed to seem small? Nevertheless, what they seem to offer us with the one
hand, the same with the other they pull back again. They grant we err not in
palpable manner, wear not openly and notoriously impious; yet Errors we have,
which the sharp insight of their wisest men do espy; there is hidden impiety,
which the profounder sort are able enough to disclose. Their skilful ears
perceive certain harsh and unpleasant discords in the sound of our Common
Prayer, such as the Rules of Divine Harmony, such as the Laws of God cannot
bear.

The form of our Liturgy too near the Papists, too far different from that of
or her reformed Churches, as they pretend.
28. Touching our Conformity with the Church of Rome, as also of the difference
between some Reformed Churches and ours, that which generally has been already
answered, may serve for answer to that Exception, which in these two respects
they take particularly against the form of our Common Prayer. To say, that in
nothing they may be followed, which are of the Church of Rome, were violent and
extreme. Some things they do, in that they are men, in that they are Wise men,
and Christian men some things, some things in that they are men misled and
blinded with Error. As far as they follow Reason and Truth, we fear not to
tread the self-same steps wherein they have gone, and to be their Followers.
Where Rome keeps that which is antienter and better; others whom we much more
affect leaving it for newer, and changing it for worse; we had rather follow
the perfections of them whom we like not, than in defects resemble them whom we
love. T. C. l. 1. p. 135.
For although they profess they agree with us touching a prescript form of
Prayer to be used in the Church; yet in that very form which they say, is
agreeable to Gods Word, A Bo^k of the form of Common Prayer tendered to the
Parliament, p. 46.
and the use of Reformed Churches, they have by special Protestation declared,
That their meaning is not, it shall be prescribed as a thing whereunto they
will tie their Minister. It shall not (they say) be necessary for the Minister
daily to repeat all these things before mentioned, but beginning with some like
Confession, to proceed to the Sermon; which ended, he either uses the Prayer
for all States before mentioned, or else prays as the Spirit of God shall
move his Heart. Herein therefore we hold it much better, with the Church of
Rome, to appoint a prescript form which every man shall be bound to observe,
then with them to set down a kind of direction, a form for men to use if they
list, or otherwise to change as pleases themselves. Furthermore, the Church of
Rome has rightly also considered, that Public Prayer is a Duty entire in it
self, a Duty requisite to be performed, much oftener than Sermons can possibly
be made. For which cause, as they, so we have likewise a Public form how to
serve God both Morning and Evening, whether Sermons may be had or no. On the
contrary side, their form of Reformed Prayer shows only what shall be done
upon the days appointed for the Preaching of the Word; Page 22.
with what words the Minister shall begin, Page 24.
when the hour appointed for Sermon is come; what shall be said or sung before
Sermon, and what after. So that according to this form of theirs, it must stand
for a Rule, No Sermon, No Service. Which oversight, occasioned the French
spitefully to term Religion that sort exercised, a mere Preach. Sundry other
more particular defects there are, which I willingly forbear to rehearse; in
consideration whereof, we cannot be induced to prefert their Reformed form of
Prayer before our own, what Church soever we resemble therein.

A^te be^enging to the Service of God. T. C. l.. 1 p. ^1. We think the Surplice
especially unmeet for a Minister of the Gosp. ^ to ^ear, p. 75. ^^ is easily
seen by Solomo n Eccles. 8. 9. th^^ to wear a white Garment was highly esteemed
in the E^st parts, and was ordinary to those that were in any elimination, as
black with us, and therefore was no several Apparel for the Ministers to
execute their Ministry in ^ Hierom in 44. Ezech. P^iero. Adver. Pelag. l. 1. c.
9. T. C. l. 1. p. 77. Be a White Garment is meant a comely Apparel, and not
slovenly.
29. The Attire which the Minister of God is by Order to use at times of Divine
Service, being but a matter of mere formality, yet such as for Comeliness sake
has hitherto been judged by the wiser sort of men not unnecessary to concur
with other sensible Notes, betokening the different kind or quality of Persons
and Actions whereto it is tied; as we think not ourselves the holier, because
we use it, so neither should they with whom no such thing is in use, think us
therefore unholy, because we submit our selves unto that, which in a matter so
indifferent the wisdom of Authority and Law have thought comely. To solemn
Actions of Royalty and Justice, their suitable Ornaments are a Beauty. Are they
only in Religion a stain? Divine Religion, says Saint Ierom (he speaks of
the Priestly Attire of the Law) has one kind of Habit wherein to minister
before the Lord, another for ordinary uses belonging unto common life. Pelagius
having carped at the curious neatness of men's Apparel in those days, and
through the sowreness of his disposition spoken somewhat too hardly thereof,
affirming, That the glory of Clothes and Ornaments was a thing contrary to God
and godliness; S. Ierom, whose custom is not to pardon over-easily his
Adversaries, if any where they chance to trip, presses him as thereby making
all sorts of men in the World God's enemies. Is it enmity with God (says he)
if I wear my Coat somewhat handsome? If a Bishop, a Priest, Deacon, and the
rest of the Ecclesiastical Order come to administer the usual Sacrifice in a
white Garment, are they hereby God's Adversaries; Clarks, Monks, Widows,
Virgins, take beed, it is dangerous for you to be otherwise seen than in soul
and ragged Clothes. Not to speak any thing of Secular men, which have
proclaimed to have war with God as often as ever they put on precious and shining
Clothes. By which words of Jerome, we may take it at the least for a probable
collection, that his meaning was to draw Pelagius into hatred, as condemning by
so general a speech even the neatness of that very Garment it self, wherein the
Clergy did then use to administer publicly the holy Sacrament of Christ's most
blessed Body and Blood; For that they did then use some such Ornament, the
words of Chrysostom give plain testimony, Chrysostom. ^^ popul. Antioch ^om. 5.
Sermon. 60.
who speaking to the Clergy of Antioch, tells them that if they did suffer
notorious Male^actors to come to the Table of our Lord, and not put them by, it
would be as heavily revenged upon them, as if themselves had shed his Blood,
that for this purpose God had called them to the rooms which they held in the
Church of Christ; that this they should reckon was their Dignity, this their
Safety, this their whole Crown and Glory; and therefore this they should
carefully intend, and not when the Sacrament is administered, imagine themselves
called only to walk up and down in a White and shining Garment. Now, whereas
these speeches of Jerome and Chrysostom do seem plainly to allude unto such
Ministerial Garments as were then in use; To this they answer, that by Ierom
nothing can be gathered, but only that the Ministers came to Church in handsome
Holy Day apparel, and that himself did not think them bound by the Law of God
no go like Slovens; but the Weed which we mean he defends not. That
Chrysostom means the same which we defend, T. C. l. 1. p. 75. It is true,
Chrysostom makes mention of a White Garment, but not in commendation of it,
but rather to the contrary: for he shows that the dignity of their Ministry
was in taking h^d that none unmeet were admitted to the Lords Supper, not in
going about the Church with a White Garment.
but seems rather to reprehend than allow it as we do. Which Answer wringeth
out of Jerome and Chrysostom that which their words will not gladly yield.
They both speak of the same Persons, namely, the Clergy; and of their Weed at
the same time when they administer the blessed Sacrament; and of the self-same
kind of Weed, a white Garment, so far as we have wit to conceive; and for any
thing we are able to see, their manner of speech is not such as does argue
either the thing it self to be different whereof they speak, or their Judgment
concerning it different; although the one do only maintain it against Pelagius,
as a thing not therefore unlawful, because it was fair or handsome, and the
other make it a matter of small commendation in it self, if they which wear it,
do nothing else but wear the Robes which their Place requires. The honesty,
dignity, and estimation of White Apparel in the Eastern part of the World, is a
token of greater fitness for this sacred use, wherein it were not convenient
that any thing basely thought of should be suffered. Notwithstanding, I am not
bent to stand stiffely upon these Probabilities, that in Ierom's and
Chrysostom's time any such Attire was made several to this purpose. Yet surely
the words of Solomon are very impertinent to prove it an Ornament, therefore
not several for the Ministers to execute their Ministry in, because men of
credit and estimation wore their ordinary Apparel white. For we know that when
Solomon wrote those words, the several Apparel for the Ministers of the Law, to
execute their Ministry in, was such. The Wise man which seared God from his
heart, Eccles. 45. 7.
and honored the Service that was done unto him, could not mention so much as
the Garment of Holiness, but with effectual signification of most singular
reverence and love. Were it not better that the love which men bear to God,
should make the least things which are employed in his Service amiable, than
that their over-scrupulous dislike of so mean a thing as a Vestment, should
from the very Service of God withdraw their hearts and affections? I term it
rather a mean thing, a thing not much to be respected, because even they so
account now of it, whose first Disputations against it were such, as if
Religion had scarcely any thing of greater weight. Their Allegations were then,
T. C. l. 1. p. ^9.
That if a man were assured to gain a thousand by doing that which may offend
any one Brother, or be unto him a cause of falling, he ought not to do it; That
this Popish Apparel, the Surplice especially, 71.
has been by Papists abominably abused, That it has been a mark and a very
Sacrament of Abomination; 75.
That remaining, it serves as a Monument of Idolatry, and not only edifieth
not, but, as a dangerous and scandalous Ceremony does exceeding much harm to
them of whose good we are commanded to have regard, 7^.
that it causes men to perish, T. C. l. 2 p 403. L^. p. ^3 ^6. l. ^. p. 403.
and make shipwreck of Conscience, for so themselves profess they mean, when
they say the weak are offended herewith; that it hardneth Papists, hinders the
weak from profiting in the knowledge of the Gospel, grieveth godly minds, and
gives them occasion to think hardly of their Ministers; that if the
Magistrates may command, or the Church appoint Rites and Ceremonies, yet seeing
our abstinence from things in their own nature indifferent, if the weak Brother
should be offended, is a flat Commandment of the Holy Ghost, which no
Authority either of Church or Commonwealth can make void; Lib. 1. p. 76. Page.
81.
therefore neither may the one nor the other lawfully ordain this Ceremony,
which has great incommodity and no profit, great offense and no edifying; That
by the Law it should have been burnt and consumed with fire as a thing infected
with Leprosy; That the Example of Ezekiah beating to powder the Brazen
Serpent, and of Paul abrogating those abused Feasts of Charity, inforceth upon
us the duty of abolishing altogether a thing which has been, and is so
offensive; Finally, Page. 78.
That God by his Prophet has given an express Commandment, which in this case
touches us, no less than of old it did the Jews, Esaias. 30. 12.
'Ye shall pollute the covering of the Images of Silver, and the rich ornament
of your Images of Gold, and cast them away as a stained ragg; thou shall say
unto it, Get thee hence. These, and such like, were their first Discourses,
touching that Church-Attire, which with us for the most part is usual in
Public Prayer; our Ecclesiastical Laws so appointing, as well because it has
been of reasonable continuance, and by special choice was taken out of the
number of those holy Garments, which (over and besides their mystical
reference) served for Exodus 18. 2.
comeliness Exodus 39.27.
under the Law, and is in the number of those Ceremonies, which may with choice
and discretion be used to that purpose in the Church of Christ; as also for
that it suiteth so fitly with that lightsom affection of Psalm. 149 2. Apoc.
13.9. Mar. 16. 5.
joy, wherein God delights when his Saints praise him; and so lively
resembles the glory of the Saints in Heaven, together with the beauty wherein
Angels have appeared unto men, that they which are to appear for men in the
presence of God, as Angels, if they were left to their own choice, and would
choose any, could not easily devise a Garment of more decency for such a
Service. As for those fore-rehearsed vehement allegations against it, shall we
give them credit, when the very Authors from whom they came, confess they
believe not their own sayings? For when once they began to perceive how many,
both of them in the two Universities, and of others, who abroad having
Ecclesiastical charge, do favor mightily their Cause, and by all means set it
forward, might by persisting in the extremity of that Opinion, hazard greatly
their own Estates, and so weaken that part which their Places do now give them
much opportunity to strengthen; they asked counsel, as it seemed from some
abroad, who wisely considered, that the Body is of far more worth than the
Raiment. Whereupon, T C. l. 1. p. 7^. and 1. 2. p 250. Index.l 3.c. 8. l.3. p.
262, 263.
for fear of dangerous inconveniences, it has been thought good to add, That
sometimes Authority must and may with good conscience be obeyed even where
Commandment is not given upon good ground; That the duty of Preaching is one of
the absolute Commandments of God, and therefore ought not to be forsaken; for
the bare inconveniency of a thing which in the own nature is indifferent; That
one of the foulest spots is the Surplice, is the offense which is gives in
occasioning the weak to fall, and the wicked to be confirmed in their
wickedness; yet hereby there is no unlawfulness proved, but only an
inconveniency, that such things should be established, howbeit no such
Inconveniency neither, as may not be born with; That when God does flatly
command us to abstain from things is their own Nature indifferent; if they
offend our weak Brethren, Lib. 3. p. 263.
his meaning is not we should obey his Commandment herein, unless we may do
it, and not leave undone that which the Lord has absolutely commanded. Always
provided, That whosoever will enjoy the benefit of this Dispensation, to wear a
scandalous Badge of Idolatry, Page. 263.
rather than forsake his Pastoral charge, do ( as occasion serves) teach
nevertheless still the incommodity of the thing it self, admonish the weak
Brethren that they be not, and pray unto God so to strengthen them that they
may not be offended thereat. So that whereas before, they which had Authority
to institute Rites and Ceremonies, were denied to have power to institute this,
it is now confessed, that this they may also lawfully, but not so conveniently
appoint; they did well before, and as they ought, who had it in utter
detestation and hatred as a thing abominable; they now do well, which think it
may be both born and used with a very good Conscience; before, he which by
wearing it were sure to win thousands unto Christ, ought not to do it if there
were but one which might be offended; now, though it be with the offense of
thousands, yet it may be done rather than that should be given over, whereby
notwithstanding we are not certain we shall gain one; the Examples of Ezechias
and of Paul, the Charge which was given to the Jews by Esaias, the strict
Apostolical prohibition of things indifferent, whenever they may be
scandalous, were before so forcible Laws against our Ecclesiastical Attire, as
neither Church nor Commonwealth could possibly make void, which now one of far
less authority than either, has found how to frustrate by dispensing with the
breach of inferior Commandments, to the end that the greater may be kept. But
it booteth them not, thus to soder up a broken Cause, whereof their first and
last discourses will fall asunder, do what they can. Let them ingenuously
confess that their Invectives were too bitter, their Arguments too weak, the
matter not so dangerous as they did imagine. If those alleged testimonies of
Scripture did indeed concern the matter, to such effect as was pretended, that
which they should infer were unlawfulness, because they were cited as
Prohibitions of that thing which indeed they concern. If they prove not our
attire unlawful, because in truth they concern it not, it follows that they
prove not any thing against it, and consequently, not so much as uncomeliness
or incoveniency. Unless therefore they be able thoroughly to resolve themselves,
that there is no one Sentence in all the Scriptures of God, which does control
the wearing of it in such manner, and to such purpose, as the Church of England
allows; unless they can fully rest and settle their minds in this most sound
persuasion, that they are not to make themselves the only competent Judges of
decency in these cases, and to despise the solemn judgment of the whole
Church, preferring before it their own conceit, grounded only upon uncertain
suspicions and fears, whereof if there were at the first some probable cause,
when things were but raw and tender, yet now very tract of time has it self
worn that out also; unless, I say, thus resolved in mind they hold their
Pastoral Charge with the comfort of a good Conscience, no way grudging at that
which they do, or doing that which they think themselves bound of duty to
reprove, how should it possibly help or further them in their course, to take
such occasions as they say are requisite to be taken, and in pensive manner to
tell their Audience; Brethren, our hearts desire is, that we might enjoy the
full liberty of the Gospel, as in other reformed Churches they do elsewhere,
upon whom the heavy hand of Authority has imposed no grievous burden. But
such is the misery of these our days, that so great happiness we cannot look to
attain unto. Were it so, that the equity of the Law of Moses could prevail, or
the zeal of Ezechias be found in the hearts of those Guides and Governors
under whom we live; or the voice of God's own Prophets be duly heard; or the
Examples of the Apostles of Christ be followed; yea, or their Precepts be
answered with full and perfect obedience: these abominable Rags, polluted
Garments, marks and Sacraments of Idolatry, which Power, as you see,
constrains us to wear, and Conscience to abhor, had long ere this day been
removed both out of sight and out of memory. But, as now things stand, behold
to what narrow streights we are driven; On the one side, we fear the words of
our Savior Christ, Woe be to them by whom scandal and offense comes: on the
other side, at the Apostles speech we cannot but quake and tremble, If I preach
not the Gospel, woe be unto me. Being thus hardly beset, we see not any other
remedy, but to hazard your Souls the one way, that we may the other way
endeavor to save them. Touching the the offense of the Weak therefore, we must
adventure it. If they perish, they perish. Our Pastoral charge is God's most
absolute Commandment. Rather than that shall be taken from us, we are resolved
to take this filth, and to put it on, although we judge it to be so unfit and
inconvenient, that as often as ever we pray or preach so arrayed before you, we
do as much as in us lies, to cast away your Souls that are weak-minded, and to
bring you unto endless perdition. But we beseech you, Brethren, have a care of
your own safety, take heed to your steps, that ye be not taken in those snares
which we lay before you. And our Prayer in your behalf to Almighty God is, that
the poison which we offer you, may never have the power to do you harm. Advice
and counsel is best sought for at their hands, which either have no part at all
in the Cause whereof they instruct; or else are so far engaged, that
themselves are to bear the greatest adventure in the success of their own
Counsels. The one of which two Considerations makes men the less respective,
and the other the more circumspect. Those good and learned men which gave the
first direction to this course, had reason to wish that their own proceedings
at home might be favored abroad also, and that the good affection of such as
inclined toward them might be kept alive. But if themselves had gone under
those sails which they require to be hoised up, if they had been themselves to
execute their own Theory in this Church, I doubt not but castly they would have
seen, being nearer at hand, that the way was not good which they took of
advising men, first, to wear the apparel, that thereby they might be free to
continue their preaching, and then, of requiring them so to preach as they
might be sure they could not continue, except they imagine that Laws which
permit them not to do as they would, will endure them to speak as they list,
even against that which themselves do by constraint of Laws; they would have
easily seen that our People being accustomed to think evermore that thing evil
which is publicly under any pretense reproved, and the men themselves worse
which reprove it, and use it too; it should be to little purpose for them to
salve the wound, by making protestations in disgrace of their own actions, with
plain acknowledgement that they are scandalous, or by using fair entreaty with
the weak Brethren, they would easily have seen how with us it cannot be
endured, to hear a man openly profess that he puts fire to his Neighbors
house, but yet so halloweth the same with Prayer, that he hops it shall not
burn. It had been therefore perhaps safer and better for ours to have observed
S. Basils advice, both in this and in all things of like nature: Basil. Asect.
^^^pent 2. l in^er. 47.
Let him which approves not his Governors Ordinances, either plainly (but
privately always) show his dislike of he have (...), strong and invincible
reason against them, according to the true will and meaning of Scripture; or
else let him quietly with silence do what is enjoined. Obedience with professed
unwillingness to obey, is no better than manifest disobedience.

Of gesture in praying, and of different places chosen to that purpose. T C.
l.1. p. 134.
30. Having thus disputed, whether the Surplice be a fit Garment to be used in
the service of God, the next Question whereinto we are drawn, is, Whether it be
a thing allowable or no, that the Minister should say Service in the Chancel,
or ruin his face at any time from the People, or before Service ended remove
from the place where it was begun? By them which trouble us with these doubts,
we would more willingly be resolved of a greater doubt; Whether it be not a
kind of taking God's Name in vain, to debase Religion with such frivolous
disputes, a sin to bestow time and labor about them? Things of so mean regard
and quality, although necessary to be ordered, are notwithstanding very
unsavory when they come to be disputed of; because Disputation presupposes
some difficulty in the matter which is argued, whereas in things of this nature
they must be either very simple or very froward, who need to be taught by
disputation what is meet. When we make profession of our Faith, we stand; when
we acknowledge our sins, or seek unto God for favor, we fall down; because the
gesture of constancy becomes us best in the one, in the other the behavior of
humility. Some part of our Liturgy consist in the reading of the word of God,
and the proclaiming of his Law, that the people may thereby learn what their
duties are toward him; some consist in words of praise and thanksgiving,
whereby we acknowledge unto God what his blessings are toward us; some are
such as albeit they serve to singular good purpose, even when there is no
Communion administered; nevertheless, being devised at the first for that
purpose, are at the Table of the Lord for that cause also commonly read; some
are uttered as from the people, some as with them unto God, some as from God
unto them, all as before his sight, whom we fear, and whose presence to offend
with any the least unseemliness, we would be surely as loath as they, who most
reprehend or deride that we do. Now, T. C. l. 1. p. 203.
because the Gospels which are weekly read, do all historically declare
something which our Lord Jesus Christ himself either spoke, did, or suffered in
his own Person, it has been the custom of Christian men then especially in
token of the greater reverence to stand, to utter certain words of acclamation,
and at the name of Jesus to bow. Which harmless Ceremonies, as there is no man
constrained to use; so we know no reason wherefore any man should yet imagine
it an unsufferable evil. Mark 12. 6.
It shows a reverend regard to the Son of God above other Messengers,
although speaking as from God also. And against Infidels, Jews, Arians, who
derogate from the honor of Jesus Christ, such Ceremonies are most profitable.
As for any erroneous estimation, advancing the Son above the Father and the
holy Ghost, T C l. 3 p. 215.
seeing that the truth of his equality with them, is a mystery so hard for the
wits of mortal men to rise unto, of all Heresies, that which may give him
superiority above them, is least to befeared. But to let go this as a matter
scarce worth the speaking of, whereas, if fault be in these things any where
justly found, Law has referred the whole disposition and redress thereof to
the Ordinary of the place; T. C. l. 1. p ^4.
they which elsewhere complain, that disgrace and injury is offered even to the
meanest Parish Minister, when the Magistrate appoints him what to wear, and
leaves not so small a matter as that to his own discretion, being presumed a
man discreet, T. C. l 1. p 134. ^. 3. p. 137.
and trusted with the care of the Peoples Souls, do think the gravest Prelates
in the Land no competent Judges, to discern and appoint where it is fit for the
Minister to stand, or which way convenient to look Praying. From their Ordinary
therefore they appeal to themselves, finding great fault that we neither reform
the thing against the which they have so long since given sentence, nor yet
make answer unto what they bring, which is, that Saint Luke, declaring how
Peter stood up in the midst of the Disciples, Acts 1. 13. T. C. l. 1. p. 134.
l. 3 p. 137.
did thereby deliver an unchangeable rule, that whatsoever is done in the
Church, ought to be done in the midst of the Church; and therefore not Baptism
to be administered in one place, Marriage solemnized in another, the Supper of
the Lord received in a third, in a fourth Sermons, in a fifth Prayers to be
made; that the custom which we use is Levitical, absurd, and such as hinders
the understanding of the People; that if it be meet for the Minister, at some
time to look toward the People, if the body of the Church be a fit place for
some part of Divine Service, it must needs follow that whenever his face is
turned any other way, or any thing done any other where, it has absurdity. All
these reasons, they say, have been brought, and were hitherto never answered,
besides a number of metriments and jests unanswered likewise, wherewith they
have pleasantly moved much laughter at our manner of serving God. Such is their
evil hap to play upon dull spirited men. We are still persuaded that a bare
denial is answer sufficient to things which mere fancy objecteth, and that the
best Apology to words of scorn and petulancy, is Isaac's Apology to his Brother
Ismael, the Apology which patience and silence makes. Our Answer therefore to
their Reasons, is, no; to their Scoffs, nothing.

31. When they object that our Book requires nothing to be done, Easiness of
Praying alter our form. T.C.l. 1. p. 133. and l.3. p. 184. Another fault in the
whole Service or Liturgy of England, is, for that it maintains an unpreaching
Ministry in requiring nothing to be done by the Minister, which a Child of ten
years old cannot do as well, and as lawfully, as that man wherewith the Book
contenteth it self.
which a Child may not do as lawfully and as well as that man wherewith the
Book conteneth it self; Is it their meaning that the service of God ought to be
a matter of great difficulty, a Labor which requires great learning and deep
skill, or else^ that the Book containing it should teach what men are fit to
attend upon it, and forbid either men unlearned, or Children, to be admitted
thereunto? In setting down the form of Common Prayer, there was no need that
the Book should mention either the learning of a fit, or the unfitness of an
ignorant Minister, more than that he which describes the manner how to pitch a
field, should speak of moderation and sobriety in diet. And concerning the duty
it self, although the hardness thereof be not such as needs much Art, yet
surely they seem to be very far carried besides themselves, to whom the
dignity of Public Prayer does not discover somewhat more fitness in men of
gravity and ripe discretion, than in children of ten years of age, for the
decent discharge and performance of that Office. It cannot be that they who
speak thus, should thus judge. At the board and in private it very well
becomes Children's innocence to pray, and their Elders to say, Amen. Which
being a part of their virtuous education, serves greatly both to nourish in
them the fear of God, and to put us in continual remembrance of that powerful
grace which opens the mouths of Infants to sound his praise. But Public
Prayer, the service of God in the solemn Assembly of Saints, is a work, though
easy, yet withal so weighty and of such respect, that the great facility
thereof is but a slender argument to prove, it may be as well and as lawfully
committed to Children as to men of years, howsoever their ability of learning
be but only to do that in decent order wherewith the Book contenteth it self.
The Book requires but orderly reading. As in truth, what should any Prescript
form of Prayer framed to the Minister's hand require, but only so to be read as
behooves? We know that there are in the world certain voluntary Overseers of
all Books, whose censure in this respect would fall as sharp on us as it has
done on many others, if delivering but a form of Prayer, we should either
express or include an thing, more than does properly concern Prayer. The
Ministers greatness or meanness of knowledge to do other things, his aptness or
insufficiency otherwise than by reading to instruct the flock, stands in this
place as a Stranger, with whom our form of Common Prayer has nothing to do.
Wherein their exception against easiness, as if that did nourish Ignorance,
proceeds altogether out of a needless jealousy; I have often heard it
inquired of by many, how it might be brought to pass that the Church should
every where have able Preachers to instruct the People; what impediments there
are to hinder it, and which were the speediest way to remove them. In which
consultation, the multitude of Parishes, the paucity of Schools, the manifold
discouragements which are offered unto men's inclinations that way, the penury
of the Ecclesiastical estate, the irrecoverable loss of so many Livings of
principal value, clean taken away from the Church long sithence by being
appropriated, the daily bruises that Spiritual promotions use to take by often
falling, the want of somewhat in certain Statutes which concern the state of
the Church, the too great facility of many Bishops, the stony hardness of too
many Patrons hearts not touched with any feeling in this case: such things
oftentimes are debated, and much thought upon by them that enter into any
discourse concerning any defect of knowledge in the Clergy. But whosoever be
found guilty, the Communion Book has surely deserved least to be called in
question for this fault. If all the Clergy were as learned as themselves are
that most complain of ignorance in others, yet our Book of Prayer might remain
the same; and remaining the same it is, I see not how it can be a let unto any
man's skill in Preaching. Which thing we acknowledge to be God's good gift,
howbeit no such necessary element, that every act of Religion should he
thought imperfect and lame, wherein there is not somewhat exacted that none can
discharge but an able Preacher.

The length of our Service. T C l.1. p. 133. and l. 3. p. 184.
32. Two faults there are, which our Lord and Savior himself especially
reproved in Prayer, the one, when ostentation did cause it to be open; the
other, when superstition made it long. As therefore Prayers the one way are
faulty, not whenever they be openly made, but when Hypocrisy is the cause of
open Praying: so the length of Prayer is likewise a fault, howbeit not simply,
but where error and superstition causes more than convenient repetition or
continuation of speech to be used. It is not, as some do imagine, Aug. Ep. 121.
(says Saint Augustine) that long Praying is that fault of much speaking in
Prayer which our Savior did reprove; for then would not he himself in Prayer
have continued whole nights. Luke 6. 12.
Use in Prayer no vain superfluity of words, as the Heathens do, for they
imagine that their much speaking will cause them to be heard: whereas in truth
the thing which God does regard is, how virtuous their minds are, and not how
copious their tongues in Prayer; how well they think, and not how long they
talk, who come to present their Supplications before him. Notwithstanding for
as much as in Public Prayer we are not only to consider what is needful in
respect of God, but there is also in men that which we must regard; we somewhat
the rather incline to length, lest over-quick dispatch of a Duty so important
should give the World occasion to deem, that the thing it self is but little
accounted of, wherein but little time is bestowed. Length thereof is a thing
which the gravity and weight of such actions does require. Beside, this benefit
also it has, that they whom earnest letts and impediments do often hinder from
being Partakers of the whole, have yet through the length of Divine Service,
opportunity sleft them, at the least, for access unto some reasonable part
thereof. Again, it should be considered, how it does come to pass that we are
so long. For if that very Service of God in the Jewish Synagogues, which our
Lord did approve and sanctify with the presence of his own Person, had so
large portions of the Law and the Prophets, together with so many Prayers and
Psalms read day by day, as do equal in a manner the length of ours, and yet in
that respect was never thought to deserve blame, is it now an offense, that the
like measure of time is bestowed in the like manner? Peradventure the Church
had not now the leisure which it had then, or else those things whereupon so
much time was then well spent, have sithence that lost their dignity and worth.
If the reading of the Law, the Prophets and Psalms, be a part of the Service of
God, as needful under Christ as before, and the adding of the New Testament, as
profitable as the ordaining of the Old to be read; if therewith instead of
Jewish Prayers it be also for the good of the Church to annex that variety
which the Apostle does commend; 1 Timothy 2. 1.
seeing that the time which we spend is no more than the orderly performance of
these things necessarily required, why are we thought to exceed in length?
Words, be they never so few, are too many when they benefit not the Hearer. But
he which speaks no more than edifieth, is undeservedly reprehended for much
speaking. T. C. l. 1. p. 184.
That as the Devil under the color of long Prayer drove Preaching out of the
Church heretofore, so we in appointing so long Prayers and Readings, whereby
the less can be spent in Preaching, maintain an unpreaching Ministry, is
neither advisedly nor truly spoken. They reprove long Prayer, and yet
acknowledge it to be in it self a thing commendable; For so it must needs be,
if the Devil have used it as a color to hide his malicious practices. When
Malice would work that which is evil, and in working avoid the suspicion of any
evil intent, the color wherewith it overcasteth it self, is always a fair and
plausible pretense of seeking to further that which is good. So that if we both
retain that good which Saran has pretended to seek, and avoid the evil which
his purpose was to effect, have we not better prevented his malice, than if, as
he has, under color of long Prayer, driven Preaching out of the Church, so we
should take the quarrel of Sermons in hand, and revenge their Cause, by
requital, thrusting Prayer in a manner out of doors under color of long
Preaching? In case our Prayers being made at their full length, did necessarily
enforce Sermons to be the shorter, yet neither were this to uphold and maintain
an unpreaching Ministry, unless we will say that those ancient Fathers,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Leo, and the rest, whose Homilies in that consideration
were shorter for the most part than our Sermons are, did then not preach when
their Speeches were not long. The necessity of shortness causes men to cut off
impertinent Discourses, and to comprize much matter in few words. But neither
did it maintain inabilitie, not at all prevent opportunity of Preaching, as
long as a competent time is granted for that purpose. An hour and an half is,
they say, in reformed Churches ordinarily thought reasonable, for their whole
Liturgy or Service. Neh. 8. 3. Acts 20. 9.
Do we then continue as Ezra did in reading the Law from morning till midday?
or, as the Apostle Saint Paul did in Prayer and Preaching, till men through
weariness be taken up dead at our feet? The huge length whereof they make such
complaint, is but this, that if our whole form of Prayer be read, and besides
an hour allowed for a Sermon, we spend ordinarily in both more time than they
do by half an hour. Which half hour being such a matter, as the age of some,
and infirmity of other some are not able to bear; if we have any sense of the
common imbecility, if any care to preserve men's wits from being broken with
the very bent of so long attention, if any love or desire to provide that
things most holy be not with hazard of men's Souls abhorred and loathed, this
half-hours tediousness must be remedied, and that only by cutting off the
greatest part of our Common Prayer. For no other remedy will serve to help so
dangerous an Inconvenience.

33. The Brethren in Egypt (says St. Augustine, Epist. 121.) are reported to
have many Prayers, Instead of such Prayers at the Pr^mitive Churches have used
and those that be reformed now use; we have (they say) diverse short cuts or
shreddings, rather wishes than Prayers. T. C. l. 1. p. 138. and l. 3. p. 210,
211.
but every of them very short, as if they were Darts thrown out with a kind of
sudden quickness, lest that vigilant and erect attention of mind, which in
Prayer is very necessary, should be wasted or dulled through continuance, if
their Prayers were few and long. But that which St. Augustine does allow, they
condemn. Those Prayers whereunto devout minds have added a piercing kind of
brevity, as well in that respect which we have already mentioned, as also
thereby the better to express that quick and speedy expedition, wherewith
ardent affections, the very wings of Prayer, are delighted to present our suits
in Heaven, even sooner than our tongues can devise to utter them; they in their
mood of contradiction spare not openly to deride, and that with so base terms
as do very ill beseem men of their gravity. Such speeches are scandalous, they
savor not of God in him that uses them, and unto virtuously disposed minds
they are grievous corrosives. Our case were miserable, if that wherewith we
most endeavor to please God, were in his sight so vile and despicable, as men's
disdainful speech would make it.

34. Again, Lessons intermingled with our Prayers.
for as much as effectual Prayer is joined with a vehement intention of the
inferior powers of the Soul, which cannot therein long continue without pain,
it has been therefore thought good so by turns to interpose still somewhat for
the higher part of the mind, the understanding to work upon, that both being
kept in continual exercise with variety, neither might feel any great
weariness, and yet each be a spur to other. For Prayer kindles our desire
to behold God by speculation; and the mind delighted with that contemplative
sight of God, takes every where new inflammations to pray, the riches of the
Mysteries of Heavenly wisdom continually stirring up in us correspondent
desires toward them. So that he which prays in due sort, is thereby made the
more attentive to hear, and he which hears, the more earnest to pray, for the
time which we bestow as well in the one as the other. But for what cause soever
we do it, this intermingling of Lessons with Prayers is We have no such forms
in Scripture as that we should pray in two or three lines, and then after
having read a while some other thing, come and pray as much more, and so the
20. or the 30. time, with pauses between. If a man should come to a Prince, and
having very many things to demand; after he had demanded one thing, would stay
a long time, and then demand another, and so the third, the Prince might well
think that either he came to ask before he knew what he had need of, or that
he had forgotten some piece of his Suit, or that he were distracted in his
understanding, or some other like cause of the disorder of his Supplication. T.
C. l. 1. p. 138. This kind of reason the Propher in the matter of Sacrifices
does use. T. C. 1. 3. p. 210.
in their taste a thing as unsavory, and as unseemly in their sight, as if the
like should be done in Suits and Supplications before some mighty Prince of the
World. Our speech to worldly Superiors we frame in such sort as serves best
to inform and persuade the minds of them, who otherwise neither could nor
would greatly regard our necessities: Whereas, because we know that God is
indeed a King, but a great; King who understands all things beforehand,
which no other King besides does, a King which needs not to be informed what
we lack, a King readier to grant than we to make our requests; therefore in
Prayer we do not so much respect what Precepts Art delivers touching the
method of persuasive utterance in the presence of great men, as what does most
avail to our own edification in piety and godly zeal. If they on the contrary
side do think that the same rules of decency which serve for things done unto
terrene Powers, should universally decide what is fit in the service of God, if
it be their meaning to hold it for a Maxim, That the Church must deliver her
public Supplications unto God in no other form of speech than such as were
decent; if suit should be made to the Great Turk, or some other Monarch, let
them apply their own rule unto their own form of Common Prayer. Suppose that
the people of a whole Town, with some chosen man before them, did continually
twice or thrice in a week resort to their King, and every time they come, first
acknowledge themselves guilty of Rebellions and Treasons, then sing a Song, and
after that explain some Statute of the Land to the Standers by, and therein
spend at the least an hour; this done, turn themselves again to the King, and
for every sort of his Subjects crave somewhat of him; at the length sing him
another Song, and so take their leave: Might not the King well think, that
either they knew not what they would have, or else that they were distracted in
mind, or some other such like cause of the disorder of their Supplication?
This form of suing unto Kings were absurd: This form of Praying unto God they
allow. When God was served with legal Sacrifices, such was the miserable and
wretched disposition of some men's minds, that the best of every thing they had
being culled out for themselves, if there were in their flocks any poor starved
or diseased thing not worth the keeping, they thought it good enough for the
Altar of God, pretending (as wise Hyprocrites do when they rob God to enrich
themselves) that the fatness of Calves does benefit him nothing; to us the best
things are most profitable, to him all as one, if the mind of the Offerer be
good, which is the only thing he respects. In reproof of which their devout
fraud, the Prophet Malachy alleges, that gifts are offered unto God not as
(...) Arist. Rhet. lib. 1. cap. 9.
supplys of his want indeed, but yet as testimonies of that affection wherewith
we acknowledge and honor his greatness. For which cause, since the greater they
are whom we honor, the more regard we have to the quality and choice of those
Presents which we bring them for honor's sake; it must needs follow that if we
dare not disgrace our worldly Superiors with offering unto them such reffuse
as we bring unto God himself, we show plainly that our acknowledgment of his
Greatness is but feigned, in heart we fear him not so much as we dread them.
Mal. 1. 2. 14.
If ye offer the blind for Sacrifice, is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy
Prince; Will he be content or accept thy Person, says the Lord of Hosts?
Cursed be the Deceiver which has in his Flock a Male, and having made a Vow,
sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing: For I am a great King, says the
Lord of Hosts. Should we hereupon frame a Rule, that what form of speech or
behavior soever is fit for Suitors in a Prince's Court, the same and no other
beseems us in our Prayers to Almighty God.

35. But in vain we labor to persuade them that any thing can take away the
tediousness of Prayer, The number of our Prayers for earthly things, and our
often rehearsing of the Lords Prayer.
except it be brought to the very same both measure and form which themselves
assign. Whatsoever therefore our Liturgy has more than theirs, under one
devised pretense or other they cut it off. We have of Prayers for Earthly
things in their opinion too great a number; so often to rehearse the Lords Prayer
in so small a time, is, as they think, a loss of time, the Peoples praying
after the Minister, they say, both wastes time, and also makes an unpleasant
sound; I can make no Geometrical and exact measure; but verily I believe there
shall be found more than a third part of the Prayers, which are not Psalms and
texts of Scripture, spent in praying for, and praying against the commodities
and incommodities of this life, which is contrary to all the Arguments or
Contents of the Prayers of the Church, sit down in the Scripture, but
especially of our Savior Christ's Prayer, by the which ours ought to be
directed. T. C. l. 1. p. 135. What a reason is this, we must rep at the Lords
Prayer oftentimes, therefore oftentimes in half an hour, and one in the neck of
another? Our Savior Christ does not there give a prescript Form of Prayer
whereunto he binds us: but gives us a Rule and Squire to frame all our
Prayers by. I know it is necessary to Pray, and Pray often. I know also that in
a few words it is impossible for any man to frame so pithy a Prayer, and I
confess that the Church does well in concluding their Prayers with the Lords
Prayer: But I stand upon this, Thee there is no necessity laid upon us to use
these very words and no more. T. C. lib. 1. page 219.
the Psalms they would not have to be made (as they are) a part of our
Common Prayer, nor to be sung or said by turns, nor such Music to be used with
them; those Evangelical Hymns they allow not to stand in our Liturgy; the
Letany, the Creed of Athanasius, the Sentence of Glory, wherewith we use to
conclude Psalms, these things they cancel, as having been instituted in regard
of occasions peculiar to the times of old, and as being therefore now
superfluous. Touching Prayers for things earthly, we ought not to think that
the Church has set down so many of them without cause. They, peradventure,
which find this fault, are of the same affection with Solomon; so that if God
should offer to grant the whatsoever they ask, they would neither crave Riches,
not length of days, not yet victory over their Enemies, but only an
understanding heart; for which cause themselves having Eagles wings, are
offended to see others fly so near the ground. But the tender kindness of the
Church of God it very well beseems, to help the weaker sort, which are by so
great odds more in number, although some few of the perfecter and stronger may
be therewith for a time displeased. Ignorant we are not, that of such as
resorted to our Savior Christ being present on Earth, there came not any unto
him with better success for the benefit of their Souls everlasting happiness,
than they whose bodily necessities gave them the first occasion to seek relief,
when they saw willingness and ability of doing every way good unto all. The
graces of the Spirit are much more precious than worldly benefits; our ghostly
evils of greater importance than any harm which the body feels. Therefore our
desires to heavenward should both in measure and number no less exceed, than
their glorious Object does every way excel in value. These things are true and
plain in the eye of a perfect Judgment. But yet it must be withal considered,
that the greatest part of the World are they which be farthest from perfection.
Such being better able by sense to discern the wants of this present life, than
by spiritual capacity to apprehend things above sense, which tend to their
happiness in the world to come, are in that respect the more apt to apply their
minds even with hearty affection and zeal at the least unto those Branches of
Public prayer, wherein their own particular is moved. And by this mean there
steals upon them a double benefit; first because that good affection, which
things of smaller account have once set on work, is by so much the more easily
raised higher; and secondly, in that the very custom of seeking so particular
aid and relief at the hands of God, does by a secret contradiction withdraw
them from endeavoring to help themselves by those wicked shifts, which they
know can never have his allowance, whose assistance their Prayer seeks. These
multiplied Petitions of worldly things in Prayer have therefore, besides their
direct use, a Service, whereby the Church underhand, through a kind of
heavenly fraud, takes therewith the Souls of men as with certain baits. If
then their calculation be true (for so they reckon) that a full third of our
Prayers be allotted unto earthly benefits, for which our Savior in his
platform has appointed but one Petition amongst seven, the difference is
without any great disagreement; we respecting what men are, and doing that
which is mere in regard of the common imperfection, our Lord contrariwise
proposing the most absolute proportion that can be in men's desires, the very
highest mark whereat we are able to aim. Praemisse legitima and ordinaria
oratione, quasi fundamento, accidentium jus est desideriorum, jus est
superstruendi extrinsecus petitioner. Ter^ol. de Orat.
For which cause also our custom is both to place it in the front of our
Prayers as a Guide, and to add it in the end of some principal limbs or parts,
as a complement which fully perfecteth whatsoever may be defective in the rest.
Twice we rehearse it ordinarily, and oftener as occasion requires more
solemnity or length in the form of Divine Service; not mistrusting, till these
new curiosities sprang up, that ever any man would think our labor herein
misspent, the time wastfully consumed, and the Office it self made worse, by
so repeating that which otherwise would more hardly be made familiar to the
simpler sort; for the good of whose Souls there is not in Christian Religion
any thing of like continual use and force throughout every hour and moment of
their whole lives. I mean not only because Prayer, but because this very Prayer
is of such efficacy and necessity: for that our Savior did but set men a bare
example how to contrive or devise Prayers of their own, and no way bind them
to use this, is no doubt as Error. John the Baptist's Disciples, Luke 11. 1.
which had been always brought up in the bosom of God's Church from the time of
their first Infancy, till they came to the School of John, were not so brutish,
that they could be ignorant how to call upon the Name of God: but of their
Master they had received a form of Prayer amongst themselves, which form none
did use saving his Disciples, so that by it as by a mark of special difference
they were known from others. And of this the Apostles having taken notice, they
request that as John had taught his, so Christ would likewise teach them to
pray, Tertullian and Saint Augustine do for that cause term it, Orationem
legitimam, the Prayer which Christ's own Law has tied his Church to use in the
same Prescript form of words wherewith he himself did deliver it: and therefore
what part of the World soever we fall into, if Christian Religion have been
there received, the ordinary use of this very Prayer has with equal
continuance accompanied the same, as one of the principal and most material
duties of honor done to Jesus Christ. Cypr. in Orat. Dom.
Seeing that we have (says Saint Cyprian) an Advocate with the Father for our
Sins, when we that have sinned come to seek for pardon, let us allege unto God
the words which our Advocate has taught. For since his promise is our plain
warrant, that in his Name what we ask we shall receive, must we not needs much
the rather obtain that for which we sue, if not only his Name do countenance,
but also his Speech present our requests? Though men should speak with the
tongues of Angels, yet words so pleasing to the ears of God, as those which the
Son of God himself has composed, were not possible for men to frame. He
therefore which made us to live, has also taught us to pray, to the end that
speaking unto the Father in the Sonn's own prescript without scholy or gloss of
ours, we may be sure that we utter nothing which God will either disallow or
deny. Other Prayers we use may besides this, and this oftener than any other,
although not tied so to do by any Commandment of Scripture, yet moved with
such considerations as have been before set down: the causeless dislike where
of which others have conceived, is no sufficient reason for us, as much as once
to forbear, in any place, a thing which uttered with true devotion and zeal of
heart, affords to God himself that glory, that aid to the weakest sort of
men, to the most perfect that solid comfort which is unspeakable.

The Peoples trying after the Minister. Another fault is, That all the people
are appointed in diverse places to say after the Minister, whereby not only the
time is unprofitably wasted, and a confused noise of the people (one speaking
after another) caused, but an Opinion bred in their hearts that those only be
their Prayers which they pronounce with their own mouths after the Minister,
otherwise than the order which is left to the Church does bear. 1 Cor. 14. 16.
and otherwise than Justin Martyr shows the custom of the Churches to have
been in his time. T. C. l. 1 p. 139. and l. 3. p. 211, 212, 213.
36. With our Lords Prayer they would find no fault, so that they might
persuade us to use it before or other Sermons only (because so their manner is)
and not (as all Christian people have been of old accustomed) insert it so
often into the Liturgy. But the Peoples custom to repeat any thing after the
Minister, they utterly mislike. Twice we appoint that the words which the
Minister first pronounces, the whole Congregation shall repeat after him. As
first in the public Confession of Sins, and again in rehearsal of our Lord's
Prayer, presently after the blessed Sacrament of his Body and Blood received. A
thing no way offensive, no way unfit or unseemly to be done, although it had
been so appointed ofner than with us it is. But surely, with so good reason, it
stands in those two places, that otherwise to order it were not, in all
respects so well. Could there be any thing devised better, then that we all at
our first access unto God by Prayer, should acknowledge meekly our sins, and
that not only in heart, but with tongue; all which are present, being made
earwitnesses, even of every man's distinct and deliberate assent unto each
particular branch of a common Indictment drawn against our selves? How were it
possible, that the Church should any way else with such ease and certainty
provide, that none of her Children may as Adam dissemble that wretchedness, the
penitent confession whereof is so necessary a Preamble, especially to Common
Prayer? In like manner, if the Church did ever devise a thing fit and
convenient, what more then this, that when together we have all received those
Heavenly Mysteries wherein Christ imparteth himself unto us, and gives visible
testification of our blessed communion with him, we should in hatred of all
Heresies, Factions, and Schisms, the Pastor as a Leader, the people as willing
followers of him step by step, declare openly our selves united as Brethren in
one, (...) Basil. P^^s. in Pral.
by offering up with all our hearts and tongues that most effectual
Supplication, wherein he unto whom we offer it, has himself not only
comprehended all our necessities; but in such sort also framed every Petition,
as might most naturally serve for many, and does, though not always require,
yet always import a multitude of speakers together? For which cause
Communicants have ever used it, and we at that time by the form of our very
utterance do show we use it; yea, every word and syllable of it, as
Communicants. In the rest we observe that custom whereunto St. Paul alludeth, 1
Cor. 14. 15.
and whereof the Fathers of the Church in their Writings, make often mention,
to show indefinitely what was done, but not universally to bind for ever, all
Prayers unto one only fashion of utterance. The Reasons which we have
alleged, induce us to think it still a good work, which they in their pensive
care for the well bestowing of time account waste. As for unpleasantness of
sound, if it happen, the good of Men's souls, does either deceive our ears that
we note it not, or arm them with patience to endure it. We are not so nice as
to cast away a sharp Knife, because the edge of it may sometimes grate. And
such subtle opinions as few but Utopians are likely to fall into, we in this
climate do not greatly fear.

37. The complaint which they make about Psalms and Hymns, might as well be
over-past without any answer, Our manner of reading the Psalms otherwise then
the rest of the Scripture.
as it is without any cause brought forth. But our desire is to content them,
if it may be, and to yield them a just reason, even of the least things wherein
undeservedly they have but as much as dreamed or suspected that we do amiss.
They seem sometimes so to speak as if greatly offended them, that such Hymns
and Psalms as are Scripture, should in Common Prayer be otherwise used, then
the rest of the Scripture is wont; They have always the same profit to be
stu^ied in, to be read, and preached upon, which either Scriptures have, and
this above the rest, that they are to be sung.
sometime displeased they are at the artificial Music which we add unto
Psalms of this kind, or of any other nature else; sometime the plainest and
the most intelligible rehearsal of them, yet they savor not, because it is
done, by Interlocution, and with a mutual return of Sentences from side to
side. They are not ignorant what difference there is between other parts of
Scripture and Psalms. The choice and flower of (...)Di^nys. Hierar. Eccles.
cap. 3.
all things profitable in other Books, the Psalms do both more briefly contain,
and more movingly also express, by reason of that Poetical Form wherewith they
are written. The Ancients when they speak of the Book of Psalms, use to fall
into large Discourses, showing how this part above the rest does of purpose set
forth and celebrate all the considerations and operations which belong to God;
it magnifieth the holy Meditations and Actions of Divine Men; it is of things
heavenly an Universal Declaration, But to make daily Prayers of them
hand-over-head, or otherwise then the present estate wherein we he, does agree
with the manner contained in them, is an abusing of them. T. C. l^. 3. page 206.
working in them, whose hearts God inspireth with the due consideration
thereof, an habit or disposition of mind whereby they are made fit Vessels
both for receipt and for delivery of whatsoever spiritual perfection. What is
there necessary for man to know, which the Psalms are not able to teach? They
are to beginners an easy and familiar Introduction, a mighty Augmentation of
all Virtue and Knowledge in such as are entered before, a strong confirmation to
the most perfect amongst others. Heroical Magnanimity, exquisite Justice, gave
Moderation, exact Wisdom, Repentance unfeigned, unwearied Patience, the
Mysteries of God, the Sufferings of Christ, the Terrors of Wrath, the Comforts
of Grace, the Works of Providence over this World, and the promised Joys of
that World which is to come, all good necessarily to be either known, or done,
or had, this one Celestial Fountain yields. Let there be any grief or disease
incident nuto the Soul of Man, any wound or sickness named, for which there is
not in this Treasure-house, a present comfortable remedy at all times ready to
be found. Hereof it is that we covet to make the Psalms especially familiar
unto all. This is the very cause, why we iterate the Psalms oftener then any
other part of Scripture besides; the cause wherefore we inure the people
together with their Minister, and not the Minister alone, to read them as other
parts of Scripture he does.

Of Music with Psalms.
38. Touching Musical Harmony, whether by Instrument or by Voice, it being but
of high and low in sounds a due proportionable disposition, such
notwithstanding is the force thereof, and so pleasing effects it has in that
very part of man which is most Divine, that some have been thereby induced to
think that the Soul it self by Nature is, or has in it Harmony. A thing which
delights all Ages, and beseems all States; a thing as seasonable in grief
as in joy; as decent being added unto actions of greatest weight and solemnity,
as being used when men most sequester themselves from action. The reason hereof
is an admirable faculty which Music has to express and represents to the
mind, more inwardly then any other sensible mean, the very standing, rising,
and falling, the very steps and inflections every way, the turns and varieties
of all Passions, whereunto the mind is subject; yea, so to imitate them, that
whether it resemble unto us the same state wherein our minds already are, or a
clean contrary, we are not more contentedly by the one confirmed, then changed
and led away by the other. In Harmony, the very Image and Character, even of
Virtue and Vice is perceived, the mind delighted with their Resemblances, and
brought, by having them often iterated, into a love of the things themselves.
For which cause there is nothing more contagious and pestilent then some kinds
of Harmony; then some, nothing more strong and potent unto good. And that there
is such a difference of one kind from another, we need no proof but our own
experience, in as much as we are at the hearing of some more inclined unto
sorrow and heaviness, of some more mollified and softened in mind; one kind
apter to stay and settle us, another to move and stir our affections: There is
that draws to a marvelous grave and sober mediocrity, there is also that
carries as it were into ecstasies, filling the mind with an heavenly joy, and
for the time, in a manner, severing it from the body: So that although we lay
altogether aside the consideration of Ditty or Matter, the very Harmony of
sounds being framed in due sort, and carried from the Ear to the Spiritual
faculties of our Souls, is by a Native Puissance and Efficacy greatly available
to bring to a perfect temper whatsoever is there troubled, apt as well to
quicken the spirits as to allay that which is too eager, sovereign against
melancholy and despair, forcible to draw forth tears of devotion, if the mind
be such as can yield them able, both to move and to moderate all affections.
The Prophet David having therefore singular knowledge, not in Poetry alone, but
in Music also, judged them both to be things most necessary for the House of
God, left behind him to that purpose, a number of divinely indicted Poems, and
was farther the Author of adding unto Poetry, melody a public Prayer, melody
both Vocal and Instrumental for the raising up of Men's hearts, and the
sweetning of their affections toward God. In which consideration, the Church
of Christ does likewise at this present day, retain it as an ornament to Gods
service, and an help to our own devotion. They which, under pretense of the Law
Ceremonial abrogated require the abrogation of Instrumental Music, approving
nevertheless the use of Vocal melody to remain, must show some reason wherefore
the one should be thought a Legal Ceremony, and not the other. In Church Music
curiosity and oftentation of Art, wanton, or light, or unsuitable harmony, such
as only pleases the ear, and does not naturally serve to the very kind and
degree of those impressions which the matter that goes with it, leaves, or is
apt to leave in men's minds, does rather blemish and disgrace that we do, then
add either beauty or furtherance unto it. On the other side, these faults
prevented, the force and efficacy of the thing it self, when it drowneth not
utterly, but fitly suiteth with matter altogether sounding to the praise of
God, is in truth most admirable, and does much edify, if not the
Understanding, because it teaches not; yet surely the Affection, because
therein it works much. They must have hearts very dry and tough, from whom
the melody of Psalms does not sometime draw that wherein a mind religiously
affected delights. Be it as Rabanus Maurus observes, that at the first the
Church in this exercise was more simple and plain then we are; that their
singing was little more then only a melodious kind of pronounciation; that
the custom which we now use, was not instituted so much for their cause which
are Spiritual, as to the end that into grosser and heavier minds, whom bare
words do not easily move, the sweetness of melody might make some entrance for
good things. St. Basil himself acknowledging as much, did not think that from
such inventions, the least jot of estimation and credit thereby should be
derogated: (...) Basil. in Psalm.
For (says he) whereas the Holy Spirit saw, that Mankind is unto Virtue
hardly drawn, and that Righteousness is the less accounted of, by reason of the
proveness of our affections to that which delights; it pleased the Wisdom of
the same Spirit to borrow from melody that pleasure, which mingled with
Heavenly Mysteries, causes the smoothness and softness of that which touches
the ear, to convey, as it were, by stealth the treasure of good things into
man's mind. To this purpose were those harmonious tunes of Psalms divised for
us; that they which are either in years but young, or touching perfection of
Virtue, as yet not grown to ripeness, might, when they think they sing, learn.
O the wise conceit of that Heavenly Teacher, which both by his skill found out
a way, that doing those things wherein we delight, we may also learn that
whereby we profit!

39. And if the Prophet David did think that the very meeting of men together,
Of singing or saying Psalms and other parts of Common Prayer, wherein the
People and Minister answer one another by course. For the singing of Psalms by
course, and side after side, although it be very ancient, yet it is not
commendable; and so much the mere to be suspected, for that the Devil has gone
about to get it so great Authority, partly by deriving it from Ignatius time,
and partly in making the World believe that this came from Heaven, and that the
Angels were heard to sing after this sort. Which as it is a mere Fable, so is
it confuted by Historiographers, whereof some ascribe the beginning of this to
Damasus, some other unto Flavianus and Diodorus. T. C. lib. 1. p. 203.
and their accompanying one another to the House of God, should make the Bond
of their Love insoluble, and tie them in a League of inviolable Amity, Psalm.
54. 14. How much more may we judge it reasonable to hope, that the like effects
may grow in each of the people toward other, in them all toward their Pastor,
and in their Pastor toward every of them; between whom there daily and
interchangeably pass in the hearing of God himself, and in the presence of his
holy Angels, so many heavenly Acclamations, Exultations, Provocations,
Petitions, Songs of Comfort, Psalms of Praise and Thanksgiving; in all which
particulars, as when the Pastor makes their suits, and they with one voice
testify a general assent thereunto; or when he joyfully begins, and they
with like alacrity follow, dividing between them the sentences wherewith they
strive, which shall most show his own, and stir up others zeal, to the glory of
that God, whose name they magnify; or when he proposes unto God their
necessities, and they their own requests for relief in every of them; or when
he lifts up his voice like a Trumpet, to proclaim unto them the Laws of God,
they adjoining, though not as Israel did, by way of generality a cheerful
promise, Exodus 19.^. Is 24.3. Deuteronomy. 3. 27. and 26. 17. Josh. 24.16.
All that the Lord has commanded, we will do; yet that which God does no less
approve, that which favoreth more of meekness, that which testifies rather a
feeling knowledge of our common imbecility, unto the several Branches thereof,
several lowly and humble requests for Grace at the merciful Hands of God, to
perform the thing which is commanded; or when they wish reciprocally each
others ghostly happiness; or when he by exhortation raises them up, and they
by protestation of their readiness declare, be speaks not in vain unto them.
These interlocutory forms of speech, what are they else, but most effectual,
partly testifications, and partly inflammations of all Piety? When, and how
this custom of singing by course, came up in the Church, it is not certainly
known. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Socrates makes Ignatius, the Bishop of Antioch, in Syria, the first beginner
thereof, even under the Apostles themselves. But against Socrates they set the
authority of Theod. lib. 2 cap. 24.
Theodoret, who draws the original of it from Antioch, as Socrates does;
howbeit ascribing the invention to others, Flavian and Diodore, men which
constantly stood in defense of the Apostolic Faith, against the Bishop of that
Church, Leontius, a favorer of the Arians. Against both Socrates and Theodoret,
Plat. in vit^ Damasi.
Platina is brought as a witness, to testify that Damasus, Bishop of Rome,
began it in his time. Of the Latin Church, it may be true which Platina says.
And therefore, the eldest of that Church which makes any mention thereof, is
St. Ambrose, Been mari plerunque comparatur Ecclesia, quae primo ingredientis
populi agmine totis vestibulis undas commit; deinde in oratione totius plebis
tanquam undis ^efl. ^ensib^s strides; cum responsuriis Psalmorum, canruvinocura
mulierum, virginum, parvulorum consonus undatum stragor resulta:. Hexam. lib.
2. cap. 5.
Bishop of Milan, at the same time when Damasus was of Rome. Amongst the
Grecians, St. Basil Basil. Epist. 63.
having brought it into his Church before they of Neocaesarea used it,
Sabellius the Heretic, and Marcellus, took occasion thereat, to incense the
Churches against him, as being an Author of new devices in the Service of God.
Whereupon, to avoid the opinion of Novelty and Singularity, he alleges for
that which he himself did, the example of the Churches of Egypt, Lybia, Thebes,
Palestina, Tharabians, Phoenicians, Syrians, Mesopotamians, and, in a manner,
all that reverenced the custom of singing Psalms together. If the Syrians had
it then before Basil, Antioch the Mother Church of those parts, must needs have
used it before Basil, and consequently before Damasus. The question is then,
how long before, and whether so long, that Ignatius, or as ancient as Ignatius,
may be probably thought the first Inventors. Ignatius in Trajans days suffered
Martyrdom. And of the Churches in Pontus and Bithynia, to Trajan the Emperor,
his own Vicegerent, there affirms Plin. secund. Epist lib. 10. cp. 97. Exodus
15. 1. 21.
, That the only crime, he knew of them, was, They used to meet together at a
certain day, and to praise Christ with Hymns as a God, Secum invicem, one to
another amongst themselves. Which for any thing we know to the contrary, might
be the self-same form which Philo Iudaeus expresses, declaring how the Essens
were accustomed with Hymns and Psalms to honor God, sometime all exalting their
voices together in one, and sometime one part answering another, wherein, as he
thought, they swerved not much from the pattern of Moses and Miriam. Whether
Ignatius did at any time hear the Angels praising God after that sort, or no,
what matter is it: If Ignatius did not, Isai. 6. 3.
yet one which must be with us of greater Authority did. I saw the Lord (says
the Prophet Isaiah) on an high Throne, the Seraphims stood upon it, one cried
to another, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, the whole world is
full of his glory. But whosoever were the Author, whatsoever the Time,
whencesoever the Example of beginning this Custom in the Church of Christ; since
we are wont to suspect things only before trial, and afterward either to
approve them as good, or if we find them evil, accordingly to judge of them;
their counsel must needs seem very unseasonable, who advise men now to suspect
that wherewith the World has had, by their own account, Twelve hundred years
acquaintance, and upwards, enough to take away suspicion and jealousy. Men
know by this time, if ever they will know, whether it be good or evil which
has been so long retained. As for the Devil, which way it should greatly
benefit him to have this manner of singing Psalms accounted an invention of
Ignatius, or an imitation of the Angels of Heaven, we do not well understand,
But we very well see in them who thus plead, a wonderful celerity of discourse.
For perceiving at the first, but only some cause of suspicion and fear, left
it should be evil, they are presently in one and the self-same breath resolved,
From whence soever it came, it cannot he good, considering, that when it is
granted, that all the people may praise God (as it is in singing of Psalms)
then this ought no: to be restrained unto a few; and where it is lawful, both
with heart and voice, tosing the whole Psalm; there it is not meet, that they
should sing but the one half with their heart and voice, and the other with
their heart only. For where they may, both with heart and voice sing, ^i^e^
the heart is not enough. Therefore besides the incommodity which comes this
way, in that being tossed after this sort, men cannot understand what is sung,
those other two inconveniences come of this form of singing, and therefore it
is vanished in all Reformed Churches T. C. lib. 1. p. 103.
That what beginning soever it had, there is no possibility it should be good.
The Potent Arguments which did thus suddenly break in upon them, and overcome
them, are; First, That it is not unlawful for the People, all jointly to praise
God in singing of Psalms. Secondly, That they are not any where forbidden by
the Law of God, to sing every Verse of the whole Psalm, both with heart and
voice, quite and clean throughout. Thirdly, That it cannot be understood what
is sung after our manner. Of which three, for as much as lawfulness to sing one
way, proves not another way inconvenient; the former two, are true
Allegations, but they lack strength to accomplish their desire; the third so
strong; that it might persuade, if the truth thereof were not doubtful. And
shall this enforce us to banish a thing which all Christian Churches in the
World have received; a thing which so many ages have held; a thing which the
most approved Councils and Laws have so oftentimes ratified; a thing which was
never sound to have any inconvenience in it; a thing which always heretofore
the best Men, and wisest Governors of Gods people, did think they could never
commend enough; a thing which as Basil was persuaded, did both strengthen the
Meditation of those holy Words which were uttered in that sort, and serve also
to make attentive, and to raise up the hearts of men; a thing whereunto Gods
people of old, did resort with hope and thirst, that thereby, especially their
Souls, might be edified; a thing which fills the mind with comfort and
heavenly delight, stirs up flagrant desires and affections correspondent
unto that which the words contain, allayeth all kind of base and earthly
Cogitations, banisheth and drives away those evil secret suggestions which our
invisible Enemy is always apt to minister, waters the heart to the end it may
fructify, makes the virtuous, in trouble, full of magnanimity and courage,
serves as a most approved remedy against all doleful and heavy accidents which
befall men in this present life. To conclude, So fitly accords with the
Apostles own Exhortation, Ephesians. 5. 19.
Speak to your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, making melody,
and singing to the Lord in your hearts; that surely, there is more cause to
fear, lest the want thereof be a main, then the use a blemish to the Service of
God. It is not our meaning, that what we attribute unto the Psalms, should be
thought to depend altogether on that only form of singing or reading them by
course, as with us the manner is; but the end of our speech is to show, That
because the Fathers of the Church, with whom the self-same custom was so many
ages ago in use, have uttered all these things concerning the fruit which the
Church of God did then reap, observing that and no other form, it may be justly
avouched, that we our selves retaining it; an besides it also the other more
newly and not unfruitfully devised, do neither want that good which the latter
invention can afford, not lose any thing of that, for which the Ancients so often
and so highly commend the former. Let Novelty therefore in this give over
endless contradictions, and let ancient custom prevail.

40. We have already given cause sufficient for the great convenience, Of
Magnificat, Benedictus, and Nunc dimittis.
and use of reading the Psalms oftener then other Scriptures. Of reading or
singing likewise Magnificat, Benedictus, and Nunc dimittis, oftener then the
rest of the Psalms, the causes are no whit less reasonable; These Thanksgivings
were made by occasion of certain particular be^^^^e, and are no more to be used
for ordinary Prayers, then the Ave-Maria. So that both for this cause, and the
other before alleged of the Psalms, it is not convenient in make ordinary
prayers of them. T. C. lib. 3. p. 208.
so that if the one may very well monthly, the other may as well even daily be
iterated. They are Songs which concern us so much more then the Songs of David,
as the Gospel touches us more then the Law, the New Testament then the Old.
And if the Psalms for the excellency of their use, deserve to be oftener
repeated then they are, but that the multitude of them permits not any
ofther repetition, What disorder is it if these few Evangelical Hymns which are
in no respect less worthy, and may be by reason of their paucity imprinted with
much more ease in all men's memories, be for that cause every day rehearsed? In
our own behalf it is convenient and orderly enough, that both they and we make
day by day Prayers and Supplications the very same; why not as fit and
convenient to magnify the Name of God day by day with certain the very
self-same Psalms of Praise and Thanksgiving? Either let them not allow the one,
or else cease to reprove the other. For the Ancient received use of
intermingling Hymns and Psalms with Divine Readings, enough has been written.
And if any may fitly serve unto that purpose, how should it better have been
devised, then that a competent number of the Old being first read, these of the
New should succeed in the place where now they are set? In which place
notwithstanding, there is joined with Benedictus, the Hundredth Psalm; with
Magnifica^, the Ninety eighth, the Sixty seventh with Nunc dimittis; and in
every of them, the choice left free for the Minister to use indifferently the
one, or the other. Seeing therefore they pretend no quarrel at other Psalms,
which are in like manner appointed also to be daily read, why do these so much
offend and displease their taste? They are the first Gratulations wherewith our
Lord and Savior was joyfully received at his entrance into the World, by such
as in their Hearts, Arms, and very Bowels embraced Him; being Prophetical
discoveries of Christ already present, whose future coming, the other Psalms
did but fore-signifie, they are against the obstinate incredulity of the Jews,
the most luculent testimonies that Christian Religion has; yea, the only
sacred Hymns they are, that Christianity has peculiar unto it self; the other
being Songs too, of praise and thanksgiving, but Songs wherewith as we serve
God, so the Jew likewise. And whereas they tell us, These Songs were fit for
that purpose, when Simeon and Zachary, and the Blessed Virgin uttered them, but
cannot so be to us which have not received like benefit; Should they not
remember how expressly Hezekiah, amongst many other good things, 2 Chro. 29.30.
is commended for this also, That the praises of God were through his
appointment daily set forth, by using in public Divine Service, the Songs of
David and Asaph unto that very end? Either there wanted wise men to give
Hezekiah advice, and to inform him of that, which in his case was as true, as
it is in ours, namely, that without some inconvenience and disorder, he could
not appoint those Psalms to be used as ordinary Prayers, seeing what although
they were Songs of Thanksgiving, such as David and Asaph had special occasion
to use, yet not so the whole Church and People afterward, whom like occasions
did not befall; or else Hezekiah was persuaded as we are, that the praises of
God in the mouths of his Saints, are not so restrained to their own particular,
but that others may both conveniently and fruitfully use them; first, because
the Mystical Communion of all faithful men is such as makes every one to be
interested in those precious Blessings, which any one of them receives at Gods
hands: Secondly, because when any thing is spoken to extol the goodness of God,
whose mercy endures for ever, albeit the very particular occasion whereupon it
rises, do come no more; yet, the Fountain continuing the same, and yielding
other new effects which are but only in some sort proportionable, a small
resemblance between the benefits, which we and others have received, may serve
to make the same words of praise and thanksgiving fit, though not equally in
all circumstances fit for both; a clear demonstration whereof, we have in all
the Ancient Fathers Commentaries and Meditations upon the Psalms. Last of all,
because even when there is not as much as the show of any resemblance,
nevertheless by often using their words in such manner, our minds are daily
more and more ensured with their affections.

Of the Le^any.
41. The Public Estate of the Church of God amongst the Jews, has had many
rare and extraordinary Occurrents, which also were occasions of sundry We pray
for the avoiding of those dang^^^ which are nothing near us; as from Lightning
and Thundering in the midst of Winter; from Storms; and Tempest, when the
Weather is most fair, and the Seas most calm. It is true. That upon some urgent
Calamity, a Prayer may, and ought to be framed, which may beg, either the
community, for want whereof the Church is in distress, ^^ the turning away of
that mischief, which either approaches, or is already upon it. But to make
those Prayers which are for the present time and danger, ordinary and daily
Prayers; I cannot hitherto see any, either Scripture, or example of the
Primitive Church. And here, for the simples sake, I will set down after what
^ur^ this abuse crept into the Church. There was one Mamericus, Bishop of
Vienna, which in the time of great Earthquakes, which were in France,
instituted certain Supplications, which the Grecians (and we of them) call the
Letany, which concerned that matter: There is no doubt, but as other
discommodities rose in other Countries, they likewise had Prayers accordingly.
Now Pope Gregory either made himself, or gathered the Supplications that were
made against the Calamities of every Country, and made of them a great Letany
or Supplication, as Platina calls in, and gave it to be used in all Churches:
which thing albeit, all Churches might do for the time, in respect of the case
of the Calamity which the Churches suffered, yet there is no cause, why it
should be perpetual, that was ordained but for a time ^ and why all Lands
should pray to be delivered from the Incommodities that some Land has been
troubled with. T. C. lib 1. page 137. ^ Exodus 15.30. Wild. 10. 20. 2 Samuel 6. 1.
1 Chronicles. 13.4. 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. Joel 1. 1^.
open Solemnities and Offices, whereby the people did with general consent make
show of correspondent affection toward God. The like duties appear usual in
the ancient Church of Christ, by that which Tertul. lib. ^. ad Exor.
Tertullian speaks of Christian Women themselves matching with Infidels. She
cannot content the Lord with performance of his discipline, that has at her
side a Vassal, whom Satan has made his vice-agent to cross whatsoever the
faithful should do. If her presence be required at the time of station or
standing Prayer, he charge her at no time, but that to be with him in his
baths; if a fasting day come, he has on that day a banquet to make, if there
be cause for the Church to go forth in solemn Procession, his whole family have
such business come upon them, that no one can be spared. These Processions, as
it seems, were first begun for the interring of holy Martyrs, and the
visiting of those places where they were intombed. Which thing, the name it
self applied by Terent. Andr.
Heathens, unto the office of Exequies, and partly the speeches of some of the
Ancients delivered concerning Hier. Epist. 22. ad Eust. Martyrs tibi
quaerantur in cubiculo tuo. Nunquam causa decrit procedendi, and ^emper quando
^ecesse est, progressura sis.
Christian Processions, partly also the very dross which Superstition thereunto
added, I mean, the Custom of Invocating Saints in Processions, heretofore
usual, do strongly insinuate. And as things invented to one purpose, are by use
easily converted to more Socrat. lib. 6. cap ^. S^^om. lib. ^. cap. 8. These.
lib. 15. li^ 30. ^^b. 3. cap. 10 Novel. 68. 5^.
, it grew, That Supplications, with this solemnity for the appeasing of Gods
wrath, and the averting of public evils, were of the Greek Church termed
Litanies, Rogations of the Latin Basil. Epist. 63. Wheph. lib. 1^. cap 3.
Codem. in Theodis.
. To the people of Vienna ( Mamercus being their Bishop above 450 years after
Christ) therebefel many things, the suddenness and strangeness whereof, so
amazed the hearts of all men, that the City they began to forsake as a place
which Heaven did threaten with imminent ruin. It beseemed not the person of so
grave a Prelate to be either utterly without counsel, as the rest were, or in a
common perplexity to show himself alone secure. Wherefore as many as remained,
he earnestly exhorts to prevent portended calamities, using those virtuous
and holy means, wherewith others in like case have prevailed with God. To which
purpose, he perfecteth the Rogations or Litanies before in use, and adds unto
them that which the present necessity required. Their good success moved
Sidonius, Sidon lib. 7. Epist. ^.
Bishop of Averna, to use the same so-corrected Rogations at such time, as he
and his people were after afflicted with Famine, and besieged with potent
Adversaries. For till the empty name of the Empire came to be settled in Charles
the Great, the fall of the Romans huge Dominion concurring with other universal
evils, caused those times to be days of much affliction and trouble throughout
the World. So that Rogations or Litanies were then the very strength, stay, and
comfort of Gods Church. Whereupon in the year Five hundred and six, it was by
the Council of Aurelia decreed, That the whole Church should bestow yearly at
the Feast of Pentecost, Concii. tom. 2. page 513.
three days in that kind of Processionary service. About half an hundred years
alter, to the end, that the Latin Churches, which all observed this Custom,
might not vary in the order and form of those great Litanies which were so
solemnly every where exercised, it was thought convenient by Gregory the First,
and the best of that name, to draw the flower of them all into one. But this
iron began at length to gather rust; which thing the Synod of Colen saw, and in
part redrest within that Province, neither denying the necessary use for which
such Litanies serve, Council. romans 5. Anno 1536.
wherein Gods clemency and mercy is desired by public suit, to the end, that
Plagues, Destructions, Calamities, Famines, Wars, and all other the like
adversities, which for our manifold sins we have always cause to fear, may be
turned away from us and prevented through his Grace, not yet dissembling the
great abuse whereunto as sundry other things, so this had grown by men's
improbity and malice; to whom, that which was devised for the appeasing of Gods
displeasure, gave opportunity of committing things which justly kindled his
wrath. For remedy whereof it was then thought better, that these and all other
Supplications or Processions should be no where used, but only within the
Walls of the House of God, the place sanctified unto Prayer. And by us not
only such inconveniences being remedied, but also whatsoever was otherwise
amiss in form or matter, it now remains a work, the absolute perfection
whereof upbraideth with Error, or somewhat worse, them whom in all parts it
does not satisfy. As therefore Litanies have been of longer continuance then
that we should make either Gregory or Mamercus the Author of them; so they are
of more permanent use, then that now the Church should think it needs them
not. What dangers at any time are imminent, what evils hang over our heads, God
does know, and not we. We find by daily experience, that those calamities may
be nearest at hand, readiest to break in suddenly upon us, which we in regard
of times or circumstances, may imagine to be farthest off. Or if they do not
indeed approach, yet such miseries as being present, all men are apt to bewail
with tears, the wise by their Prayers should rather prevent. Finally, if we for
our selves had a privilege of immunity, does not true Christian Charity
require, that whatsoever any part of the World, yea, any one of all our
Brethren elsewhere, does either suffer or fear, the same we account as our own
burden? What one Petition is there found in the whole Litany, whereof we shall
ever be able at any time to say, That no man living needs the grace or
benefit therein craved at Gods hands? I am not able to express how much it does
grieve me, that things of Principal Excellency, should be thus bitten at, by
men whom God has endued with graces, both of Wit and Learning for better
purposes.

Of Athanasius Cre^^, and Gloria Pa^ri.
We have from the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ received that brief
Confession of Faith, which has been always a badge of the Church, a mark
whereby to discern Christian men from Infidels and Jews, Ir^n. lib. 1. cap. 3
This Faith, received from the Apostles and their Disciples (says Ireneus) the
Church, though dispersed throughout the World, does notwithstanding keep as
safe, as if it dwells within the Walls of some one house, and as uniformly hold,
as if it had but one only heart and soul; this as consonantly it Preaches,
teaches, and delivers, as if but one tongue did speak for all. At one Sun
shines to the whole World; so there is no Faith but this one published, the
brightness whereof must enlighten all that come to the knowledge of the Truth.
Pertu^. de Prae^^. Advers. Haeres. and Advers. Prax.
This rule (says Tertullian) Christ did institute, the stream and current of
this rule has gone as far, it has continued as long as the very promulgation
of the Gospel. The like may be said of the Gloria Patri, and the Athanasius
Creed. It was first brought into the Church to the end, that men thereby should
make an open Profession in the Church of the Divinity of the son of God,
against the de^^stible opinion of Arius and his Disciples, wherewith at that
time marvelously swarmed almost the whole Christendom. Now that it has pleased
the Lord to quench that fire, there in no such en^e way these things should be
used in the Church, at the least, why that Gloria Patri should be so often
repeated T. C. lib. 1. p. 137.
Under Constantine the Emperor, about Three hundred years and upward after
Christ, Arius a Priest in the Church of Alexandria, a suttle-witted, and a
mavelous fair-spoken man, but discontented, that one should be placed before
him in honor, whose superior he thought himself in desert, became through envy
and stomach, prone unto contradiction, and hold to broach at the length, that
Heresy wherein the Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ, contained, but not opened
in the former Creed, the coequality and coeternity of the Son with the Father
was denied. Being for this impiety deprived of his place by the Bishop of the
same Church, the punishment which should have reformed him, did but increase
his obstinacy, and give him occasion of laboring with greater earnestness
elsewhere, to entangle unwary minds with the snares of his damnable opinion.
Arius in short time had won to himself, a number both of Followers and of great
Defenders, whereupon much disquietness on all sides ensued. The Emperor, to
reduce the Church of Christ unto the Unity of sound Belief, when other means,
whereof trial was first made, took no effect, gathered that famous Assembly of
Three hundred and eighteen Bishops in the Council of Nice, where besides, order
taken for many things which seemed to need redress, there was with common
consent, for the settling of all men's minds, that other Confession of Faith set
down, which we call the Nicene Creed, whereunto the Arians themselves which
were present subscribed also; not that they meant sincerely, and indeed to
forsake their error, but only to escape deprivation and exile, which they saw
they could not avoid, openly persisting in their former opinions, when the
greater part had concluded against them, and that with the Emperors Royal
Assent. Reserving therefore themselves unto future opportunities, and knowing,
that it would not boot them to stir again in a matter so composed, unless they
could draw the Emperor first, and by his means the chiefest Bishops unto their
part; till Constantines death, and somewhat after, they always professed love
and zeal to the Nicene Faith, yet ceased not in the mean while to strengthen
that part which in heart they favored, and to infest by all means, under color
of other quarrels, their greatest Adversaries in this cause: Amongst them
Athanasius especially, whom by the space of Forty six years, from the time of
his Consecration, to succeed Alexander, Archbishop in the Church of Alexandria,
till the last hour of his life in this World, they never suffered to enjoy the
comfort of a peaceable day. The heart of Constantine stolen from him.
Constantius Constantines Successor, his scourge and torment by all the ways
that malice armed with Sovereign Authority could devise and use. Under Julian
no rest given him; and in the days of Valentinian, as little. Crimes there were
laid to his charge many, the least whereof, being just, had bereaved him of
estimation and credit with men, while the World stands. His Judges evermore
the self-same men by whom his accusers were suborned. Yet the issue always on
their part shame; on his, triumph. Those Bishops and Prelates, who should have
accounted his cause theirs, and could not many of them, but with bleeding
hearts, and with watered checks, behold a person of so great place and worth
constrained to endure so soul indignities, were sure by bewraying their
affection toward him, to bring upon themselves those molestations, whereby if
they would not be drawn to seem his Adversaries, yet others should be taught
how unsafe it was to continue his friends. Whereupon it came to pass in the
end, that (very few excepted) all became subject to the sway of time; other
odds there was none amongst them, saving only that some fell sooner away, some
latter from the soundness of Belief; some were Leaders in the Host of Impiety,
and the rest as common Soldiers, either yielding through fear, or brought under
with penury, or by flattery ensnared, or else beguiled through simplicity,
which is the fairest excuse that well may be made for them. Yes, (that which
all men did wonder at) Osius the ancientest Bishop that Christendom then had,
the most forward in defense of the Catholic cause, and of the contrary part
most feared; that very Osius, with whose hand the Nicene Creed it self was set
down, and framed for the whole Christian World to subscribe unto, so far
yielded in the end, as even with the same hand to ratify the Arians
Confession, a thing which they neither hoped to see, nor the other part ever
feared, till with amazement they saw it done. Both were persuaded, that
although there had been for Osius no way, but either presently subscribe or
die, 2 Mac. 6. 24. Major Centenario. Sulpit. Sever. hist. l. ^.^
his answer and choice would have been the same that Eleazars was, It does not
become our age to dissemble, whereby many young persons might think, that Osius
in hundred years old and upward, were now gone to another Religion; and so
through mine hypocrisy [for a little time of transitory life] they might be
deceived by me, and I procure malediction and reproach to my old age. For
though I were now delivered from the torments of men, yet could I not escape
the hand of the Almighty, neither alive nor dead. But such was the stream of
those times, that all men gave place unto it, which we cannot but impute,
partly, to their own oversight. For at the first the Emperor was theirs, the
determination of the Council of Nice was for them, they had the Arians hands to
that Council: So great advantages are never changed so far to the contrary, but
by great error. It plainly appears, that the first thing which weakened them,
was their security. Such as they knew were in heart still affected toward
Arianism, they suffered by continual nearness to possess the minds of the
greatest about the Emperor, which themselves might have done with very good
acceptance, and neglected it. In Constantines life time to have settled
Constantius the same way, had been a duty of good service toward God, a mean
of peace and great quietness to the Church of Christ, a labor easy, and how
likely we may conjecture, when after that so much pains was taken to instruct,
and strengthen him in the contrary course, after that so much was done by
himself to the furtherance of Heresy, yet being touched in the end voluntarily
with remorse, nothing more grieved him then the memory of former proceedings in
the cause of Religion, and that which he now foresaw in Julian, the next
Physician into whose hands the body that was thus distempered must fall.
Howbeit this we may somewhat excuse, in as much as every man's particular care
to his own charge was such, as gave them no leisure to heed what others
practiced in Princes Courts. But of the two Synods of Arimine and Selencia,
what should we think? Constantius by the Arians suggestion, had devised to
assemble all the Bishops of the whole World about this controversy; but in two
several places, the Bishops of the West at Arimine in Italy, the Eastern at
Selencia the same time. Amongst them of the East there was no stop, they agreed
without any great ado, gave their sentence against Heresy, excommunicated some
chief maintainers thereof, and sent the Emperor word what was done. They had at
Arimine about Four hundred which held the truth, scarce of the adverse part
Fourscore; but these obstinate, and the other weary of contending with them:
Whereupon, by both it was resolved to send to the Emperor, such as might inform
him of the cause, and declare what hindered their peaceable agreement. There are
chosen for the Catholic side Ex part nostra leguntur homines ad lescentes,
pardon docti pardon cauti^^, Ar^anis autem missi ^nes, callidi and ingenio
valentes vetes ano, perfidia imbuti, qui apud Regem facile superiorese
^^nirunt. Sulpit. lib. 1.
, such men as had in them nothing to be noted but boldness, neither gravity,
nor learning, nor wisdom. The Arians for the credit of their faction, take the
eldest, the best experienced, the most wary, and the longest practiced Veterans
they had amongst them. The Emperor conjecturing of the rest on either part, by
the quality of them whom he saw, sent them speedily away, and with them a
certain Confession of Faith Est temque conscri^^^ ab improbit sidem tradie
verbis fallentibus involutam, quae Catholicano disciplinam persidia latente
Inqueretur. Ibid.
, ambiguously and subtly drawn by the Arians, whereunto unless they all
subscribed, they should in no case be suffered to depart from the place where
they were. At the length it was perceived, that there had not been in the
Catholics, either at Arimine, or at Selencia, so much foresight, as to
provide, that true intelligence might pass between them what was done, Upon the
advantage of which Error, their adversaries abusing each with persuasion that
other had yielded, suprized both. The Emperor the more desirous and glad of
such events, for that, besides all other things wherein they hindered
themselves, the gall and bitterness of certain Men's writings, who spared him
little for honors sake, made him for their sakes the less inclinable to that
truth which he himself should have honored and loved. Only in Athanasius there
was nothing observed throughout the course of that long Tragedy, other then
such as very well became a wise man to do, and a righteous to suffer. So that
this was the plain condition of those times, The whole World against
Athanasius, and Athanasius against it; Half an hundred of years spent in
doubtful trial, which of the two in the end would prevail, the side which had
all, or else the part which had no friend but God and Death; the one a Defender
of his Innocence, the other a Finisher of all his Troubles. Now although these
Contentions were cause of much evil, yet some good the Church has reaped by
them, in that they occasioned the learned and sound in Faith, to explain such
things as Heresy went about to deprave. And in this respect, the Creed of
Athanasius, first exhibited unto Julius, Bishop of Rome, and afterward (as we
may probably gather) sent to the Emperor Iovinian, for his more full
information concerning that truth which Arianism so mightily did impugn, was
both in the East and the West Churches accepted as a treasure of inestimable
price, (...) Greg. Nazia^. de Atha.
by as many as had not given up even the very ghost of belief. Then was the
Creed of Athanasius written, howbeit not then so expedient to be publicly used
as now in the Church of God; because while the heat of division lasts, truth
it self enduring opposition, does not so quietly and currantly pass throughout
all men's hands, neither can be of that account, which afterward it has, when
the World once perceives the virtue thereof, not only in it self, but also by
the conquest which God has given it over Heresy. That which Heresy did by
sinister interpretations, go about to pervert in the first and most ancient
Apostolic Creed, the same being by singular dexterity and plainness cleared
from those Heretical corruptions, partly by this Creed of Athanasius, written
about the year Three hundred and forty, and partly by that other set down in
the Synod of Constantinople, That Creed which in the Book of Common Prayer,
follows immediately after the reading of the Gospel.
Forty years after, comprehending, together with the Nicene Creed, an addition
of other Articles which the Nicene Creed omitted, because the controversy then
in hand needed no mention to be made of them. These Catholic Declarations of
our Belief delivered by them, which were so much nearer then we are unto the
first publication thereof, and continuing needful for all men at all times to
know, these Confessions as testimonies of our continuance in the same Faith to
this present day, we rather use them any other gloss or paraphrased devised by
our selves, which though it were to the same effect, notwithstanding could not
be of the like authority and credit. For that of Hilary unto St. Augustine has
been ever, and is likely to be always true, Hilar. Arela. Epist. id A^g.
Your most religious wisdom knows how great their number is in the Church of
God, whom the very authority of men's names, does keep in that opinion which
they hold already, or draw unto that which they have not before held. Touching
the Hymn of Glory, out usual conclusion to Psalms, the glory of all things is
that, 1 Cor. 15. 40. Exodus 33. 1^. Heb. 1. 3. Matthew. 18. 13.
wherein their highest perfection does consist; and the glory of God, that
divine excellency whereby he is eminent above all things, his omnipotent,
infinite, and eternal Being, which Angels and glorified Saints do intuitively
behold; we on Earth apprehend principally by Faith, in part also by that kind
of knowledge which grows from experience of those effects, the greatness
whereof exceeds the powers and abilities of all Creatures, both in Heaven and
Earth. Josh 7. 13. Psalm. 2^. 23.
God is glorified, when such his excellency above all things, is with due
admiration acknowledged. Which dutiful acknowledgment of Gods excellency by
occasion of special effects, being the very proper subject, and almost the
only matter purposely treated of in all Psalms, if that joyful Hymn of Glory
have any use in the Church of God, whose Name we therewith extol and magnify,
Can we place it more fitly then where now it serves as a close or conclusion
to Psalms? Neither is the Form thereof newly or unnecessarily invented. Basil.
Ep. ^8.
We must (says St. Basil) as we have received, even so Baptize; and as we
Baptize, even so Believe; and as we Believe, even so give Glory. Baptizing, we
use the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Confessing the
Christian Faith, we declare our Belief in the Father, and in the Son, and in
the Holy Ghost: Ascribing Glory unto God, we give it to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost. It is (...), the token of a true and sound
understanding for matter of Doctrine about the Trinity, when, in ministering
Baptism, and making Confession, and giving Glory, there is a conjunction of all
three, and no one of the three severed from the other two. Against the Arians,
affirming the Father to be greater then the Son in honor, excellency, dignity,
majesty, this form and manner of glorifying God was not at that time first
begun, but received long before, and alleged at that time as an argument for
the truth. Fabad. lib. cont^. Arian.
If (says Fabadius) there be that inequality which they affirm, then do we
every day blaspheme God, when, in Thanksgivings and offerings of Sacrifice, we
acknowledge those thing; common to the Father and the Son. The Arians
therefore, for that they perceived how this did prejudice their cause, altered
the Hymn of Glory, whereupon ensued in the Church of Antioch, about the year
Three hundred forty nine, that jar which Theodoret and Sozomen mention. Theod.
lib. 1. cap. 21. Sozom lib. 4. cap. 19.
In their Quires, while they praised God together, as the manner was, at the
end of the Psalms which they sung, it appeared what opinion every man held; for
as much as they glorified some the Father, And the Son, And the Holy Ghost;
some the Father By the Son, In the Spirit; the one sort thereby declaring
themselves to embrase the Sons equality with the Father, as the Council of Nice
had defined; the other sort, against the Council of Nice, his inequality.
Leontiuos their Bishop, although an enemy to the better part, yet wary and
subtle, as in a manner all the heads of the Arians Faction were, could at no
time be plainly heard to use either form, perhaps lest his open contradiction
of them whom he favored not, might make them the more eager, and by that mean
the less apt to be privately won; or peradventure for that, though he joined in
opinion with that sort of Arians, who denied the Son to be equal with the
Father; yet from them he dissented, which thought the Father and the Son, not
only unequal, but unlike, as AEtuis did upon a frivolous and false surmise,
that because the Apostle has said, 1 Cor. 8. 6. 1 Cor. 12. 3. 4. 13.
One God of whom, one Lord by whom, one Spirit in whom, his different manner of
speech does argue a different Nature and Being in them, of whom he speaks:
Ou^ of which blind collection, it seems that this their new devised Form did
first spring. But in truth, even that very Form which the Arians did then use
(saving that they chose it to serve as their special mark of Recognisance, and
gave it secretly within themselves a sinister construction) has not otherwise
as much as the show of any thing which sounds toward impiety. For albeit, if
we respect Gods glory within it self, it be the equal right and possession of
all three, and that without any odds, any difference; yet, touching his
manifestation thereof unto us by continual effects, and our perpetual
acknowledgment thereof unto him likewise by virtuous Offices, Does not every
tongue both ways confess, That the brightness of his Glory has spread it self
throughout the World By the Ministry of his only begotten Son, and is In the
manifold Graces of the Spirit every way mavelous? Again, That whatsoever we
do to his Glory, it is done In the power of the Holy Ghost, and made acceptable
By the Merit and Mediation of Jesus Christ? So that glory to the Father And the
Son, or glory to the Father By the Son, saving only where evil minds do abuse
and pervert most holy things, are not else the voices of Error and Schism, but
of sound and sincere Religion. It has been the Custom of the Church of Christ,
to end sometimes Prayers, and Sermons always, with words of glory, wherein, as
long as the Blessed Trinity had due honor, and till Arianism had made it a
matter of great sharpness and subtilty of Wit, to be a sound believing
Christian; men were not curious what Syllables or Particles of speech they
used. Upon which confidence and trust notwithstanding, when St. Basil began to
practice the like indifferency, and to conclude Public Prayers, glorifying
sometime the Father, with the Son, and the Holy Ghost; sometime the Father, by
the Son, in the Spirit; whereas long custom had enured them unto the former
kindealone, by means whereof, the latter was new and strange in their ears:
This needless experiment brought afterward upon him a necessary labor of
excusing himself to his Friends, and maintaining his own act against them, who
because the Light of his Candle too much drowned theirs, were glad to lay hold
on so colorourable matter, and exceeding forward to traduce him as an Author of
suspicious Innovation. How has the World forsaken that course which it
sometime held? How are the judgments, hearts, and affections of men altered?
May we not wonder, that a man of St. Basils authority and quality, an
Arch-Prelate in the House of God, should have his Name far and wide called in
question, and be driven to his painful Apologies, to write in his own defense
whole Volumes, and yet hardly to obtain with all his endeavor a pardon; the
crime laid against him, being but only a change of some one or two syllables
in their usual Church Liturgy? It was thought in him an unpardonable offense to
alter any thing; in us as intolerable, that we suffer any thing to remain
unaltered. The very Creed of Athanasius, and that sacred Hymn of Glory, then
which, nothing does sound more heavenly in the ears of faithful men, are now
reckoned as superfluities, which we must in any case pare away, left we cloy
God with too much service. Is there in that Confession of Faith, any thing
which does not at all times edefie and instruct the attentive hearer? Or is our
Faith in the Blessed Trinity, a matter needless, to be so oftentimes mentioned
and opened in the principal part of that duty which we ow to God, our Public
Prayer? Has the Church of Christ from the first beginning, by a secret
Universal Instinct of Gods good Spirit, always tied it self to end neither
Sermon, nor almost any speech of moment which has concerned Matters of God,
without some special words of honor and glory to that Trinity which we all
adore; and is the like conclusion of Psalms, become now at length an eyesore,
or a galling to their ears that hear it? Those flames of Arianism, they say,
are quenched, which were the cause why the Church devised in such sort to
confess and praise the glorious Deity of the Son of God. Seeing therefore the
sore is whole, why retain we as yet the Pla^ster? When the cause, why any thing
was ordained does once cease, the thing it self should cease with it, that the
Church being eased of unprofitable labors, needful offices may the better be
attended. For the doing of things unnecessary, is many times the cause why the
most necessary are not done. But in this case so to reason, will not serve
their turns. For first, the ground whereupon they build, is not certainly their
own, but with special limitations. Few things are so restrained to any one end
or purpose, that the same being extinct, they should forthwith utterly become
frustrate. Wisdom may have framed one and the same thing to serve commodiously
for diverse ends, and of those ends, any one be sufficient cause for
continuance, though the rest have ceased, even as the Tongue, which Nature has
given us, for an Instrument of speech is not idle in dumb persons, because it
also serves for taste. Again, if time have worn out, or any other mean
altogether taken away, what was first intended; uses, not thought upon before,
may afterward spring up, and be reasonable causes of retaining that which
other considerations did formerly procure to be instituted. And it comes
sometime to pass, that a thing unnecessary in it self, as touching the whole
direct purpose, whereto it was meant, or can be applied, does notwithstanding
appear convenient to be still held, even without use, lest by reason of that
coherence which it has with somewhat most necessary, the removal of the one,
should indamage the other: And therefore men which have clean lost the
possibility of sight, keep still their eyes nevertheless in the place where
Nature set them. As for these two Branches whereof our Question grows,
Arianism was indeed some occasion of the one, but a cause of neither, much less
the only entire cause of both. For albeit, conflict with Arians brought forth
the occasion of writing that Creed, which long after was made a part of the
Church Liturgy, as Hymns and Sentences of Glory were a part thereof before; yet
cause sufficient there is, why both should remain in use, the one as a most
Divine Explication of the chiefest Articles of our Christian Belief, the other
as an Heavenly acclamation of joyful applause to his praises in whom we
believe; neither the one, nor the other unworthy to he heard souncing as they
are in the Church of Christ, whether Arianism live or die. Against which poison
likewise, if we think, that the Church at this day needs not those ancient
preservatives, which ages before us were so glad to use, we deceive our selves
greatly. The Weeds of Heresy being grown unto such ripeness as that was, do
even in the very cutting down, scatter oftentimes those seeds which for a while
lie unseen and buried in the Earth, but afterward freshly spring up again no
less pernicious them at the first. Which thing they very well know, and I doubt
not will easily confess, who live to their great, both toil and grief, where
the blasphemies of Arians, Samosatenians, Tritheits, Eutychians, and
Maccdonians, are renewed by them, who to hatch their Heresy, have chosen those
Churches as fittest Nests where Athanasius Creed is not heard; by them, I say,
renewed, who following the course of extreme Reformation, were wont in the
pride of their own proceedings to glory, that whereas Luther did but blow away
the Roof, and Zwinglius batter but the Walls of Popish Superstition, the last
and hardest work of all remained, which was, to raze up the very ground and
foundation of Popery, that doctrine concerning the Deity of Christ, which
Satanasius (for so it pleased those impious forsaken Miscreants to speak) has
in this memorable Creed explained, So manifestly true is, that which one of the
Ancients has concerning Arianism, (...) contra Ar.
Mortuis authoribus hujus veneni, scelerata tamen eorum doctrina non moritur,
The Authors of this venom being dead and gone, their wicked doctrine
notwithstanding continues.

43. Amongst the heaps of these Excesses and Superfluities, Our want o^
particular thank giving. ^^ such Prayers are needful, whereby we beg release
from o distresses; so there ought to be as necessary Prayers of Thanksgiving,
when we have received those things at the Lords hand which we asked. T. C. lib
1. page 13^. I do not simply require a solemn and express Thanksgiving for such
benefits; but only upon a supposition, which is, that is it be expedi^nt that
there should be experts Prayers against so many of their earthly miseries, that
then al^o it is meet that upon the deliverance, there should be an express
Thanksgiving. T. C. lib. 3. page 209.
there is espied the want of a principal part of duty, There are no
thanksgivings for the benefits, for which there are Petitions in our Book of
Prayer. This they have thought a point material to be objected. Neither may we
take it in evil part to be admonished, what special duties of thankfulness we
ow to that merciful God, for whose unspeakable Graces, the only requital which
we are able to make, is a true, hearty, and sincere acknowledgement, how
precious we esteem such benefits received, and how infinite in goodness the
Author from whom they come. But that to every Petition we make for things
needful, there should be some answerable sentence of thanks provided
particularly to follow such requests obtained; either it is not a matter so
requisite as they pretend; or if it be, wherefore have they not then in such
order framed their own Book of Common Prayer? Why has our Lord and Savior
taught us a form of Prayer containing so many Petitions of those things which
we want, and not delivered in like sort, as many several forms of Thanksgiving,
to serve when any thing we pray for is granted? What answer soever they can
reasonably make unto these demands, the same shall discover unto them how
causeless a censure it is, that there are not, in our Book, Thanksgivings for
all the benefits forwhi^^ there are Petitions The default of the Book, for that
there are no Forms of Thanksgiving for the release from those common calamities
from which we have Petitions to be delivered. T. C. lib. 3. p. 2^3. ^ ph^^^. p
C^^la. 16.
. For concerning the Blessings of God, whether they tend unto this life, or the
life to come, there is great cause why we should delight more if giving thanks,
then in making requests for them, in as much as the one has pen^^veness and
fear, the other always joy annexed; the one belongs unto them that seek, the
other unto them that have found happiness; they that pray, do but yet sow, they
that give thanks, declare they have reaped. Howbeit, because there are so many
Graces, whereof we stand in continual need, Graces for which we may not cease
daily and hourly to sue, Graces which are in bestowing always, but never come
to be sully had in this present life; and therefore, when all things here have
an end, endless thanks must have their beginning in a state, which brings the
full and final satisfaction of all such perpetual desires: Again, because our
common necessities, and the lack which we all have, as well of ghostly as of
earthly favors, is in each kind so easily known; but the gifts of God,
according to those degrees and times which he in his secrets wisdom sees meet,
are so diversely bestowed, that it seldom appears what all receive, what all
stand in need of it seldom lies hid; we are not to marvel, though the Church
do oftener concur in suits, then in thanks unto God for particular benefits.
Nevertheless, lest God should be any way unglorified, the greatest part of our
daily Service, they know, consists according to the ^ Blessed Apostles own
precise rule, in much variety of Psalms and Hymns, for no other purpose, but
only, that out of so plentiful a treasure, there might be for every man's heart
no choose out his own Sacrifice, and to offer unto God by particular secret
instinct, what fitteth best the often occasions which any several, either Party
or Congregation, may seem to have. They that would clean take from us
therefore, the daily use of the very best means we have to magnify and praise
the Name of Almighty God for his rich Blessings, they that complain of out
reading and singing so many Psalms for so good an end; they, I say, that find
fault with our store, should of all men be least willing to reprove our
scarcity of Thanksgivings. But because peradventure they see, it is not either
generally fit or possible that Churches should frame Thanksgivings answerable
to each Petition, they shorten somewhat the reins of their censure, there are
no forms of Thanksgiving, they say, for release of those common calamities,
from which we have Petitions to be delivered. T. C. lib. 1. page 138.
There are Prayers set forth to be said in the common calamities and Universal
scourges of the Realm, as Plague, Famine, etc. And indeed so it ought to be by
the Word of God. But as such Prayers are needful, whereby we beg release from
our Distresses, so there ought to be as necessary Prayers of Thanksgiving, when
we have received those things at the Lords hand, which we asked in our Prayers.
As often therefore, as any Public or Universal scourge is removed, as often as we
are delivered from those, either imminent or present Calamities, against the
storm and tempest whereof we all instantly craved favor from above, let it be a
Question what we should render unto God for his Blessings universally,
sensibly, and extraordinarily bestowed. A Prayer of three or four lines
inserted into some part of our Church Liturgy? No, we are not persuaded that
when God does in trouble enjoin us the duty of Invocation, and promise us the
benefit of Deliverance, and profess, That the thing he expects after at our
hands, is to glorify him as our mighty and only Savior, the Church can
discharge in manner convenient, a work of so great importance, by
fore-ordaining some short Collect wherein briefly to mention thanks. Our custom
therefore, whenever so great occasions are incident, is by Public Authority
to appoint throughout all Churches, set and solemn Forms, as well of
Supplication, as of Thanksgiving, the preparations and intended Complements
whereof may stir up the minds of men in much more effectual sort, then if
only there should be added to the Book of Prayer, that which they require. But
we err in thinking, that they require any such matter. For albeit their words
to our understanding be very plain, that in our Book there are Prayers set
forth to be said when common calamities are felt, as Plague, Famine, and such
like; Again, that indeed so it ought to be by the Word of God: That likewise
there ought to be as necessary Prayers of Thanksgiving when we have received
those things. Finally, that the want of such Forms of Thanksgiving for the
release from those common calamities from which we have Petitions to be
delivered, is the default of the Book of Common Prayer: Yet all this they mean,
but only by way of supposition if express Prayers against so many Earthly
miseries were convenient, that then indeed as many express and particular
Thanksgivings should be likewise necessary. Seeing therefore we know that they
hold the one superfluous, they would not have it so understood, as though their
minds were that any such addition to the Book is needful, whatsoever they say
for Arguments sake concerning this pretented defect. The truth is, they wave in
and out, no way sufficiently grounded, no way resolved what to think, speak, or
write, more then only that, because they have taken it upon them, they must
(no remedy now) be opposite.

In some things the Matter of our Prayer, as they affirm, Unsound.
44. The last supposed fault concerns some few things, the very matter
whereof, is thought to be much amiss. In a Song of Praise to our Lord Jesus
Christ, we have these words, When thou had overcome the sharpness of death,
tho^ did open the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers. Which makes some show
of giving countenance to their Error, who think, that the faithful which
departed this life before the coming of Christ, were never till then made
partakers of joy, but remained all in that place which they term the Lake of
the Fathers. In our Liturgy, request is made, that we may be preserved from
sudden death. This seems frivolous, because the godly should always be
prepared to die. Request is made, that God would give those things, which we
for our unworthiness, dare not ask. This, they say, carries with it the note
of Popish servile fear, and savoreth not of that confidence and reverent
familiarity that the children of God have through Christ, with their Heavenly
Father. Request is made, that we may evermore be defended from all adversity.
For this there is no promise in Scripture; and therefore it is no Prayer of
Faith, or of the which we can assure our selves, that we shall obtain it.
Finally, Request is made, That God would have mercy upon all men. This is
impossible, because some are the Vessels of Wrath, to whom God will never
extend his Mercy.

45. As Christ has purchased that Heavenly Kingdom, When thou had overcome
the sharpness of death, thou did open the Kingdom of Heaven unto all
Believers.
the last perfection whereof is, Glory in the life to come, Grace in this life,
a preparation thereunto; so the same he has opened to the World in such sort,
that whereas none can possibly without him attain salvation, by him all that
believe, are saved. Now whatsoever he did, or suffered, the end thereof was, to
open the doors of the Kingdom of Heaven, which our iniquities had shut up. But
because by ascending after that the sharpness of death was overcome, he took
the very local possession of glory, and that to the use of all that are his,
even as himself before had witnessed, I go to prepare a place for you. And
again, John 14.2. and 17.24.
Whom thou have given me, O Father, I will that where I am, they be also with
me, that my glory which thou have given me, they may behold. It appears, that
when Christ did ascend, he then most liberally opened the Kingdom of Heaven, to
the end, that with him, and by him, all Believers might reign. In what estate
the Fathers rested which were dead before, it is not hereby either one way or
other determined. All that we can rightly gather, is, that as touching their
souls, what degree of joy or happiness soever it pleased God to bestow upon
them, his Ascension which succeeded, procured theirs, and theirs concerning the
Body, must needs be not only of, but after his. As therefore Helvidius, Ierem
contra Helvid. August. Haer. ^4.
against whom St. Jerome writes, abused greatly those words of Matthew,
concerning Joseph, and the Mother of our Savior Christ, He knew her not till
she had brought forth her firstborn, thereby gathering against the honor of
the Blessed Virgin, that a thing denied with special circumstance, does import
an opposite affirmation when once that circumstance is expired: After the
self-same manner, it should be a weak collection, if whereas we say, That when
Christ had overcome the sharpness of death, he then opened the Kingdom of
Heaven to all Believers; a thing in such sort affirmed with circumstance, were
taken as insinuating an opposite denial before that circumstance be
accomplished, and consequently, that because when the sharpness of death was
overcome, he then opened Heaven as well to believing Gentiles as Jews, Heaven
till then was no receptacle to the Souls of either. Wherefore, be the Spirits
of the just and righteous before Christ, truly or falsely thought excluded out
of Heavenly joy, by that which we in the words alleged before, do attribute to
Christ's Ascension, sqv. super. Genesis 29. Th. p. 3. ^. 52.
there is to no such opinion, nor to the favorers thereof, any countenance at
all given. We cannot better interpret the meaning of these words, then Pope Leo
himself expounds them, whose Speech concerning our Lords Ascension may serve
instead of a Marginal gloss, Leo. Re^. 1. de Ascens.
Christ's Exaltation is our Promotion; and whither the glory of the Head is
already gone before, thither the Hope of the ^ody also is to follow. For at
this day, we have not only the possession of Paradise assured unto us, but in
Christ we have entered the highest of the Heavens. His opening the Kingdom of
Heaven, and his entrance thereinto, was not only to his own use, but for the
benefit of all Believers.

46. Our good or evil estate after death, Touching Prayer for deliverance from
sudden death.
depends most upon the quality of our lives. Yet somewhat there is, why a
virtuous mind should rather wish to depart this world with a kind of
treatable dissolution, then to be suddenly cut off in a moment; rather to be
taken then snatched away from the face of the Earth. Death is that which all
men suffer. but not all men with one mind, neither all men in one manner. For
being of necessity a thing common, it is through the manifold persuasions,
dispositions, and occasions of men, with equal desert both of praise and
dispraise, shunned by some, by others desired. So that absolutely we cannot
discommend, we cannot absolutely approve, either willingness to live, or
forwardness to die. And concerning the ways of death, albeit the choice thereof
be only in his hands, who alone has power over all flesh, and unto whose
appointment we ought with patience meekly to submit our selves (for to be
agents voluntarily in our own destruction, is against both God and Nature) yet
there is no doubt, but in so great variety, our desires will and may lawfully
prefer one kind before another. Is there any man of worth and virtue, although
not instructed in the School of Christ, or ever taught what the soundness of
Religion means, that had not rather end the days of this transitory life, as
Cyrus in Xenophon, or in Plato, Socrates, are described, then to sink down with
them, Job 34. 20.
of whom Elihu has said, Momento Moriuntur, there is scarce an instant between
their flourishing, and their not being? But let us which know what it is to
die, as Absalon, or Ananias and Saphira died; let us beg of God, that when the
hour of our rest is come, the patterns of our dissolution may be Jacob, Moses,
Iosoua, David; Heb. 11. 21. Deuteronomy. 33 Josh. 24. 1 King. 2.
who leisureably ending their lives in peace, prayed for the Mercies of God to
come upon their posterity; replenished the hearts of the nearest unto them;
with words of memorable Consolation; strengthened in the fear of God, gave them
wholesome instructions of life, and confirmed them in true Religion; in sum,
Taught the World no less virtuously how to die, then they had done before how
to live. To such as judge things according to the sense of natural men, and
ascend no higher, suddenness, because it shortneth their grief, should in
reason be most acceptable. That which causes bitterness in death, is the
languishing attendance and expectation thereof, ere it come. And therefore
Tyrants use what art they can, to increase the slowness of death. Quick
riddance out of life, is often both requested and bestowed as a benefit.
Commonly therefore it is, for virtuous considerations, that Wisdom so far
prevails with men, as to make them desirous of slow and deliberate death
against the stream of their sensual inclination, con^ent to endure the longer
grief, and bodily pain, that the Soul may have time to call it self to a just
account of all things past, by means whereof, Repentance is perfected, there is
wherein to exercise patience, the joys of the Kingdom of Heaven have leisure to
present themselves, the pleasures of sin and this Worlds vanities, are censured
with incorrupt judgment, Charity is free to make advised choice of the soil
wherein her last Seed may most fruitfully be bestowed, the mind is at liberty
to have due regard of that disposition of worldly things, which it can never
afterward alter; and because the nearer we draw unto God, Cypr. de Mortal.
the more we are oftentimes enlightened with the shining beams of his glorious
presence, as being then even almost in sight, a leisureable departure may in
that case bring forth for the good of such as are present, that which shall
cause them for ever after from the bottom of their hearts to pray, O let us die
the death of the righteous, and let our last end be like theirs. All which
benefits and opportunities are by sudden death prevented. And besides, for as
much as death howsoever, is a general effect of the wrath of God against sin,
and the suddenness thereof, a thing which happens but to few: The World in this
respect fears it the more as being subject to doubtful constructions, which
as no man willingly would incur, so they whose happy estate after life, is of
all men's the most certain, should especially wish, that no such accident in
their death may give uncharitable minds occasion of rash, sinister, and
suspicious verdicts, whereunto they are over-prone: So that, whether evil men
or good be respected, whether we regard our selves or others, to be preserved
from sudden death, is a Blessing of God. And our Prayer against it, imports a
twofold desire; first, That death when it comes, may give us some convenient
respight; or secondly, If that be denied us of God, yet we may have wisdom to
provide always beforehand; that those evils overtake us not, which death
unexpected does use to bring upon careless men; and that although it be sudden
in it self, nevertheless in regard of our prepared minds, it may not be sudden.

Prayer that those things which we for our unworthiness dare not ask, God for
the worthiness of his Son would vouchsafe to grant. This request car^ieth with
it still the note of the Popish servile fear, and ^avoreth not of that
confidence and reverent familiarity that the Children of God have, through
Christ, with their Heavenly Father. T. C. lib. 1. page 136.
47. But is it credible, that the very acknowledgment of our own unworthiness to
obtain, and in that respect our professed fearfulness to ask anything,
otherwise then only for his sake, to whom God can deny nothing, that this
should be noted for a Popish Error; that this should be termed baseness,
abjection of mind, or servility, is it credible? That which we for our
unworthiness are afraid to crave, our Prayer is, That God for the worthiness of
his Son, would notwithstanding vouchsafe to grant. May it please them to show
us which of these words it is, that carries the note of Popish and servile
fear? In reference to other Creatures of this inferior World, Man's worth and
excellency is admired. Compared with God, the truest Inscription wherewith we
can circle so base a coin, is, that of David Psalm. 39. 5.
, Universa vanitas est omnis homo; Whosoever has the name of a mortal man,
there is in him whatsoever the name of vanity does comprehend. And therefore
what we say of our own unworthiness, there is no doubt but Truth will ratify,
alleged in Prayer, it both becomes and behooves Saints. For as Humility is in
Suitors a decent virtue; so the testification thereof, by such effectual
acknowledgments, not only argues a sound apprehension of his super-eminent
Glory and Majesty before whom we stand, M(...) Philo. de Sacrif. Abel. and Cain.
but puts also into his hands, a kind of pledge of bond for security
against our unthankfulness, the very Natural Root whereof, is always either
Ignorance, Dissimulation, or Pride: Ignorance, when we know not the Author from
whom our good comes: Dissimulation, when our hands are more open then our
eyes; upon that we receive: Pride, when we think our selves worthy of that,
which mere Grace and undeserved Mercy bestows. In Prayer therefore, to abate
so vain imaginations with the true conceit of unworthiness, is rather to
prevent, then commit a fault. It being no error thus to think, no fault thus to
speak of our selves when we pray; is it a fault, that the consideration of our
unworthiness; makes us fearful to open our mouths by way of suit? While Job
had prosperity, and lived in honor, men feared him for his authorities sake,
and in token of their fear, when they saw him, they hid themselves. Between
Elihis, and the rest of Jobs Familiars, Job 29 8. Amongst the parts of hom. 8.
Aristotle reckons (...) and (...) Rhet. lib. 1. cap. ^.
the greatest disparity was but in years. And he, though riper then they in
judgment, doing them reverence in regard of age, stood long Job 32. 6.
doubtful, and very loath to adventure upon speech in his Elders hearing. If so
small inequality between man and man, make their modesty a commendable virtue,
who, respecting Superiors as Superiors, can neither speak nor stand before them
without fear; that the Publican approaches not more boldly to God; that when
Christ in mercy draws near to Peter, he in humility and fear, craveth
distance: That being to stand, to speak, to sue in the presence of so great
Majesty, we are afraid, let no man blame us. In which consideration
notwithstanding, The Publican did indeed not lift up his eyes: So that if by
his example we should say, we dare ask nothing, we ought also to ask nothing;
otherwise instead of reaching true humility, we open a School to hypocrisy,
which the Lord detesteth. T. C. lib. 3. p. 203.
because to fly altogether from God, to despair that Creatures unworthy shall
be able to obtain any thing at his hands, and under that pretense, to surcease
from Prayers, as bootless or fruitless offices, were to him no less injurious,
then pernicious to our own souls; even that which we tremble to do we do, we
ask those things which we dare not ask. The knowledge of our own unworthiness,
is not without belief in the merits of Christ. With that true fear which the
one causes, there is coupled true boldness; and encouragement drawn from the
other. The very silence which our unworthiness puts us unto, does it self
make request for us, and that in the confidence of his Grace. Looking inward,
we are stricken dumb; looking upward, we speak and prevail. O happy mixture,
wherein things contrary do so qualify and correct the one the danger of the
others excess, that neither boldness can make us presume, as long as we are
kept under with the sense of our own wretchedness; nor, while we trust in the
Mercy of God through Jesus Christ, fear be able to tyrannize over us! As
therefore our fear excludes not that boldness Rom.. 2.^. 15. Heb. ^0. 19.
which becomes Saints; so if our familiarity with God, do not savor of this
fear, it draws too near that irreverend confidence, wherewith true Humility
can never stand.

48. Touching continual deliverance in the World from all adversity, Prayer to
be evermore delivered from all adversity. For as much as there is no promise in
the Scripture, that we should be free from all adversity, and that evermore; it
seems that this Prayer might have been better conceived, being no Prayer of
Faith, or of the which we can assure our selves, that we shall obtain it. T. C.
lib. 1. p. 135.
their conceit is, that we ought not to ask it of God by Prayer; for as much as
in Scripture there is no promise that we shall be evermore free from vexations,
calamities, and troubles. Minds religiously affected, are wont in every thing
of weight and moment, which they do or see, to examine according unto rules of
Piety, what dependency it has on God, what reference to themselves, what
coherence with any of those duties whereunto all things in the World should
lead, and accordingly they frame the inward disposition of their minds,
sometime to admire God, sometimes to bless him, and give him thanks, sometime
to exult in his love, sometime to implore his mercy. All which different
elevations of spirit unto God, are contained in the name of Prayer. Every good
and holy desire, though it lack the form, has notwithstanding in it seft the
substance, and with him the force of a Prayer, who regards the very moanings,
groans, and sighs of the heart of man. Petitionary Prayer belongs only to
such as are in themselves impotent, and stand in need of relief from others. We
thereby declare unto God, what our own desire is, that he by his power should
effect. It presupposes therefore in us, First, the want of that which we pray
for: Secondly, a feeling of that want: Thirdly, an earnest willingness of mind
to be eased therein: Fourthly, a declaration of this our desire in the sight of
God, not as if he should be otherwise ignorant of our necessities; but because
we this way show that we honor him as our God, and are verily persuaded, that
no good thing can come to pass, which he by his omnipotent Power effects not.
Now because there is no man's Prayer acceptable, whose person is odious; neither
any man's person gracious without Faith; Oration, quae non sit per Christum, non
solum non potest delere peccatum, sed etiam ipsa fit pe^catum. Aug. E^ar. 1. in
Psalm. 108.
it is of necessity required, that they which pray, do believe. The Prayers
which our Lord and Savior made, were for his own worthiness accepted; ours God
accepts not, but with this condition, If they be joined with belief in
Christ. The Prayers of the Just are accepted always, but not always those
things granted for which they pray: For in Prayer, if Faith and Assurance to
obtain, were both one and the same thing, seeing that the effect of not
obtaining, is a plain testimony, that they which prayed, were not sure they
should obtain; it would follow, that their Prayer being without certainty of
the event, was also made unto God without Faith, and consequently, that God
abhorred it. Which to think of so many Prayers of Saints, as we find have
failed in particular requests, how absurd were it? His faithful people have
this comfort, that whatsoever they rightly ask, the same (no doubt, but) they
shall receive, so far as may stand with the glory of God, and their own
everlasting good; unto either of which two, it is no virtuous man's purpose to
seek, or desire to obtain any thing prejudicial; and therefore that clause
which our Lord and Savior in the Prayer of his Agony did express, we in
Petitions of like nature, do always imply, Pater, si possibile est, If it may
stand with thy will and pleasure. Or if not, but that there be secret
impediments and causes, in regard whereof, the thing we pray for, is denied us;
yet the Prayer it self, which we make, is a pleasing Sacrifice to God, who both
accepts and rewards it some other way. Numb. 1^ 3^. 1 Samuel 8. 9. Job 1. 12.
and 2 ^. Luke 8. 52.
So that sinners, in very truth, are denied when they seem to prevail in their
Supplications, because it is not for their sakes, or to their good, that their
suits take place; the faithful contrariwise, because it is for their good
oftentimes that their Petitions do not take place, prevail even then when they
most seem denied. 2 Cor. 1^. 5, 8, 9.
Our Lord God in anger has granted some impenitent men's requests, as on the
other side the Apostles suit, he has of ^avor and mercy not granted (says St.
Augustine.) Aug. Ep. 12 1. Ad Pro^am vid. aen.
To think we may pray unto God for nothing, but what he has promised in holy
Scripture, we shall obtain, is perhaps an error. For of Prayer there are two
uses. It serves as a mean to procure those things which God has promised, to
grant when we ask; and it serves as a mean to express our lawful desires also
toward that, which whether we shall have or no, we know not, till we see the
event. Things in themselves unholy or unseemly, we may not ask; we may
whatsoever, being not forbidden, either Nature or Grace shall reasonably move
us to wish as importing the good of men; albeit, God himself have no where by
promise assured us of that particular which our Prayer craveth. To pray for
that, which is in it self, and of its own nature, apparently a thing
impossible, were not convenient. Wherefore, though men do without offense wish
daily, that the affairs which with evil success are past, might have fallen out
much better, yet to pray that they may have been any other then they are, this
being a manifest impossibilty in it self, the Rules of Religion do not permit.
Whereas contrariwise, when things of their own nature contingent and mutable,
are by the secret determination of God, appointed one way, though we the other
way make our Prayers, and consequently ask those things of God, which are by
this supposition impossible, we notwithstanding do not hereby in Prayer,
transgress our lawful bounds. That Christ, as the only begotten Son of God,
having no Superior, and therefore owing honor unto none, neither standing in
any need, should either give thanks, or make petition unto God, were most
absurd. As Man, what could beseem him better, whether we respect his affection
to Godward, or his own necessity, or his charity and love toward men? Some
things he knew should come to pass, and notwithstanding prayed for them,
because he also knew that the necessary means to effect them, were his Prayers.
As in the Psalm it is said, Psalm. 2. ^.
Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the
ends of the Earth for thy possession. Wherefore, that which here God promises
his Son, the same in the Seventeenth of John he prays for, John 17. 1, 2.
Father, the hour is now come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify
thee, according as thou have given him power over all flesh. But had Christ the
like promise, concerning the effect of every particular for which he prayed?
That which was not effected, could not be promised. And we know in what sort he
prayed for removal of that bitter Cup, which Cup he tasted, notwithstanding his
Prayer. To shift off this example, Matthew. 26 39. Mark 14. 30. Luke 22. 42.
Neither did our Savior Christ pray without promise; for as other the Children
of God, in whose condition he had humbled himself have, so had be a promise of
deliverance in far, as the glory of God that acomplishment of his vocation
would suffer. T. C. lib. 3. page 2^0.
they answer first, That as other children of God, so Christ had a promise of
deliverance, as far as the glory of God in the accomplishment of his vocation
would suffer. And if we our selves have not also in that sort the promise of
God to be evermore delivered from all adversity, what means the Sacred
Scripture to speak in so large terms, Be obedient, and the Lord thy God will
make thee plenteous Deuteronomy. 30. 4.
in every work of thy hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy
cattle, and in the fruit of the Land for thy wealth. Again, Keep his Laws, and
thou shall be blessed above all people, the Lord shall take from the Deuteronomy. 7. 15.
all infirmities. The man whose delight is in the Law of God, Psalm. 1.4.
whatsoever he does, it shall prosper. For the ungodly there are great plagues
remaining; but whosoever puts his trust in the Lord, Mercy imbraceth him
Psalm. 32 11, 17.
on every side. Not only that mercy which keeps from being over-laid or
oppressed, but Mercy which saves from being touched with grievous miseries,
Mercy which turns away the course of T. C. lib. 3. page 201.
the great water floods, and permits them not to come near. Nevertheless,
because the Prayer of Christ did concern but one calamity, they are still bold
to deny the lawfulness of our Prayer for deliverance out of all, yea, though we
pray with the same exception that he did. If such deliverance may stand with
the pleasure of Almighty God, and not otherwise. For they have, secondly, found
out a Rule, that Prayer ought only to be made for deliverance We ought not to
desire to be free from all adversity, if it be his will, considering that he
has already declared his Will therein. T. C. lib. 3. page 201.
from this or that particular adversity, whereof we know not, but upon the
event, what the pleasure of God is. Which quite overthrows that other
principle, wherein they require unto every Prayer, which is of Faith, an
assurance to obtain the thing we pray for. At the first to pray against all
adversity was unlawful, because we cannot assure our selves that this will be
granted. Now we have license to pray against any particular adversity, and the
reason given, because we know not but upon the event what God will do. If we
know not what God will do, it follows, that for any assurance we have, he may
do otherwise then we pray, and we faithfully pray for that which we cannot
assuredly presume that God will grant. Seeing therefore neither of these two
Answers will serve the turn, they have a third, which is, That to pray in such
sort, is but idly misspent labor, because God has already revealed his Will
touching this request; and we know, that the suit we make, is denied before we
make it. Which neither is true, and if it were, was Christ ignorant what God
had determined touching those things which himself should suffer? To say, T. C.
lib. 3 p. 201.
He knew not what weight of sufferances his Heavenly Father had measured unto
him, is somewhat hard; harder, that although he knew them, notwithstanding for
the present time they were forgotten, through the force of these unspeakable
pangs which he then was in. The one against the plain express words of the holy
Evangelist, John 18. 4.
He knew all things that should come upon him; the other less credible, if any
thing may be of less credit then what the Scripture it self gain-sayeth. Does
any of them which wrote his sufferings, make report that memory failed him? Is
there in his words and speeches any sign of defect that way? Did not himself
declare before, whatsoever was to happen in the course of that whole tragedy?
Can we gather by any thing, after taken from his own mouth, either in the place
of public judgment, or upon the Altar of the Cross, that through the bruising
of his Body, some part of the treasures of his Soul were scattered and slipped
from him? If that which was perfect both before and after, did fail at this
only middle instant, there must appear some manifest cause how it came to
pass. True it is, that the pangs of his heaviness and grief were unspeakable;
and as true, That because the minds of the afflicted, do never think they have
fully conceived the weight or measure of their own woe, they use their affection
as a whetstone, both to wit and memory; these as Nurses do feed grief, so that
the weaker his conceit had been touching that which he was to suffer, the more
it must needs in that hour have helped to the mitigation of his anguish. But
his anguish we see was then at the very highest whereunto it could possibly
rise; which argues his deep apprehension, even to the last drop of the Gall
which that Cup contained, and of every circumstance wherein there was any force
to augment heaviness; but above all things, the resolute determination of God,
and his own unchangeable purpose, which he at that time could not forget. To
what intent then was his Prayer, which plainly testifies so great willingness
to avoid death? Will, whether it be in God or Man, belongs to the Essence or
Nature of both. The Nature therefore of God being one, there are not in God
diverse Wills, although the Godhead be in diverse persons, because the power of
willing, is a natural, not a personal propriety. Contrariwise, the Person of
our Savior Christ being but one, there are in him two Wills; because two
Natures, the Nature of God, and the Nature of Man, which both do imply this
Faculty and Power. So that in Christ there is a Divine, and there is an Humane
will, otherwise he were not both God and Man. Hereupon the Church has of old
condemned Monothelites as Heretics, for holding, That Christ had but one Will.
The Works and Operations of our Saviors Humane will, were all subject to the
Will of God, and framed according to his Law, Psalm. 40. 1.
I desire to do thy Will, O God, and thy Law is within mine heart. Now as Man's
will, so the Will of Christ has two several kinds of operation, the one
Natural or necessary, whereby it desires simply whatsoever is good in it self,
and shunneth as generally all things which hurt; the other Deliberate, when we
therefore embrace things as good, because the eye of understanding judges them
good, to that ^^d which we simply desire. Thus in it self we desire health,
Physic only for healths sake. And in this sort special Reason oftentimes
causes the Will by choice to prefer one good thing before another, to leave
one for another sake, to forgo meaner for the attainment of higher desires,
which our Savior likewise did. These different inclinations of the Will
considered, the reason is easy, how in Christ there might grow desires
seeming, but being not indeed opposite, either the one of them unto the other,
or either of them to the Will of God. For let the manner of his speech be
weighed, Joh. 12. 21.
My Soul is now troubled, and what should I say? Father, save me out of this
hour. But yet for this very cause I am come into this hour. His purpose herein
was most effectually to propose to the view of the whole World two contrary
Objects, the like whereunto in force and efficacy were never presented in that
manner to any, but only to the Soul of Christ. There was presented before his
eyes in that fearful hour, on the one side Gods heavy indignation and wrath
toward mankind, as yet unappeased, death as yet in full strength, Hell as yet
never mastered by any that came within the confines and bounds thereof,
somewhat also peradventure more then is either possible or needful for the wit
of man to find out; finally, Himself flesh and blood Matthew 27.46. Non potuit
divinitas humanitatem, and secundum aliquid deseruisse, and secundum ali quid
non deseruisse? Subtraxit prefectionem, sed non separa it unionem Sce^go
da^diquit ut non adjuvaret, sed non direliqunt ut ^eredeter. Sic ^^gu humanitas
a d visitate in passione derelicta est. Quam tamen ^^ngtem quia non pro sua
iniquitare, sed pro nostra redemptione sustinuit, quare sae derelicta requirit
non quasi adversus Deum de ^oena murmura^e, sed nobis innocentiam suam in ^una
demensir^ra. Hug. de Sacra. lib. 2. put. 1. cap. 10. Deus meus, unquis
dereliquisti me? Vox est nec ignorantiae, nec diffidentia, nec querel^, sed
admirationis ^anrum, quae aliis investigandae causae ardorem and diligentiam
actua^.
left alone to enter into conflict with all these: On the other side, a World
to be saved by One, a pacification of wrath through the dignity of that
Sacrifice which should be offered, a conquest over death through the power of
that Deity, which would not suffer the Tabernacle thereof to see corruption,
and an utter disappointment of all the forces of infernal powers, through the
purity of that Soul which they should have in their hands, and not be able to
touch. Let no man marvel, that in this case the Soul of Christ was much
troubled. For what could such apprehensions breed, but (as their nature is)
inexplicable Passions of mind, desires abhorring what they embrace, and
embracing what they abhor? In which Agony, how should the tongue go about to
express what the soul endured? When the griefs of Job were exceeding great, his
words accordingly to open them were many; howbeit, still unto his seeming they
were undiscovered: Though my talk (says Job Job 23 ^.
) be this day in bitterness, yet my plague is greater then my groaning. But
here to what purpose should words serve, when nature has more to declare then
groans and strong cries, more then streams of bloody sweats, more then his
doubled and tripled Prayers can express, who thrice putting forth his hand to
receive that Cup, besides which, there was no other cause of his coming into
the World, he thrice pulls it back again, and as often even with tears of
blood craveth, If it be possible, O Father, or if not, even what thine own good
pleasure is; for whose sake the Passion that has in it a bitter, and a bloody
conflict, even with Wrath, and Death, and Hell, is most welcome. Whereas
therefore we find in God a will resolved that Christ shall suffer; and in the
Humane will of Christ two actual desires, the one avoiding, and the other
accepting death; Is that desire which first declares it self by Prayer,
against that wherewith he concludes Prayer, or either of them against his
mind, to whom Prayer in this case seeks? We may judge of these diversities
in the Will, by the like in the Understanding. For as the intellectual part
does not cross it self, by conceiving man to be just and unjust, when it
means not the same man, nor by imagining the same man learned and unlearned,
if learned in one skill, and in another kind of learning unskilful, because
the parts of every true opposition do always both concern the same subject, and
have reference to the same thing, since otherwise they are but in show opposite,
and not in truth: So the Will about one and the same thing may in contrary
respects have contrary inclinations, and that without contrariety. The Minister
of Justice may, for public example to others, virtuously will the execution of
that party, whose pardon another for cousanguinities sake as virtuously may
desire. Consider death in it self, and nature teaches Christ to shun it.
Consider death as a mean to procure the salvation of the World, and mercy
works in Christ all willingness of mind toward it. Isa. 53.1^. Job 10. 15.
Therefore in these two desires, there can be no repugnant opposition. Again,
compare them with the Will of God, and if any opposition be, it must be only
between his appointment of Christ's death, and the former desire which wishes
deliverance from death. But neither is this desire opposite to the Will of God.
The Will of God was, that Christ should suffer the pains of death. Not so his
will, as if the torment of innocence did in it self please and delight God; but
such was his Will, in regard of the end whereunto it was necessary, that Christ
should suffer. The death of Christ in it self therefore, God wills not, which
to the end we might thereby obtain life, he both allows and appoints. In
like manner, the Son of Man endures willingly to that purpose those grievous
pains^ which simply not to have shunned had been against Nature, and by
consequent against God. I take it therefore to be an error, that Christ either
knew not what himself was to suffer, or else had forgotten the things he knew.
The root of which error, was an over-restrained consideration of Prayer, as
though it had no other lawful use, but only to serve for a chosen mean,
whereby the Will resolves to seek that which the Understanding certainly
knows it shall obtain: Whereas Prayers, in truth, both unto are, and his
were, as well sometime a presentation of mere desires, as a mean of procuring
desired effects at the hands of God. We are therefore taught by his example,
that the presence of dolorous and dreadful objects, even in minds most
perfect, may as clouds over-cast all sensible joy; that no assurance touching
future victories can make present conflicts so sweet and easy, but nature will
shun and shrink from them; nature will desire case and deliverance from
oppressive burdens; that the contrary determination of God is oftentimes
against the effect of this desire, yet not against the affection it self,
because it is naturally in us; that in such case our Prayers cannot serve us as
means to obtain the thing we desire; that notwithstanding they are unto God
most acceptable sacrifices, because they testify we desire nothing but at his
hands, and our desires we submit with contentment to be overruled by his Will;
and in general they are not repugnant unto the Natural Will of God, which
wishes to the works of his own hands, in that they are his own handiwork, all
happiness, although perhaps for some special cause in our own particular, a
contrary determination have seemed more convenient; finally, that thus to
propose our desires which cannot take such effects as we specify, shall
notwithstanding otherwise procure us his Heavenly grace, even as this very
Prayer of Christ obtained Angels to be sent him, Luke 22. 14.
as comforters in his Agony. And, according to this example, we are not afraid
to present unto God our Prayers for those things, which that he will perform
unto us, we have no sure nor certain knowledge. St. Paul's Prayer for the Church
of Corinth was, 2 Cor. 13 7.
that they might not do any evil, although he knew that no man lives which
sins not, although he knew that in this life we always must pray, Forgive us
our sins. It is our frailty, We may not pray in this life, to be free from all
sin, because we must always prays. Forgive in our sins. T. C. lib. 3. page 2^0.
that in many things we all do amiss; but a virtue, that we would do amiss in
nothing; and a testimony of that virtue, when we pray, That what occasion of
sin soever do offer it self, we may be strengthened from above to withstand it.
They pray in vain to have sin pardoned, which seek not also to prevent sin by
Prayer, even every particular sin, by Prayer against all sin, except men can
name some transgression wherewith we ought to have truce. For in very deed,
although we cannot be free from all sin collectively, in such sort that no part
thereof, shall be found inherent in us, yet distributively, at the least, all
great and grievous actual offenses, as they offer themselves one by one, both
may and ought to be by all means avoided. So that in this sense, to be
preserved from all sin, is not impossible. Finally, concerning deliverance it
self from all adversity, we use not to say, men are in adversity whenever
they feel any small hinderance of their welfare in this World, but when some
notable affliction or cross, some great calamity or trouble befalls them.
Tribulation has in it diverse circumstances, the Mind sundry faculties to
apprehend them: It offers sometime it self to the lower powers of the Soul,
as a most unpleasant spectacle; to the higher sometimes, as drawing after it a
train of dangerous inconveniences; sometime as bringing with it remedies for
the curing of sundry evils, as Gods instrument of revenge and fury sometime;
sometime as a rod of his just, yet moderate, ire and displeasure; sometime, as
matter for them that spightfully hate us to exercise their poisoned malice;
sometime as a furnace of trial for virtue to show it self, and through conflict
to obtain glory. Which different contemplations of adversity, do work for the
most part their answerable effects. Adversity either apprehended by Sense as a
thing offensive and grievous to Nature, or by Reason conceived as a snare, an
occasion of many men's falling from God, a sequel of Gods indignation and wrath,
a thing which Satan desires, and would be glad to behold; Tribulation thus
considered being present causes sorrow, and being imminent breeds fear. For
moderation of which two affections, growing from the very natural bitterness
and gall of adversity, Psalm. 119. 71.
the Scripture much alleges contrary fruits, which Affliction likewise has
whenever it falls on them that are tractable, the grace of Gods holy Spirit
concurring therewith. 2 Timothy 3. 12. To pray against persecution, is contrary to
that word which says. That every one which will live godly in Christ Jesus,
must suffer persecution. T. C. lib. 3. p. 200.
But when the Apostle St. Paul teaches, That every one which will live godly
in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution, and, by many tribulations we must
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, because in a Forest of many Wolves, Sheep
cannot choose bat feed in continual danger of life; or when Jam. 1.3.
St. James exhorts, to account it a matter of exceeding joy, when we fall into
diverse temptations, because by the trial of Faith, Patience is brought forth;
was it, suppose we, their meaning to frustrate our Lords admonition, Pray that
ye enter not into temptation? When himself pronounces them blessed that should
for his Names sake be subject to all kinds of ignominy and opprobrious
malediction, was it his purpose that no man should ever pray with David Psalm.
119. 22.
, Lord, remove from me shame and contempt? In those tribulations, says St.
Augustine Aug Epist. 1^1 cap. 14.
, which may hurt as well as profit, we must say with the Apostle, What we
should ask as we ought, we know not; yet because they are tough, because they
are grievous, because the sense of our weakness flies them, we pray according
to the general desire of the will of man, that God would turn them away from
us, owing in the mean while this devotion to the Lord our God; that if he
remove them not, yet we do not therefore imagine our selves in his sight
despised, but rather with godly sufferance of evils, expect greater good at his
merciful hands. For thus is virtue in weakness perfected. To the flesh (as the
Apostle himself grants) all affliction is naturally grievous. Therefore
Nature which causes to fear, teaches to pray against all adversity.
Prosperity in regard of our corrupt inclination to abuse the blessings of
Almighty God, does prove for the most part a thing dangerous to the Souls of
Men. Very Ease it self, is death to the wicked, Prove. 1. 3^.
and the prosperity of fools slays them: Their Table is a Snare, and their
Felicity their utter overthrow. Few men there are, which long prosper and sin
not. Howbeit, even as these ill effects, although they be very usual and
common, are no bar to the hearty prayers, whereby most virtuous minds with
peace and prosperity always where they love, because they consider, that this
in it self is a thing naturally desired: So because all adversity is in it self
against nature, what should hinder to pray against it, although the providence
of God turn it often unto the great good of many men? Such Prayers of the
Church to be delivered from all adversity, are no more repugnant to any
reasonable disposition of men's minds toward death, much less to that blessed
Patience and meek Contentment which Saints by Heavenly inspiration have to
endure, (what cross or calamity soever it pleases God to lay upon them) then
our Lord and Saviors own Prayer before his Passion, was repugnant unto his
most gracious resolution to die for the sins of the whole World.

49. In praying for deliverance from all adversity, Prayer, that all men may
find Mercy, and of the Will of God. that all men might be saved.
we seek that which Nature does wish to it self; but by entreating for Mercy
toward all, we declare that Affection wherewith Christian Charity thirsts
after the good of the whole World, we discharge that duty which the 1 Timothy 2. 3.
Apostle himself does impose on the Church of Christ, as a commendable office,
a sacrifice acceptable in Gods sight, a service according to his heart, whose
desire is to have all men saved: A work most suitable with his purpose, who
gave himself to be the price of redemption for all, and a forcible mean to
procure the conversion of all such, as are not yet acquainted with the
Mysteries of that Truth which must save their Souls. Against it, there is but
the bare show of this one Impediment, that all men's salvation, and many men's
eternal condemnation or death, are things, the one repugnant to the other; that
both cannot be brought to pass; that we know there are Vessels of Wrath, to
whom God will never extend mercy, and therefore that wittingly we ask an
impossible thing to be had. The truth is, that as life and death, mercy and
wrath, are matters of mere understanding or knowledge, all men's salvation, and
some men's endless perdition are things so opposite, that whosoever does affirm
the one, must necessarily deny the order; God himself cannot effect both, or
determine, that both shall be. There is in the knowledge both of God and Man,
this certainty. That life and death have divided between them, the whole Body
of mankind. What portion either of the two has, God himself knows; for us
he has left no sufficient means to comprehend, and for that cause neither
given any leave to search in particular, who are infalliby the heirs of the
Kingdom of God, who cast-aways. Howbeit, concerning the state of all men, with
whom we live (for only of them our Prayers are meant) we may till the Worlds
end, for the present, always presume, That as far as in us there is power to
discern what others are; and as far as any duty of ours depends upon the
notice of their condition in respect of God, the safest Axioms for Charity to
rest it self upon, are these. He which believes already, is; and he which
believes not as yet, may be the child of God. It becomes not us, Sid^n. ^ p
^^ lib. ^ Epist.
during life, altogether to condemn any man, seeing that (for any thing we
know) there is hope of every man's forgiveness; the possibility of whose
repentance, is not yet cut off by death. And therefore Charity which hops all
things, 1 Cor. 14. 7.
prays also for all Men. Wherefore to let go Personal Knowledge touching
Vessels of Wrath and Mercy, what they are inwardly in the sight of God, it
skilleth not; for us there is cause sufficient in all men, whereupon to ground
our Prayers unto God in their behalf. For whatsoever the Mind of Man
apprehencieth as good, the Will of Charity and Love, is to have it enlarged in
the very uttermost extent, that all may enjoy it to whom it can any way add
perfection. Because therefore, the father a good thing does reach, the nobler
and worthier we reckon it; our Prayers for all men's good, no less then for our
own, the Apostle with very fit terms commends as being (...), a work
commendable for the largeness of the affection from whence it springs, even
as theirs, which have requested at Gods hands, the salvation of many, Rom ^ 3.
and 10. 1.
with the loss of their own Souls, drowning, as it were, and overwhelming
themselves in the abundance of their love toward others, is proposed as being
in regard of the rareness of such affections (...), more then excellent. But
this extraordinary height of desire after other men's salvation, is no common
mark. The other is a duty which belongs unto all, and prevails with God
daily. For as it is in it self good, so God accepts and takes it in very
good part, at the hands of faithful men. Our Prayers for all men do include,
both them that shall find mercy, and them also that shall find none. For them
that shall, no man will doubt but our Prayers are both accepted and granted.
Touching them for whom we crave that mercy which is not to be obtained, let us
not think that our Savior did mis-instruct his Disciples, Matthew. 10. 11, 12.
willing them to pray for the peace, even of such as should be incapable of so
great a blessing; or that the Prayers of the Prophet Jeremy offended God, Jere.
15. 1.
because the answer of God was a resolute denial of favor to them, for whom
Supplication was made. And if any man doubt, how God should accept such Prayers
in case they be opposite to his Will, or not grant them, if they be according
unto that which himself wills, our answer is, That such suits God accepts,
in that they are conformable unto his general inclination, which is, that all
men might be saved; yet always he grants them not, for as much as there is in
God sometimes a more private occasioned will, which determines the contrary.
So that the other being the rule of our actions, and not this; our requests for
things opposite to this Will of God, are not therefore the less gracious in his
sight. There is no doubt but we ought in all things to frame our wills to the
Will of God, and that otherwise in whatsoever we do, we sin. For of our selves,
being so apt to err, the only way which we have to streighten our paths, is by
following the rule of his Will, whose footsteps naturally are right. If the
eye, the hand, or the foot, do that which the will commands, though they
serve as instruments to sin, yet is sin the commanders fault, and not theirs,
because Nature has absolutely, and without exception, made them subjects to
the will of man, which is Lord over them. As the body is subject to the will of
man, so man's will to the Will of God; for so it behooves, that the better
should guide and command the worse. But because the subjection of the body to
the will, is by natural necessity, the subjection of the Will unto God
voluntary; we therefore stand in need of direction, after what sort our wills
and desires may be rightly conformed to his. Which is not done, by willing
always the self-same thing that God intends. For it may chance, that his
purpose is sometime the speedy death of them, whose long continuance in life if
we should not wish we were unnatural. When the object or matter therefore of
our desires is (as in this case) a thing both good of it self, and not
forbidden of God; when the end for which we desire it, is virtuous and
apparently most holy; when the root from which our affection toward it
proceeds, is Charity, Piety that which we do in declaring our desire by
Prayer; yea, over and besides all this, since we know, that to pray for all men
living, is but to show the same affection which toward every of them our Lord
Jesus Christ has born, who knowing only as God who are his, did as Man taste
death for the good of all men; surely, Propterea nihil contrarietatis erat, si
Christus homo secundum affectum pietatis quam in humanitate sui assumpserat
aliquid volebat, quod tamen secundum voluntatem divinam, in qua cum Fatre ot^n
a d^siponebat securum non esse praesciehat, quia and hoc ad veram humaniratem
pertinebar, ut pietate moveretur, and hoc ad veram divnitatem, ut and sua
dispeditione, non moveretur, Hug. de Quae Christi Volunt.
to that Will of God which ought to be, and is the known rule of all our
actions, we do not herein oppose our selves, although his secret determination
happily be against us; which if we did understand, as we do not; yet to rest
contented with that which God will have done, is as much as he requires at the
hands of men. And concerning our selves, what we earnestly crave in this case,
the same, as all things else that are of like condition, we meekly submit unto
his most gracious will and pleasure. Finally, as we have cause sufficient why
to think the practice of our Church allowable in this behalf, so neither is
ours the first which has been of that mind. For to end with the words of
Prosper Prosp. de Vocat. G^n. lib 1. cap. 4. inter opera Ambros.
, This Law of Supplication for all Men (says he) the devout zeal of all
Priests, and of all faithful Men, does hold with such full Agreement; that
there is not any part of all the World, where Christian people do not use to
pray in the same manner. The Church every where makes Prayers unto God, not
only for Saints, and such as already in Christ are regenerate; but for all
Infidels and Enemies of the Cross of Jesus Christ, for all Idolaters, for all
that persecute Christ in his followers, for Jews to whose blindness the Light
of the Gospel does not yet shine, for Heretics and Schismatics, who from the
Unity of Faith and Charity are estranged. And for such, what does the Church
ask of God but this, That leaving their Errors, they may be converted unto him,
that Faith and Charity may be given them, and that out of the darkness of
ignorance, they may come to the knowledge of his truth? Which because they
cannot themselves do in their own behalf, as long as the sway of evil custom
ever-beareth them, and the chains of Satan detain them bound, neither are they
able to break through those Errors wherein they are so determinately settled,
that they pay unto falsity, the whole sum of whatsoever love is owing unto Gods
Truth. Our Lord merciful and just, requires to have all men prayed for; that
when we behold innumerable multitudes drawn up from the depth of so bottomless
evils; we may not doubt, but (in part) God has done the thing we requested;
nor despair, but that being thankful for them, toward whom already he has
showed mercy; the rest which are not as yet enlightened, shall before they pass
out of life, be made partakers of the like grace. Or if the Grace of him which
saves [for so we set is falls out] over-pass some, so that the Prayer of the
Church for them be not received, this we may leave to the hidden Judgments of
Gods Righteousness, and acknowledge that in this Secret there is a Gulf, which,
whole we live, we shall never sound.

50. Instruction and Prayer, Of the Name, the Author, and the force of
Sacraments, which Force consists in thi^, The^ God, has ordained them as
means to make us partakers of him in Christ, and of life through Christ.
whereof we have hitherto spoken, are duties which serve as Elements, Parts, or
Principles to the rest that follow, in which number the Sacraments of the
Church are chief. The Church is to us, that very Gal. 4. 26. Isai. 54 3.
Mother of our New Birth, in whose Bowels we are all bred, at whose Breasts we
receive nourishment. As many therefore as are apparently to our judgment born
of God, they have the Seed of their Regeneration by the Ministry of the
Church, which uses to that end and purpose, not only the Word, but the
Sacrament, both having Generative force and virtue. As often as we mention a
Sacrament properly understood (for in the Writings of the Ancient Fathers, all
Articles which are peculiar to Christian Faith, all Duties of Religion
containing that which Sense or Natural Reason cannot of it self discern, are
most commonly named Sacraments) our restraint of the Word to some few principal
Divine Ceremonies, imports in every such Ceremony two things, the Substance
of the Ceremony it self which is visible; and, besides that, somewhat else more
secret, in reference whereunto we conceive that Ceremony to be a Sacrament. For
we all admire and honor the holy Sacraments, not respecting so much the Service
which we do unto God in receiving them, as the dignity of that Sacred and
Secret Gift which we thereby receive from God. Seeing that Sacraments therefore
consist altogether in relation to some such Gift or Grace Supernatural, as
only God can bestow, how should any but the Church administer those Ceremonies
as Sacraments, which are not thought to be Sacraments by any, but by the
Church? There is in Sacraments to be observed their Force and their Form of
Administration. Upon their Force, their necessity depends. So that how they
are necessary we cannot discern, till we see how effectual they are. When
Sacraments are said to be Visible Signs of Invisible Grace, we thereby conceive
how Grace is indeed the very end for which these Heavenly Mysteries were
instituted; and besides sundry other Properties observed in them, the matter
whereof they consist, is such as signifies, Figureth, and represents their
End. But still their efficacy rests obscure to our understanding, except we
search somewhat more distinctly what Grace in particular that is, whereunto
they are referred, and what manner of operation they have toward it. The use
of Sacraments is, but only in this life, yet so, that here they concern a far
better life then this, and are for that cause accompanied with Grace, which
works Salvation. Sacraments are the Powerful Instruments of God to Eternal
Life. For as our Natural Life consists in the Union of the Body with the
Soul; so our Life Supernatural in the Union of the Soul with God. And for as
much as there is no Union of God with Man, without that Oportebat D^um carnem
fieri uein semitipso concu^^^a^ consi^ulare: Ter^^urum pariter asque
Coelestiur, dum utriusque partisinse connectens pignora, and Deum pariter
homini, and hominem Deo copularet. T^^tul. de Tri^^^.
mean between both, which is both, it seems requisite, that we first consider
how God is in Christ, then how Christ is in us, and how the Sacraments do serve
to make us partakers of Christ. In other things we may be more brief, but the
weight of these requires largeness.

51. The Lord our God is but one God. That God is in Christ by the Personal
Inc. r^aeion of the Son, who is very God. Isai. 9. 6. Jere. 21. 6. Romans 9.5.
John 16. 15. and 5. 21. Col. 2. 9. 1 John ^. 29.
In which Indivisible Unity notwithstanding, we adore the Father, as being
altogether of himself; we glorify that Consubstantial Word which is the Son;
we bless and magnify that Co-essential Spirit eternally proceeding from both,
which is the Holy Ghost. Seeing therefore the Father is of none, the Son is of
the Father, and the Spirit is of both, they are by these their several
Properties really distinguishable each from other. For the Substance of God,
with this property to be of none, does make the Person of the Father; the very
self-same Substance in number with this property to be of the Father, makes
the Person of the Son; the same Substance having added unto it, the property of
proceeding from the other two, makes the Person of the Holy Ghost. So that in
every Person, there is implied both the Substance of God, which is one; and
also, that property which causes the same Person really and truly to differ
from the other two. Every (...) Damase. de Orthod. Fide, lib. 9. cap. 6.
Person has his own subsistence, which no other besides has, although there
be others besides that are of the same Substance. As no man but Peter can be
the person which Peter is, yet Paul has the self-same Nature which Peter has.
Again, Angels have every of them the Nature of pure and Invisible Spirits, but
every Angel, is not that Angel which appeared in a Dream to Joseph. Now when
God became Man, lest we should err in applying this to the Person of the
Father, or of the Spirit, St. Peter's confession unto Christ was, Matthew. 16. 16.
Thou art the Son of the Living God; and St. John's Exposition thereof was made
plain, Joh. 1. 14. Ignat. ^ Epist. ad Magnes.
That it is the Word which was made Flesh. (...)
The Father, and the Holy Ghost (says Damascen) have no Communion with the
Incarnation of the Word, otherwise then only by approbation and assent.
Notwithstanding, for as much as the Word and Deity are one Subject, we must
beware we exclude not the Nature of God from Incarnation, and so make the Son
of God incarnate, not to be very God. For undoubtedly, (...) Damase.
even the Nature of God it self, in the only Person of the Son, is incarnate,
and has taken to it self Flesh. Wherefore, Incarnation may neither be granted
to any Person, but only One, nor yet denied to that Nature which is common
unto all Three. Concerning the cause of which incomprehenble Mystery, for as
much as it seems a thing unconsonant, That the World should honor any other
as the Savior, but him whom it honoreth as the Creator of the World, and in
the Wisdom of God, it has not been thought convenient to admit any way of
saving man, but by man himself, though nothing should be spoken of the Love and
Mercy of God toward Man; which this way are become such a Spectacle, as
neither Men nor Angels can behold without a kind of Heavenly astonishment, we
may hereby perceive there is cause sufficient, why Divine Nature should assume
Humane, that so ^ Cor. 5. 19
God might be in Christ, In il^^ Divinitus est Unigenici facta particeps
mortalintis nostrae, ^^ and ora participes eius immorialitatis essemus. Aug.
epist. 37.
reconciling to himself the World. And if some cause be likewise required, why
rather to this end and purpose the Son, then either the Father, or the Holy
Ghost, should be made man, Could we which are born the children of wrath, be
adopted the Sons of God, through Grace, any other then by the Natural Son of
God, being Mediator between God and us? It Heb. 2. 10.
became therefore him, by whom all things are to be the Way of Salvation to
all, that the Institution and Restitution of the World might be both wrought by
one hand. The Worlds Salvation was without the Incarnation of the Son of God, a
thing impossible; not simply impossible, but impossible, it being presupposed,
That the Will of God, was no otherwise to have it saved, then by the Death of
his own Son. Wherefore taking to himself our Flesh, and by his Incarnation,
making it his own Flesh, he had now of his own, although from us, what to offer
unto God for us. And as Christ took Manhood, that by it he might be capable of
death, whereunto he humbled himself; so because Manhood is the proper subject
of compassion and feeling pity, which makes the Scepter of Christ's Regency
even in the Kingdom of Heaven be amiable; he which without our Nature could not
on Earth suffer for the sins of the World, Heb. 4. 15.
does now also by means thereof, both make intercession to God for sinners, and
exercise domnion over all men with a true, a natural, and a sensible touch of
Mercy.

The Misinterpretations which Heresy has made of the manner, l^w God an^ Man
are United in one Christ.
52. It is not in man's ability, either to express perfectly, or conceive the
manner how this was brought to pass. But the strength of our Faith is tried by
those things wherein our wits and capacities are not strong. Howbeit, because
this Divine Mystery is more true then plain, diverse having framed the same to
their own conceits and fancies, are found in their Expositions thereof more
plain then true: In so much, that by the space of Five hundred years after
Christ, the Church was almost troubled with nothing else, saving only with
care and travel to preserve this Article from the sinister construction of
Heretics. Whose first mists when the light of the Nicene Council had
dispelled, An. Dom. 32^.
it was not long ere Macedonius transfered unto Gods most holy Spirit the same
blasphemy, wherewith Arius had already dishonored his co-eternally begotten
Son; (...) ^ui^.
not long ere Apollinarius began to pare away from Christ's Humanity. In
refutation of which impieties, when the Fathers of the Church, Athanasius,
Basil, and the two Gregory's, had by their painful travels, sufficiently
cleared the truth, no less for the Deity of the Holy Ghost, then for the
complete Humanity of Christ, there followed hereupon a final conclusion,
whereby those Controversies, as also the rest which Paul^n Samosatenus,
Sabellius, Phatinus, A^tius, Ennomius, together with the whole swarm of
pestilent Demi-Arians, had from time to time stirred up since the Council of
Nice, were both privately, first at Rome in a smaller Synod, and then at
Constantinople in a general famous Assembly brought to a peaceable and quiet
end, An. D^m. 381.
Sevenscore Bishops and ten agreeing in that Confession, which by them set
down, remains at this present hour, a part of our Church Liturgy, a Memorial
of their Fidelity and Zeal, a sovereign preservative of Gods people from the
venomous infection of Heresy. Thus in Christ the verity of God, and the
complete substance of man, were with full agreement established throughout the
World, till such time as the Heresy of Nesterius broached it self, (...)
Cyril. Epist ad ^u^g. (...) at Le^^^. de Sect.
Dividing Christ into two Persons, the Son of God, and the Son of Man, the one
a Person begotten of God before all Worlds, the other also a Person born of the
Virgin Mary, and in special favor chosen to be made entire to the Son of God
above all men, so that whosoever will honor God, must together honor Christ,
with whose Person God has vouchsafed to join himself in so high a degree of
gracious respect and favor. But that the self-same Person, which verily is Man,
should properly be God also, and that by reason not of two Persons linked in
Amity, but of two Natures, Humane and Divine, conjoined in one and the same
Person, the God of Glory may be said as well to have suffered death, as to have
raised the dead from their Graves; the Son of Man as well to have made, as to
have redeemed the World, Nestorius in no case would admit. That which deceived
him, was want of heed to the first beginning of that admirable combination of
God with Man. The Word (says St. John) was made flesh, and dwelt John 1. 16.
in us. The Evangelist uses the plural number, Men for Manhood, us for the
nature whereof we consist, even as the Apostle denying the Assumption of
Angelical Nature, says likewise in the plural number, he took not Heb 2 16.
Angels, but the Seed of Abraham. It pleased not the Word or Wisdom of God, to
take to it self some one Person amongst men, for then should that one have been
advanced which was assumed, and no more; but Wisdom, to the end, she might save
many, built her House of that Nature which is common unto all, she made not
this or that Man her Habitation, but dwelt in us. The Seeds of Herbs and Plants
at the first, are not in act, but in possibility, that which they afterward
grow to be. If the Son of God had taken to himself a Man now made, and already
perfected, it would of necessity follow, that there are in Christ two Persons,
the one assuming, and the other assumed, whereas the Son of God did not assume
a man's person into his own, but a man's nature to his own Person, and therefore
took Semen, the Seed of Abraham, the very first original Element of our Nature,
(...). The^d. Dial.
before it was come to have any Personal Humane subsistence. The Flesh and the
Conjunction of the Flesh with God, began both at one instant; his making, and
taking to himself our flesh, was but one act, (...).
so that in Christ^ there is no Personal subsistence but one, and that from
everlasting. By taking only the nature of man, he still continues one Person,
and changes but the manner of his subsisting, which was before in the mere
glory of the Son of God, and is now in the habit of our flesh. For as much
therefore as Christ has no personal subsistence but one, whereby we
acknowledge him to have been eternally the Son of God, we must of necessity
apply to the Person of the Son of God, even that which is spoken of Christ,
according to his Humane nature. For example, according to the flesh, he was
born of the Virgin Mary, baptized of John in the River Jordan, by Pilate
adjudged to die, and executed by the Jews. We cannot say properly, that the
Virgin bore, or John did baptize, or Pilate condemn, or the Jews crucify the
Nature of Man, because these all are Personal Attributes; his Person is the
subject which receives them, his Nature that which makes his Person capable
or apt to receive. If we should say, that the Person of a Man in our Savior
Christ was the subject of these things, this were plainly to entrap our selves
in the very snare of the Nestorians Heresy, between whom, and the Church of
God, there was no difference, saving only, that Nestorius imagined in Christ,
as well a Personal Humane subsistence, as a Divine; the Church acknowledging a
substance, both Divine and Humane, but no other Personal subsistence then
Divine, because the Son of God took not to himself a man's person, but the
nature only of a man. Christ is a Person both Divine and Humane, howbeit not
therefore two persons in one; neither both these in one sense, but a Person
Divine, because he is personally the Son of God; Humane, because he has really
the nature of the Children of Men. In Christ therefore God and Man, Pasch lib.
de Spir. Sanct.
There is (says Paschasius) a twofold substance, not a twofold Person, because
one Person distinguishes another, whereas one nature cannot in another become
extinct. For the Personal Being, which the Son of God already had, suffered not
the Substance to be Personal which he took, although together with the Nature
which he had, the Nature also which he took, continues. Whereupon it follows
against Nestorius, That no Person was born of the Virgin but the Son of God, no
Person but the Son of God baptized, the Son of God condemned, the Son of God
and no other Person crucified; which one only point of Christian Belief, The
infinite north of the Son of God, is the very ground of all things believed
concerning Life and Salvation, by that which Christ either did or suffered as
Man in our behalf. But for as much as St. Cyril, the chiefest of those Two
hundred Bishops assembled in the Council of Ephesus, An. Dom. 430.
where the Heresy of Nestorius was condemned, had in his Writings against the
Arians avouched, That the Word or Wisdom of God has but one Nature which is
Eternal, and whereunto he assumed Flesh, (for the Arians were of opinion, That
besides Gods own Eternal Wisdom, there is a Wisdom which God created before all
things, to the end he might thereby create all things else; and that this
Created Wisdom was the Word which took Flesh.) Again, for as much as the same
Cyril had given instance in the Body and the Soul of Man, no farther then only
to enforce by example against Nestorius, That a visible, and an invisible, a
mortal and an immortal Substance, may united, make one Person; the words of
Cyril were in process of time so taken, as though it had been his drift to
teach, That even as in us the Body and the Soul, so in Christ, God and Man,
make but one Nature. Of which Error, An. Dom. 451.
Six hundred and thirty Fathers in the Council of Chalcedon condemned Eutiches.
For as Nestorius teaching rightly, That God and Man are distinct Natures, did
thereupon mis-infer, That in Christ those Natures can by no conjunction make
one Person; so Eutiches, of ^ound belief as touching their true Personal
Copulation, became unsound, by denying the difference which still continues
between the one and the other Nature. We must therefore keep warily a middle
course, shunning both that distraction of Persons, wherein Nestorius went awry;
and also this latter confusion of Natures, which deceived Eutiches. (...).
Theodor. Di^l. (...).
These Natures from the moment of their first combination, have been and are
for ever inseparable. For even when his Soul forsook the Tabernacle of his
Body, his Deity forsook neither Body nor Soul. ^ it had, then could we not
truly hold, either that the Person of Christ was buried, or that the Person of
Christ did raise up it self from the dead. For the Body separated from the
Word, can in no true sense be termed the Person of Christ; nor is it true, to
say, That the Son of God in raising up that Body, did raise up himself, if the
Body were not both with him, and of him, even during the time it lay in the
Sepulcher. The like is also to be said of the Soul, otherwise we are plainly
and inevitably Nestorians. The very Person of Christ therefore, for ever one
and the self-same, was only, touching Bodily Substance, concluded within the
Grave, his Soul only from thence severed; but by Personal Union, his Deity
still inseparably joined with both.

That by the Union of the one, with the ^^her Nature in Christ, there grows
neither gain nor loss of Essential Properties to either.
53. The sequel of which Conjunction of Natures in the Person of Christ, is no
abolishment of Natural Properties appertaining to either Substance, no
transition or transmigration thereof, out of one substance into another:
Finally, no such mutual infusion, as really causes the same Natural Operations
or Properties to be made common unto both Substances; but whatsoever is natural
to Deity, the same remains in Christ uncommunicated unto his Manhood, and
whatsoever natural to Manhood, his Deity thereof is incapable. The true
Properties and Operations of his Deity, are, To know that which is not possible
for Created Natures to comprehend; to be simply the highest cause of all
things, the Wellspring of Immortality and Life; to have neither end nor
beginning of days; to be every where present, and enclosed no where; to be
subject to no alteration nor passion; to produce of it self those effects,
which cannot proceed but from infinite Majesty and Power. The true Properties
and Operation of his Manhood, are such as Irenaus reckons up, (...). ^^er.
lib. 3. Advers. Haeres.
If Christ (says he) had not taken flesh from the very Earth, he would not
have coveted those earthly nourishments, wherewith bodies which be taken from
thence, are fed. This was the Nature which felt hunger after long fasting, was
desirous of rest after travel, testified compassion and love by tears, groaned
in heaviness, and with extremity of grief, even melted away it self into bloody
sweats. To Christ we ascribe, Christ did all these (...) Greg. Nazlant. Orat. a
de^tilo. (...).
both working of Wonders, and suffering of Pains; we use concerning him,
speeches as well of Humility, as of Divine Glory; but the one we apply unto
that Nature which he took of the Virgin Mary, the other to that which was in
the beginning. We may not therefore imagine, that the properties of the weaker
Nature, have vanished with the presence of the more glorious, and have been
therein swallowed up as in a Gulf. We dare not in this point give ear to them,
who over-boldly affirm, Greg. Esse. Epist. 21. These. Ibid. Alexandr.
That the Nature which Christ took weak and feeble from us, by being mingled
with Deity, became the same which Deity is; that the Assumption of our
Substance unto his, was like the blending of a drop of Vinegar with the huge
Ocean, wherein although it continue still, yet not with those properties which
severed it has; because sithence the instant of their conjunction, all
distinction and difference of the one from the other, is extinct; and
whatsoever we can now conceive of the Son of God, is nothing else but mere
Deity: Which words are so plain and direct for Eutiches, that I stand in doubt,
they are not his whose name they carry. Sure I am, they are far from truth, and
must of necessity give place to the better advised sentences of other men.
Milar. de Trin. lib. 9.
He which in himself was appointed (says Hilary) a Mediator to save his
Church, and for performance of that Mystery of Mediation between God and Man,
is become God and Man, does now being but one, consist of both those Natures
united, neither has he, through the Union of both, incurred the damage or loss
of either, lest by being born a Man, we should think he has given over to be
God; or that, because he continued God, therefore he cannot be Man also;
whereas the true belief which makes a man happy, proclaims jointly God and
Man, confesses the Word and Flesh together. Cyril more plainly, Cypr. Epist.
ad ^est.
His two Natures have knit themselves the one to the other, and are in that
nearness, as incapable of confusion, as of distraction. Their coherence has
not taken away the difference between them, Flesh is not become God, but does
still continue Flesh, although it be now the Flesh of God. Tea, Salva
propriera^e ^^^ns^ue naturae, susceptra est a Majestate humilitas, a briure
infirmitas, ab eccernitare mortalitas, Leo Epist. ^^t Flav.
of each Substance (says Leo) the Properties are all preserved and kept safe.
These two Natures are as causes and original Grounds of all things which Christ
has done. Wherefore some things he does as God, because his Deity alone is the
Wellspring from which they flow; some things as Man, because they issue from
his mere Humane nature; some things jointly as both God and Man, because both
Natures concur as Principles thereunto. For albeit, the Properties of each
Nature do cleave only to that Nature whereof they are Properties; and
therefore Christ cannot naturally be as God, the same which he naturally is as
Man, yet both Natures may very well concur unto one effect, and Christ in that
respect be truly said to work, both as God and as Man, one and the self-same
thing. Let us therefore set it down for a rule or principle so necessary, as
nothing more, to the plain deciding of all doubts and questions about the Union
of Natures in Christ, that of both Natures there is a Cooperation often, an
Association always, but never any Mutual Participation, whereby the Properties
of the one are infused into the other. Which rule must serve for the better
understanding of that which (...). Damasc. de Orrbed. ^^^ lib. 3. cap 4. Verem
est riaarum in Christu naturarum alteram sua^ alteri proprietates impartire,
enuncian so videlicer. Idque non in abstract sed in concreto soluta, divinas
liembat non humanitati, humanas non de^^a^^ sed Deo tribul. Cujus haec est
ratio, q^^^, cum supp^ss^um praeticationis sit cjasmodi ut utramque naturam in
se continear, sive ab una sive ab altero denomineretur nihil refere.
Damascene has touching cross and circulatory speeches, wherein there are
attributed to God such things as belong to Manhood, and to Man such as properly
concern the Deity of Christ Jesus, the cause whereof is the Association of
Natures in one Subject. A kind of Mutual Commutation there is, whereby those
concrete Names, God and Man, when we speak of Christ, do take interchangeably
one another room; so that for truth of speech, it skilleth not whether we say,
That the Son of God has created the World, and the Son of Man by his Death
has saved it; or else, That the Son of Man did create, and the Son of God die
to save the World. Howbeit, as often as we attribute to God what the Manhood of
Christ claims, or to Man what his Deity has right unto, we understand by the
Name of God, and the Name of Man, neither the one nor the other Nature, but the
whole Person of Christ, in whom both Natures are When the Apostle says of the
Jews, that they crucified the Lord of Glory, and when the Son of Man, being on
Earth, affirms, That the Son of Man was in Heaven at the same instant; there
is in these two speeches that Mutual Circulation beforementioned. In the one, 1
Cor. 2. 8.
there is attributed to God, or the Lord of Glory, Death, whereof Divine Nature
is not capable; John 3. 13.
in the other Ubiquity unto Man, which Humane Nature admits not. Therefore
by the Lord of Glory, we must needs understand the whole Person of Christ, who
being Lord of Glory, was indeed crucified, but not in that nature, for which he
is termed the Lord of Glory. In like manner, by the Son of Man, the whole
Person of Christ must necessarily be meant, who being Man upon Earth, filled
Heaven with his glorious presence, but not according to that nature, for which
the title of man is given him. Without this Caution, the Fathers whose belief
was sincere, and their meaning most sound, shall seem in their Writings, one to
deny what another constantly does affirm. Theodoret disputes with great
earnestness, that God cannot be said to suffer. (...). Greg. Wyss. de Secta^or.
Apollinar. Epist.^.^. Flav.
But he thereby means Christ's Divine Nature against Apollinarius, which held
even Deity it self possible. Cyril on the other side against Nestorius, as much
contendeth, That whosoever will deny very God to have suffered death, does
forsake the Faith. Which notwithstanding to hold, were Heresy, if the Name of
God in this Assertion did not import, as it does, the Person of Christ, who
being verily God, suffered death, but in the Flesh, and not in that substance
for which the Name of God is given him.

What Christ has obtained according to the Flesh^ by the ^^ion of his Flesh
with D^ry.
54. If then both Natures do remain with their properties in Christ thus
distinct, as has been showed, we are for our better understanding, what either
Nature receives from other, to note, That Christ is by three degrees a
Receiver: First, In that he is the Son of God: Secondly, In that his Humane
nature has had the honor of Union with Deity bestowed upon it: Thirdly, In
that by means thereof sundry eminent Graces have flowed as effects from Deity
into that Nature which is coupled with it. On Christ therefore, is bestowed the
Gift of Eternal Generation, the Gift of Union, and the Gift of Unction. By the
Gift of Eternal Generation, Christ has received of the Father one, and in
number the Nativi^^s Dei non potest non came ex qua prosecta est tenere naturam.
Neque enim aliud qua^ Deus su ^^^^^ qui non assunde quam ex Deo Deos subsistir.
Milar. de Trin. lib. 5. Cum sit gloria, sem^inernitate, virtute, regno,
potesta^e hoc quod Pa^er est, omnia tamen haec non sine auct^ire ^out pave^^^,
s^u^ex po^^e an quare silius sine iuitio and aequalis habet, ^. haber. ^^^^^^.
in Symb Apost cap. ^ilium aliunde non de substantis Patris omnem a pa^re
consecatum porestatem. T^rtul. contra Prax.
self-same substance, which the Father has of himself, unreceived from any
other. For every Ephesians. 1. 15. (...). quicquid alteri quovis. m^do dat esse. 6.
Jam. 1. 17. Pater luminum (...). Pachym. in Dionys. de Coel. Hierar. cap. 1.
Pater est principium totias divinitatis, quis ipse a nullo est. Nos enim habet
de quo procedat, fest ab eo and. Filius est genitus and Spicius sanctus
procedit. Aug. de Trinit. lib. 4. cap. 80. Hinc Christus ^clea^ls loco nomen
ubique patris usurpit, quis pates nimirum est (...).
beginning is a Father unto that which comes of it, and every offspring is a
Son unto that out of which it grows. Seeing therefore the Father alone is
originally that Deity which Christ Pares ^o^a substantia est, filius vero
derivatio totius and propagatio. Tertul. contra Prix.
originally is not (for Christ is God Quod entra U^^s est. ex Deo es^. Hilar.
de Trin. lib. 5. Nihil nisi narum habet filius. Hilar. lib. 4.
, by being of God, Light (...) Heb. 1. 3. (...). sap. 9. 28. 27.
, by issuing out of Light.) it follows hereupon. That whatsoever Christ has
Nihil in se diversum ac dissimile habene natus and generans. Hilar. de Synod.
Advers. Aria. In Trivliae alium atque alias, non aliud arque ali^^. Vincem.
Lyr. cap. 19.
common unto him with his Heavenly Father, the same of necessity must be given
him, but naturally and Ubi author aeternus est ibi and nativitatis aeternitas
est: Quia sicut ^^^ivitas ab authore est, ita ^^ ab aeterno authore aeterna
nativitas est. Hilar. de Trin. lib. 32. Sicut naturam praestat fillo fine
initio Graetatio: I^ Spiritus sancti praestat essentiam sine initio Processio.
Aug. de Trini. lib. 5. cap. 15.
eternally given; not bestowed by way of benevolence and favor, as the other
gifts both are. And therefore (...). Theod. sol. 49. andex Greg Nazian. Orat.
2. de Fill. ibid. 44.
where the Fathers give it out for a rule, That whatsoever Christ is said in
Scripture to have received, the same we ought to apply only to the Manhood of
Christ: Their Assertion is true of all things which Christ has received by
Grace; but to that which he has received of the Father, by Eternal Nativity or
Birth, it reaches not. Touching Union of Deity with Manhood, it is by Grace,
because there can be no greater Grace showed toward Man, then that God should
vouchsafe to unite to Man's nature, the Person of his only begotten Son.
Because the Father John 3. 35.
loves the Son as Man, he has by Uniting Deity with Manhood, given all things
into his hands. It has Ephesians. 1 5.
pleased the Father, that in him all Fullness should dwell. The name which he
has above all names is Phil. 2. 9.
given him. As the Father has life in himself, the Son in himself has life
also by the John 5. 25.
gift of the Father. The gift whereby God has made Christ a Fountain of Life,
is, That 1 John 5 20. Hic est verus Deus. and with (...).
conjunction of the Nature of God, with the Nature of Man, in the Person of
Christ, John 4. 10.
which gift (says Christ to the Woman of Samaria) if thou did know, and in
that respect understand, who it is which asks water of thee, thou would ask
of him, that he might give thee Living Water. The Union therefore of the Flesh
with Deity, is to that Flesh a gift of Principal Grace and Favor. For by virtue
of this Grace, Man is really made God, a Creature is exalted above the dignity
of all Creatures, and has all Creatures else under it. This admirable Union of
God with Man, can enforce in that higher Nature no alteration, (...). Theod.
Di^l. (...) Periculum status sui Deo nulium est. Tertul. de Car. Chr. Majestati
V^^ Dei corporate No^irus ^^l^l con^^l^, nihil abstuit, Leo de Nativit. Ser. 8.
(...). Thesphil. In sormam servi transisse non est natural perdib^isse Dei.
H^la^. de Trin. lib. 12.
because unto God there is nothing more natural, then not to be subject to any
change. Neither is it a thing impossible, That the Word being made Flesh,
should be that which it was not before, as touching the manner of subsistence,
and yet continue in all Qualities or Properties of Nature the same it was,
because the Incarnation of the Son of God consists merely in the Union of
Natures, which Union does add Perfection to the Weaker, to the Nobler no
alteration at all. If therefore it be demanded what the Person of the Son of
God has attained by assuming Manhood; surely, the whole sum of all, is this,
to be as we are, truly, really, and naturally Man, by means whereof he is made
capable of meaner offices, then otherwise his Person could have admitted, the
only gain he thereby purchased for himself, was to be capable of loss and
detriment for the good of others. But may it rightly be said concerning the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ, That as our Nature has in no respect changed his,
so from his to ours, as little alteration has ensued? The very cause of his
taking upon him our Nature, was to change it, to better the Quality, and to
advance the condition thereof, although in no sort to abolish the Substance
which he took; nor to infuse into it the Natural forces and Properties of his
Deity. As therefore we have showed, how the Son of God by his Incarnation has
changed the manner of that Personal subsistence, which before was solitary, and
is now in the Association of Flesh, no alteration thereby accruing to the
Nature of God; so neither are the Properties of Man's nature, in the Person of
Christ, by force and virtue of the same Conjunction so much altered, as not to
stay within those limits which our Substance is bordered withal; nor the state
and quality of our Substance so unaltered, but that there are in it many
glorious effects proceeding from so near Copulation with Deity. God from us can
receive nothing, we by him have obtained much. For albeit, the Natural
Properties of Deity be not communicable to Man's nature, the Supernatural Gifts,
Graces, and Effects thereof, are. The honor which our Flesh has by being the
Flesh of the Son of God, is in many respects great. If we respect but that
which is common unto us with him, the Glory provided for him and his in the
Kingdom of Heaven, his Right and Title thereunto, even in that he is Man,
differs from other men's, because he is that Man of whom God is himself a
part. We have right to the same Inheritance with Christ, but not the same right
which he has; his being such as we cannot reach, and ours such as he cannot
stoop unto. Furthermore, to be the Way, the Truth, and the Life; to be the
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, Resurrection; to be the Peace of the
whole World, the Hope of the Righteous, the Heir of all things; to be that
Supreme Head whereunto all Power, both in Heaven and in Earth is given: These
are not Honors common unto Christ, with other Men; they are Titles above the
dignity and worth of any which were but a mere Man, yet true of Christ, even in
that he is Man, but Man with whom Deity is personally joined, and unto whom it
has added those excellencies which makes him more then worthy thereof.
Finally, Since God has deified our Nature, though not by turning it into
himself, yet by making it his own inseparable Habitation, we cannot now
conceive, how God should without Man, either (...) Theod.
exercise Divine Power, or receive the glory of Divine Praise. For Man is in
(...)Greg^^. Nyss. apud Th^od (...) Chrysostom. in Pi^l. 41.
both an Associate of Deity. But to come to the Grace of Unction: Did the parts
of our Nature, the Soul and Body of Christ receive by the influence of Deity,
wherewith they were matched, no ability of Operations, no Virtue, or quality
above Nature? Surely, as the Sword which is made fiery, does not only cut by
reason of the sharpness which simply it has, but also burn by means of that
heat which it has from fire; so, there is no doubt, but the Deity of Christ
has enabled that Nature which it took of Man, to do more then Man in this
World has power to comprehend; for as much as (the bare Essential Properties
of Deity excepted) he has imparted unto it all things, he has replenished it
with all such Perfections, as the same is any way apt to receive, at the least,
according to the exigence of that economy or service; for which, it pleased
him in Love and Mercy to be made Man. Luke 2.47.
For, as the Parts, Degrees, and Offices of that Mystical Administration did
require, which he voluntarily undertook, the Beams of Deity did in operation
always accordingly, either restrain or enlarge themselves. (...) Theod. and
tren. lib. 3. Advers. Haeres. Matthew. 27. 46.
From hence we may somewhat conjecture, how the Powers of that Soul are
illuminated, which being so inward unto God, cannot choose but be privy unto all
things which God works, and must therefore of necessity be endued with
knowledge, so far forth Col 2. 3.
Universal; though not with infinite knowledge, peculiar to Deity itself. The
Soul of Christ that saw, in this life, the Face of God, was here, through so
visible presence of Deity, filled with all manner Isai. 11. 2.
of Graces and Virtues in that unmatchable degree of Perfection; for which, of
him we read it written, That God with the Oil of Gladness, anointed Isai. 61.
1. Luk 4 18. Acts 4. 27.
him Heb. 1. ^.
above his 2 Cor. 1. 21. 1 John 2. 20, 27.
fellows. And as God has in Christ, unspeakably glorified the Nobler, so
likewise the meaner part of our Nature, the very Bodily Substance of Man. Where
also that must again be remembered, which we noted before, concerning the
degrees of the influence of Deity proportionable unto his own purposes,
intents, and counsels. For in this respect his Body, which by Natural condition
was corruptible, wanted the gift of Everlasting immunity from Death, Passion,
and Dissolution, till God which gave it to be slain for sin, had for
Righteousness sake restored it to life, with certainty of endless continuance.
Yea, in this respect, the very glorified Body of Christ, retained in it the
John 20. 27.
skars and marks of former mortality. But shall we say, that in Heaven his
glorious Body, by virtue of the same cause, has now power to present it self
in all places, and to be every where at once present? We nothing doubt, but God
has many ways above the reach of our capacities, exalted that Body which it
has pleased him to make his own, that Body wherewith he has saved the World,
that Body which has been, and is the Root of Eternal Life; the Instrument
wherewith Deity works, the Sacrifice which takes away sin, the Price which
has ransomed Souls from Death, the Leader of the whole Army of Bodies that
shall rise again. For though it had a beginning from us, yet God has given it
vital efficacy, Heaven has endowed it with celestial power, that virtue it
has from above, in regard whereof, all the Angels of Heaven adore it.
Notwithstanding, (...) Theod. fol. 81.
a Body still it continues, a Body consubstantial with our Bodies, a Body of
the same, both Nature and Measure which it had on Earth. To gather therefore
into one sum, all that hitherto has been spoken, touching this point, there
are but four things which concur to make complete the whole state of our Lord
Jesus Christ; his Deity, his Manhood, the Conjunction of both, and the
distinction of the one from the other, being joined in one. Four principal
Heresies there are which have in those things withstood the truth. Arians, by
bending themselves against the Deity of Christ; Apollinarians, by maiming and
misinterpreting that which belongs to his Humane Nature; Nestorians, by
renting Christ asunder, and dividing him into two persons; the followers of
Eutiches, by confounding in his Person, those Natures which they should
distinguish. Against these there have been four most famous Ancient. General
Councils; the Council of Nice, to define against Arians, against Apollinarians,
the Council of Constantinople; the Council of Ephesus against Nestorians;
against Eutichians, the Calcedon Council. In four words, (...), truly,
perfectly, indivisibly, distinctly: The first, applied to his being God; and
the second, to his being Man; the third, to his being of both One; and the
fourth, to his still continuing in that One both. We may fully by way of
Abridgment, comprize whatsoever Antiquity has at large handled, either in
Declaration of Christian Belief, or in Refutation of the soresaid Heresies.
Within the compass of which four heads, I may truly affirm, That all Heresies
which touch but the Person of Jesus Christ, (whether they have risen in these
latter days, or in any age heretofore,) may be with great facility brought to
confine themselves. We conclude therefore, That to save the World, it was of
necessity the Son of God should be thus incarnate, and that God should so be in
Christ, as has been declared.

55. Having thus far proceeded in speech concerning the Person of Jesus Christ,
Of the Perso^^^ Presence of Christ every where, and in what sense it may be
granted, be is crazy where present sce^nling to the (...).
his two Natures, their Conjunction, that which he either is, or does in
respect of both, and that which the one receives from the other; since God in
Christ is generally the Medicine which does cure the World, and Christ in as is
that Receipt of the same Medicine, whereby we are every one particularly cured:
In as much as Christ's Incarnation and Passion, can be available to no man's
good, which is not made partaker of Christ, neither can we participate him
without his Presence; we are briefly to consider how Christ is present, to the
end, it may thereby better appear, how we are made partakers of Christ, both
otherwise, and in the Sacraments themselves. All things are in such sort
divided, into Finite and Infinite, that no one Substance, Nature, or Quality,
can be possibly capable of both. The World and all things in the World, are
stinted; all effects that proceed from them; all the powers and abilities
whereby they work; whatsoever they do, whatsoever they may, and whatsoever they
are, is limited. Which limitation of each Creature, is both the perfection, and
also the perservation thereof. Measure, is that which perfecteth all things,
because every thing is for some end; neither can that thing be available to any
end, which is not proportionable thereunto; and to proportion as well excesses,
as defects, are opposite. Again, for as much as nothing does perish, but only
through excess or defect of that, the due proportioned measure whereof does
give perfection, it follows, That measure is likewise the preservation of all
things. Out of which premises, we may conclude, not only, that nothing
created, can possibly be unlimited, or can receive any such accident, quality,
or property, as may really, make it infinite (for then should it cease to be a
Creature) but also, that every Creatures limitation is according to his own
kind; and therefore, as often as we note in them any thing above their kind, it
argues, That the same is not properly theirs, but grows in them from a cause
more powerful then they are. Such as the Substance of each thing is, such is
also the Presence thereof. Impossible it is, that Psalm. 133. 9. ^ Jere. 23. 24.
God should withdraw his Presence from any thing, because the very Substance of
God is infinite. He fills Heaven and Earth; although he take up no room in
either, because his Substance is immaterial, pure, and of us in this World so
incomprehensible, that albeit Ideo Deus ubique esse asi^^r, quia, nulli parti
irr^m absers est; ideo^ns, quia non parti rerum partem sui piaesenum praebet,
and alteri parti alceram partem, sed non inlum Universtati Creaturae, verum
etiam e^libet parti ejus colut pariter adest. Aug. Epist. 57.
an part of us be ever absent from him, who is present whole unto every
particular thing, yet his Presence with us, we no way discern further, then
only that God is present; which partly by Reason, and more perfectly by Faith,
we know to be firm and certain. Seeing therefore that Presence every where is
the sequel of an infinite and incomprehensible Substance, (for what can be
every where, but that which can no where be comprehended?) To enquire, whether
Christ be every where, is to enquire of a Natural Property, a Property that
cleaves to the Deity of Christ. Which Deity being common unto him with none,
but only the Father, and the Holy Ghost, it follows, That nothing of Christ
which is limited, that nothing created, that neither the Soul nor the Body of
Christ, and consequently, not Christ as Man, or Christ according to his Humane
Nature, can possibly be every where present, because those phrases of
Limitation and Restraint, do either point out the principal subject whereunto
every such attribute adhereth, or else they intimate the radical cause out of
which it grows. For example, when we say, that Christ as Man, or according to
his Humane Nature, suffered death; we show what Nature was the proper subject
of Mortality: When we say, that as God, or according to his Deity, he conquered
Death, we declare his Deity to have been the cause, by force and virtue
whereof, lie raised himself from the Grave. But neither is the Manhood of
Christ, that subject whereunto Universal Presence agrees, neither is it the
cause original, by force whereof his Person is enabled to be everywhere
present. Wherefore Christ is essentially present with all things, in that he is
very God, but not present with all things as Man, because Manhood and the parts
thereof, can neither be the cause, nor the true subject of such Presence.
Notwithstanding, somewhat more plainly to show a true immediate reason,
wherefore the Manhood of Christ, can neither be every where present, nor cause
the Person of Christ so to be, we acknowledge that of St. Augustine concerning
Christ most true, Quod id cero bu^ animer, Crea^orest; quoda ^hon inen,
creatura est. Aug. Epist. 57. Deus qui semper est. and semper erat, sit
creatura, Le^. de Nativ. Multi timore screpisant ire Christum esse, Creatam
dicere compellanter; nos proclamimus non esse periculum dicere, Christum esse
Creaturam. Hier. in Epist. ad Epist. 2.
In that he is personally the Word, he created all things; in that he it
naturally Man, he himself is created of God; and it does not appear, that any
one Creature has Power to be present withal Creatures. Whereupon nevertheless
it will not follow, that Christ cannot therefore be thus present, because he is
himself a Creature; for as much as only Infinite Presence, is that which
cannot possibly stand with the Essence or Being of any Creature; as for
Presence with all things that are, since the whole Race, Mass, and Body of them
is Finite, Christ by being a Creature, is not in that respect excluded from
possibility of Presence with them. That which excludes him therefore, as Man,
from so great largeness of Presence, is only his being Man, a Creature of this
particular kind, whereunto the God of Nature has set those bounds of
restraint and limitation, beyond which, to attribute unto it any thing more
then a Creature of that sort can admit, were to give it another Nature, to make
it a Creature of some other kind then in truth it is. Furthermore, if Christ,
in that he is Man, be every where present, seeing this comes not by the Nature
of Manhood it self, there is no other way how it should grow, but either by the
Grace of Union with Deity, or by the Grace of Unction received from Deity. It
has been already sufficiently proved, that by Force of Union, the Properties
of both Natures are imparted to the Person only, in whom they are, and not
what belongs to the one Nature, really conveyed or translated into the other;
it has been likewise proved, That Natures united in Christ, continue the very
same which they are, where they are not united. And concerning the Grace of
Unction, wherein are contained the Gifts and Virtues which Christ as Man has
above men, they make him Really and Habitually a Man more excellent then we
are, they take not from him the Nature and Substance that we have, they cause
not his Soul nor Body to be of another kind, then ours is. Supernatural
endowments, are an advancement, they are no extinguishment of that Nature
whereto they are given. The Substance of the Body of Christ has no Presence,
neither can have, but only Local. It was not therefore every where seen, nor
did it every where suffer death, every where it could not be intombed, it is
not every where now being exalted into Heaven. There is no proof in the World
strong to enforce, that Christ had a true Body, but by the true and natural
Properties of his Body. Amongst which Properties, Definite or Local Presence is
chief, Tertul. de Cir. Chr.
How it is true of Christ (says Tertullian) that he died, was buried, and rose
again, if Christ had not that very flesh, the nature whereof is capable of
these things, flesh mingled with blood, supported with bones, woven with
sinews, embroidered with veins? If his Majestical Body have now any such new
property, by force whereof it may every where really, even in Substance present
it self, or may at once be in many places; then has the Majesty of his estate
extinguished the veri^y of his Nature. Aug. Epist. ^7.
Make thou no doubt or question of it (says St. Augustine) but that the Man
Christ Jesus, is now in that very place from whence he shall come in the same
Form and Substance of Flesh, which he carried thither, and from which he has
not taken Nature, but given thereunto Immortality. According to this Form, he
spreads not out himself into all places: For it behooves us to take great
heed, lest while we go about to maintain the glorious Deity of him, which is
Man, we leave him not the true Bodily Substance of a Man. According to St.
Augustines opinion therefore, that Majestical Body which we make to be every
where present, does thereby cease to have the Substance of a true Body. To
conclude, We hold it in regard of the fore-alleaged proofs, a most infallible
truth, That Christ as Man, is not every where present. There are which think it
as infallibly true, That Christ is every where present as Man, which
peradventure in some sense may be well enough granted. His Humane Substance in
it self, is naturally absent from the Earth; his Soul and Body not on Earth,
but in Heaven only: Yet because this Substance is inseparably joined to that
Personal Word, which by his very Divine Essence, is present with all things;
the Nature which cannot have in it self Universal Presence, has it after a
sort, by being no where severed from that which every where is present. For in
as much as that Infinite Word is not divisible into parts, it could not in
part, but must needs be wholly incarnate, and consequently wheresoever the Word
is, it has with it Manhood, else should the Word be in part, or somewhere God
only, and not Man, which is impossible. For the Person of Christ is whole,
perfect God, and perfect Man, wheresoever; although the parts of his Manhood,
being Finite, and his Deity Infinite, we cannot say, that the whole of Christ
is simply every where, as we may say, that his Deity is, and that his Person is
by Force of Deity. For, somewhat of the Person of Christ is not every where in
that sort, namely, His Manhood; the only Conjunction whereof with Deity is
extended as far as Deity, the actual position restrained and tied to a certain
place; yet presence by way of Conjunction, is in some sort presence. Again, As
the Manhood of Christ may after a sort be everywhere said to be present,
because that Person is every where present, from whose Divine Substance,
Manhood is no where severed: So the same Universality of Presence, may likewise
seem in another respect appliable thereunto, namely, by Cooperation with Deity,
and that in all things. The Light created of God in the Beginning, did first by
it self illuminate the World; but after that the Sun and Moon were created, the
World sithence has by them always enjoyed the same. And that Deity of Christ,
which before our Lords Incarnation, wrought all things without man, does now
work nothing wherein the Nature which it has assumed, is either absent from
it, or idle. Christ as Man, has all Power both in Heaven and Earth given him.
Matthew. 28. Romans 14. 8.
He has as Man, not as God only, Supreme Dominion over quick and dead; for so
much his Ascension into Heaven, and his Session at the right Hand of God, do
import. The Son of God which did first humble himself, by taking our flesh upon
him, descended afterward much lower, and became according to the Flesh
obedient, so far as to suffer Death, even the Death of the Cross for all men,
because such was his Fathers Will. The former was an Humiliation of Deity, the
later an Humiliation of Manhood; Psalm. 2 9. Heb. 2. 9. Revel. 5 12.
for which cause there followed upon the latter an Exaltation of that which was
humbled: For with Power he created the World, but restored it by obedience. In
which obedience, as according to his Manhood, he had glorified God on Earth; so
God has glorified in Heaven, that Nature which yielded him obedience; and has
given unto Christ, even in that he is Man, such Fullness of Power over the whole
World, that he which before fulfilled in the state of Humility and Patience,
whatsoever God did require, does now reign in Glory till the time that all
things be restored. Luke 21.27. Acts 3. 21. Ephesians. 4. 9.
He which came down from Heaven, and descended into the lowest parts of the
Earth, is ascended far above all Heavens; that fitting at the right Hand of
God, he might from thence fill all things with the gracious and happy fruits of
his saving Presence. Ascension into Heaven, is a plain local translation of
Christ, according to his Manhood, from the lower to the higher parts of the
World. Session at the right Hand of God, is the actual exercise of that Regency
and Dominion, wherein the Manhood of Christ is joined, and matched with the
Deity of the Son of God. Not that his Manhood was before without the Possession
of the same Power, but because the full use thereof was suspended, till that
Humility which had been before as a vail to hide and conceal Majesty, were laid
aside. After his rising again from the dead, Ephesians 1.20.
then did God set him at his right Hand in Heavenly places, far above all
principality and power, and might, and domination, and every name that is
named, not in this World only, but also in that which is to come; and has put
all things under his feet, Psalm. 3. 4. Heb. 2. 6.
and has appointed him over all the Head to the Church, which is his Body, the
fullness of him that fills all in all. 1 Cor. 25.
The Scepter of which Spiritual Regiment over us in this present World is at
the length to be yielded up into the hands of the Father which gave it; that is
to say, The use and exercise thereof shall cease, there being no longer on
Earth any Militant Church to govern. This Government therefore he exercises
both as God and as Man; as God, by Essential Presence with all things; as Man,
by Cooperation with that which essentially is present. Touching the manner how
he works as Man in all things; the Principal Powers of the Soul of Man, are
the Will and Understanding, the one of which two in Christ assenteth unto all
things, and from the other nothing which Deity does work, is hid; so that by
knowledge and assent, the Soul of Christ is present with all things which the
Deity of Christ works. And even the Body of Christ it self, although the
definite limitation thereof be most sensible, does notwithstanding admit in
some sort a kind of infinite and unlimited Presence likewise. For his Body
being a part of that Nature, which whole Nature is presently joined unto Deity;
wheresoever Deity is, it follows, That his Bodily Substance has every where
a Presence of true Conjunction with Deity. And for as much as it is, by virtue
of that Conjunction, made the Body of the Son of God, by whom also it was made
a Sacrifice for the sins of the whole World, this gives it a presence of force
and efficacy, throughout all Generations of Men. Albeit therefore, nothing be
actually infinite in substance, but God only in that he is God, nevertheless,
as every number is infinite by possibility of addition, and every line by
possibility of extension infinite; so there is no stint which can be set to the
value or merit of the Sacrificed Body of Christ, it has no measured certainty
of limits, bounds of efficacy unto life it knows none, but is also it self
infinite in possibility of Application. Which things indifferently every way
considered, that gracious promise of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
concerning presence with his to the very end of the World, I see no cause but
that we may well and safely interpret he does perform, both as God, by
essential presence of Deity, and as Man, in that order, sense, and meaning,
which has been showed.

The Union or Mutual Participation which is between Christ and the Church of
Christ, in this person^ World.
56. We have hitherto spoken of the Person and of the presence of Christ.
Participation is that mutual inward hold which Christ has of us, and we of
him, in such sort that each possesses other by way of special interest,
property, and inherent copulation. For plainer explication whereof, we may from
that which has been before sufficiently proved, assume to our purpose these
two Principles, That every original cause imparteth it self unto those things
which come of it; and whatsoever takes Being from any other, the same is after
a sort in that which gives it Being. It follows hereupon, that the Son of
God being Light of Light, must needs be also Light in Light. In the bosom of
the Father, Joh. 1. 18. Ecce dica ali um esse Patrem, and alium Filium; non
chretone alium, sed ^ stincti or, Tertul.(...) Prax. ^^e in tumetum pluraiem
desitur incor^nea generatio, nec in divisionem cadit, ubi qui nascitur
nequaquam a generante separa ^^. ^^ssin in Symbol.
The Persons of the Godhead, by reason of the Unity of their substance, do as
necessarily remain one within another, as they are of necessity to be
distinguished one from another, because two are the issue of one, and one the
Offspring of the other two; only of three, one not growing out of any other.
And since they all are but one God in number, one indivisible Essence or
Substance, their distinction cannot possibly admit Separation. For how should
that subsist solitarily by it self, which has no substance, but individually
the very same, whereby others subsist with it; seeing that the Multiplication
of Substances in particular, is necessarily required to make those things
subsist apart, which have the self-same General Nature, and the Persons of that
Trinity, are not three particular Substances, to whom one General Nature is
common, but three that subsist by one substance, which it self is Particular;
yet they all three have it, and their several ways of having it, are that which
makes their Personal distinction? The Father therefore is in the Son, and the
Son in him; they both in the Spirit, and the Spirit in both them. So that the
Fathers first Offspring which is the Son, remains eternally in the Father;
the Father eternally also in the Son, no way severed or divided, by reason of
the sole and single Unity of their Substance. The Son in the Father, as Light
in that Light out of which it flows without separation; the Father in the
Son, as Light in that Light which it causes, and leaves not. And because in
this respect his eternal Being is of the Father, which eternal Being is his
Life, therefore he by the Father lives. Again, since all things do accordingly
love their Offspring, as themselves are more or less contained in it, he which
is thus the only begotten, must needs be in this degree the only Beloved of
the Father. He therefore which is in the Father, by eternal Derivation of Being
and Life from him, must needs be in him through an eternal Affection of love.
His Incarnation causes him also as man to be now in the Father, and the Father
to be in him. For in that he is Man, he receives Life from the Father, as from
the Fountain of that Ever-living Deity, which in the Person of the Word has
combined it self with Manhood, and does thereunto impart such life, as to no
other Creature besides him is communicated. In which consideration likewise,
Luke 3 22. Joh 3. 14.35. and 5 20. and 10. 17 and 14. 31. and 15. 10.
the love of the Father toward him, is more then it can be toward any other;
neither can any attain unto that perfection of love, which he bears toward
his Heavenly Father. Wherefore God is not so in any, nor any so in God as
Christ; whether we consider him as the Personal Word of God, or as the Natural
Son of Man. All other things that are of God, have God in them, and he them in
himself likewise. Yet because their Substance and his wholly differs, their
coherence and communion either with him or amongst themselves, is in no sort
like unto that before mentioned. God has his influence into the very Essence
of all things, without which influence of Deity supporting them, their utter
annihilation could not choose but follow. Of him all things have both received
their first Being, and their continuance to be that which they are. All things
are therefore partakers of God, they are his Offspring, his influence is in
them, and the Personal Wisdom of God is, for that very cause, said to excel in
nimbleness or agility, to pierce into all intellectual, pure, and subtle
spirits, Wisd. 7. 29.
to go through all, and to reach unto every thing which is. Otherwise, how
should the same Wisdom be that which supporteth, bears up, and sustaineth
all? Heb. 1.3.
Whatsoever God does work, the hands of all three Persons are jointly and
equally in it, according to the order of that connection, whereby they each
depend upon other. And therefore albeit in that respect the Father be first,
the Son next, the Spirit last, and consequently nearest unto every effect which
grows from all three; nevertheless, they all being of one Essence, are
likewise all of one Efficacy. Dare any man, unless he be ignorant altogether
how inseparable the Persons of the Trinity are, persuade himself that every of
them may have their sole and several Possessions, or that we being not
partakers of all, can have fellowship with any one? John 14. 13.
The Father as Goodness, the Son as Wisdom, the Holy Ghost as Power, do all
concur in every particular, outwardly issuing from that one only glorious
Deity which they all are. For that which moves God to work, is Goodness; and
that which orders his Work, is Wisdom; and that which perfecteth his Work, is
Power. All things which God in their times and seasons has brought forth, were
eternally and before all times in God, as a work unbegun is in the Artificer,
which afterward brings it unto effect. Therefore whatsoever we do behold now
in this present World, it was inwrapped within the Bowels of Divine Mercy,
written in the Book of Eternal Wisdom, and held in the hands of Omnipotent
Power, the first Foundations of the World being as yet unlaid. So that all
things which God has made, are in that respect the Offspring of God, Acts
19.28, 29. Joh. 1.4. and 1.10. Isai. 40.26.
they are in him as effects in their highest cause; he likewise actually is in
them, the assistance and influence of his Deity is their life. Let hereunto
saving efficacy be added, and it brings forth a special Offspring amongst
men, containing them to whom God has himself given the gracious and amiable
name of Sons. We are by Nature the Sons of Adam. When God created Adam, he
created us; and as many as are descended from Adam, have in themselves the
Root, out of which they spring. The Sons of God we neither are all, nor any one
of us, otherwise then only by grace and favor. The Sons of God have Gods own
Natural Son, as a second Adam from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15.47.
whose Race and Progeny they are by Spiritual and Heavenly Birth. God therefore
loving eternally his Son, he must needs eternally in him, have loved and
preferred before all others, them which are spiritually sithence descended and
sprung out of him. Ephesians. 1. 3,4.
These were in God as in their Savior, and not as in their Creator only. It
was the purpose of his saving Goodness, his saving Wisdom, and his saving
Power, which inclined it self toward them. They which thus were in God
eternally by their intended admission to life, have, by vocation or adoption,
God actually now in them, as the Artificer is in the Work, which his hand does
presently frame. Life as all other gifts and benefits, grows originally from
the Father, and comes not to us but by the Son; nor by the Son to any of us in
particular, but through the Spirit. 1 John 5. 11. Romans 8. 10. 3 Cor. 13. 13.
For this cause the Apostle wishes to the Church of Corinth, The Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost.
Which three St. Peter comprehends in one, The participation of Divine Nature.
2 Pet. 1. 4.
We are therefore in God, through Christ eternally, according to that intent
and purpose, whereby we are chosen to be made his in this present World, before
the World it self was made: We are in God, through the knowledge which is had
of us, and the love which is born toward us from everlasting. But in God we
actually are no longer then only from the time of our actual Adoption into the
Body of his true Church, into the Fellowship of his Children. For his Church he
knows and loves; so that they which are in the Church, are thereby known to
be in him. Our being in Christ by Eternal foreknowledge saves us not, without
our Actual and Real Adoption into the Fellowship of his Saints in this present
World. For in him we actually are by our actual incorporation into that Society
which has him for their Head; Gal. 2.10.
and does make together with him one Body, (he and they in that respect having
one name) for which cause by virtue of this Mystical Conjunction, we are of
him, and in him, 1 Cor. 12. 11. Ephesians. 5. 30.
even as though our very flesh and bones should be made continuate with his. We
are in Christ, because he knows and loves us, John 15.9. 1 John 5. 12.
even as parts of himself. No man actually is in him, but they in whom he
actually is. For he which has not the Son of God, has not Life: John 19. 9. 4.
I am the Vine, and ye are the Branches: He which abides in me; and I in him,
the same brings forth much Fruit; but the Branch severed from the Vine,
withers. We are therefore adopted Sons of God to Eternal Life, by
Participation of the only begotten Son of God, whose Life is the Wellspring
and cause of ours. John 14. 19. Ephesians. 5. 23.
It is too cold an interpretation, whereby some men expound our Being in Christ
to import nothing else, but only, That the self-same Nature which makes us to
be Men, is in him, and makes him Man as we are. For what man in the World is
there, which has not so far forth communion with Jesus Christ? It is not this
that can sustain the weight of such sentences as speak of the Mystery of our
Coherence with Jesus Christ. The Church is in Christ, John 14. 30. and 15. 4.
as Eve was in Adam. Yea, by Grace we are every of us in Christ, and in his
Church, and in his Church, as by Nature we were in those our first Parents. God
made Eve of the Rib of Adam: And his Church he frames out of the very Flesh,
the very wounded and bleeding side of the Son of Man. His Body crucified and
his Blood shed for the Life of the World, 1 Cor. 15. 48.
are the true Elements of that Heavenly Being, which makes us such as himself
is of whom we come. For which cause the words of Adam may be fitly the words of
Christ concerning his Church, Flesh of my Flesh, and Bone of my Bones; a true
Nature extract out of my own Body. So that in him, even according to his
Manhood, we, according to our Heavenly Being, are as Branches in that Root out
of which they grow. To all things he is Life, and to men Light, John 1. and 6.
57.
as the Son of God; to the Church, both Life and Light Eternal, by being made
the Son of Man for us, and by being in us a Savior, whether we respect him as
God, or as Man. Adam is in us as an original cause of our Nature, and of that
corruption of Nature which causes death; Christ as the cause original of
Restoration to Life. Heb. 5. 9.
The person of Adam is not in us, but his nature, and the corruption of his
nature derived into all men by Propagation; Christ having Adams nature, as we
have, but incorrupt, deriveth not nature but incorruption, and that immediately
from his own Person, into all that belong unto him. As therefore we are really
partakers of the body of Sin and Death received from Adam; so except we be
truly partakers of Christ, and as really possessed of his Spirit, 1 Cor 15.4^.
52.
all we speak of Eternal Life, is but a dream. That which quickneth us, is the
Spirit of the Second Adam, and his Flesh that wherewith he quickneth. That
which in him made our Nature incorrupt, was the Union of his Deity with our
Nature. And in that respect the sentence of Death and Condemnation, which only
takes hold upon sinful flesh, could no way possibly extend unto him. This
caused his voluntary death for others to prevail with God, and to have the
force of an Expiatory Sacrifice. The Blood of Christ, as the Apostle
witnesses, does therefore take away sin, Heb. 9. 14.
because through the Eternal Spirit, he offered himself unto God without spot.
That which sanctified our Nature in Christ, that which made it a Sacrifice
available to take away sin, is the same which quickneth it, raised it out of
the Grave after Death, and exalted it unto Glory. Seeing therefore that Christ
is in us as a quickening Spirit, the first degree of Communion with Christ, must
needs consist in the Participation of his Spirit, Cypr. de Coena Dom. cap. 6.
which Cyprian in that respect well terms Germanissimam Societatem, the
highest and truest Society that can be between man and him, which is both God
and Man in one. Cy^in Iiar. lib. 12. cap 13.
These things St. Cyril duly considering, reproves their speeches, which
^aught that only the Deity of Christ, is the Vine whereupon we by Faith do
depend as Branches, and that neither his Flesh not our Bodies are comprised in
this resemblance. For does any man doubt, but that even from the Flesh of
Christ, our very Bodies do receive that Life which shall make them glorious at
the latter day; and for which, they are already accounted parts of his Blessed
Body? Our corruptible bodies could never live the life they shall live, were it
not that here they are joined with his Body, which is incorruptible, and that
his is in ours as a cause immortality, a cause by removing through the Death
and Merit of his own Flesh that which hindered the life of ours. Christ is
therefore, both as God and as Man, that true Vine whereof we both spiritually
and corporally are Branches. The mixture of his Bodily Substance with ours is a
thing which the Ancient Fathers Nostra quippe and Ipsius conjunctio n^c mi^cet
person ^s nec nai^ substance as, sed aff. ^us consocist and consoe lerat
voluntates. Cypr de Co^^. Dam.
disclaim. Yet the mixture of his Flesh with ours they Quomodo dicunt carnem in
corruptionem devenice, and non percipe^ c vi^am, qua a corpore Domini and
sanguine ali^^? Iran. lib. 4. Advers. Haeres. cap. 34.
speak of, to signify what our very bodies, through Mystical Conjunction,
receive from that vital efficacy which we know to be in his; and from bodily
mixtures, they borrow diverse Similitudes, rather to declare the Truth, Unde
cons^erandum est non solum (...) sea conformitate affectionum, Christum in
nobis esse; verum enam participatione Naturali (id est, p^ali and vera:)
quamadm^dum and quis igne liquefactan cetam a^^i cere si^lliter lique^actae i^
a miscu^^i^u^ ^num quid ex ^tris; suctum videatus; sie communicatione Corporis
and Sanguinis Christi ipse in nobis est, and no^ in ipso. Cyril. in Io^n. lib.
10. cap. 13.
then the manner of coherence between his sacred, and the sanctified Bodies of
Saints. Thus much no Christian Man will deny, That when Christ sanctified his
own Flesh, giving as God, and taking as Man the Holy Ghost, he did not this for
himself only, but for our sakes, that the Grace of Sanctification and Life,
which was first received in him, might pass from him to his whole Race, as
Malediction came from Adam unto all mankind, Howbeit, because the Work of his
Spirit to those effects is in us prevented by Sin and Death, possessing us
before; it is necessity, that as well our present Sanctification unto newness
of life; as the future of Restoration of our Bodies, should presuppose a
participation of the Grace, Efficacy, Merit, or Virtue of his Body and Blood;
without which Foundation first laid, there is no place for those other
operations of the Spirit of Christ to ensue. So that Christ imparteth plainly
himself by degrees. I^ pleases him in Mercy, to account himself incomplete and
maimed Ephesians. 1. 23. Ecclesi^ complementam ejus qui implet omnia in omnibus.
(...).
without us. But most assured we are, that we all receive of his Fullness,
because he is in us as a moving and working Cause; from which, many blessed
effects are really found to ensue, and that in sundry, both kinds and degrees,
all tending to eternal happiness. It must be confessed, that of Christ, working
as a Creator, and a Governor of the World by providence, all are partakers; not
all partakers of that Grace, whereby he inhabiteth whom he saves. Again, as he
dwells not by Grace in all, so neither does he equally work in all them in
whom he dwells. Aug. Ep 55.
Whence is it (says St. Augustine) that some be holier then others are, but
because God does dwell in some more plentifully then in others? And because the
Divine Substance of Christ, is equally in all, his Humane Substance equally
distant from all, it appears, that the participation of Christ, wherein there
are many degrees and differences, must needs consist in such effects, as being
derived from both Natures of Christ really into us, are made our own; and we by
saving them in us, are truly said to have him from whom they come; Christ also
more or less, to inhabit and impart himself, as the Graces are fewer or more,
greater or smaller, which really flow into us form Christ. Christ is whole with
the whole Church, and whole with every part of the Church, as touching his
Person which can no way divide it self, or be possessed by degrees and portions.
But the Participation of Christ imports, besides the Presence of Christ's
Person, and besides the Mystical Copulation thereof, with the Parts and Members
of his whole Church, a true actual influence of Grace whereby the life which we
live according to godliness, is his; Gal. 2. 3^^
and from him we receive those perfections wherein our eternal happiness
consists. Thus we participate Christ, partly by imputation; as when those
things which he did, and suffered for us, are imputed unto us for
Righteousness: Partly by habitual and real infusion, Isa. 53 5. Ephesians. 1.7.
as when Grace is inwardly bestowed while we are on Earth, and afterward more
fully, both our Souls and Bodies make like unto his in Glory. The first thing
of his so infused into our hearts in this life, is the Spirit of Christ;
whereupon, because the rest, Romans ^.9. Gal. 4.6.
of what kind soever, do all both necessarily depend and infallibly also
easue; therefore the Apostles term it, sometime the Seed of God, 1 John 3.9.
Ephesians. 1. 14. Romans 9.23.
sometime the Pledge of our Heavenly Inheritance, sometime the Hansel or
Earnest of that which is to come. From hence it is, that they which belong to
the Mystical Body of our Savior Christ, and be in number as the Stars of
Heaven, divided successively, by reason of their mortal condition, into many
Generations, 1 Cor. 12.29. Ephesians. 4. 15. Romans 12. 5. Ephesians. 4. 29.
are notwithstanding coupled every one to Christ their Head, and all unto every
particular person amongst themselves, in as much as the same Spirit, which
anointed the Blessed Soul of our Savior Christ, does so formalize, unite, and
actuate his whole Race, as if both he and they, were so many Limbs compacted
into one Body, by being quickened all with one and the same Soul. That wherein
we are Partakers of Jesus Christ by Imputation, agrees equally unto all that
have it. For it consists in such Acts and Deeds of his, as could not have
longer continuance, then while they were in doing, nor at that very time belong
unto any other, but to him from whom they come; and therefore how men, either
then, or before, or fithence, should be made Partakers of them, there can be no
way imagined, but only by Imputation. Again, a Deed must either not be imputed
to any, but rest altogether in him, whose it is; or if at all it be imputed,
they which have it by Imputation, must have it such as it is, whole. So that
degrees being neither in the Personal Presence of Christ, nor in the
Participation of those effects which are ours by Imputation only, it rests,
that we wholly apply them to the Participation of Christ's infused Grace;
although, even in this kind also, the first beginning of Life, the Seed of
God, the First Fruits of Christ's Spirit, be without latitude. For we have
hereby only the being of the Sons of God, in which number how far soever one
may seem to excel another, yet touching this that all are Sons, they are all
equals, some happily better Sons then the rest are, but none any more a Son
then another. Thus therefore we see, how the Father is in the Son, and the Son
in the Father; how they both are in all things, and all things in them; what
Communion Christ has with his Church, how his Church and every Member thereof,
is in him by original derivation, and he personally in them, by way of Mystical
Association, wrought through the Gift of the Holy Ghost, which they that are
his, receive from him, and together with the same, what benefit soever the
vital force of his Body and Blood may yield; yea, by steps and degrees they
receive the complete measure of all such Divine Grace as does sanctify and
save throughout, till the day of their Final Exaltation to a state of
Fellowship in glory with him, whose partakers they are now in those things that
tend to glory. As for any mixture of the Substance of his Flesh with ours, the
Participation which we have of Christ includes no such kind of gross surmise.

The necessity of Sacraments unto the Participatien of Christ.
57. It greatly offends, that some, when they labor to show the use of the
holy Sacraments, assign unto them no end but only to teach the mind, by other
seases, that which the Word does teach by Hearing. Whereupon how easily neglect
and careless regard of so Heavenly Mysteries may follow, we see in part by some
experience had of those Men, with whom that opinion is most strong. For where
the Word of God may be heard, which teaches with much more Expedition, and
more full Explications, any thing we have to learn; if all the benefit we reap
by Sacraments be instruction, they which at all times have opportunity of using
the better mean to that purpose, will surely hold the worse in less estimation.
And unto Infants which are not capable of instruction, who would not think it a
mere superfluity, that any Sacrament is administered, if to administer the
Sacraments, be but to teach receivers what God does for them? There is of
Sacraments therefore, undoubtedly, some other more excellent and Heavenly use.
Sacraments, by reason of their mixed Nature, are more diversely interpreted and
disputed of, then any other part of Religion besides; for that in so great
store of Properties belonging to the self-same thing, as every Man's wit has
taken hold of some especial consideration above the rest, so they have
accordingly seemed one to cross another, as touching their several opinions
about the necessity of Sacraments; whereas in truth their disagreement is not
great. For, let respect be had to the duty which every Communicant does
undertake, and we may well determine concerning the use of Sacraments, that
they serve as Bonds of Obedience to God, strict Obligations to the mutual
exercise of Christian Charity, Provocations to Godliness, Preservations from
Sin, Memorials of the Principal benefits of Christ; respect the time of their
institution, and it thereby appears, that God has annexed them for ever unto
the New Testament, as other Rites were before with the Old; regard the weakness
which is in us, and they are warrants for the more security of our belief:
Compare the receivers of then with such as receive them not, and Sacraments are
marks of distinction to separate Gods own from strangers; so that in all these
respects, they are sound to be most necessary. But their chiefest force and
virtue, consists not herein so much as in that they are Heavenly Ceremonies,
which God has sanctified and ordained to be administered in his Church: First,
As marks whereby to know when God does impart the vital or saving Grace of
Christ unto all that are capable thereof; and secondly, as Means conditional,
which God requires in them, unto whom he imparteth Grace. For, since God in
himself is invisible, and cannot by us be discerned working; therefore when it
seems good in the eyes of his Heavenly Wisdom, that men for some special
intent and purpose, should take notice of his glorious Presence, he gives them
some plain and sensible token whereby to know what they cannot see. For Moses
to see God and live, Exodus 3. ^.
was impossible; yet Moses by fire, knew where the glory of God extraordinarily
was present. The Angel, J^hn 5. 4.
by whom God endued the Waters of the Pool, called Bethesda, with Supernatural
Virtue to Heal, was not seen of any: yet the time of the Angels presence known
by the troubled motions of the Waters themselves. Acts 2. 3.
The Apostles by Fiery Tongues which they saw, were admonished when the Spirit,
which they could not behold, was upon them: In like manner it is with us.
Christ and his Spirit with all their blessed Effects, though entering into the
Soul of Man, we are not able to apprehend or express how, do notwithstanding
give notice of the times, when they use to make their access, because it
pleases Almighty God to communicate by sensible means those Blessings which
are incomprehensible. Seeing therefore, that Grace is a consequent of
Sacraments, a thing which accompanies them as their end, a benefit which they
have received from God himself, the Author of Sacraments, and not from any
other Natural or Supernatural Quality in them, it may be hereby both
understood, That Sacraments are necessary, and that the manner of their
necessity to Life Supernatural, is not in all respects as food unto Natural
Life, because they contain in themselves no vital force of efficacy; they are
not Physical, but Moral Instruments of Salvation, duties of Service and
Worship; which unless we perform as the Author of Grace requires, they are
unprofitable. For, all receive not the Grace of God, which receive the
Sacraments of his Grace. Neither is it ordinarily his Will to bestow the Grace
of Sacraments on any, but by the Sacraments; which Grace also, they that
receive by Sacraments or with Sacraments, receive it from him, and not from
them. For of Sacraments, the very same is true which Solomon's Wisdom observes
in the Brazen Serpent: Wisd. 15.10. Sp^^itus Sancti munus est gratiam imp^ete
mysterii. Ambr. in Luc. cap. 3. Sanctificatus Elementis effectum non propria
ipsarum natura praebet, sed virtus divina potentius operatur. Cypr. de Christ.
He that turned toward it, was not healed by the thing he saw, but by thee, O
Savior of all, This is therefore the necessity of Sacraments. That saving
Grace which Christ originally is, or has for the general good of his whole
Church, by Sacraments he severally deriveth into every member thereof,
Sacraments serve as the Instruments of God, to that end and purpose: Moral
Instruments, the use whereof is in our own hands, the effect in his; for the
use, we have his express Commandment; for the effect, his Conditional Promise:
So that without our obedience to the one, there is of the other no apparent
assurance; as contrariwise, where the Signs and Sacraments of his Grace, are
not either through contempt unreceived, or received with contempt, we are not
to doubt, but that they really give what they promise, and are what they
signify. For we take not Baptism, nor the Eucharist, for bare resemblances or
memorials of things absent, neither for naked signs and testimonies assuring us
of Grace received before, but (as they are indeed and in verity) for means
effectual, whereby God, when we take the Sacraments, delivers into our hands
that Grace available unto Eternal Life, which Grace the Sacraments Dum homini
bonum inv^sibile redd^tur, foris ei ejusdem significatio per species visibiles
adhibetur: Ut foris excitetur and intus reparetur. In ipsa vasis specie virtus
exprimitur medicinae. Hugo de Sacram. lib. 1. cap. 3. Si ergo vasa sunt
spiritualis gratiae sacramenta, non ex suo sanant, quia vasa aegrotum non
curant, sed medicina. Idem. lib. 1. cap. 3.
represent or signify. There have grown in the Doctrine concerning Sacraments
many difficulties for want of distinct Explication, what kind or degree of
Grace does belong unto each Sacrament. For by this it has come to pass, that
the true immediate cause why Baptism, and why the Supper of our Lord is
necessary, few do rightly and distinctly consider. It cannot be denied, but
sundry the same effects and benefits which grow unto men by the one Sacrament,
may rightly be attributed unto the other. Yet then does Baptism challenge to it
self but the inchoation of those Graces, the consummation whereof depends on
Mysteries ensuing. We receive Christ Jesus in Baptism once, as the first
beginner; in the Eucharist often, as being by continual degrees, the finisher
of our Life. By Baptism therefore, we receive Christ Jesus; and from him that
saving Grace which is proper unto Baptism. By the other Sacrament we receive
him also, imparting therein himself, and that Grace which the Eucharist
properly bestows. So that each Sacrament having both that which is general or
common, and that also which is peculiar unto it self, we may hereby gather,
that the Participation of Christ, which properly belongs to any one
Sacrament, is not otherwise to be obtained, but by the Sacrament whereunto it
is proper.

The Substance of Raptism: the ^zes et Solemnites thereunto belonging, and that
the substance thereof being kept, other things in ^ap ti^m may give place to
necessity.
58. Now even as the Soul does Organize the Body, and give unto every Member
thereof, that substance, quantity, and shape which Nature sees most expedient;
so, the inward Grace of Sacraments may teach what serves best for their
outward form; a thing in no part of Christian Religion, much less here, to be
neglected. Grace intended by Sacraments, was a cause of the choice, and is a
reason of the fitness of the Elements themselves. Furthermore, seeing that the
Grace which here we receive, does no way depend upon the Natural force of that
which we presently behold, it was of necessity, That words of express
Declaration taken from the very mouth of our Lord himself, should be added unto
visible Elements, that the one might infallibly teach what the other do most
assuredly bring to pass. In writing and speaking of the Blessed Sacrament, we
Eucharistia dub^^ ex r^laws constat, tenere and coel^^^^. ^^uss. (...) cap. 34
(...).
use for the most part under the name of their Substance, not only to comprise
that, whereof they outwardly and sensibly consist, but also the secret Grace
which they signify and exhibit. This is the reason wherefore commonly in
Sacramentum est, cum res g^sta visibilis long alid: invisibile intas
reperatur. Isid Erem. lib. 1. Sacramentum per quod su^ ^^gumento rerum visi^^le
^en divina virtus s^lutem serecitus opela^^. Greg. Mi^. Sacramentum of signum
significans ^circe eff^ctum Dei g^a^i^um. Ce^ca. sent. lib. 4 d. 1. Sacramentum
propri^ non ^^^^^^ ^^ ^^lther rei sac^^. ^^^ tan^um rei sacrae sancti (...).
tho. 12. q. 101. 4. and q. 102. 5. Sacramentum est signam Pass ni Christi
gratiae and gloriae. Ideo est commemoratio praete^iti, demonstratis praesentis,
and prognodi^en ^uturi. Tho. 3. q. 60.3. Sacramenta sunt signa and symbols
visibilia rerum, insernatura and invisibilium, per quae, set per me li^. Deus
virtuce Spiritus sancti in nobis agit. Cons. Belg. Art. 33. Item Beb^^n. Cons.
cap. 11.
definitions, whether they be framed larger to aug^ment, or stricter to abridge
the number of Sacraments, we find Grace expressly mentioned as their ^^^^
Essential Form, Elements as the matter whereunto that Form does adjoyn it s^^.
But if that be separated, which is secret, and that considered alone, which is
seen, as of necessity it must in all those speeches that make distinction of
Sacraments from Sacramental Grace; the name of a Sacrament, in such speeches,
can imply no more then what the outward substance thereof does comprehend. And
to make complete the outward substance of a Sacrament, there is required an
outward Form, which Form Sacramental Elements receive from Sacramental words.
Hereupon it grows, that Sacramen^^a constant verbo, signis, and rebus
significatio. Confess. Helen. Post. c. 1^.
many times there are three things said to make up the Substance of a Sacrament;
namely, the Grace which is thereby offered, the Element which shadoweth or
signifies Grace, and the Word which expresses what is done by the Element. So
that whether we consider the outward by it self alone, or both the outward and
inward substance of any Sacraments, there are in the one respect but two
essential parts, and in the other but three that concur to give Sacraments
their full being. Furthermore, because definitions are to express but the most
immediate and nearest parts of Nature, whereas other principles farther off,
although not specified in defining, are notwithstanding in Nature implied and
presupposed, we must note, that in as much as Sacraments are actions religious
and mystical, which Nature they have not unless they proceed from a serious
meaning; and what every man's private mind is, as we cannot know, so neither
are we bound to examine: Therefore always in these cases, the known intent of
the Church generally does suffice; and where the contrary is not Si ^^iquid
Ministri agere incendant, pura sacris illudere mysteriis, vel ali^^ quod
Ecclesiae non consentiat. nihil agitur ^ sine fi^e enim spi^^^^als potestae
exerceti quidem potest, sine Ecclesiae intention non potest. Laurel. Insi.
Jar. Can. lib. 2. Ti^. 2. 5. Hoc tamen
manifest, we may presume, that he which outwardly does the work, has inwardly
the purpose of the Church of God. Concerning all other Orders, Rites, Prayers,
Lessons, Sermons, Actions, and their Circumstances whatsoever, they are to the
outward Substance of Baptism but things accessory, which the wisdom of the
Church of Christ is to order according to the exigence of that which is
principal. Again, Considering that such Ordinances have been made to adorn the
Sacrament, Accessonium non regular Principle sed ab eo regulatur. 42. De
stegul. Jar. in Sex^. lib. 3. If quod iustu.
not the Sacrament to depend upon them; seeing also, that they are not of the
Substance of Baptism, and that Baptism is far more necessary, then any such
incident rite or solemnity ordained for the better Administration thereof,
E^ns^ nihil facile mutandu^^ est ex solennibus, canen ubi aequie as evidens
poseit subveniendum est. Lib. 183. de Reg. Jur.
if the case be such as permits not Baptism to have decent Complements of
Baptism, better it were to enjoy the Body without his Furniture, then to wait
for this, till the opportunity of that for which we desire it be lost. Which
Premises standing, it seems to have been no absurd Collection, that in cases
of necessity, which will not suffer delay till Baptism be administered, with
usual solemnities, (to speak the least) it may be tolerably given without them,
rather then any man without it should be suffered to depart this life.

59. They which deny that any such case of necessity can fall, The Grounds in
Scripture, whereupon a necessity of outward ^ Baptism has been hunt. T. C.
lib. 1. p. 123. invate Baptism first ^ose upon ^ fal^ in ^^ relation of the
place of St. John. Clap. ^. 5. Unless a man be Son again of Water, and of the
S^ri^, etc. Where, certain do interpret the wo^ i^ Water, se^ the Material, and
Elemental Water, when as our Savior Christ coheth Water there by a borrowed
speech, for the Spirit of God, he effect whereof it shadoweth our. Nor even as
in another place, ^^^a^ith. 3. 11. ^ ^y^^^^e and the Spirit, he means nothing
but the Spirit of God, which purges and purifieth as ^ire does: So^a this
place, by Water and the Spirit, he means nothing else but the Spirit of God
which cleanses the silth of sin, and cools the boiling heir of an unquiet
Conscience; as Water washes the thing which ^^ is foul, and quenches the heat
of the Fire.
in regard whereof the Church should tolerate Baptism without the decent Rites
and Solemnities thereunto belonging, pretend, that such Tolerations have risen
from a false interpretaon which certain men have made of the Scripture,
grounding a necessity of External Baptism, upon the words of our Savior
Christ: Unless a man be born again of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. For by Water and the Spirit, we are in that place
to understand (as they imagine) no more then if the Spirit alone had been
mentioned, and Water not spoken of. Which they think is plain, because elsewhere
it is not improbable, that the Holy Ghost and Fire, do but signify the Holy
Ghost in operation resembling Fire. Whereupon they conclude, That seeing Fire
in one place may be, therefore Water in another place is, but a Metaphor:
Spirit, the interpretation thereof; and so the words do only mean, That unless
a man be born again of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
I hold it for a most infallible rule in Expositions of Sacred Scripture, that
were a literal construction will stand, the farthest from the Letter is
commonly the worst. There is nothing more dangerous then this licentious and
deluding Art, which changes the meaning of words, as Alchymy does or would the
substance of Metals, makes of any thing what it lists, and brings in the
end all Truth to nothing. Or howsoever such voluntary exercise of wit might be
born with, otherwise; yet in places which usually serve, as this does,
concerning Regeneration by Water and the Holy Ghost, to be alleged for Grounds
and Principles, less is permitted. To hide the general consent of Antiquity,
agreeing in the literal interpretation, they cunningly affirm, That certain
have taken those words as meant of Material Water, when they know, that of all
the Ancients there is no one to be named, that ever did otherwise, either
expound or allege the place, then as implying External Baptism. Shall that
which has always Mini^e sunt muianda quae Interpretationem certain semper
habue^rant. D. lib. ti^. 2. lib. 23.
received this, and no other construction, be now disguised with a toy of
Novelty? Must we needs at the only show of a critical conceit, without any
more deliberation, utterly condemn them of Error, which will not admit that
Fire in the words John, is quenched with the Name of the Holy Ghost; or, with
the name of the Spirit, Water dried up in the words of Christ? When the Letter
of the Law has two things plainly and expressly specified, Water and the
Spirit; Water as a duty required on our parts, the Spirit as a Gift which God
bestows: There is danger in presuming so to interpret it, at if the clause
which concerns our selves, were more then needs. We may by such rate
Expositions, attain perhaps in the end to be thought witty, but with ill
advice. Finally, if at Acts 1. 3 John Baptized with Water, but you shall within
few days be Baptized with the Holy Ghost.
the time, when that Baptism which was meant by John, came to be really and
truly performed by Christ himself, we find the Apostles, that had been, as we
are, before Baptized, new Baptized with the Holy Ghost; and in this their
latter Baptism as well a Acts 2 3.
visible descent of Fire, as a secret miraculous infusion of the Spirit; if on
us he accomplish likewise the Heavenly work of our New birth, not with the
Spirit alone, but with Water thereunto adjoined; since the faithfullest
Expounders of his words are his own Deeds, let that which his hand has
manifestly wrought, declare what his speech did doubtfully utter.

60. To this they add. What kind of necessity in outward Baptism has been
gathered by the words of our Savior Christ, and what the true necessity
thereof indeed is. T. C. lib. 1. page 143. Secondly, This Error (of Privo^^
Baptism) came by a false and unnecessary conclusion drawn from that place. For,
although the Scripture should say, That none can be saved, but those which have
the Spirit of God, and are Baptized with Material and Elemental Water; yet
ought it to be understood of those which can conveniently and orderly be
brought to Baptism; as the Scripture, saying, That who so does not believe the
Gospel, is condemned already, Job. 3. 18. means this sentence of those which
can hear the Gospel, and have discretion to understand it when the hear it; and
cannot here shut under this condemnation, either those that he born deaf and so
remain, or little infants, or natural Fools that have no wit to couceive what
is Preached.
That as we err by following a wrong construction of the place before alleged;
so our second oversight is, that we thereupon infer a necessity over-rigorous
and extreme. The true necessity of Baptism, a sew Propositions considered, will
soon decide. All things which either are known (...). Necessarium i^ dicitur,
sine quo ut concaus^, fieri non potest ut viratur: Et es sinc quibus neri
nequis ut bonum aut sit aut fiat; vel malum aliquod amovea^^r, aut non ^^lsi^.
Arist. Metaph. 5. cap. 5.
Causes or set Means, whereby any great Good is usually procured, or Men
delivered from grievous evil, the same we must needs confess necessary. And if
Regeneration were not in this very sense a thing necessary to eternal life,
would Christ himself have taught Nicodemus, that to see the Kingdom of God is
Joh 3. 3.
impossible, saving only for those Men which are born from above? His words
following in the next Sentence, are a proof sufficient, that to our
Regeneration, his Spirit is no less Verse. 4.
necessary, then Regeneration it self necessary unto Life. Thirdly, Unless as
the Spirit is a necessary inward cause; so Water were a necessary outward mean
to our Regeneration, what construction should we give unto those words wherein
we are said to be new born, and that (...), even of Water? Why are we taught,
that Ephesians. 5. 2^.
with Water, God does purify and cleanse his Church? Wherefore do the Apostles
of Christ term Baptism Tit. 3. 5.
a Bath of Regeneration? What purpose had they in giving men advice to receive
outward Baptism, and in persuading them, it did avail AM^. 2. 38.
to remission of sins? If outward Baptism were a cause in it self, possessed of
that power, either Natural or Supernatural, without the present operation
whereof no such effect could possibly grow; it must then follow, That seeing
effects do never prevent the necessary causes, out of which they spring, no man
could ever receive Grace before Baptism: Which being apparently both known, and
also confessed to be otherwise in many particulars, although in the rest we make
not Baptism a cause of Grace; yet the Grace which is given them with their
Fidelet salutem ex istis Elementis non quaerunt, e^iam^i in isus a^erunt. N^^
enim ista tribuunt quod per ista tribuitur. Huge de Sacram lib. 1. cap. 3.
Baptism, does so far forth depend on the very outward Sacrament, that God will
have it embraced, not only as a sign or token what we receive; but also as an
Instrument or Mean whereby we receive Grace, because Baptism is a Sacrament
which God has instituted in his Church, to the end, that they which receive
the same, might thereby be Susceptus a Christo, Christumque suscipiens, non
idem fir post lavacrum qui ante Baptismum sui^sed corpus vegenerati sic caro
crucifixi. Lev. Scam. 4. de Pas. Dom.
incorporated into Christ; and so through his most precious Merit obtain, as
well that saving Grace of Imputation which takes away Caro abluitur ut anima
emaculetur. Tert. de Caro. Re^^r. Romo per aquam Baptist millet a suis L^em
esse vidratur, intus tamen alter efficitur; cum peccato natus fine peccato
renasciru: priuribus petir, succedentibus proficis; detericribus exuiour; in
mellora innova^u^ persons tingitur, and natura matatur. Eusebius. Emis. de
Epiphan. Homil. 3. (...). Gregor. Hemil. de Sanct. Bapt.
all former guiltiness, as also that Unde genitali^ auxilio superioris ^ei l^b^
de^^ria in expi^to^^ pectus ac p^^^um desuper se lomen insundit. Cypr. Epist.
ad Domet. (...). Theodore^. Epito. Divin. Dogunat. Baptisari. est purgari and
s^ntibus peccatorum, and domari ^atia Dei grati: ad ritam novam and innocentem.
Confess. Helvet. cap. 80.
infused Divine Virtue of the Holy Ghost, which gives to the Powers of the
Soul their first disposition toward future newness of life. There are that
elevate too much the ordinary and immediate means of life, relying wholly upon
the bare conceit of that Eternal Election, which notwithstanding, includes a
subordination of means, without which, we are not actually brought to enjoy
what God secretly did intend; and therefore to build upon Gods Election, if we
keep not our selves to the ways which he has appointed for men to walk in, is
but a self-deceiving vanity. When the Apostle saw men called to the
participation of Jesus Christ after the Gospel of God embraced, and the
Sacrament of Life received, he fears not Ephesians. 1. 1.
then to put them in the number of Elect Saints; he Ephesians. 5. 8.
then accounts them delivered from death, and clean purged from all sin. Till
then, notwithstanding their preordination unto life, which none could know of,
saving God; what were they in the Apostles own Ephesians. 2. 3. 11.
account, but Children of Wrath, as well as others, plain Aliens, altogether
without hope, strangers, utterly without God in this present World? So that by
Sacraments, and other sensible tokens of Grace, we may boldy gather that he,
whose Mercy vouchsafes now to bestow the means, has also long sithence
intended us that whereunto they lead. But let us never think i^ safe to presume
of our own last end, by bare conjectural Collections of his first intent and
purpose, the means failing that should come between. Predestination brings
not to life, without the Grace of External Romans 8. 30.
Vocation, wherein our Baptism is implied. For, as we are not Naturally men
without birth, so neither are we Christian men in the eye of the Church of God,
but by New birth; nor according to the manifest ordinary course of Divine
Dispensation new born, but by that Baptism which both declares and makes us
Christians. In which respect, we justly hold it to be the Door of our Actual
Entrance into Gods House, the first apparent (...). Basil. de Scit. Sanct. cap.
15.
beginning of Life, a Seal perhaps to the T. C. lib. 5. page 1. 4. ^^ which is
not a Christian before he come to rese^^ ^^^^^^ cannot b^e made Caraside by
Baptism; which is only the Seat of the Grace of God ^tio ^ receiv^^.
Grace of Election before received; but to our Sanctification here, a step that
has not any before it. There were of the old Valentinian Heretics, some which
had Knowledge in such admiration, that to it they ascribed all, and so despised
the Sacraments of Christ, pretending, That as Ignorance had made us subject to
all misery, so the full Redemption of the Inward Man, and the Work of our
Restoration, must needs belong unto Iven contra Haeres. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Knowledge only. They draw very near unto this Error, who fixing wholly their
minds on the known necessity of Faith, Hic sceld^i^imi illi provocant
quastiones. Adeo ^^^^, Esptimus non est necessarius quibus sides satis est.
Tert. de Baptis. Huic ^alla pro^ter it s^iet, qui, cum possit non percipie
Sacramentum. Sern. Epist.
imagine, that nothing but Faith is necessary for the attainment of all Grace.
Yet is it a Branch of Belief, that Sacraments are in their place no less
required then Belief it self. For when our Lord and Savior promises Eternal
Life, is it any otherwise, then as he promised Restitution of health unto
Naaman the Syrian, namely, with this condition, ad Hugon. 12 Kings 5. 14.
Wash and be clean? or as to them which were stung of Serpents, health by Numb.
21. 8.
beholding the Brazen Serpent? If Christ himself which gives Salvation do Mark
15. 16.
require Baptism; it is not for us that look for Salvation, to sound and
examine him, whether unbaptized men may be saved; but seriously to Inssuci^
Sacramentorum quantum ad Deum Authorem, dispensatio^is est, quantum were a^
hontinem obedientem, necesstatis, Quoniam in potestate Dei est prae^ ^r ista
hominea^ salvare, led in potesta^e haminis neu est sine idis a^ satutem
pervenire. Hugo. de Sacra. lib. 1. cap 5.
do that which is required, and religiously to fear the danger which may grow
by the want thereof. Had Christ only declared his Will to have all men
Baptized, and not acquainted us with any cause why Baptism is necessary, our
ignorance in the reason of that he enjoyneth, might perhaps have hindered
somewhat the forwardness of our obedience thereunto: Whereas now being taught,
that Baptism is necessary to take away sin, how have we the fear of God in our
hearts, if care of delivering Men's Souls from sin, do not move us to use all
means for their Baptism? Pelagi^^ al^etere arrepta impietare praesion^ non
propter vicani. sed propter regnum Coelorum Baptismum parvulis conferendum.
Eusebius. Emiss. Hom. 5. de Pas.^.
Pelagius which denied utterly the guilt of Original sin, and in that respect,
the necessity of Baptism, did notwithstanding both Baptize Infants, and
acknowledge their Baptism necessary for entrance into the Kingdom of God. Now
the Law of Christ, which in these considerations makes Baptism necessary, must
be construed and understood according to Rules of Benignius leges
interpretandur sunt, quo voluntas carum corservetur. L. Benign. D. de legib.
and Sen^use.
Natural Equity. Which Rules, if they themselves did not follow in expounding
the Law of God, would they ever be able to prove, that T. C. lib. 1. page 143.
the Scripture, in saying, Whosoever believes not the Gospel of Christ, is
condemned already; means this sentence of those which can hear the Gospel,
and have discretion when they hear to understand it; neither ought it to be
applied unto Infants, Deaf-men, and Fools? That which teaches them thus to
interpret the Law of Christ, is Natural Equity. And (because Equity so
teaches) it is on all parts gladly confessed, That there may be in diverse cases
Life by virtue of inward Baptism, even where outward is not found. So that if
any question be made, it is but about the bounds and limits of this
possibility. For example, to think that a man whose Baptism the Crown of
Martyrdom preventeth, does lose, in that case, the happiness which so many
thousands enjoy, that only have had the Grace to Believe, and not the Honor to
seal the testimony thereof with Death, were almost barbarous. Again, When B^n.
Epist. ^0. ad Hugonem.
some certain opinative men in St. Bernards time began privately to hold that,
because our Lord has said, Unless a Man be born again of Water, therefore
life, without either Actual Baptism, or Martyrdom in stead of Baptism, cannot
possibly be obtained at the hands of God; Bernard considering, that the same
equity which had moved them to think the necessity of Baptism no Bar against
the happy estate of Unbaptized Martyrs, is as forcible for the warrant of their
Salvation, in whom, although there be not the Sufferings of holy Martyrs, there
are the Virtues which sanctified those Sufferings, and made them precious in
Gods sight, professed himself an enemy to that severity and strictness which
admits no exception but of Martyrs only. For, says he, if a Man desirous
of Baptism, be suddenly cut off by Death, in whom there wanted neither sound
Faith, devout Hope, not sincere Charity (God be merciful unto me, and pardon me
if I err) but verily of such a ones Salvation, in whom there is no other defect
besides his faultless lack of Baptism; despair I cannot, nor induce my mind to
think his Faith void, his Hope confounded, and his Charity fallen to nothing,
only because he has not that which not contempt but impossibility
withholds. Tell me, I beseech you, (says Ambrose) what there is in any of
us, more then to will, and to seek for our own good. They Servant Valentinian,
O Lord, did both. (For Valentinian the Emperor died before his purpose to
receive Baptism could take effect.) And is it possible, that he which had
purposely thy Spirit given him to desire Grace, should not receive thy Grace
which that Spirit did desire? Does it move you, that the outward accustomed
Solemnities were not done? At though Converts that suffer Martyrdom before
Baptism, did thereby forfeit their right to the Crown of Eternal Glory in the
Kingdom of Heaven. If the Blood of Martyrs in that case be their Baptism,
surely his religious desire of Baptism stands him in the same stead. It has
been therefore constantly held as well touching other Believers, as Martyrs,
That Baptism, taken away by necessity, is supplied by desire of Baptism,
because with Equity this opinion does best stand. Quid ad rolerandam omnem pro
Dei gloria injuriam semel dicavie animum in Martyrium mihi videter implesse.
Suarmi ergo meriti est temel fixisse seure^tiam, ocque ideo, ut dixi, ratio
principarum obtinet passionis, and si sora perpetiendi deneget facultatem,
pertulit tamen, cuncta quae voluit pati. Joseph. lib. de Imper. Ration.
Touching Infants which die unbaptized, since they neither have the Sacrament it
self, nor any sense or conceit thereof, the judgment of many has gone hard
against them. But yet seeing Grace is not absolutely tied unto Sacraments; and
besides, such is the lenity of God, that unto things altogether impossible, he
binds no man; but, where we cannot do what is enjoined us, accepts our will
to do in stead of the deed it self. Again, For as much as there is in their
Christian Parents, and in the Church of God, a presumed desire, That the
Sacrament of Baptism might be given them, yea, a purpose also that it shall be
given; remorse of Equity has moved diverse of the Gers. Sermon. in Nativit.
Beatae Mar. Cajetan. in 3. Tho. 9. 68. Art. 1. and 2. ^iel. in 4. Sentes. ^. 4.
q 2. Tilman. Segeberg. de Sacr. cap. 1. Elisius Neapol. in Clyp. Advers.
Haeres. cap. de Baptis.
School-Divines in these considerations, ingeuously to grant, That God,
all-merciful to such as are not in themselves able to desire Baptism, imputes
the secret desire that others have in their behalf, and accepts the same as
theirs, rather then casts away their Souls, for that which no man is able to
help. And of the Will of God to impart his Grace unto Infants without Baptism,
in that case, the very circumstance of their Natural Birth may serve as a just
Argument; whereupon it is not to be misliked, that men in charitable
presumption do gather a great likelihood of their Salvation, to whom the
benefit of Christian Parentage being given, the rest that should follow, is
prevented by some such casualty, as man has himself no power to avoid. For, we
are plainly taught of God; 1 Cor. 7. 1^.
That the Seed of Faithful Parentage is holy from the very Birth. Which albeit,
we may not so understand, as if the Children of Believing Parents were without
Sin; or Grace, from Baptized Parents, derived by Propagation; or God, by
Covenant and Promise, tied to save any in mere regard of their Parents Belief:
Yet seeing, that to all Professors of the Name of Christ, this pre-eminence
above Infidels, is freely given; the fruit of their Bodies brings into the
World with it, a present interest and right to those means wherewith the
Ordinance of Christ is, that his Church shall be sanctified; it is not to be
thought, that he which, as it were, from Heaven, has nominated and designed
them unto Holiness by special privilege of their very Birth, will himself
deprive them of Regeneration and Inward Grace, only because necessity
depriveth them of outward Sacraments. In which case, it were the part of
Charity to hope, and to make men rather partial then cruel Judges, if we had
nor those fair apparancies which here we have. Wherefore a necessity there is
of Receiving, and a necessity of Administering the Sacrament of Baptism; the one
peradventure not so absolute as some have thought, but out of all peradventure
the other more straight and narrow, then that the Church which is by Office a
Mother unto such as crave at her hands the Sacred Mystery of their new Birth,
should repel them; and see them die unsatisfied of these their Ghostly desires,
rather then give them their Souls Rights, with omission of those things which
serve T. C. lib. 3. page 218. It is in question, whether there be any such
necessity of Baptism, as that for the Ministering thereof, the common deccur
Order^ should be broken.
but only for the more convenient and orderly Administration thereof. For as
on the one side we grant, that those sentences of holy Scripture which make
Sacraments most necessary to eternal life, are no prejudice to their Salvation,
that want them by some inevitable necessity, and without any fault of their
own: So it ought, in reason, to be likewise acknowledged, that for as much as
our Lord himself makes Baptism necessary, necessary whether we respect the
good received by Baptism, or the Testimony thereby yielded unto God, of that
Humility and meek Obedience, which reposing wholly it self on the absolute
Authority of his Commandment, and on the Truth of his Heavenly Promise,
doubts not but from Creatures despicable in their own condition and
substance, to obtain Grace of inestimable value; or rather not from them, but
from him, yet by them, as by his appointed means. Howsoever he, by the secret
ways of his own incomprehensible Mercy, may be thought to save without Baptism;
this clears not the Church from guiltiness of Blood, if through her
superstuous scrupulosity, lets and impediments of less regard should cause a
Grace of so great moment to be withheld, wherein our merciless strictness may
be our own harm, although not theirs toward whom we show it; and we for the
hardness of our hearts may perish, albeit they through Gods unspeakable Mercy
do live. God which did not afflict that Innocent, whose Circumcision Moses had
overlong deferred, took revenge upon Moses himself, Psalm. ^ ^4.
for the injury which was done through so great neglect; giving us thereby to
understand, that they whom Gods own Mercy saves without us, are on our parts
notwithstanding, and as much as in us lies, even destroyed; when under
unsufficient pretenses, we defraud them of such ordinary outward helps, as we
should exhibit. We have for Baptism no day set, as the Jews had for
Circumcision; neither have we by the Law of God, but only by the Churches
discretion, a place thereunto appointed. Baptism therefore, even in the meaning
of the Law of Christ, belongs unto Infants capable thereof, from the In
omnibus obligationibus in quibus dies non ponitu^, praesenti dic dehe^^. Lib.
14. D.de Reg. sur.
very instant of their Birth. Which if they have not howsoever, rather than
lose it by being put off, because the time, the place, or some such like
circumstance does not solemnly enough concur, the Church, as much as in her
lies, wilfully casts away their Souls.

61. The Ancients, it may be, were too severe, What things in Baptism have been
dispeaced with by the Fathers, ^^specting necessity.
and made the necessity of Baptism more absolute then Reason would, as touching
Infants. But will T. C. lib. 1. page 13^. The ^urthers themselves of that Error,
that they cannot be saved which are ^^^ baptized, did never seek a remedy of
the mischief. In Women^ or Private Dip. 1. 11. T. C. lib 3. p. 219. What
plains Testimony can there be then that of Augustine; which notes the use of
the Church to have been, to come to the Church with their Children in danger of
death, and that when some had opinion, that their Children could not be saved,
if they were not baptized, Cum. Lit. Parm. lib. 9. cap. 13. I would also know
of him what he will answer to that, which is noted of a Christian Jew
desperately sick of the Palsy, that was with his Bed caused on the place of
Baptism. Sect. lib. 7. c. 4. What will he answer to this, That those which were
baptized in their Beds, were thereby made unapt to have any place amongst the
Clergy (as they call them?) does it not leave a note of inf^my in those, which
had procured that Baptism should be ministered in private houses? Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap. 43. What unto the Emperors Decree, which upon authority of the ancient
Laws, and of the Apostles, forbids. That the holy lungs should be
administered in any man's house? Ioh. ^^^l. 32.
any man say, that they, notwithstanding their too much rigor herein, did not
in that respect sustain and tolerate defects of Local, or of Personal
Solemnities, belonging to the Sacrament of Baptism? The Apostles themselves did
neither use nor appoint for Baptism, any certain time. The Church for general
Baptism heretofore, made choice of two chief days in the year; the Feast of
Easter, and the Feast of Pentecost. Which Custom, when certain Churches in
Sicily began to violate without cause, they were by ^^^ Epist. ^. an Epiic.
Cicit.
Leo, Bishop of Rome, advised, rather to conform themselves to the rest of the
World in things so reasonable, then to offend men's minds through needless
singularity: Howbeit, always providing, That nevertheless in apparent peril of
death, danger of siege, streights of persecution, fear of shipwreck, and the
like exigents; no respect of times should cause this singular defense of true
safety to be denied unto any. This of Leo did but confirm that sentence, which
Vict. Epist. ad Theop^. Alexand. in Pentis. Damasc.
Victor had many years before given, extending the same exception, as well unto
places as times. That which St. Augustine speaks of Women, hasting to bring
their children to the Church when they saw danger, is a weak proof, That when
necessity did not leave them so much time, it was not then permitted them
neither to make a Church of their own home. Which answer discharges likewise
their example of a sick Jew, carried in a Bed to the place of Baptism, and not
baptized at home in private. The casue why such kind of Baptism barred men
afterward from entering into holy Orders, the reason wherefore it was objected
against Novatian, in what respect, and how far forth it did disable, may be
gathered by the Twelfth Canon, set down in the Council of Neocaesarea, after
this manner. A man which has been baptized in sickness, is not after to be
ordained Priest. For it may be thought, That such do rather at that time,
because they see no other remedy, then of a voluntary mind, lay hold on the
Christian Faith, unless their true and sincere meaning be made afterward the
more manifest, or else the scarcity of others enforce the Church to admit them.
They bring in Justinians Imperial Constitution, but to what purpose? seeing it
only forbids men to have the Mysteries of God administered in their Private
Chapels, lest under that pretense, Heretics should do secretly those things
which were unlawful? In which consideration he therefore commands, that if
they would use those private Oratories otherwise then only for their private
Prayers, the Bishop should appoint them a Clerk, whom they might entertain for
that purpose. This is plain by latter Constitutions, made in the time of Leo:
Leo. Con^t. 4.
It was thought good (says the Emperor) in their judgment which have gone
before, that in Private Chapels none should celebrate the holy Communion, but
Priests belonging unto greater Churches. Which Order they took as it seems
for the custody of Religion, lest men should secretly receive from Heretics,
in stead of the food, the ban: of their Souls, pollution in place of expiation.
Idem. Co^st. 15.
Again, Whereas a Sacred Canon of the Sixth Reverend Synod requires Baptism,
as others have likewise the holy Sacrifices and Mysteries, to be celebrated
only in ^emples hallowed for public use, and not in private Oratories; which
strict Decrees appear to have been made heretofore in regard of Heretics,
which entered closely into such men's houses as favored their opinions, whom,
under color of performing with them such Religious Offices, they drew from the
soundness of true Religion: Now that perverse Opinions, through the Grace of
Almighty God, are extinct and gone, the cause of former restraints being taken
away we see no reason but that private Oratories may hence forward enjoy that
liberty, which to have granted them heretofore, had not been safe. In sum, all
these things alleged are nothing, nor will it ever be proved while the World
does continue, but that the practice of the Church in cases of extreme
necessity, has made for private Baptism always more then against it. Yea,
Baptism by any man in the case of necessity, was the T. C. lib. 1. page 145. To
allow of Women's Baptising, is not only contrary to the learned Writers ^ow,
but also contrary to all learned Antiquity, and contrary to the practice of the
Church whilst there was any tolerable estate. Tertul. de Virgin. Veland. and
lib. de Baptis. Epipha. lib. 1. and lib. 8. cont. Haeres S. Augustine although
he seem to a^low of a Laymans Baptism in time of necessity. Cour. Epist.
Parmen. lib. 2. cap. 13. Yet there he mentions no^ Women's Baptism; and in the
Fourth Council of Carthage, cap. 100. It is simply, without exception decreed,
That a Woman ought not to Baptize. Tertul. de Baptis.
voice of the whole World heretofore. Neither is Tertullian, Epiphanius,
Augustine, or any other of the Ancient against it. The boldness of such, as
pretending Teclaes example, took openly upon them both Baptism, and all other
Public Functions of Priesthood. Tertullian severely controlleth, saying,
Subjectum est general speciale. In ipso significante, quia in ipso continerus.
Ter^^^l. de Veland. Virg. Post. genere, supponirur species. Aug. in lib. 2.
cap. de Transact.
To give Baptism is in truth the Bishops Right. After him it belongs unto
Priests and Deacons; but not to them without authority from him received. For
so the honor of the Church requires, which being kept, preserves peace. Were
it not in this respect, the Laity might do the same; all sorts might give, even
as all sorts receive. But because Emulation is the Mother of Schisms, Let it
content thee (which art of the order of Laymen) to do it in necessity, when
the state of time, or place, or person thereunto compels. For then is their
boldness privileged that help, when the circumstance of other men's dangers
craveth it. What he grants generally to Lay-persons of the House of God, the
same we cannot suppose he denies to any sort or sex contained under that name,
unless himself did restrain the limits of his own speech; especially seeing
that Tertullians rule of interpretation is Subjectum e^t generali speciale. ^a
ipso significa^te, quia in ipso contine^ut. Tertul. de Veland. Virg. Posit.
gene^^, supponi^ur species. Aug. in ^^^ 2. cap. de Transact.
elsewhere, Specialties are signified under that which is general, because they
are therein comprehended. All which Tertullian does Non per^i^i^^^ mulieri in
ecclesia loqui, sed nee docere, now ringere, nec offerre, non dibus virilis
muneris ^edum sacerdotalis officii sortem sibi vendicare. Tertul. de Velund.
Virg.
deny, is, That Women may be called to bear, or publicly take upon them to
execute Offices of Ecclesiastical Order, whereof none but men are capable. As
for Epiphanius, he strikes on the very self-same Anvil with Tertullian. And in
necessity, if St. Augustine allows as much unto Laymen, as Tertullian does,
his not mentioning of Women, is but a slender proof that his meaning was to
exclude Women. Finally, the Council of Carthage likewise, although it make no
express submission, may be very well presumed willing to stoop, as other
Positive Ordinances do, to the countermands of necessity. Judge therefore what
the Ancients would have thought, if in their days it had been heard, which is
published in ours, T. C. lib. 1. page 144. The Substance of the Sacrament
depends chiefly of the Institution and Word of God, which is the Form, and,
as it were, the Life of the Sacrament. T. C. lib. 1. page 144. Although part of
the Institution be observed, yet if the whole Institution be ^^t, it is no
Sacrament. T. C. lib. 1. page 146. The Orders which God has set, are, That it
should be done in the Congregation, and by the Minister. T. C. lib. 1. page
145. And I will further say, That although the Infants which die without
Baptism, should be assuredly damned (which is most false,) yet ought not the
Orders which God has set in his Church, be broken ^ke^ this sort.
that because, The Substance of the Sacrament does chiefly depend on the
Institution of God, which is the form, and as it were the life of the
Sacrament; therefore first, If the whole Institution be not kept, it is no
Sacrament; and secondly, If Baptism be private, his Institution is broken, in
as much as according to the orders which he has set for Baptism, it should be
done in the Congregation; from whose Ordinance in this point, we ought not to
swerve, although we know that infants should be assuredly damned without
Baptism. O Sir, you that would spurn thus at such, as in case of so dreadful
extremity should lie prostrate before your feet; you that would turn away your
face from them at the hour of their most need; you that would dam up your ears,
and harden your hearts as Iron, against the unresistable cries of Supplicants,
calling upon you for mercy with terms of such invocation, as that most dreadful
perplexity might minister, if God by miracle did open the mouths of Infants, to
express their supposed necessity, should first imagine your self in their case,
and them in yours. This done, let their Supplications proceed out of your
mouth, and your answer out of theirs. Would you then contentedly hear, Nostro
p^o^^ alterius salu^i consulere non debemus. Aug. lib. cont. ^end. cap. 17.
My Son, the Rites and Solemnities of Baptism must be kept; we may not do ill,
that good may come of it; neither are Souls to be delivered from eternal death
and condemnation; by breaking Orders which Christ has set: Would you in their
case your self be shaken off with these answers, and not rather embrace,
enclosed with both your arms, a sentence, which now is no Gospel unto you, I
will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice? Matthew. 9. 13.
To acknowledge Christ's Institution, the ground of both Sacraments, I suppose,
no Christian man will refuse: For it gives them their very Nature, it
appoints the Matter whereof they consist, the Form of their Administration it
teaches; and it blesses them with that Grace, whereby to us they are both
Pledges and Instruments of life. Nevertheless, seeing Christ's Institution
contains, besides that which makes complete the Essence or Nature, other
things that only are parts, as it were, of the Furniture of Sacraments; the
difference between these two must unfold that which the general terms of
indefinite speech would confound. If the place appointed for Baptism, be a part
of Christ Institution, it is but his Institution as Sacrifice, Baptism his
Institution as Mercy: In this case, He which requires both Mercy and
Sacrifice, rejects his own Institution of Sacrifice, where the Offering of
Sacrifice would hind: Mercy from being showed: External Circumstances even in
the holiest and highest actions, are but the lesser things of the Law, Matthew.
23. 2^.
whereunto those actions themselves being compared, are the greater; and
therefore as the greater are of such importance, that they must be done; so in
that extremity before supposed if our account of the lesser which are not to be
omitted, should cause omission of that which is more to be accounted of, were
not this our strict obedience to Christ's Institution touching Mint and Cummin,
a disobedience to his Institution concerning Love? But since no Institution of
Christ has so strictly tied Baptism to public Assemblies, as it has done all
men unto Baptism; away with these merciless and bloody sentences, let them
never be found standing in the Books and Writings of a Christian man; they
favor not of Christ, nor of his most gracious and meek Spirit, but under color
of exact obedience, they nourish cruelty and hardness of heart.

62. To leave Private Baptism therefore, Whether Baptism by Women, be ^^^
Baptism, go^^ and effectual to them that receive it.
and to come unto Baptism by Women, which they say T. C. lib. 1. page 144.
O^dus polar, whether he ^e a Minister, or so, depends not only the dignity,
but also the being of the Sacrament. So that I take the Baptism of Women to be
^o more the holy sacrament of Baptism, than any other daily or ordinary washing
of the Child.
, is no more a Sacrament, then any other ordinary Washing or Bathing of a Man's
Body: The reason whereupon, they ground their opinion herein is such, as making
Baptism by Women void, because Women are no Ministers in the Chruch of God,
must needs generally annihilate the Baptism of all unto whom their conceit
shall apply this exception, Whether it be in regard of Sex, of Quality, of
Insufficiency, or whatsoever. For if want of Calling do frustrate Baptism, they
that Baptize without Calling do nothing, be they Women or Men. To make Women
Teachers in the House of God, were a gross absurdity, seeing the Apostle has
said, 1 Timothy 2. 22.
I permit not a Woman to teach. And again, 1 Timothy 14. 34.
Let your Women in Churches be silent. Those extraordinary gifts of speaking
with Tongues and Prophesying, which God at that time did not only bestow upon
Men, but on Women also, made it the harder to hold them confined with private
bounds. Whereupon the Apostles Ordinance was necessary against Women's public
Admission to teach. And because, when Law has begun some one thing or other
well, it gives good occasion, either to draw by Judicious Exposition out of
the very Law it self, or to annex to the Law by Authority and Jurisdiction,
things of like convenience; therefore Clement extends this Apostolic
Constitution to Baptism. Clem. Constable. Apostol. lib. 2^ cap. ^.
For (says he) if we have denied them leave to teach, how should any man
dispense with Nature, and make them Ministers of holy things; seeing this
unskilfulness is a part of the Grecians impiety, which for the service of
Women-Goddesses, have Women-Priests? I somewhat marvel, that Men which would
not willingly be thought to speak or write, but with good conscience, dare
hereupon openly avouch Clement for a witness, T. C. lib. 1. page 144.
That, as, when the Church began not only to decline, but to fall away from
the sincerity of Religion, it borrowed a number of other prophanations of the
Heathens; so it borrowed this, and would needs have Women-Priests, as the
Heathens had; and that this was one occasion of bringing ^p^ism by Women into
the Church of God. Is it not plain in their own eyes, that first by an evidence
which forbids Women to be Ministers of Baptism, they endeavor to show how
Women were admitted unto that Function in the wain and declination of Christian
Piety. Secondly, That by an evidence, rejecting the Heathens, and condemning
them of Impiety, they would prove such affection toward Heathens, as orders
the Affairs of the Church by the pattern of their example: And Thirdly, That
out of an evidence which names the Heathens, as being in some part a reason
why the Church had no Women-Priests, they gather, the Heathens to have been one
of the first occasions why it had. So that throughout every branch of this
testimony, their issue is, Yea; and their evidence directly No. But to Women's
Baptism in private, by occasion of urgent necessity, the reasons that only
concern Ordinary Baptism in public, are no just prejudice; neither can we by
force thereof, disprove the practice of those Churches which (necessity
requiring) allow Baptism in private to be Administered by Women. We may not from
Laws that prohibit any thing with restraint, conclude absolute and unlimited
prohibitions: Although we deny not, but they which utterly forbid such Baptism,
may have perhaps wherewith to justify their orders against it. For, even
things lawful are L^^i^ prelibentur, ne, si permitterentar, eorum occasion
perveniatur ad Illicita. Lib. neque tamen. Just. de Asuth. The. lib. Offici^^.
D. de rei Vind.
well prohibited, when there is fear left they make the way to unlawful more
easy. And it may be, the Liberty of Baptism by Women at such times, does
sometimes embolden the rasher sort to do it where no such necessity is. But
whether of Permission besides Law, or in Presumption against Law they do it, is
it thereby altogether frustrate, void, and as though it were never given? They
which have not at the first their right Baptism, must of necessity be
Rebaptized, because the Law of Christ tieth all men to receive Baptism.
Iteration of Baptism once given, has been always thought a manifest contempt
of that Ancient Apostolic Aphorism, Ephesians. 4.^.
One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism: Baptism not only one, in as much as it has
every where the same Substance, and offers unto all men the same Grace; but
one also, for that it ought not to be received by any one man above once. We
serve that Lord which is but one, because no other can be joined with him: We
embrace that Faith which is but one, because it admits no innovation: That
Baptism we receive which is but one, because it cannot be received often. For
how should we practice Iteration of Baptism, and yet teach, that we are by
Baptism born anew: That by Baptism we are admitted unto the Heavenly Society of
Saints, that those things be really and effectually done by Baptism, which are
no more possible to be often done, Una est Nativi^as de ti^ri^, alia de ^oelo;
una de cainc, alia de Spiritu; Una de ^ie^mitate alia de mortalitate; una de
masculo and foemina, alia de Deo and Ecclesia. Sed ip ae du^ singulares sunt.
Quo modo enim ^terus non potest repeti, sie nec Baptismus ^^e^ari. Prosp.
Senten. 3^1. Eia fra^res lacteum genitalis sont^s ad laticem con^olate, ut
se^^per robia aqua sufficiar, hoc ante omnia scient^s quia hanc nec^ssandere
lioet nec turfes haurire. Zene^h. Invit. ad Fent.
then a man can naturally be often born, or civilly be often adopted into any
ones Stock and Family! This also is the cause, why they that present us unto
Baptism, are entitled for ever after, our Parents in God; and the reason why
there we receive new names, in token, that by Baptism we are made new
Creatures. As Christ has therefore died, and risen from the dead but once; so
that Sacrament, which both extinguisheth in him our former sin, and begins
in us a new condition of life, is by one only Actual Administration for ever
available, according to that in the Nicene Creed, I believe one Baptism for
^emission of sins. August. de Eap^. ^ Don. lib. 2. cap. 14. T^^t. de Bap^.
Cypr. Epist. 7 1.
And because second Baptism was ever abhorred in the Church of God, as a kind
of incestuous Birth, they that iterate Baptism, are driven under some pretense
or other, to make the former Baptism void. Tertullian, the first that proposed
to the Church; Agrippinus the first in the Church that accepted, and against
the use of the Church; Novatianus the first, that publicly began to practice
Rebaptization, did it therefore upon these two grounds; a true persuasion, that
Baptism is necessary; and a false, that the Baptism which others administered
was no Baptism. Novatianus his conceit was, that none can administer true
Baptism, but the true Church of Jesus Christ; that he and his followers alone,
were the Church; and for the rest, he accounted then wicked and profane
persons, such as by Baptism could cleanse no man, unless they first did purify
themselves, and reform the faults wherewith he charged them. Eusebius. lib. 7.
cap. 1, 2, 3. Cypr Epist 70, 71,72 73, 74, 75, 76.
At which time, St. Cyprian with the greatest part of Affrican Bishops, because
they likewise thought, that none but only the true Church of God can Baptize;
and were of nothing more certainly persuaded, then that Heretics are as rotten
Branches cut off from the Life and Body of the true Church, gathered hereby,
That the Church of God both may with good consideration, and ought to reverse
that Baptism which is given by Heretics. These held and practiced their own
opinion, yet with great protestations often made, that they neither loved
awhit, the less, nor thought in any respect the worse of them that were of a
contrary mind. In requital of which ingenuous moderation, the rest that
withstood them, did it in peaceable sort, with very good regard had of them, as
of men in Error, but not in Heresy. The Bishop of Rome against their
Novelties, upheld, as beseemed him, the ancient and true Apostolic Customs,
till they which unadvisedly before had erred, became in a manner all Illi ips:
Episcopi qui Rebap^zandes Haeret^: ^^ cum Cyprians statuerant, ad an^iquem
consuerudinem revo^^ti ne^um ^^misere decretum. Hierim. cont. Lucifer. Vide and
August. cunt. Crescon. lib. 3. cap ^, ^. and Epist. 48.
reconciled friends unto Truth, and saw that Heresy in the Ministers of
Baptism, could no way evacuate the force thereof: Di^^lti ^eri nun p^sse ut in
^als^ Baptisi^are inquinatus ab^uar, immundus ^munlet, supplantator ^rigat
perilkus liberer, reus veniam tribnar, damu^tus abtolvar. ^^ne haec ^innia
poter^^^^ ad sulos H^re^le^^ pertinete, qui sahave^unt Sy^bolum, dum alter
dixe^it duos Deos cum Deus anus s^, alter ^atrem rule in persona Filil
cog^osei, alter catnem sub lucins Fili^ Dei per quam Deo reconci^^^tus est
^aundus: Er ^^ereil I^^usm^^, qui 3 Sacramenns Catholicis alteri, moseuatus.
Op^^i. lib. 1.
Such Heresy alone excepted, as by reason of unsoundness in the highest
Articles of Christian Faith, presumed to change, and by changing to main the
Substance, the Form of Baptism, in which respect, the Church did neither simply
disannul, nor absolutely ratify Baptism by Heretics. For the Baptism which
Novarianists gave, stood firm, whereas they whom Synod. Nico. cap. 19.
Samosotenians had baptized, were rebaptized. It was likewise ordered in the
Council of Arles, Syno^. 1. Ar^^at. cap. 8.
That if any Arian did reconcile himself to the Church, they should admit him
without new Baptism, unless by examination they found him not baptized in the
Name of the Trinity. Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria Eusebius. Eccles. Hist lib.
7. cap ^.
, makes report, how there live under him a man of good reputation, and of very
ancient continuance in that Church, who being present at the Rites of Baptism,
and observing with better consideration then ever before, what was there done,
came, and with weeping submission craved of his Bishop, not to deny him
Baptism, the due of all which profess Christ, seeing it had been so long
sithence his evil hap to be deceived by the fraud of Heretics, and at their
hands (which till now, he never thoroughly and duly weighed) to take a Baptism
full fraught with blasphemous impieties; a Baptism in nothing like unto that
which the true Church of Christ uses. The Bishop was greatly moved thereat,
yet durst not adventure to Rebaptize, but did the best he could to put him in
good comfort, using much persuasion with him not to trouble himself with things
that were past and gone, nor after so long continuance in the Fellowship of
Gods people, to call now in question his first entrance. The poor man that law
himself in this sort answered, but not satisfied, spent afterward his life in
continual perplexity, whereof the Bishop remained fearful to give release;
perhaps too fearful, if the Baptism were such as his own Declaration imports.
For that, the substance whereof was rotten at the very first, is never by tract
of time able to recover soundness. And where true Baptism was not before given,
the case of Rebaptization is clear. But by this it appears, that Baptism is
not void in regard of Heresy; and therefore much less through any other Moral
defect in the Minister thereof. Under which second pretense, Do^atists
notwithstanding, took upon them to make frustrate the Churches Baptism, and
themselves to Rebaptize their own sry. For whereas some forty years after the
Martyrdom of Blessed Cyprian, the Emperor Dioclesian began to persecute the
Church of Christ; Circa An. 3^0
and for the speedier abolishment of their Religion, to burn up their Sacred
Books; there were in the Church it self Traditors, content to deliver up the
Books of God by composition, to the end, their own lives might be spared. Which
men growing thereby odious to the rest, whose constancy was greater; it
fortuned that after, when one Caecilian was ordained Bishop in the Church of
Carthage, whom others endeavored in vain to defeat by excepting against him as
a Traditor, they whose accusations could not prevail, desperately joined
themselves in one, and made a Bishop of their own crew, accounting from that
day forward, their Faction, the only true and sincere Church. The first Bishop
on that part, was Majorinus, whose Successor Donatus, being the first that
wrote in defense of their Schism, the Birds that were hatched before by others,
have their names from him. Arians and Donatists began both about one time.
Which Heresies according to the different strength of their own sinews, wrought
as hope of success led them; the one with the choicest wits, the other with the
multitude, so far, that after long and troublesome experience, the perfectest
view men could take or both, was hardly able to induce any certain determinate
resolution, whether Error may do more by the curious subtilty of sharp
Discourse, or else by the mere appearance of zeal and devout affection; the
latter of which two aids, gave Donatists, beyond all men's expectation, as great
a sway as ever any Schism or Heresy had within that reach of the Christian
World, where it bred and grew; the rather perhaps, because the Church which
neither greatly feared them, and besides had necessary cause to bend it self
against others that aimed directly at a far higher mark, the Deity of Christ,
was contented to let Donatists have their course, by the space of Threescore
years and above, even from Ten years before Constantine, till the time that
Optatus, Circa An 370.
Bishop of Nilevis, published his Books against Parmenian. During which term,
and the space of that Schisms continuance afterward, they had, besides many
other Secular and Worldly means to help them forward, these special advantages.
First, the very occasion of their breach with the Church of God, a just hatred
and dislike of Traditors, seemed plausible; they easily persuaded their
hearers, that such men could not be holy as held communion and fellowship with
them that betrayed Religion. Again, when to dazzle the eyes of the simple, and
to prove, that it can be no Church which is not holy, they had in show and
sound of words the glorious pretense of the Creed Apostolic, I believe the
holy Catholic Church: We need not think it any strange thing that with the
multitude they gain credit. And avouching that such as are not of the true
Church, can administer no true Baptism, they had for this point whole Volums of
St. Cyprians own writing, together with the judgment of diverse Affrican Synods,
whose sentence was the same with his. Whereupon, the Fathers were likewise in
defense of their just cause very greatly prejudiced, both for that they could
not enforce the duty of men's communion with a Church, confessed to be in many
things blameworthy, unless they should oftentimes seem to speak as
half-defenders of the faults themselves, or at the least not so vehement
accusers thereof, as their adversaries; And to withstand it^ration of Baptism,
the other Branch of the Donatists Heresy was impossible, without manifest and
professed rejection of Cyprian, whom the World universally did in his life time,
admire as the greatest among Prelates, and now honor as not the lowest in the
Kingdom of Heaven. So true we find it by experience of all Ages in the Church
of God, that the teachers error is the peoples trial, harder and heavier by so
much to bear, as he is in worth and regard greater, that mis-perswadeth them.
Although there was odds between Cyprians cause and theirs, he differing from
others of sounder understanding in that point, but not dividing himself from
the Body of the Church by Schism, as did the Donatists. For which cause,
Vi^^ent Lyren. Adve^s. ^^res. cap 11.
says Vincentius, Of one and the same opinion we judge (which may seem
strange) the Authors Catholic, and the followers heretical: we acquit the
Masters, and condemn the Scholars; they are Heirs of Heaven which have written
those Books, the defenders whereof, are trodden down to the pit of Hell. The
Invectives of Catholic Writers therefore against them, are sharp; the words of
Vide C. The^^ lib. 15. ^^. ^^b. Adve^ ^^. ^^s se lib. ^ullus dica An^^^.
Imperial Edicts by Honorius and Theodosius, made to bridle them very bitter,
the punishments severe in revenge of their folly. Howbeit, for fear (as we may
conjecture) lest much should be derogated from the Baptism of the Church, and
Baptism by Donatists be more esteemed of then was meet; if on the one side,
that which Heretics had done ill, should stand as good; on the other side,
that be reversed which the Catholic Church, had well and religiously done;
diverse better minded then advised men, thought it fittest to meet with this
inconvenience, by Rebaptising Donatists, as well as they Rebaptized Catholics.
Si quis C. Ne. Sin ^^. Baptis. Circa An. 41^.
For stay whereof, the same Emperors saw it meet to give their Law a double
edge, whereby it might equally, on both sides, cut off not only Heretics
which Rebaptized, whom they could pervert; but also Catholic and Christian
Priests which did the like unto such as before had taken Baptism at the hands
of Heretics, and were afterward reconciled to the Church of God. Donatists
were therefore, in process of time, though with much ado, wearied, and at the
length worn out by the constancy of that Truth which reaches, that evil
Ministers of good things are as Torches, a Light to others, a Waste to none but
themselves only; and that the soulness of their hands, can neither any whit
impair the Virtue, nor stain the Glory of the Mysteries of Christ. Now that
which was done amiss by virtuous and good men, as Cyprian carried aside with
hatred against Heresy; and was secondly followed by Donatists, whom Envy and
Rancor, covered with show of Godliness, made obstinate to cancel whatsoever the
Church did in the Sacrament of Baptism; has of latter days, in another
respect, far different from both the former, been brought freshly again into
practice. For the Anabaptist Rebaptizeth, because, in his estimation, the
Baptism of the Church is frustrate, for that we give it unto Infants which have
not Faith; whereas, according unto Christ's Institution, as they conceive it,
true Baptism should always presuppose Actual Belief in Receivers, and is
otherwise no Baptism. Of these three Errors, there is not any but has been
able, at the least, to allege in defense of it self, many fair probabilities.
Notwithstanding, since the Church of God has hitherto always constantly
maintained, that to Rebaptize them which are known to have received true
Baptism is unlawful; that if Baptism seriously be administered in the same
Element, and with the same form of words which Christ's Institution teaches,
there is no other defect in the World that can make it frustrate, or deprive it
of the Nature of a true Sacrament: And lastly, That Baptism is only then to be
re-adminstred, when the first delivery thereof is void, in regard of the
fore-alledged imperfections, and no other: Shall we now in the case of Baptism,
which having both for matter and form, the substance of Christ's Institution, is
by a fourth sort of men voided, for the only defect of Ecclesiastical
Authority in the Minister, think it enough, that they blow away the force
thereof, with the bare strength of their very breath, by saying, We take such
Baptism to be no more the Sacrament of Baptism, then any other ordinary Bathing
to be a Sacrament? Numb. 16. 10. Levit. 10. 1. 1 Samuel 13.11. 2 Samuel ^.6. 2
Chro. 26.16. Heb. ^.4.
It behooves generally all sorts of men to keep themselves within the limits of
their own vocation. And seeing God, from whom mers several degrees and
pre-eminences do proceed, has appointed them in his Church, at whose hands his
pleasure is, that we should receive both Baptism, and all other public
medicinable helps of Soul, perhaps thereby the more to settle our hearts in the
love of our ghostly superiors, they have small cause to hope that with him
their voluntary services will be accepted, who thrust themselves into
Functions, either above their capacity, or besides their place, and over-boldly
intermeddle with Duties, whereof no charge was ever give them, They that in any
thing exceed the compass of their own order, do as much as in them lies, to
dissolve that Order which is the Harmony of Gods Church. Suppose therefore,
that in these and the like considerations, the Law did utterly prohibit
Baptism to be administered by any other, then persons thereunto solemnly
consecrated, what necessity soever happen; Are not Sect. 306. Lugdunentis ex
lireria Decret. de Manim, ^n^rast. Dunase, Ea^ciur Reg. 10^. Prohibita neri si
sians non tenent. In prohibitionibus, antemcirca re^ favorables contratiom
obtin^r.
many things firm being done, although in part done otherwise then Positive
Rigor and Strictness did require? Nature, as much as is possible, inclines
unto validities and preservations. Dissolutions and Nullities of things done
are not only not favored, but hated, when other urged without cause, or
extended beyond their reach: If therefore at any time it come to pass, that in
reaching publicly or privately, in delivering this Blessed Sacrament of
Regeneration, some unsanctified hand, contrary to Christ's supposed Ordinance,
do intrude it self to execute that, whereunto the Laws of God and his Church
have deputed others, Which of these two opinions seems more agreeable with
Equity, outs that disallow what is done amiss, yet make not the force of the
Word and Sacraments, much less their nature and very substance to depend on the
Ministers authority and calling, or else T. C. lib. ^. page 144. As St. Paul
says, That a man cannot Preach which is not sent Romans 10. 15. No not although
he speak the words of the Scripture, and interpret them: So I cannot see how a
man can Baptize unless he be sent to that end, although he pour witer, and
rehearse the words which are to be rehearsed in the Ministry of Baptism.
theirs which defeat, disannul, and annihilate both, in respect of that one
only personal defect, there being not any Law of God, which says, That if the
Minister be incompetent, his Word shall be no Word, his Baptism no Baptism? He
which teaches, and is not sent, loses the reward, but yet retains the name
of a Teacher: His usurped actions have in him the same nature which they have
in others, although they yield him not the same comfort. And if these two cases
be Peers, the case of Doctrine, and the case of Baptism both alike; since no
defect in their vocation that teach the Truth, is able to take away the benefit
thereof from him which hears, Wherefore should the want of a lawful calling
in them that Baptize, make Baptism to be vain? T. C. lib. 1. page 16^. If
either the Matter of the Sacrament, or the Form of it, which is the Institution
(which things are only substantial part) were wanting, there should then have
been no Sacrament at all ministered. But they being retained, and yet other
things used which are not convenient, the Sacrament is ministered, but not
sincerely.
They grant, that the Matter and the Form in Sacraments are the only parts of
Substance, and that if these two be retained, albeit other things besides be
used which are inconvenient, the Sacrament notwithstanding is administered, but
not sincerely. Why persist they not in this opinion? when by these fair
speeches, they have put us in hope of agreement? Wherefore sup they ^up their
words again, interlacing such frivolous Interpretations and Glosses as disgrace
their Sentence? What should move them, having named the Matter and the Form of
the Sacrament, to give us presently warning, T. C. lib. 3. page 1^^.
that they mean by the Form of the Sacrament, the Institution; which Exposition
darkneth whatsoever was before plain? For whereas in common understanding, that
Form, which added to the Element, does make a Sacrament, and is of the outward
substance thereof, contains only the words of usual Application, they set it
down (lest common Dictionaries should deceive us) that the Form does signify
in their Language, the Institution; which Institution in truth, comprehends
both Form and Matter. Such are their fumbling shifts to enclose the Ministers
vocation within the compass of some essential part of the Sacrament. A thing
that can never stand with sound and sincere construction. For what if the T. C.
lib. 3. page 121.
Minister be no circumstance, but a subordinate efficient cause in the work of
Baptism? What if the Ministers Vocation be a Matter T. C. lib. 3. page 135. The
Minister is of the Substance of the Sacrament, considering that it is a
principal part of Christ^ Institution. Faza, Epist. 2. Desir aqua, and tamen
Baptismu^ alicujus diff. tri cum aedificasione non pessit nec debear, ego^ ^^t^
quo^ is ali^ liquere non minus tire^ quam aqua Bapti^^arim.
of perpetual necessity, and not a Ceremony variable as times and occasions
require? What if his calling be a principal part of the Institution of Christ?
Does it therefore follow, that the Ministers authority is T. C. lib. 3. page
138. Show me why the breach of the Institution in the Form should make the
Sacrament unavailable, and not the breach of this part (which concerns the
Minister) T. C. ibid. Howsoever some learned and godly give some liberty in the
change of the Elements of the holy Sacrament; yet I do notice how that can
stand. Idem, page 137. I would rather judge him baptized, who is baptized into
the Name of Christ, without adding the Father and the Holy Ghost, when the
Element of Water is added, then when the other words being duty kept, some
other liquor is used.
of the Substance of the Sacrament, and as incident into the nature thereof, as
the Matter and the Form it self, yea, more incident? For whereas in case of
necessity, the greatest amongst them professes the change of the Element of
Water lawful, and others which like not so well this opinion, could be better
content, that voluntarily the words of Christ's Institution were altered, and
Men baptized in the Name of Christ, without either mention made of the Father,
or of the Holy Ghost; nevertheless, in denying that Baptism administered by
private persons ought to be reckoned of as a Sacrament, they both agree. It may
therefore please them both to consider, That Baptism is an Action in part
Moral, in part Ecclesiastical, and in part Mystical: Moral, as being a duty
which men perform toward God; Ecclesiastical, in that it belongs unto Gods
Church as a public duty: Finally, Mystical, if we respect what God does
thereby intend to work. The greatest Moral perfection of Baptism consists in
men's devout obedience to the Law of God, which Law requires both the outward
act or thing done, and also that Religious affection which God does so much
regard, that without it, whatsoever we do, is ^tateful in his sight, who
therefore is said to respect Adverbs, more then Verbs, because the end of his
Law, in appointing what we shall do, is our own Perfection; which Perfection
consists chiefly in the virtuous disposition of the Mind, and approves it
self to him, not by doing, but by doing well. Wherein appears also, the
difference between Humane and Divine Laws; the one of which two are content
with Opus operatum, the other require Opus operantis; the one do but claim the
Deed, the other, especially the Mind. So that according to Laws, which
principally respect the heart of Men, Works of Religion being not religiously
performed, cannot Morally be perfect. Baptism as an Ecclesiastical work, is for
the manner of performance, ordered by diverse Ecclesiastical Laws, providing,
That as the Sacrament it self, is a gift of no mean worth; so the Ministry
thereof, might in all circumstances, appear to be a Function of no small
regard. All that belongs to the Mystical Perfection of Baptism outwardly, is
the Element, the Word, and the serious Application of both, unto him which
receives both; whereunto, if we add that secret reference which this action
has to li^e and remission of sins, by virtue of Christ's own compact solemnly
made with his Church, to accomplish fully the Sacrament of Baptism, there is
not any thing more required. Now put the Question, Whether Baptism, Administered
to Infants, without my Spiritual Calling, be unto them both a true Sacrament,
and an effectual instrument of Grace; or else an act of no more account, then
the ordinary Washings are. The sum of all that can be said to defeat such
Baptism, is, That those things which have no Being, can work nothing; and that
Baptism, without the power of Ordination, is, as a Judgment without sufficient
Jurisdiction, void, frustrate, and of no effect. But to this we answer, That
the Fruit of Baptism depends only upon the Covenant which God has made:
That God by Covenant requires in the elder sort, Faith and Baptism; in
Children, the Sacrament of Baptism alone, whereunto he has also given them
right by special privilege of Birth, within the bosom of the holy Church: That
infants therefore, which have received Baptism complete, as touching the
Mystical Perfection thereof, are by virtue of his own Covenant and Promise
cleansed from all sin; for as much as all other Laws, concerning that which in
Baptism is either Moral or Ecclesiastical, do bind the Church which gives
Baptism, and not the Infant which receives it of the Church. So that if any
thing be therein amiss, the harm which grows by violation of holy Ordinances,
must altogether rest, where the Bonds of such Ordinances hold. For, that in
actions of this nature, it fares not as in Jurisdictions, may somewhat appear
by the very opinion which men have of them. The nullity of that which a Judge
does by way of Authority without Authority, is known to all men, and agreed
upon with full consent of the whole World, every man receives it as a general
Edict of Nature; whereas the nullity of Baptism, in regard of the like defect,
is only a few men's new ungrounded, and as yet unapproved imagination. Which
difference of generality in men's persuasions on the one side, and their paucity
whose conceit leads them the other way, has risen from a difference easy to
observe in the things themselves. The exercise of unauthorised Jurisdiction is
a grievance unto them that are under it, whereas they that without Authority
presume to Baptize, offer nothing but that which to all men is good and
acceptable. Sacraments are food, and the Ministers thereof, as Parents, or as
Nurses; at whose hands when there is necessity, but no possibility of receiving
it, if that which they are not present to do in right of their Office, be of
pity and compassion done by others; shall this be thought turn Celestial Bread
into Gravel, or the Medicine of Souls into Poison? Jurisdiction is a yoke,
which Law has imposed on the necks of men in such sort, that they must endure
it for the good of others, how contrary soever it be to their own particular
appetites and inclinations: Jurisdiction bridleth men against their wills; that
which a Judge does, prevails by virtue of his very Power; and therefore, not
without great reason, except the Law has given him Authority, whatsoever he
does, vanishes. Baptism on the other side, being a favor which it pleases God
to bestow, a benefit of Soul to us that receive it, and a Grace, which they
that deliver, are but as mere Vessels, either appointed by others, or offered
of their own accord to this Service; of which two, if they be the one, it is
but their own honor, their own offense to be the other: Can it possibly stand
with Factu^ alterins alil nacer^ non deber. Vl^ lib. de Tupille, ^^ct, S.
Plurimum. Item. A^pier. lib Pater familias. De Here. Irs^^. ^. a^^ficia renent
Authors in^s. non ali^^. Lib. Sancmus 22 C. de l^oen.
Equity and Right, That the faultiness of their presumption in giving Baptism,
should be able to prejudice us, who by taking Baptism have no way offended? I
know there are many Sentences found in the Books and writings of the Ancient
Fathers, to prove both Ecclesiastical and also Moral defects in the Minister of
Baptism, a bar to the Heavenly benefit thereof, Which Sentences we always so
understand, August. Epist. 23.
as Augustine understood in a case of like nature, the words of St. Cyprian.
When Infants baptized, were, after their Parents revolt, carried by them in
arms to the Stews of Idols, those wretched Creatures, as St. Cyprian thought,
were not only their own ruin, but their Childrens also: Their Children, whom
this their Apostasy profaned, did lose what Christian Baptism had given them
being newly born. They lost (says St. Augustine) the Grace of Baptism, if we
consider to what their Parents impiety did tend; although the Mercy of God
preserved them, and will also in that dreadful day of account give them
favorable audience, pleading in their own behalf: The harm of other men's
perfidiousness, it lay not in us to avoid. After the same manner, whatsoever we
read written, if it sound to the prejudice of Baptism, through any either Moral
or Ecclesiastical defect therein, we construe it, as Equity and Reason
teaches, with restraint to the offender only; which does, as far as
concerns himself, and them which wittingly concur with him, make the
Sacrament of Godfruitless. St. Augustines doubtfulness, Whether Baptism by a
Lay man may stand, or ought to be readministred, T. C. lib. 3. page 136.
Augustine stands in doubt, whether Baptism by a Layman he available, or no.
Conr. Lit. Pat^. lib. 2. ^. 13. Where, by all likelihood he was out of doubt,
that that which was ministered by a Woman, whose unaptness herein is double to
that of a Layman, was of no esse.1.
should not be mentioned by them which presume to define peremptorily of that,
wherein he was content to profess himself unresolved. Albeit, in very truth,
his opinion is plain enough; but the manner of delivering his judgment being
modest, they make of a virtue, an imbecility, and impute his calmness of
speech to an irresolution of mind. His Disputation in that place, is against
Parmenian, which held, That a Bishop, or a Priest, if they fall into any
Heresy, do thereby lose the Power which they had before to Baptize; and that
therefore Baptism by Heretics, is merely void. For answer whereof, he first
denies, That Heresy can more deprive men of power to Baptize others, then it
is of force to take from them their own Baptism: And in the second place, he
farther adds, That if Heretics did lose the power which before was given
them by Ordination, and did therefore unlawfully usurp as often as they took upon
them to give the Sacrament of Baptism, it follows not, That Baptism, by them
administered without Authority, is no Baptism. For then, what should we think of
Baptism by Laymen, to whom Authority was never given? I doubt (says St.
Augustine) whether any man which carries a virtuous and godly mind, will
affirm, That the Baptism which Laymen do in case of necessity administer,
should be iterated, For to do it unnecessarily, is to execute another man's
office; necessity urging, to do it is then either no fault at all (much less so
grievous a crime, T. C. lib. 1. page 116. The Sacrilege of Private Persons,
Women especially, in Administering the holy Sament of Baptism.
that it should deserve to be termed by the name of Sacrilege,) or, if any, a
very pardonable fault. But suppose it even of very purpose usurped and given
unto any man, by every man that lists; yet that which is given, cannot
possibly be denied to have been given, how truly soever we may say, it has not
been given lawfully. Unlawful Usurpation, a penitent Affection must red^ess. If
not, the thing that was given, shall remain to the hurt and detriment of him,
which unlawfully either administered, or received the same; yet so, that in this
respect it ought not to be reputed, as if it had not at all been given. Whereby
we may plainly perceive, that St. Augustine was not himself uncertain what to
think, but doubtful, Whether any well-minded man, in the whole World, could
think otherwise then he did. Their T. C. lib. 3. page 139. As by the Seal which
the Prince has set apart to Seal his Grants with, when it is sloin and set to
by him that has no authority, there grows as assurance to the party that
has it. So if it were possible to be the Seal of God, which a Woman should set
to, yet for that, she has f^ola i^, and put it to not only without, but
contrary to the Commandment of God; I see not how any can take any assurance by
reason thereof.^
Argument taken from a stoin Seal, may return to the place out of which they
had it, for it helps their cause nothing. That which men give or grant to
others, must appear to have proceeded of their own accord. This being manifest,
their Gifts and Grants are thereby made effectual, both to bar themselves from
revocation, and to assecure the right they have given. Wherein, for further
prevention of mischiefs that otherwise might grow by the malice, treachery, and
fraud of men, it is both equal and meet, that the strength of Men's Deeds, and
the Instruments which declare the same, should strictly depend upon diverse
Solemnities, whereof there cannot be the like reason in things that pass
between God and us; because since we need not doubt, lest the Treasures of his
Heavenly Grace, should, without his consent, be past by forged conveyances; nor
lest he should deny at any time his own acts, and seek to revoke what has been
consented unto before: As there is no such fear of danger through deceit and
falsehood in this case, so neither has the circumstance of men's persons that
weight in Baptism; which for good and just considerations in the custody of
Seals of office, it ought to have. The Grace of Baptism comes by Donation from
God alone: That God has committed the Ministry of Baptism unto special men,
it is for orders sake in his Church, and not to the end, that their Authority
might give being, or add force to the Sacrament it self. That Infants have
right to the Sacrament in Baptism, we all acknowledge. Charge them we cannot,
as guilful and wrongful possessors of that, whereunto they have right by the
manifest will of the Donor, and are not parties unto any defect or disorder in
the manner of receiving the same. And if any such disorder be, we have
sufficiently before declared, That delictum cum capite semper ambulat, men's own
faults are their own harms. Wherefore, to countervail this and the like
mischosen resemblances, with that which more truly and plainly agrees; the
Ordinance of God, concerning their Vocation that minister Baptism, wherein the
Mystery of our Regeneration is wrought, has thereunto the same Analogy, which
Laws of Wedlock have to our first Nativity and Birth: So that if Nature do
effect procreation, notwithstanding the wicked violation and breach even of
Natures Law, made that the entrance of all mankind into this present World
might be without blemish; may we not justly presume, that Grace does accomplish
the other, although there be faultiness in them that transgress the Order which
our Lord Jesus Christ has established in his Church? Some Light may be
borrowed from Circumcision, for Explication of what is true in this question of
Baptism. Seeing then, that even they which condemn Zipporah the Wife of Moses,
Exodus 4.24. T. C. lib. 1. page 144. I say, that the unlawfulness of that sect,
does appear, sufficiently, in that she did it before her Husband Moses, which
was a Prophet of the Lord, to whom that Office of Circumcision aid appertain
Besides, that she did cut off the Foreskin of the Insane, not of mind to they
the Commandment of God, or for the Salvation of the Child; but in a choser
only, to the end. that her Husband might be eased, and have release: Which
mind appears in her, both by her words, and by casting away in anger, the
Foreskin which she had cut off. And if it be said. That the event declared,
that the act pleased God, because, that Moses forthwith wanted batter, and was
recovered of his sickness. I have showed before, That if we measure things by
the event, we shall oftentimes justify the wicked, and take the Righteousness
of the Righteous from them.
for taking upon her to Circumcise her son, a thing necessary at that time for
her to do, and as I think very hard to reprove in her, considering how Moses,
because himself had not done it sooner, was therefore stricken by the hand of
God, neither could in that extremity perform the Office; whereupon, for the
stay of Gods indignation, there was no choice, but the action must needs fall
into her hands; whose fact therein, whether we interpret, as some have done,
that being a Midianite, and as yet not so thoroughly acquainted with the Jewish
Rites, it much discontented her, to see her self, through her Husbands
oversight, in a Matter of his own Religion, brought unto these perplexities and
straights; that either she must now endure him perishing before her eyes, or
else wound the flesh of her own Child; which she could not do, but with seem
indignation showed, in that she fumingly, both threw down the foreskin at his
feet, and upbraided him with the cruelty of his Religion: Or, if we better like
to follow their more judicious Exposition, which are not inclinable to think,
that Moses was matched like Socrates, nor that Circumcision could now in
Eleazar, be strange unto her, having had Gersons her elder son before
circumcised, nor that any occasion of ch^ler could rise from a spectacle of
such misery, as does Mala passis non ^ascimer, sed compatmur, B^et de Consol.
naturally move Compassion, and not Wrath; nor that Zipporah was so impious, as
in the visible presence of Gods deserved Anger, to storm at the Ordinance and
Law of God; not that the words of the History it self, can enforce any such
affection; but do only declare how after the act performed, she touched the
feet of Moses, saying, Where the usual Translation h^th, Exodus 4.25. She cut
away the Foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said, Thou art
indeed a bloody Husband unto me. So he departed from him. Then she said, O
bloody Husband, because of the Circumcision. The words as theylle in the
original, are rather thus to be interpreted: And she cut off the Foreskin of
her son. Which being done, she touched his Fact, (the Feet of Moses) and said.
Thou art to we an Husband of Blood (in the plural number, thereby signifying
I^^usion of Blood.) And the Lord withdrew from him or the very time, when she
said, A Husband of Blood, in regard of Circumcisor.
Sponsus tu mihi as sanguinum, Thou art unto me an Husband of Blood; which
might be very well, the one done, and the other spoken, even out of the slowing
abundance of commiseration and love, to signify, with hands laid under his
feet, That her tender affection toward him, had caused her thus to forget
Woman-hood, to lay all Motherly affection aside, and to redeem her Husband out
of the hands of Death, with effusion of Blood: The sequel thereof, take it
which way you will, is a plain Argument, That God was satisfied with that she
did, as may appeal by his own Testimony, declaring, How there followed in the
person of Moses, present release of his grievous punishment upon her speedy
discharge of that duty, which by him neglected, had offended God; even, as
after execution of Justice by the hands of Phineas, Psalm. ^c6. 30.
the Plague was immediately taken away, which former impunity of sin had
caused; In which so manifest and plain cases, not to make that a reason of the
event, which God himself has set down as a reason, were falsely to accuse whom
he does justify, and without any cause to traduce what we should allow; yet
seeing, they which will have it a breach of the Law of God, for her to
circumcise in that necessity, are not able to deny, but Circumcision being in
that very manner performed, was to the innocent Child which received it, true
Circumcision; why should that defect, whereby Circumcision was so little
wealmed, be to Baptism a deadly wound? These Premises therefore remaining, as
hitherto they have been laid, because the Commandment of our Savior Christ,
which commits jointly to Public Ministers, both Doctrine and Baptism, T. C.
lib. 2. page 142. Seeing they only are t.^^l ten in the Scripture to
administer the Sacraments, which are bidden to Preach the Word. and that the
public Ministers have only this charge of the Word; and seeing that the
Administration of both these are so linked together, that the denial of license
to do out, is aden^al to do the other; as of the contrary part, license to one,
is license to the other; considering also. that to minister the Sacraments, is
an honor in the Church. which none can take unto him, but he which is called
unto it, i^ was Aaron: And further, for as much as the Baptising by private
persons, and by Women especially. confirms the dangerous terror of the
Cumile^^ra^ of young Children, which ^^ie without Baptism: L^^t of all, seeing
we have the consent of the godly learned of all times against the Baptism by
Women, and of the Reformed Churches now, against the Baptism by private men; we
conclude. That the administration of this Sacrament by private persons, and
especially by Women; is merely both unlawful and void.
does no more, by linking them together, import, That the Nature of the
Sacrament depends on the Ministers Authority and Power to Preach the Word,
then the force and virtue of the Word does on License to give the Sacrament;
and considering, that the Work of External Ministry in Baptism, is only a
pre-eminence of honor, which they that take to themselves, and are not
thereunto called as Aaron was, do but themselves in their own persons, by means
of such usurpation, Incur the just blame of disobedience to the Law of God;
father also, in as much as it stands with no reason, That Errors grounded on
a wrong interpretation of other Men's Deeds, should make frustrate whatsoever is
misconceived; and that Baptism by Women, should cease to be Baptism, as often as
any Man will thereby gather, That Children which die unbaptized are damned;
which opinion, if the Act of Baptism administered in such manner, did enforce,
it might be sufficient cause of disliking the same, but none of defeating or
making it altogether void: Last of all, whereas general and full consent of the
godly-learned in all ages, does make for Validity of Baptism; yea, albeit
administered in private, and even by Women; which kind of Baptism, in case of
necessity, diverse Reformed Churches do both allow and defend; some others which
do not defend, tolerate; few, in comparison, and they without any just cause,
do utterly disannul and annihilate: Surely, howsoever through defect on either
side, the Sacrament may be without Fruit, as well in some cases to him which
receives, as to him which gives it; yet no disability of either part can so
far make it frustrate and without effect, as to deprive it of the very Nature
of true Baptism, having all things else which the Ordinance of Christ
requires. Whereupon we may consequently infer, That the Administration of
this, Sacrament by private persons, be it lawful or unlawful, appears not as
yet to be merely void.

Interrogatories is Baptism touching Faith, and the purpose of a Christian life.
63. All that are of the Race of Christ, the Scripture names them, Children of
the Promise, which God has made. The Promise of Eternal Life, is the Seed of
the Church of God. And because there is no attainment of life, but through the
only begotten Son of God, nor by him otherwise then being such as the Creed
Apostolic describes; it follows, That the Articles thereof, are Principles
necessary for all men to subscribe unto, whom by Baptism the Church receives
into Christ's School. All Points of Christian Doctrine are either demonstrable
Conclusions, or demonstrative Principles. Conclusions having strong and
invincible Proofs, as well in the School of Jesus Christ, as elsewhere. And
Principles be Grounds, which require no Proof in any kind of Science, because
it suffices, if either there certainty be evident in it self, or evident by the
light of some higher knowledge; and in it self, such, as no man's knowledge is
ever able to overthrow. Now the principles whereupon we do build our souls,
have their evidence where they had their original; and as received from thence,
we adore them, we hold them in reverend admiration, we neither argue nor
dispute about them, we give unto them that assent which the Oracles of God
require. We are not therefore ashamed of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
because miscreants in scorn have upbraided us, That the highest point of our
Wisdom, is Belief. Aposto^ae ma^ulictum. (...) Na^. Otar Contr. Iuli^.
That which is true, and neither can be disceined by Sense, not concluded by
mere Natural Principles, must have Principles of revealed Truth whereupon to
build it self, and an habit of Faith in us, wherewith Principles of that kind
are apprehended. (...) Just Marc. Expos. ^^^..
The Mysteries of our Religion are above the reach of our Understanding, above
discourse of Man's Reason, above all that any Creature can comprehend. Therefore
the first thing required of him, which stands for admission into Christ's
Family, is Belief. Which Belief consists not so much in knowledge, as in
acknowledgment of all things that Heavenly Wisdom reveals; the Affection of
Faith is above her reach, her Love to Godward above the comprehension which
the has of God. And because only for Believers all things may be done, He
which is Goodness it self, loves them above all. Deserve we then the love of
God, because we believe in the Son of God? What more opposite then Faith and
Pride? When God had created all things, he looked upon them, and loved them,
because they were all as himself had made them. So the true Reason wherefore
Christ does love Believers, is, Because their belief is the gift of God, Matthew.
15. 17. John 1.12
a gift then which flesh and blood in this World cannot possibly receive a
greater. And as to love them, of whom we receive good things, is Duty, because
they satisfy our desires in that which else we should want; so to love them on
whom we bestow, is Nature, because in them we behold the effects of our own
virtue. Seeing therefore no Religion enjoys Sacraments, the signs of Gods
love, unless it have also that Faith whereupon the Sacraments are built, could
there be any thing more convenient then that our first admittance to the Actual
Receipt of his Grace in the Sacrament of Baptism, Spiritus Sanct^^ habitatoc
ejus Templi non effecti^^, quod Antistitem non haber veram Fidem. Ierom. Adv.
Lucifer. cap. 4.
should be consecrated with profession of Belief; which is to the Kingdom of
God as a Key, the want whereof excludes Infidels, both from that and from all
other saving Grace: We find by experience, that although Faith be an
Intellectual Habit of the Mind, and have her Seat in the Understanding, yet an
evil Moral Disposition, obstinately wedded to the love of darkness, dampeth the
very Light of Heavenly Illumination, and permits not the Mind to see what
does shine before it. Men are lovers of pleasure, more then lovers of God.
Their assent to his saving Truth, is many times withheld from it, not that the
Truth is too weak to persuade, but because the stream of corrupt affection
carries them a clean contrary way. That the Mind therefore may abide in the
Light of Faith, there must abide in the Will as constant a resolution to have
no fellowship at all with the vanities and works of darkness. Two Covenants
there are which Christian men (says Isidor) do make in Baptism, Isid. de
Offic. Eccles. lib. 2 cap. 24. Ambros. Mennen. lib. 1. cap. 4. Tertul. de
Spectac.
the one concerning relinquishment of Satan, the other touching Obedience to
the Faith of Christ. In like sort St. Ambrose, He which is baptized, forsakes
the Intellectual Pharaoh, the Prince of this World, saying, Abrenuncio; Thee, O
Satan, and thy Angels, thy works and thy mandates, I forsake utterly.
Tertullian having speech of wicked spirits: These (says he) are the Angels
which we in Baptism renounce. (...) Pustin. Apol.
The Declaration of Justin the Martyr concerning Baptism, shows how such as
the Church in those days did baptize, made profession of Christian Belief, and
undertook to live accordingly. Neither do I think it a matter easy for any man
to prove, that ever Baptism did use to be administered without Interrogatories
of these two kinds. Whereunto 1 Pet. 3. 21.
St. Peter (as it may be thought) alluding, has said, That the Baptism which
saves us, is not (as Legal Purifications were) a cleansing of the flesh from
outward impurity, but (...), as Interrogative trial of a good conscience
toward God.

64. Now the fault which they find with us concerning Interrogatories,
Interrogatories proposed on^ Infants in Baptism, and answered as it their names
by God fathers. They pensa^^e July Baptism in toyne foolish; for that they ask
Questions of an Infant which ca^ace answer, and speak unto them, as was went to
be spoken unto ^^^, ^^ unto such as being converted answered it to mo^^, ^^^l
were baptized. Which is but a mockery of God, and therefore against the holy
Scriptures. Gal. 6.7 Admonition to the Parliament ^^e tante desend c^ in T. C.
lib. 1. page ^^^.
is, our moving of these Questions unto Infants which cannot answer them, and
the answering of them by others as in their names. The Anabaptist has many
pretenses to scorn at the baptism of Children: First, Because the Scriptures,
he says, do no where give Commandment to Baptize Infants: Secondly, For that,
as there is no Commandment, so neither any manifest example, showing it to have
been done either by Christ, or his Apostles: Thirdly, In as much as the Word
Preached, and the Sacraments, must go together; they which are not capable of
the one, are no fit receivers of the other: Last of all, since the Order of
Baptism continued from the first beginning, has in it those things which are
unfit to be applied unto Sucking Children; it follows in their conceit, That
the Baptism of such is no Baptism, but plain mockery. They with whom we
contend, are no enemies to the Baptism of Infants; it is not their desire, that
the Church should hazard so many Souls, by letting them run on till they come
to ripeness of understanding, that so they may be converted, and then baptized,
as Infidels heretofore have been; they bear not toward God so unthankful
minds, as not to acknowledge it even amongst the greatest of his endless
mercies, That by making us his own possession so soon, many advantages which
Satan otherwise might take are prevented, and (which should be esteemed a part
of no small happiness) the first thing whereof we have occasion to take notice,
is, How much has been done already to our great good, though altogether
without our knowledge: The Baptism of Infants, they esteem as an Ordinance
which Christ has instituted, even in special love and favor to his own people:
They deny not the practice thereof accordingly to have been kept, as derived
from the hands, and continued from the days of the Apostles themselves unto
this present; only it pleases them not, That to Infants there should be
Interrogatories proposed in Baptism. This they condemn as foolish, toyish, and
profane mockery: But are they able to show, that ever the Church of Christ had
any Public Form of Baptism without Interrogatories; or, that the Church did
ever use at the Solemn Baptism of Infants, to omit those Questions as needless
in this case? Aug. 1 pti. ^3.
Ioniface, a Bishop in St. Augustines time, knowing, That the Church did
Universally use this Custom of Baptising Infants with Interrogatories, was
desirous to learn from St. Augustine, the true cause and reason thereof. If
(says he) I should see before thee a young infant, and should ask of thee,
whether that Infant when he comes unto riper age, will be honest and just, or
no; Thou would answer (I know) that to tell in these things what shall come
to pass, is not in the power of Mortal Man. If I should ask, What good or evil
such an infant thinks? Thine answer hereunto must needs be again with the
like uncertainty. If them neither can promise for the time to come, nor for
the present pronounce any thing in this case; How is it, that when such are
brought unto Baptism, their Parents there undertake what the Child shall
afterward do? Yea, they are not doubtful to say, It does that which is
impossible to be done by Infants. At the least there is no man precisely able
to affirm it done. Vonchsafe me hereunto some short answer, such as not only
may press me with the bare authority of Custom, but also instruct me in the
cause thereof. Touching which difficulty, whether it may truly be said for
Infants, at the time of their Baptism, That they do believe; the effect of St.
Angustines answer is, Yea, but with this distinction, (...) lipsius res
^^^^^mentum percirtialo. Aug.
a present Actual habit of Faith there is not in them; there is delivered unto
them that Sacrament, a part of the due celebration whereof consisting in
answering to the Articles of Faith, because the habit of Faith, which
afterward does come with years, is but a farther building up of the same
edifice, the first foundation whereof was laid by the Sacrament of Baptism. For
that which there we professed without any understanding, when we afterward
come to acknowledge, do we any thing else, but only bring unto ripeness, the
very Seed that was sown before? We are then Believers, because then we begun to
be that which process of time does make perfect. And till we come to Actual
Belief, the very Sacrament of Faith is a shield as strong as after this the
Faith of the Sacrament against all contrary Internal Powers. Which, whosoever
does think impossible, is undoubtedly farther off from Christian Belief, though
he be Baptized, then are these Innocents, which at their Baptism, albeit they
have no conceit cogitation of Faith, are notwithstanding pure, and free from
all opposite cogitations, whereas the other is not free. If therefore without
any fear or scruple, we may account them, and term them Believers only for
their outward professions sake, which inwardly are farther from Faith then
Infants, Why not Infants much more at the time of their solemn Initiation by
Baptism, the Sacrament of Faith, whereunto they not only conceive nothing
opposite, but have also that Voltum mirabi is les est. quemad: uncum quorundam
nondum cognoscenu^^n ^cum sir intrabitator Deus; and quo^^^m cognescen^inan,
non sit. N^c illi. nim a.l ^cmplum Dei pertinene, qai cogn^icenc^; D^un, non
Ec^t Deum ^thieavetunt: and od remphius ^^l ^^erinen: parvali sanctisicati,
Sacraments Cini^^ regenetri Spoiu Sancto qat per aeuu^^mu^dum ^^stunt
cognoscere Deum. Ilade quem po^uerunt i li nosse ^^^ haberc, illi potuerunt
habere antequ. un nosse. Aug. Epist. 59.
Grace given them, which is the first and most effectual cause out of which our
belief grows? In sum, the whole Church is a multitude of Believers, all
honored with that title, even Hypocrites for their Professions sake, as well as
Saints, because of their inward sincere persuasion, and Infants as being in the
first degree of their ghostly motions toward the actual habit of Faith; the
first sort are faithful in the eye of the World; the second faithful in the
sight of God; the last in the ready direct way to become both, if all things
after be suitable to these their present beginnings. This (says St. Augustine)
would not happily content such persons, as are incapable or unquiet; but to
them which having knowledge, are not troublesome, it may suffice. Wherein I
have not for case of my self objected against you that custom only, then
which, nothing is more from; but of a custom most profitable, I have done that
little which I could, ^^ yield you a reasonable cause. Were St. Augustine now
living, there are which would tell him for his better instruction, that to say
T.C. lib. ^. page 15; If Children could have Faith, yet they ^^at present the
child cannot precisely ^ell whether this particular child has Faith, or no;
we are to think charitably, and to hope i^ is one of the Church; but it can be
no more predicly said, that is has Faith, then it may be said precisely
elected.
of a child, It is elect, and to say it, does believe, are all one; for which
cause, since no man is able precisely to affirm the one of any Infant in
particular, it follows, that precisely and absolutely we ought not to say the
other. Which precise and absolute terms, are needless in this case. We speak of
Infants, as the rule of piety allows both to speak and think. They that can
take to themselves, in ordinary talk, a charitable kind of liberty to name men
of their own sort, Gods dear children (notwithstanding the large reign of of
Hyprocrisie) should not methinks be so strict and rigorous against the Church
for presuming as it does, of a Christian Innocent. For when we know how Christ
is general has said, That of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, which Kingdom is
the Inheritance of Gods Elect; and do withal behold, how his providence has
called them unto the first beginnings of Eternal Life, and presented them at
the Wellspring of New Birth, wherein original sin is purged; besides which sin,
there is no Hinderance of their Salvation known to us, as themselves will
grant; hard it were, that loving so many fair inducements whereupon to ground,
we should not be thought to utter, at the least, a truth as probable and
allowable in terming any such particular Infant an elect Babe, as in presuming
2 John 1.
the like of others, whose safety nevertheless we are not absolutely able to
warrant. If any troubled with these seruples, be only for Instructions sake,
desirous to know yet some farther reason, why Interrogatories should be
ministered to Infants in Baptism, and be answered unto by others, as in their
names; they may consider, that Baptism implies a Covenant or League between
God and Man, wherein as God does bestow presently remission of sins and the
Holy Ghost, hinding also himself to add in process of time, what Grace soever
shall be farther necessary for the attainment of Everlasting Life; so every
Baptized Soul receiving the same Grace at the hands of God, tieth likewise it
self for ever to the observation of his Law, no less then the Jews Gal. 5. 3.
by Circumcision bound themselves to the Law of Moses. The Law of Christ
requiring therefore Faith and newness of life in all men, by virtue of the
Covenant which they make in Baptism, Is it toyish, that the Church in Baptism
exacteth at every man's hands an express Profession of Faith, and an inevocable
promise of obedience by way of Stipu^a^o est verborum conceptio, quib^^ is qui
lateringatur denurum sactummre se quod inrterogatus est respondet, Lib. 5.
Sect. 1. ff de Obilg. and Act. In haec re alim talis ver^oa tradita fuerunt.
Spanies? Spondeto, Promitto. Fide prominis? Fide Prumitris Promitto. Fide
jubeo. Dabia? Dabo. Vacies? Faciam. ^as^it. de verb. oblig. lib. 2. tit. 15.
solemn stipulation? That Infants may contract and covenant with God, Genesis
17.14. ^. accommodat i lis nuter Ecclesia a i rum pedes ut venient, alloram eo
ut credant, ^^os ^^: ^ngum ut fateantur, ut quoniam quod agri sunt alio
peccante ut praegravantur, sic cum familiar alio p^nio conscience falvantur.
Aug. Sermon. 10. de Verb. Apest.
the Law is plain. Neither is the reason of the Law obscure: For since it
rendeth, we cannot sufficiently express how much, to their own good, and does
no way hurt or endanger them to begin the race of their lives herewith; they
are, as equity requires, admitted hereunto, and in favor of their tender
years, such formal complements of stipulation, as being requisite, are
impossible by themselves in their own persons to be performed, leave is given,
that they may and sufficiently discharge by others. Albeit therefore, neither
deaf, nor dumb men, neither surious persons, nor children, can receive any
civil stipulation; yet this kind of ghostly stipulation they may through his
indulgence, who respecting the singular benefit thereof; accepts Children
brought unto him for that end, entrech into Articles of Covenant with them, and
in tender commiseration, grants that other Men's Professions and Promises in
Baptism made for them, shall avail no less, then if they had been themselves,
able to have made their own. None more fit to undertake this office in their
behalf, then such as present them unto Baptism. A wrong conceit, that none may
receive the Sacrament of Baptism, but they whose Parents, at the least the one
of them, are by the soundness of their Religion, and by their virtuous
demeanor, known to be Men of God, T.C. lib. 1. page 172.
has caused some to repel Children whosoever bring them, if their Parents be
mis-perswaded in Religion, or sot other mis-deserts ex-communicated; some
likewise for that cause to withhold Baptism, unless the Father, albeit no such
exception can justly be taken against him, do notwithstanding make Profession
of his Faith, and avouch the child to be his own. Thus whereas God has
appointed them Ministers of holy things, they make themselves Inquisitors of
men's persons, a great deal farther then need is. They should consider, that God
has ordained Baptism in favor of mankind. To restrain favors is an odious
thing, to enlarge them, acceptable both to God and Man: Whereas therefore the
Civil Law gave diverse Immunities to them which were Fathers of three children,
and had them living; those Immunities they held, although their children were
all dead, if war had consumed them, because it seemed in that case not against
reason, to repute them by a courteous construction of Law as live men, ^li enim
qni pro Rep. cec^l p^nt, in perpertinum per glotian vivcet intelligun^ur inflit
lib. ^ tit. as sects.
in that the honor of their Service done to the Commonwealth would remain
always. Can it hurt us, in exhibiting the Graces which God does bestow on men;
or can it prejudice his glory, if the self-same equity guide and direct our
hands? When God made his Covenant with such as had Abraham to their Father, was
only Abraham's immediate issue, or only his lineal posterity according to the
flesh, included in that Covenant? Were not Proselytes as well as Jews, always
taken for the Sons of Abraham? Yea, because the very Heads of Families are
Fathers in some sort, as touching providence and care for the meanest that
belong unto them; the servants which Abraham had bought with money, were as
capable of Circumcision, being newly born, as any natural child that Abraham
himself begat. Be it then, that Baptism belongs to none, but such as either
believe presently, or else being Infants, are the children of Believing
Parents; in case the Church do bring children to the Holy Font, whose Natural
Parents are either unknown, or known to be such as the Church accurseth, but
yet forgets not in that severity, to take compassion upon their Offspring,
Osteruatur ^pliyp^ percipiendam spiritualem gratiam von ram a^^cis qucium
ges^^urut ^^nibus quamvia and a^ ipsis si and ipsi hor. 1. and ^^deles sint,
qua ^^ unit r^^ socierate santorum argusid lin v. Aug. in Epst. 23. (...)
Justin Reip. al Orth^^.
(for it is the Church which does offer them to Baptism by the Ministry of
Presenters) were it not against both equity and duty to refuse the Mother of
Believers her self, and not to take her in this case for a Faithful Parent? It
is not the virtue of our Fathers, nor the Faith of any other that can give us
the true holiness which we have by virtue of our New Birth. Yet even through
the common Faith and Spirit of Gods Church (a thing which no quality of Parents
can prejudice) I say, through the Faith of the Church of God, undertaking the
motherly care of oursouls, so far forth we may be, and are in our Infancy
sanctified, as to be thereby made sufficiently capable of Baptism, and to be
interessed in the Rites of our New Birth for their Pieties sake that offer us
thereunto. It comes sometime to pass (says St. Augustine) that the children
of Bondslaves are brought to Baptism by their Lord; sometime the Parents being
dead, the Friends alive undertake that Office, sometime Stangers or Virgins
consecrated unto God, which neither have, nor can have children of their own,
take up Infants in the open streets, and so offer them unto Baptism, whom the
cruelty of unnatural Parents casts out, and leaves to the adventure of
uncertain Pity. As therefore he which did the part of a Neighbor, was a
Neighbor to that wounded Man whom the Parable of the Gospel describes; so they
are Fathers, although Strangers, that bring Infants to him which makes them
the Sons of God. In the phrase of some kind of men, they use to be termed
Witnesses, as if they came but to see and testify what is done. It savoreth
more of Piety to give them their old accustomed name of Fathers and Mothers in
God, whereby they are well put in mind what affection they ought to bear
toward those Innocents, for whose religious education, the Church accepts
them as pledges. This therefore is their own duty: But because the answer which
they make to the usual demands of stipulation proposed in Baptism, is not their
own; the Church does best to receive it of them, in that form which best
shows whose the act is. That which a Guardian does in the name of his Guard
or Pupil, stands by natural equity forcible for his benefit, though it be
done without his knowledge. And shall we judge it a thing unreasonable, or in
any respect unfit, That Infants by words which others utter, should, though
unwittingly, yet truly and forcibly, bind themselves to that whereby their
estate is so assuredly bettered? Herewith Nestorius Si Arrianae aut Sabelliane
herese^^ and (...) esses, and non tuo ipsius symbolo tecum uterer, convincerem
re tamen testimoniorum sacrorum auctoritate. Quid tantem si sic apud ee agerem,
quid diceres? quid responderes? nonne obsecro illud, in eo re Baptisatum, in eo
te renatum esse? Ec vere, in negotio quamvis improbo non importuna defensio,
and quae non absurd causam erroris diceres, so pertinaciam non sociares
errori. Nunc autem cum in Catholica urbe natus, Catholica Fide institutus,
Catholico Baptismare regeneratus sis, nunquid agere tecum quasi cum Arriano aut
Sabelliano possim? Quod utinam fuisses. Minus dolerem in malis editum quam de
bonis laps^m, minus Fidem non ha^itam quam amissam. Non ^iquum aurem, Heretice,
non iniquum aut grave aliquid postulo. Hoc fac in Catholica Fide editus quod
fueras pro perversitate facturus. Cassieod. de incarn lib. 6. cap. 5.
the Heretic was charged, as having fallen from his first Profession, and broken
the promise which he made to God in the Arms of others. Of such as profaned
themselves, being Christians, with irreligious delight in the Ensigns of
Idolatry, Heathenish Spectacles, Shows, and Stage Plays, Tertul.. lib. de
Spectac.
Tertullian to strike them the more deep, claims the Promise which they made
in Baptism. Why were they dumb, being thus challenged? Wherefore stood they not
up to answer in their own defense, that such Professions and Promises made in
their names, were frivolous; that all which others undertook for them, was but
mockery and profanation? That which no Heretic, no wicked liver, no impious
despiset of God, no miscreant or malefactor, which had himself been Baptized,
was ever so desperate as to disgorge in contempt of so fruitfully received
Customs, is now their voice that restore, as they say, The ancient Purity of
Religion.

65. In Baptism many things of very ancient continuance are now quite and clean
abolished; Of the Cross in Baptism.
for that the Virtue and Grace of this Sacrament had been therewith
over-shadowed, as fruit with too great abundance of leaves. Notwithstanding to
them, which think that always imperfect Reformation, that does but shear and
not flea; our retaining certain of those former Rites, especially the dangerous
Sign of the Cross, has seemed almost an impardonable oversight. The Cross
(they say) since it is but a mere invention of Man, should not therefore at all
have been added to the Sacrament of Baptism. To Sign Childrens Foreheads with a
Cross, in token that hereafter they shall not be ashamed to make Profession of
the Faith of Christ, is to bring into the Church a new Word, whereas there
ought to be no Doctor heard in the Church but our Savior Christ. That reason
which moved the Fathers to use, should move us not to use the Sign of the
Cross. They lived with Heathens which had the Cross of Christ in contempt, we
with such as adore the Cross; and therefore we ought to abandon it, even as, in
like consideration, Ezekias did of old the Brazen Serpent. These are the causes
of displeasure conceived against the Cross; a Ceremony, the use whereof has
been profitable, although we observe it not as the Ordinance of God, but of
Men. For (says Tertullian) Tertul. de C^ro. Militi^.
if of this and the like Customs, thou should require some Commandment to be
showed thee out of Scriptures, there is none found. What reason there is to
justify Tradition, Life, or Custom in this behalf, either thou may of thy
self perceive, or else learn of some other that does. Lest therefore the name
of Tradition should be offensive to any, considering how far by some it has
been, and is abused, we mean by Traditiones non scriptas, si doctrinam
respiciant, cum doctrina scrip^a convenire debere dicimus. Quod ad rituales and
ecclesiasticas attinet, ordinis and aedificationis Ecclesiarum in his semper
habend^ ratio est; inutiles autem and noxias, nempe ineptas and supersticiosas
Patronis suis relinquamus, Goulart, Genevens. Annot. in Epist. Cypr. 74.
Traditions, or Ordinances made in the prime of Christian Religion, established
with that Authority which Christ has left to his Church for matters
indifferent; and in that consideration requisite to be observed, till like
authority see just and reasonable cause to alter them. So that Traditions
Ecclesiastical are not rudely and in gross to be shaken off, because the
Inventors of them were men. Such as say, They allow no T.C.l. ^. pa 71. They
should nor have been to hold as to have brought it into the holy Sacrament of
Baptism and so ^ingle the Ceremonies and inventions of Men^ with the Sacraments
and institutions of God.
invention of Men to be mingled with the Outward Administration of Sacraments;
and under that pretense, condemn our using the Sign of the Cross, have belike
some special Dispensation themselves to violate their own Rules. For neither
can they indeed decently, nor do they ever Baptize any without manifest breach
of this their profound Axiom, That Men's Inventions should not be mingled with
Sacraments and Institutions of God. They seem to like very well in Baptism, the
Custom of Godfathers, because so generally the Churches have received it.
Which Custom, being of God no more instituted then the other (howsoever they
pretend the other hurtful, and this profitable) it follows, That even in
their own opinion, if their words do show their minds, there is no necessity
of stripping Sacraments out of all such attire of Ceremonies, as Man's wisdom
has at any time clothed them withal; and consequently, That either they must
reform their speech as over-general, or else condemn their own practice as
unlawful. Ceremonies have more in weight then in sight; they work by commonness
of use much, although in the several acts of their usage, we scarcely discern
any good they do. And because the use which they have for the most part, is not
perfectly understood, Superstition is apt to impute unto them greater virtue
then indeed they have. For prevention whereof, when we use this Ceremony we
always plainly express the end whereunto it serves, namely, For a Sign of
Remembrance to put us in mind of our duty. But by this mean, they say, we make
it a great deal worse. T.C. lib 1. page 170. The profitable signification of
the Cross makes the thing a great deal worse, and brings In a new word ^neu
the Church; whereas there ought to ^e no Doctor li^ard in the Church, but only
our Savior Christ, For all hough t^ be the Word of God, that we should ^ ^ be
ashamed of the Cross of Christ, yet is it not the Word of God, that we should
be kept in remembrance of that, by ^^^n lines drawn across one over another in
the Childs Forehead.
For why? Seeing God has no where commanded to draw two lines in token of the
duty which we ow to Christ, our practice with this Exposition publishes a new
Gospel, and causes another Word to have place in the Church of Christ, where
no voice ought to be heard but his. By which good reason the Authors of those
grave admonitions to the Parliament are well-holpen up, which held, That
sitting at Communions, betokens rest and full accomplishment of Legal
Ceremonies in our Savior Christ. For although it be the Word of God, That such
Ceremonies are expired; yet seeing it is not the Word of God, that men to
signify so much should sit at the Table of our Lord; these have their doom as
well as others, Guilty of a new devised Gospel in the Church of Christ. Which
strange imagination is begotten of a special dislike they have to hear, that
Ceremonies now in use, should be thought significant; whereas, in truth, such
as are not significant must needs be vain. Ceremonies destitute of
signification, are no better then the idle gestures of men, whose broken wits
are not Masters of what they do. For if we look but into Secular and Civil
Complements, what other cause can there possibly be given why to omit them,
where of course they are looked for; for where they are not so due, to use
them, brings men's secret intents oftentimes into great jealousy: I would
know, I say, What reason we are able to yield, why things so light in their own
nature should weigh in the opinions of men so much, saving only in regard of
that which they use to signify or betoken? Does not our Lord Jesus Christ Luke
7. 44
himself impute the omission of some courteous Ceremonies, even in domestical
entertainment, to a colder degree of loving affection, and take the contrary in
better part, not so much respecting what was less done, as what was signified
less by the one, then by the other? For, to that very end, he refers in part
those gracious Expostulations, Simon, see thou this Woman? since I entered
unto thine house, thou gave me no water for my feet; but she has washed my
seet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head: Thou gave me no
kiss, but this Woman since the time I came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet:
Mine head with oil, thou did not anoint, but this Woman has anointed my feet
with oynment. Wherefore as the usual dumb Ceremonies of common life are in
request or dislike, according to that they import; even so Religion, having
likewise her silent Rites, the chiefest rule whereby to judge of their quality,
is that which they mean or betoken. For if they signify good things (as
somewhat they must of necessity signify, because it is of their very nature to
be signs of intimation, presenting both themselves unto outward sense, and
besides themselves some other thing, to the understanding of beholders) unless
they be either greatly mischosen to signify the same, or else applied where
that which they signify, agrees not, there is no cause of exception against
them, as against evil and unlawful Ceremonies, much less of excepting against
them only, in that they are not without sense. And if every Religious Ceremony
which has been invented of men, to signify any thing that God himself
allows, were the publication of another Gospel in the Church of Christ;
seeing that no Christian Church in the World, is, or can be, without continual
use of some Ceremonies which men have instituted, and that to signify good
things (unless they be vain and frivolous Ceremonies;) it would follow, That
the World has no Christian Church which does not daily proclaim new Gospels; a
sequel, the manifest absurdity whereof argues the rawness of that Supposal,
cut of which it grows. Now the T. C. lib. ^. page 170. It is known to all
that have real the Ecclesi^ssical sieries, That the Heathen did ^^^^^ in
Christians in ^^^^s, all, in reproach. Thu^ the God which ^ry believed on, was
hanged upon a Cross. And they thought go^d to r^th, that they were not ashamed
therefore of the Sun of God, by the often using of the Sign of the Crist. Which
carefulness and goul mind, to keep amongst them an open Prose^^^n of Christ
crucified, althrough it be to be commended, yet is not this means so. And they
might otherwise have kept it, and with less danger then by this use of
crossing. And as it was brought in upon no good ground, so the Lord left a mark
of his curse of it, and whereby It might be perceived to c^mour of the Forat of
Men Brain, is that it began forthwith, while it was yet in the Swalling Ciours,
to be supersti^iuosly abused. The Christians had such a Superstition in it,
that they would do nothing without Crossing: But if it were gramed, that upon
this consideration which I have before mentioned, the ancient Christians did
well; yet it follows not, that we should to do. For we live not amongst those
Nation; which do cast us in the ^^th, or reproach us with die Cross of Christ.
Now that we live amongst Papist: that do not concern the Cross of Christ, but
which esteem more of the Word in Cross, thru of the tene ^as, w^^^ is his
sufferings, we ough now to do clean con^^riwile to thrill christians, and
abolish a^l use of that Cross to. For contrary theas^^ must have contrary
remedy. If therefore th^o'd t Christians to deliver the Cross of Christ sunt
now (...), all senue the Cross; the Christians now to take away the
superstitions estimation of it, ought to take away ^e use of it.
cause why Antiquity did the more, in actions of common life, honor the
Ceremony of the Cross, might be, for that they lived with Infidels. But that
which they did in the Sacrament of Baptism, was for the self-same good of
Believers which is thereby intended still. The Cross is for us an admonition no
less necessary then for them, to glory in the Service of Jesus Christ, and not
to hang down our heads as men ashamed thereof, although it procure us reproach
and obloquy at the hands of this wretched World. Shame, is a kind of fear to
incur disgrace and ignominy. Now whereas some things are worthy of reproach,
some things ignominious only through a false opinion which men have conceived
of them; Nature that generally fears opprobtious reprehension, must by Reason
and Religion, be Ephe^. 5. 12. Romans 6. 21
taught what it should be ashamed of, and what not. But be we never so well
instructed what our duty is in this behalf, without some present admonition at
the very instant of practice, what we know is many times not called to mind,
till that be done whereupon our just confusion ensues. To supply the absence
of such, as that way might do us good, when they see us in danger of sliding;
there are Sen. Epist. 1^. lib. 1.
judicious and wise men which think, we may greatly relieve our selves by a
bare imagined presence of some, whose Authority we fear, and would be loath to
offend, if indeed they were present with us. Witnesses at hand, are a bridle
unto many offenses. Let the mind have always some whom it fears, some whose
Authority may keep even secret thoughts under aw. Take Cato or, if he be too
harsh and rugged, choose some other of a softer metal, whose gravity of life
and speech thou love, his mind and countenance carry with thee, set him
always before thine eyes, either as a watch, or as a pattern. That which is
crooked, we cannot streighten but by some such level. If men of so good
experience and insight in the maims of our weak flesh, have thought these
fancied remembrances available to awaken shamefastness, that so the boldness of
sin may be staid ere it look abroad; surely, the Wisdom of the Church of
Christ, which has so that use, converted the Ceremony of the Cross in Baptism,
it is no Christian man's part to despise; especially seeing that by this mean,
where Nature does earnestly import aid, Religion yields her that ready
assistance, then which there can be no help more forcible, serving only to
relieve memory, and to bring to our cogitation, that which should most make
ashamed of sin. The mind while we are in this present life T^ ^oin (...).
, whether it contemplate, meditate, deliberate, or howsoever exercise it self,
works nothing without continual recourse unto imagination, the only
Storehouse of wit, and peculiar Chair of memory. On this Anvile it cease not
day and night to strike, by means whereof, as the Pulse declares how the heart
does work, so the very Frons honinies cristitiae. Islortatis, Clementia,
severitatis index est, Plin. lib. 21.
thoughts and cogitations of man's mind, be they good or bad, do no where
sooner bewray themselves, then through the crevesses of that Wall wherewith
Nature has compasied the Cells and Closets of Fancy. In the Forehead nothing
more plain to be seen, then the fear of contumely and disgrace. For which
cause, the Scripture (as with great probability it may be thought) describes
them marked of God in the Forehead, Ez. k9 4. Apoc. 7. 3. ^ p 4.
whom his mercy has undertaken to keep from final confusion and shame. Not
that God does set any corporal mark on his chosen, but to note, that he gives
his Elect security of preservation from reproach, the fear whereof does use
show it self in that part. Shall I say, that the Sign of the Cross (as we use
it) is in some sort a mean to work our (...) Arist Eth. 4.c.9. a Caro signatur
u^ etc anima muniatur, Tertul de Resur. Car.
preservation from reproach? Surely, the mind which as yet has not hardened it
self in sin, is seldom provoked thereunto in any gross and grievous manner, but
Natures secret suggestion objected against it ignominy as a bar. Which conceit
being entered into that Palace of Man's fancy, the Gates whereof, have imprinted
in them that holy Sign which brings fortwith to mind, whatsoever Christ has
wrought, and we vowed against sin; it comes hereby to pass, that Christian men
never want a most effectual, though a silent Teacher, to avoid whatsoever may
deservedly procure shame. So that in things which we should be ashamed of, we
are by the Cross admonished faithfully of our duty, at the very moment when
admonition does most need. Other things there are which deserve honor, and yet
do purchase many times our disgrace in this present World, as of old, the very
truth of Religion it self, till God by his own outstretched arm made the glory
thereof to shine over all the Earth. Cypr. Epist 56. ^d Thim^^^^^.
Whereupon St. Cyprian exhorting to Ma^tyrdom in times of Heathenish
persecution and cruelty, thought it not vain to allege unto them, with other
Arguments, the very Ceremony of that Cross whereof we speak. Never let that
hand offer Sacrifice to Idols, which has already received the Body of our
Savior Christ, and shall hereafter the Crown of his Glory; Arm your Foreheads
unto all boldness ^ that the Sign of God may be kept safe. Again, when it
pleased God, that the fury of their enemies being bridled, the Church had some
little rest and quietness, (if so small a liberty, but only to breathe between
troubles, may be termed quietness and rest) to such as fell not away from
Christ, through former persecutions, he gives due and deserved praise in the
self-same manner. Cypr. de Laps.
You that were ready to endure imprisonment, and were resolute to suffer death;
you that have courageously withstood the World, ye have made your selves both a
glorious spectacle for God to behold, and a worthy example for the rest of your
Brethren to follow. Those mouths which had sanctified themselves with food,
coming down from Heaven, leashed after Christ own Body and Blood, to taste the
poisoned and contagious scraps of Idols; those Foreheads which the Sign of God
had purified, kept themselves to be crowned by him, the touch of the Garlands
of Satan, they abhorred. Erant enim supplices corona; li. Tetilib. de Core^il.
Thus was the memory of that Sign which they had in Baptism, a kind of bar or
prevention to keep them even from apostasy, whereunto the frailty of flesh and
blood, overmuch fearing to endure shame, might peradventure the more easily
otherwise have drawn them. In the service of ^lo^, the Donors of their Temples,
the Sacrifices, the Al^^^, the Priests, and the Suppliants that wore present,
were Garlands.
We have not now, through the gracious goodness of Almighty God, those extreme
conflicts which our Fathers had with blasphemous contumelies, every where
offered to the Name of Christ, by such as professed themselves Infidels and
Unbelievers. Howbeit, unless we be strangers to the age wherein we live, or
else in some partial respect, dissemblers of that we hourly both hear and see;
there is not the simplest of us, but knows with what disdain and scorn Christ
is dishonored far and wide. Is there any burden in the World, more heavy to
bear then contempt? Is there any contempt that grieveth as theirs does, whose
quality no way making them less worthy then others are, of reputation; only
the service which they do to Christ in the daily exercise of Religion, treads
them down? Does any contumely, which we sustain for Religion sake, pierce so
deeply as that which would seem of mere Conscience religiously spightful? When
they that honor God, are despised; when the chiefest service of Honor that man
can do unto him, is the cause why they are despised; when they which pretend to
honor him, and that with greatest sincerity, do with more then Heathenish
petulancy trample under foot almost whatsoever, either we, or the whole Church
of God, by the space of so many ages, have been accustomed unto, for the
comlier and better exercise of our Religion, according to the soundest Rules
that Wisdom directed by the Word of God, and by long experience confirmed, has
been able with common advice, with much deliberation and exceeding great
diligence, to comprehend; when no man fighting under Christ's Banner, can be
always exempted from seeing, or sustaining those indignities; the sting whereof
not to feel, or feeling, not to be moved thereat, is a thing impossible to
flesh and blood: If this be any object for Patience to work on, the strictest
bond that thereunto tieth us, is our vowed obedience to Christ; the solemnest
vow that we ever made to obey Christ, and to suffer willingly all reproaches
for his sake, was made in Baptism: And amongst other memorials to keep us
mindful of that vow, we cannot think, that the Sign which our new Baptized
Foreheads cid there receive, is either unfit or unforcible; the reasons
hitherto alleged, being weighed with indifferent balance. It is not (you will
say) the Cross in our Foreheads, but in our Hearts the Faith of Christ, that
ameth us with Patience, Constancy, and Courage. Which as we grant to be most
true, so neither dare we despise, no not the meanest helps that serve, though
it be but in the very lowest degree of furtherance, toward the highest
services that God does require at our hands. And if any man deny, that such
Ceremonies are available, at the least, as memorials of duty; or do think that
himself has no need to be so put in mind, what our duties are; it is but
reasonable, that in the one, the public experience of the World over-weigh
some few men's persuasion; and in the other, the rare perfection of a few
condescend unto common imbecility. Seeing therefore, that in fear shame, which
does worthily follow sin, and to bear undeserved reproach constantly, is the
general duty of all men professing Christianity; seeing also, that our
weakness, while we are in this present World, does need toward Spiritual
duties, the help even of corporal furtherance; and that by reason of natural
intercourse between the highest and the lowest powers of man's mind in all
actions, his fancy or imagination, carrying in it that special note of
Remembrance, then which, there is nothing more forcible, where either too weak,
or too strong a conceit of infamy and disgrace might do great harm, stands
always ready to put forth a kind of necessary helping hand; we are in that
respect to acknowledge the (...). Arist. ^ her. I.1. cap. 6.
good and profitable use of this Ceremony, and not to think it supersluous,
that Christ has his mark applied Oziar Rex leprae varielate in front
macularu^ est, co porie corporis norarus est. nso Domino ubi sig^^^cur qui
Domin^ prometentur. Cypr. de unit. Eccles. Cap. 16.
unto that part where bashfulness appears, in token that they which are
Christians should be at no time ashamed of his ignominy. But to prevent some
inconveniences which might ensue, if the over-ordinary use thereof (as it
fares with such Rites, when they are too common) should cause it to be of less
observation or regard, where it most avails; we neither omit it in that
place, nor altogether make it so vulgar, as the Custom heretofore has been:
Although to condemn the whole Church of God, when it most flourished in zeal
and piety, to mark that age with the brand of Error and Superstition, only
because they had this Ceremony more in use, then we now think needful; boldly
to affirm, That this their practice grew so soon, through a fearful malediction
of God, upon the Ceremony of the Cross, as if we knew, that his purpose was
thereby to make it manifest in all men's eyes, how execrable those things are in
his sight which have proceeded from humane invention, is, as we take it, a
censure of greater zeal then knowledge. Men whose judgments in these cases are
grown more moderate, although they retain not as we do the use of this
Ceremony, perceive notwithstanding very well, such censures to be out of
square; and do therefore not only Ginlart. Am not. in Cypr. lib. ad Demerr
cap. 19. Quamvis veteres Christiani externo signo cruds un sumi, lil ^amen suit
sinc superstitione, etc ductrias de Christi merito ab cr^^e qui postea
l^^^epsie pios servant; immunes.
acquit the Fathers from superstition therein, but also think it sufficient to
answer in excuse of themselves, Idem An. not. in Cypr. Epist. 57. 67.
The Ceremony which was but a thing indifferent even of old, we judge not at
this day, a matter necessary for all Christian men to observe. As for their
last upshot of all toward this Mark, they are of opinion, that if the ancient
Christians, to deliver the Cross of Christ from contempt, did well, and with
good consideration, use often the Sign of the Cross, in testimony of their
Faith and Profession, before Infidels which upbraided them with Christ's
sufferings; now that we live with such as contrariwise adore the Sign of the
Cross (because contrary diseases should always have contrary remedies) we ought
to take away all use thereof. In which conceit, they both ways greatly seduce
themselves; first, for that they imagine the Fathers to have had no use of the
Cross, but with reference unto Infidels, which mis-perswasion we have before
discovered at large; and secondly, by reason that they think there is not any
other way besides Universal Extirpation to reform superstitious abuses of the
Cross. Wherein, because there are that stand very much upon the example of
Ezechias, as if his breaking to pieces that Serpent of Brass, whereunto the
Children of Israel had burnt Incense, did enforce the utter abolition of this
Ceremony; the fact of that virtuous Prince, is by so much the more attentively
to be considered. Our lives in this World, are partly guided by Rules, and
partly directed by Examples. To conclude, out of general Rules and Axioms, by
discourse of Wit, our duties in every particular action, is both troublesome,
and many times so full of difficulty, that it makes diliberations hard and
tedious to the wisest men. Whereupon we naturally all incline to observe
examples, to mark what others have done before us, and in favor of our own
ease, rather to follow them, then to enter into new consultation; if in regard
of their Virtue and Wisdom, we may but probably think they have waded without
Error. So that the willingness of men to be led by example of others, both
discovers and helps the imbecility of our judgment. Because it does the
one, therefore insolent and proud Wits would always seem to be their own
Guides; and, because it does the other, we see how hardly the vulgar sort is
drawn unto any thing, for which there are not as well Examples as Reasons
alleged. Reasons proving that which is more particular by things more general
and farther from Sense, are with the simpler sort of men less trusted, for that
they doubt of their own judgment in those things; but of Examples which prove
unto them, one doubtful particular by another, more familiarly and sensibly
known, they easily perceive in themselves some better ability to judge. The
force of Examples therefore is great, when in matter of action, being doubtful
what to do, we are informed what others have commendably done, whose
deliberations were like. But whosoever does persuade by example, must as well
respect the fitness, as the goodness of that he alleges. To Ezechias, God
himself in this fact, gives testimony of well-doing. So that nothing is here
questionable, but only whether the example alleged, be pertinent, pregnant,
and strong. The Serpent spoken of, was first erected for the extraordinary and
miraculous cure of the Israelites in the Desert. This use having presently an
end, when the cause, for which God ordained it, was once removed; the thing it
self they notwithstanding kept for a Monument of Gods Mercy, as in like
consideration they did the Pot of Manna, the Rod of Aaron, and the Sword which
David took from Goliath. In process of time, they made of a Monument of Divine
Power a plain Idol, they burnt Incense before it contrary to the Law of God,
and did it the services of honor due unto God only. Which gross and grievous
abuse, continued till Ezekias restoring the purity of sound Religion, destroyed
utterly that which had been so long and so generally a snare unto them. It is
not amiss, which the Canon Law hereupon concludes, namely, Did. 6.3. cap.
Quid.
That if our Predecessors have done some things which at that time might be
without fault, and afterward be turned to Error and Superstition; we are taught
by Ezechias breaking the Brazen Serpent, that Posterity may destroy them
without any delay, and with great Authority. But may it be simply and without
exception hereby gathered, that Posterity is bound to destroy whatsoever has
been, either at the first invented, or but afterward turned to like
Superstition and Error? No, it cannot be. The Serpent therefore, and the Sign
of the Cross, although seeming equal in this point, That Superstition has
abused both; yet being herein also unequal, that neither they have been both
subject to the like degree of abuse, nor were in hardness of redress alike, it
may be, That even as the one for abuse was religiously taken away; so now, when
Religion has taken away abuse from the other; we should by utter abolition
thereof, deserve hardly his commendation, whose example there is offered us no
such necessary cause to follow. For by the words of Ezechias, in terming the
Serpent but A lump of Brass, to show, That the best thing in it now, was the
Metal or Matter whereof is consisted; we may probably conjecture, That the
people whose Error is therein controlled, had the self-same opinion of it,
which the Heathens had of Idols, They thought that the Power of Deity was with
it; and when they saw it dissolved, happily they might, to comfort themselves,
imagine as Olympius the Sophister did, beholding the dissipation of Idols,
^izon. lib 17. cap. 15.
Shapes and counterseits they were, fashioned of matter subject unto
corruption, therefore to grind them to dust was easy; but those Celestial
Powers which dwelt and resided in them, are ascended into Heaven. Some
difference there is between these opinions of palpable Idolatry, and that which
the Schools in Speculation have boulted out concerning the Cross.
Notwithstanding, for as much as the Church of Rome has hitherto practiced, and
does profess the same Adoration to the Sign of the Cross, and neither less nor
other, then is due unto Christ himself; howsoever they varnish and qualify
their sentence, pretending, That the Cross, which to outward sense, presents
visibly it self alone, is not by them apprehended alone, but has, in their
secret surmise or conceit, a reference to the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ;
so that the honor which they jointly do to both, respects principally his
Person, and the Cross but only for his Persons sake; the people not accustomed
to trouble their wits with so nice and subtle differences in the exercise of
Religion, are apparently no less ensnared by adoring the Cross, then the Jews
by burning Intense to the Brazen Serpent. The. page 3. q. 25. art. 3. Resp. ad
Tert.
It is by Thomas ingenuously granted, That because unto reasonable Creatures, a
kind of reverence is due for the excellency which is in them, and whereby they
resemble God; therefore, if reasonable Creatures, Angels, or Men, should
receive at our hands, holy and divine honor, as the Sign of the Cross does at
theirs, to pretend, that we honor not them alone, but we honor God with them;
would not serve the turn, neither would this be able to prevent the error of
men, or cause them always to respect God in their adorations, and not to finish
their intents in the object next before them. But unto this he adds, That no
such error can grow, by adoring in that sort a dead Image, which every man
knows to be void of excellency in it self, and therefore will easily
conceive, that the honor done unto it, has an higher reference. Howbeit,
seeing that we have by over-true experience, been taught how often, especially
in these cases, the light even of common understanding fails; surely, their
usual adoration of the Cross is not hereby freed. For in actions of this kind,
we are more to respect, what the greatest part of men is commonly prone to
conceive, then what some few men's wits may devise in construction of their own
particular meanings. Plain it is, that a false opinion of some personal divine
excellency to be in those things, which either Nature or Art has framed,
causes always religious adoration. And as plain, that the like adoration
applied unto things sensible, argues to vulgar capacities, yea, leaves
imprinted in them the very same opinion of Deity, from whence all idolatrous
worship grows. Yea, the meaner and baser a thing worshipped, is in it self,
the more they incline to think, that every man which does adore it, knows
there is in it, or with it, a presence of divine power. Be it therefore true,
That Crosses purposely framed or used for receipt of divine honor, be even as
scandalous as the Brazen Serpent it self, where they are in such sort adored;
Should we hereupon think our selves in the sight of God, and in Conscience
charged to abolish utterly the very Ceremony of the Cross, neither meant at the
first, nor now converted unto any such offensive purpose? Did the Jews which
could never be persuaded to admit in the City of Jerusalem, that Joseph. Antiq
lib. 17. cap. 8. and lib. 18. cap. 3. and de Bell. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Image of Caesar which the Romans were accustomed to Their Eagles their
Ensigns, and the Images of their Princes, they carried with them in all their
Armies, and had always a kind of Chapel wherein they places and adored them
is their gods. ^^. l. 40. Heredian. lib. 4.
adore, make any scruple of Caesar's Image in the Coin, which they knew very well
that men were not wont to worship? Between the Cross which Superstition
honoreth as Christ, and that Ceremony of the Cross, which serves only for a
Sign of Remembrance; Matthew. 22.20.
there is as plain and as great a difference, as between those 2 Chro. 4. 3.
Brazen Images which Solomon made to beat up the Cestern of the Temple, and
(since both were of like shape, but of unlike use) Exodus ^2.^.
that which the Israelites in the Wilderness did adore; or between the 2 Chro.
34 7.
Altars which Josias destroyed, because they were instruments of meet Idolatry,
and Josh. 22. 10.
that which the Tribe of Reuben, with others erected near to the River Jordan;
for which also they grew at the first into some dislike, and were by the rest
of their Brethren suspected, yea, hardly charged with open breach of the Law of
God, accused of backwardness in Religion, up braiced bitterly with the fact of
Peor, and the odious example of Athan; as if the building of their Altar in
that place had given manifest show of no better, then intended Apostasy, till
by a true Declaration made in their own defense, it appeared, that such as
misliked, mis-understood their enterprise, in as much as they had no intent to
build any Altar for Sacrifice, which God would have no where offered saving in
Jerusalem only, but to a far other end and purpose, which being opened,
satisfied all parties, and so delivered them from causeless blame. In this
particular, suppose the worst; Imagine that the immaterial Ceremony of the
Cross, had been the subject of as gross pollution as any Heathenish or profane
Idol. If we think the example of Ezechias a proof, that things which Error and
Superstition has abused, may in no consideration be tolerated, although we
presently find them not subject to so vile abuse, the plain example of
Ezechias proves the contrary. 1 King. 11. 1^.
The Temples and Idols, which under Solomon had been of very purpose framed for
the honor of foreign gods, Ezechias destroyed not; because they stood as
forlorn things, and did now no harm, although formerly they had done harm. 2
King. 13. 13.
Josias, for some inconvenience afterward, razed them up. Yet to both, there
is one commendation given, even from God himself, that touching Matter of
Religion, they walked in the steps of David, 2 King. 18 3,6. and 12. 2.
and did no way displease God. Perhaps it seems, that by force and virtue of
this example, although it bare detestation and hatred of Idolatry, all things
which have been at any time worshipped, are not necessarily to be taken out of
the World; nevertheless, for remedy and prevention of so great offenses, Wisdom
should judge it the safest course to remove altogether from the eyes of men,
that which may put them in mind of evil. Some kinds of evil, no doubt, there
are very quick in working on those affections that most easily take fire, which
evils should in that respect, no oftener then need requires, be brought in
presence of weak minds. But neither is the Cross any such evil, nor yet the
Brazen Serpent it self so strongly poisoned, that our eyes, ears, and thoughts,
ought to shun them both, for fear of some deadly harm to ensue, the only
representation thereof, by gesture, shape, sound, or such like significant
means. And for mine own part, I most assuredly persuade my self, that had
Ezechias (till the days of whose most virtuous Reign, they ceased not
continually to burn Incense to the Brazen Serpent) had he found the Serpent,
though sometime adored, yet at that time recovered from the evil of so gross
abuse, and reduced to the same that was before in the time of David, at which
time they esteemed it only as a Memorial, Sign, or Monument of Gods miraculous
goodness toward them, even as we in no other sort esteem the Ceremony of the
Cross; the due consideration of an use so harmless, common to both, might no
less have wrought their equal preservation, then different occasions have
procured, notwithstanding the ones extinguishment, the others lawful
continuance. In all persuasions, which ground themselves upon example, we are
not so much to respect what is done, as the causes and secret inducements
leading thereunto. The question being therefore, whether this Ceremony supposed
to have been sometimes scandalous and offensive, ought for that cause to be now
removed; there is no reason we should forthwith yield our selves to be carried
away with example, no not of them, whose acts, the highest judgment approves
for having reformed in that manner, any public evil: But before we either
attempt any thing, or resolve, the state and condition as well of our own
affairs as theirs, whose example presses us, is advisedly to be examined;
because some things are of their own nature scandalous, and cannot choose but
breed offense, 2 King. 23. 7.
as those Sinks of execrable filth which Josias did overwhelm; some things,
albeit not by Nature, and of themselves, are notwithstanding so generally
turned to evil, by reason of an evil corrupt habit grown, and through long
continuance incurably settled in the minds of the greatest part, that no
red^ess can be well hoped for, without removal of that wherein they have ruined
themselves, which plainly was the state of the Jewish people, and the cause why
Ezechias did with such sudden indignation destroy what he saw worshipped;
finally, some things are as the Sign of the Cross, though subject either almost
or altogether to as great abuse, yet curable with more facility and ease. And
to speak as the truth is, our very nature does hardly yield to destroy that
which may be fruitfully kept, and without any great difficulty, clean scouted
from the rust of evil, which by some accident has grown into it. Wherefore to
that which they build in this question upon the example of Ezechias, let this
suffice. When Heathens despised Christian Religion, because of the sufferings
of Jesus Christ, the Fathers, to testify how little such contumelies and
contempts prevailed with them, chose rather the Sign of the Cross, then any
other outward mark, whereby the World might most easily discern always what
they were. On the contrary side now, whereas they which do all profess the
Christian Religion, are divided amongst themselves; and the fault of the one
part is, That the zeal to the sufferings of Christ, they admire too much, and
over-superstitiously adore the Visible Sign of his Cross; if you ask, what w
that mislike them should do, we are here advised to cure one contrary by
another. Which Art or Method, is not yet so current as they imagine. For if, as
their practice for the most part shows, it be their meaning, that the scope
and drift of Reformation, when things are faulty, should be to settle the
Church in the contrary; it stands them upon, to beware of this rule, because
seeing Vices have not only Virtues, but other Vices also in Nature opposite
unto them, it may be dangerous in these cases to seek, but that which we find
contrary to present evils. For in sores and sicknesses of the mind, we are not
simply to measure good by distance from evil, because one Vice may in some
respect be more opposite to another, then either of them to that Virtue which
holds the mean between them both. Liberality and Covetousness, the one a
Virtue, and the other a Vice, are not so contrary as the Vices of Covetousness
and Prodigality: Religion and Superstition have more affiance, though the one
be Light, and the other Darkness; then Superstition and Profaneness, which
both are vicious extremities. By means whereof it comes also to pass, that the
Mean, which is Virtue, seems in the eyes of each extreme an extremity; the
liberal hearted man is by the opinion of the Prodigal miserable, and by the
judgment of the miserable lavish: Impiety for the most part upbraideth Religion
as Superstitious, which Superstition often accuses as impious; both so
conceiving thereof, because it does seem more to participate each extreme, then
one extreme does another, and is by consequent less contrary to either of them,
then they mutually between themselves. Now, if he that seeks to reform
Covetousness or Superstition, should but labor to induce the contrary, it were
but to draw men out of Lime into Cole-dust: So that their course, which will
remedy the Superstitious abuse of things profitable in the Church, is not still
to abolish utterly the use thereof, because not using at all, is most opposite
to ill using; but rather, if it may be, to bring them back to a right perfect
and religious usage, which albeit less contrary to the present sore, is
notwithstanding the better, and by many degrees the sounder way of recovery:
And unto this effect, that very Precedent it self, which they propose, may be
best followed. For as the Fathers, when the Cross of Christ was in utter
contempt, did not superstitiously adore the same, but rather declare, that they
so esteemed it as was meet? In like manner where we find the Cross, to have
that honor which is due to Christ, is it not as lawful for us to retain it, in
that estimation which it ought to have, and in that use which it had of old
without offense, as by taking it clean away, so seem Followers of their
example; which cure wilfully by abscission that which they might both preserve
and heal? Touching therefore the Sign and Ceremony of the Cross, we no way
find our selves bound to relinquish it; neither because the first Inventors
thereof were but mortal men; nor lest the sense and signification we give unto
it, should burden us as Authors of a new Gospel in the House of God; not in
respect of some cause which the Fathers had more then we have to use the same;
nor finally, for any such offense or scandal, as heretofore it has been
subject unto by Error, now reformed in the minds of Men.

66. The ancient Custom of the Church was, after they had Baptized, Of
Confirmation after Baptism.
to add thereunto Imposition of Hands, with effectual Prayer for the Caro manus
Impositione adumbeatur, ^t and anima Spiritu illumine^ur. Tertul de Reser. Ca^.
illumination of Gods most holy Spirit, to confirm and perfect that which the
Grace of the some Spirit had already begun in Baptism. For our means to obtain
the Graces which God does bestow, are our Prayers. Our Prayers to that intent,
are available as well for others, as for ourselves. To pray for others, is to
bless them, for whom we pray; because Prayer procures the blessing of God upon
them, especially the Prayer of such as God either most respects for their
Piety and Zeal that way, or else regards for that their place and calling
binds them above others unto this duty, as it does both Natural and Spiritual
Fathers. With Prayers of Spiritual and Personal Benediction, the manner has
been in all ages to use Imposition of Hands, as a Ceremony betokening our
restrained desires to the party, whom we present unto God by Prayer. Thus when
Israel blessed Ephraim and Manasses, Joseph's sons, Genesis 48. 14.
he imposed upon them his hands, and prayed; God, in whose sight my Fathers,
Abraham and Isaac, did walk; God which has fed me all my life long unto this
day, and the Angel which has delivered me from all evil, bless these Children.
The Prophets which healed diseases by Prayer, used therein the self-same
Ceremony. And therefore when Elizeus willed Naaman to wash himself seven times
in Jordan, 2 King 5. 11.
for cure of his foul disease, it much offended him; I thought (says he) with
my self, Surely the man will come forth, and stand, and call upon the Name of
the Lord his God, and put his hand on the place, to the end he may so heal the
^^eprosie. Number. 27. 18.
In Consecrations and Ordinations of Men unto Rooms of Divine Calling, the like
was usually done from the time of Moses to Christ. Their suits that came unto
Christ for help were also tendered oftentimes, Matthew. 9. 18. Mark 5. 23. 8. 12.
and are expressed in such forms or phrases of speech, as show, that he was
himself an observer of the same custom: He which with Imposition of Hands and
Prayer, did so great Works of Mercy for restoration of Bodily health, was
worthily judged as able to effect the infusion of Heavenly Grace into them,
whose age was not yet depraved with that malice, which might be supposed a bar
to the goodness of God toward them. Matthew. 19.13. Mark 10. 14. Luke 18. 15.
They brought him therefore young children to put his hands upon them, and
pray. After the Ascension of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that which he
had begun, continued in the daily practice of his Apostles, whose Prayer and
Imposition of Hands, were a mean whereby thousands became partakers of the
wonderful Gifts of God: The Church had received from Christ a promise, that
such as believed in him, these signs and tokens should follow them, Mark 16.17.
To cast one Devils, to speak with Tongues, to drive away Serpents, to be free
from the harm which any deadly poison could work, and to cure diseases by
Imposition of Hands. Which power, common at the first, in a manner, unto all
Believers, all Believers had not power to derive or communicate unto all other
men; but whosoever was the instrument of God to instruct, convert, and baptize
them, A^^ 1^. ^.
the gift of miraculous operations by the power of the Holy Ghost they had not,
but only at the Apostles own hands. For which cause Simon Magus perceiving
that power to be in none but them, and presuming, Act 8 17, 18.
that they which had it, might sell it, sought to purchase it of them with
money. And, as miraculous Graces of the Spirit continued after the Apostles
times, (...)
For (says Irenaus) they which are truly his Disciples, do in his Name, and
through Grace received from him, such works for the benefit of other men, as
every of them is by him enabled to work: Some cast one Devils, in so much, as
they which are delivered from wicked spirits, have been thereby won unto
Christ, and do constantly persevere in the Church, and Society of Faithful Men:
Some excel in the knowledge of things to come, in the grace of Visions from
God, and the gift of Prophetical Prediction: Some by laying on their hands,
restore them to health, which are grievously afflicted with sickness; yea,
there are that of dead, have been made alive, and have afterward many years
conversed with us. What should I say? The gifts are innumerable wherewith God
has enriched his Church throughout the World, and by virtue whereof, in the
Name of Christ crucified under Pontius Pilate, the Church every day does many
wonders for the good of Nations, neither fraudulently, nor in any respect of
lucre and gain to her self, but as freely bestowing, as God on her has
bestowed his Divine Graces: So it no where appears, that ever any did by
Prayer and Imposition of Hands, sithence the Apostles times, make others
partakers of the like miraculous gifts and graces, as long as it pleased God to
continue the same in his Church, but only Bishops, the Apostles Successors,
for a time, even in that power. August de ^ er ^K ^ ^ cap. 15.
St. Augustine acknowledges, That such gifts were not permitted to last
always, lest men should wax cold with the commonness of that, the strangeness
whereof at the first inflamed them. Which words of St. Augustine, declaring how
the vulgar use of these Miracles was then expired, are no prejudice to the like
extraordinary Graces, more rarely observed in some, either then or of latter
days. Now whereas the Successors, of the Apostles had but only for a time such
power, as, by Prayer and Imposition of Hands, to bestow the Holy Ghost; the
reason wherefore Confirmation, nevertheless, by Prayer and Laying on of Hands
has hitherto always continued, is for other very special benefits which the
Church thereby enjoys. The Fathers every where impute unto it that gift or
Grace of the Holy Ghost, not which makes us first Christian men, but, when we
are made such, assisteth us in all virtue, aims us against temptation and
sin. For, after Baptism administered, there follows (says Tertullian)
Imposition of Hands, Tertul. de Baptis.
with Invocation and Invitation of the Holy Ghost, which willingly comes down
from the Father, to rest upon the purified and blessed Bodies, as it were
acknowledging the Waters of Baptism a fit Seat. St. Cyprian in more particular
manner, Cypr. Epist. 2. ad Donat. c. ^.
alluding to that effect of the Spirit, which here especially was respected.
How great (says he) is that power and force wherewith the mind is here (he
means in Baptism) enabled, being not only withdrawn from that pernicious
hold which the World before had of it, nor only so purified and made clean,
that no stain or blemish of the Enemies invasion does remain; but over and
besides (namely, through Prayer and Imposition of Hands) becomes yet greater,
yet mightier in strength, so far as to reign with a kind of Imperial Dominion,
over the whole Band of that roming and spoiling Adversary. As much is signified
by Eusebius Emissenus, Eusebius Emis. Ser. de Vents.
saying, The Holy Ghost which descends with saving influence upon the Waters
of Baptism, does there give that fullness which suffices for innocenty, and
afterward exhibiteth in Confirmation an Augmentation of further Grace. The
Fathers therefore being thus persuaded, held Confirmation as an Ordinance
Apostolic, Aug. de Trin. li^ 15 cap. 26. l^^^ 6. 3.
always profitable in Gods Church, although not always accompanied with equal
largeness of those External Effects which gave it countenance at the first. The
cause of severing Confirmation from Baptism (for most commonly they went
together) was sometimes in the Minister, which being of inferior degree, might
Baptize, but not Confirm, as in their case it came to pass, whom Peter and John
did confirm, Acts 8. 12, 15. Ier. Advers. ^ucif. cap. 4.
whereas Philip had before baptized them; and in theirs of whom St. Jerome has
said, I deny not but the Custom of the Churches is, that the Bishop should go
abroad, and imposing his hands, pray for the Gift of the Holy Ghost on them,
whom Presbyters and Deacons far off, in lesser Cities, have already ^aptized.
Which ancient Custom of the Church, St. Cyprian groundeth upon the example or
Peter and John in the Eighth of the Acts, before alleged. The faithful in
Samaria (says he) had already obtained Baptism; Cypr. Epist. 73. ad Iubajenum.
only that which was wanting, Peter and John supplied by Prayer and Imposition
of Hands, to the end, the Holy Ghost might be poured upon them. Which also is
done amongst our selves, when they which be already Baptized, are brought to
the Prelates of the Church, to obtain by their Prayer and Imposition of Hands
the Holy Ghost. By this it appears, that when the Ministers of Baptism were
persons of inferior degree, the Bishops did after Confirm whom such had before
Baptized. Sometimes they which by force of their Ecclesiastical Calling, might
do as well the one as the other, were notwithstanding Men whom Heresy had
dis-joyned from the Fellowship of true Believers. Whereupon, when any Man, by
them Baptized and Confirmed, came afterward to see and renounce their Error,
there grew in some Churches very hot contention about the manner of admitting
such into the Bosom of the true Church, as has been declared already in the
question of Rebaptization. But the generally received Custom was only to admit
them with Imposition of Hands and Prayer. Of which Custom, while some imagined
the reason to be, for that Heretics might give Remission of Sins by Baptism,
but not the Spirit by Imposition of Hands, because themselves had not Gods
Spirit, and that therefore their Baptism might stand, but Confirmation must be
given again. The imbecility of this ground, gave Cyprian occasion to oppose
himself against the practice of the Church herein, laboring many ways to prove,
That Heretics could do neither; and consequently, that their Baptism in all
respects, was as frustrate as their Chrism; for the manner of those times was
in Confirming to use Anointing. On the other side, against Luciferians which
ratified only the Baptism of Heretics, but disannulled their Confirmations
and Consecrations, under pretense of the reason which has been before
specified, Heretics cannot give the Holy Ghost. St. Jerome proves at large,
That if Baptism by Heretics be granted available to Remission of Sins, which
no man receives without the Spirit, it must needs follow, that the reason
taken from disability of bestowing the Holy Ghost, was no reason wherefore the
Church should admit Converts with any new Imposition of Hands. Notwithstanding,
because it might be objected, That if the gift of the Holy Ghost do always join
it self with true Baptism, the Church, which thinks the Bishops Confirmation
after others Men's Baptism needful for the obtaining of the Holy Ghost, should
hold an error: Saint Jerome hereunto makes answer, That the cause of this
observation is not any absolute impossibility of receiving the Holy Ghost by
the Sacrament of Baptism, unless a Bishop add after it the Imposition of Hands,
but rather a certain congruity and fitness to honor Prelacy with such
pre-eminences, because the safety of the Church depends upon the dignity of
her chief Superiors, to whom, if some eminent Offices of Power above others
should not be given, there would be in the Church as many Schisms as Priests.
By which answer, it appears his opinion was, That the Holy Ghost is received
in Baptism; that Confirmation is only a Sacramental Complement; that the
reason why Bishops alone did ordinarily confirm, was not because the benefit,
grace, and dignity thereof, is greater then of Baptism; but rather, for that,
by the Sacrament of Baptism, Men being admitted into Gods Church, it was both
reasonable and convenient, that if he Baptize them not unto whom the chiefest
authority and charge of their Souls belongs; yet for honors sake, and in
token of his Spiritual Superiority over them, Heb. 6. 3.
because to bless, is an act of Authority, the performance of this annexed
Ceremony should be sought for at his hands. Now what effect their Imposition of
Hands has, either after Baptism administered by Heretics or otherwise, St.
Jerome in that place has made no mention, because all men understood that in
Converts it tends to the fruits of Repentance, and craveth in behalf of the
Penitent, Psalm. 31. 10, 11, 12.
such grace as David, after his fall, desired at the hands of God; in others,
the fruit and benefit thereof is, that which has been before showed. Finally,
Sometime the cause of severing Confirmation from Baptism, was in the parties
that received Baptism being Infants, at which age they might be very well
admitted to live in the Family; but because to fight in the Army of God, to
discharge the duties of a Christian man, to bring forth the fruits, and to do
the Works of the Holy Ghost, their time of ability was not yet come,(so that
Baptism were not deferred) there could, by stay of their Confirmation, no harm
ensue, but rather good. For by this means it came to pass, that Children in
expectation thereof, were seasoned with the principles of true Religion, before
malice and corrupt examples depraved their minds, a good foundation was laid
betimes for direction of the course of their whole lives, the Seed of the
Church of God was preserved sincere and sound, the Prelates and Fathers of Gods
Family, to whom the cure of their Souls belonged, saw by trial and examination
of them, a part of their own heavy burden discharged, reaped comfort by
beholding the first beginnings of true godliness in tender years, glorified him
whose praise they found in the mouths of Infants, and neglected not so fit
opportunity of giving every one Fatherly encouragement and exhortation.
Whereunto Imposition of Hands, and Prayer being added, our Warrant for the
great good effect thereof, is the same which Patriarks, Prophets, Priests,
Apostles, Fathers, and Men of God, have had for such their particular
Invocations and Benedictions, as no Man, I suppose, professing truth of
Religion, will easily think to have been without Fruit. No, there is no cause
we should doubt of the benefit; but surely great cause to make complaint of the
deep neglect of this Christian duty, almost with all them, to whom by tight of
their place and calling, the same belongs. Let them not take it in evil part,
the thing is true, their small regard hereunto has done harm in the Church of
God. That which T C. lib. 1. page 1^1. Tell me why there should be any such
Confirmation in the Church, being brought in by the seigned Decretal Epistles
of the Popes (this is ^e^^acted by the same T.C. lib. 3. page 232 That it is
ancienter then the seigned Decretal Epistles, I yield unto) and no one tittle
thereof, being once found in the Scripture, and seeing that it has been so
horribly abused, and not necessary, why ought it ^^^ to be utterly abolished?
And thirdly, this Confirmation has many dangerous points in it. The first step
of Popery in this Confirmation, is the Laying on of Hands upon the Head of the
Child, whereby the opinion of it that it is a Sacrament, is confirmed,
especially when as the Prayer does say, That it is done according to the
example of the Apostles, which is a manifest unw^t^, and taken indeed from the
Popish Confirmation. The second is, for that the Bishop, as he is called, must
be the only minister of it, whereby the Popish opinion, which esteems it
above Baptism, is confirmed. For whilst Baptism may be ministered of the
Minister, and not Confirmation, but only of the Bishop; there is great cause
of suspicion given to think that Baptism is not so precious a thing as
Confirmation, seeing this was one of the principal reasons whereby that wicked
opinion was established in Popery. I do not here speak of the inconvenience,
that men are constrained with charges to bring their children oftentimes half a
score miles for that, which, if it were needful, might be as well done at home
in their own Parishes. The third is, for that the Book says, a cause of using
Confirmation is, Thereby imposition of Hands and Prayer, the Children may
receive strength and defense against all temptations, whereas there is no
promise, that by the Laying on of Hands upon Children any such gift shall be
given; and it maintains the Popish distinction, That the Spirit of God is
given at Baptism, unto Remission of Sins; and in Confirmation, unto Strength.
Error rashly utters in disgrace of good things, may peradventure be sponged
out, when the print of those evils, which are grown through neglect, will
remain behind. Thus much therefore generally spoken, may serve for answer unto
their demands, that require us to tell them, Why there should be any such
confirmation in the Church, seeing we are not ignorant how earnestly they have
protested against it; and how directly (although untruly, for so they are
content to acknowledge) it has by some of them been said, To be first brought
in by the seigned Decretal Epistles of the Popes; or, why it should not be
utterly abolished, seeing that no one title thereof, can be once found in the
whole Scripture, except the Epistle to the Hebrews be Scripture: Heb. 6. 3.
And again, seeing that how free soever it be now from abuse, if we look back
to the times past, which wise men do always more respect then the present, it
has been abused, and is found at the length no such profitable Ceremony, as
the whole silly Church of Christ, for the space of these Sixteen hundred years,
has through want of experience imagined: Last of all, Seeing also, besides the
cruelty which is showed toward poor Country people, who are fain sometimes to
let their Ploughs stand still, and with increble wearisome toil of their feeble
bodies, to wander over Mountains and through Woods; it may be, now and then
little less then a whole half score of miles for a Bishops blessing, which if
it were needful, might as well be done at home in their own Parishes, rather
then they is purchase it with so great loss and so intolerable pain. There are,
they say, in Confirmation, besides this, Three terrible points. The first is,
Laying on of hands, with pretense, that the same is done to the example of the
Apostles, which is not only, as they suppose, a manifest untruth; (for all the
World does know, that the Apostles did never after Baptism lay hands on any,
and therefore Saint Luke which says they did, was much deceived:) But farther
also, we thereby teach men to think Imposition of Hands a Sacrament, Act. 8.13,
17.
belike, because it is a principle ingrafted by common Light of Nature in the
Minds of Men, that all things done by Apostolic example, must needs be
Sacrament. The second high point of danger is, That by tying Confirmation to
the Bishop alone, there is great cause of suspicion given, to think that
Baptism is not so precious a thing as Confirmation: For will any man think,
that a Velvet Coat is of more price, then a Linen Coyf, knowing the one to be
an ordinary Garment, the other an Ornament which only Sergeants at Law do
wear? Finally, To draw to an end of perils, the last and the weightiest hazard
is, where the Book it self does say, That Children by Imposition of Hands and
Prayer, may receive strength against all temptation: Which speech, as a
two-edged sword, does both ways dangerously wound; partly because it ascribes
Grace to Imposition of Hands, whereby we are able no more to assure our selves
in the warrant of any promise from God, that his Heavenly Grace shall be given,
then the Apostle was, that himself should obtain Grace by the bowing of his
knees to God; and partly, because by using the very word strength in this
matter, Ephesians. 3. 24.
a word so apt to spread infection, we maintain with Popish Evangelists, an old
forlorn distinction of the Holy Ghost, bestowed upon Christ's Apostles before
his Ascension into Heaven, John 20. 22.
and augmented upon them afterward; a distinction of Grace infused into
Christian men by degrees; Acts 1. 8.
planted in them at the first by Baptism, after cherished, watered, and (be it
spoken without offense) strengthened as by other virtuous Offices, which Piety
and true Religion teaches, even so by this very special Benediction whereof we
speak, the Rite or Ceremony of Confirmation.

67. The Grace which we have by the holy Eucharist, Of the Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Christ.
does not begin, but continue life. No man therefore receives this Sacrament
before Baptism, because no dead thing is capable of nourishment. That which
grows, must of necessity first live. If our Bodies did not daily waste, Food
to restore them, were a thing superfluous. And it may be, that the Grace of
Baptism would serve to Eternal Life, were it not that the state of our
Spiritual Being, is daily so much hindered and impaired after Baptism. In that
life therefore, where neither Body nor Soul can decay, our Souls shall as
little require this Sacrament, as our Bodies corporal nourishment. But as long
as the days of our warfare last, during the time that we are both subject to
diminution and capable of augmentation in Grace, the Words of our Lord and
Savior Christ will remain forceable, John 6. 1^.
Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no
life in you. Life being therefore proposed unto all men as their end, they
which by Baptism have laid the Foundation and attained the first beginning of a
new life, have here their nourishment and food prescribed for continuance of
life in them. Such as will live the Life of God, must eat the Flesh and drink
the Blood of the Son of Man; because this is a part of that diet, which if we
want, we cannot live. Whereas therefore in our Infancy we are incorporated into
Christ, and by Baptism receive the Grace of his Spirit, without any sense or
feeling of the gift which God bestows; in the Eucharist, we so receive the
gift of God, that we know by Grace, what the Grace is which God gives us; the
degrees of our own Increase, in holiness and virtue, we see and can judge of
them; we understand that the strength of our life begun in Christ, is Christ;
that his Flesh is Meat, and his Blood drink, not by surmised imagination, but
truly, even so truly, that through Faith, we perceive in the Body and Blood
sacramentally presented, the very taste of Eternal Life; the Grace of the
Sacrament, is here as the food which we eat and drink. This was it that some
did exceedingly fear, lest Zwinglius and Occolampadius would bring to pass,
that men should account of this Sacrament, but only as of a shadow, destitute,
empty, and void of Christ. But seeing, that by opening the several opinions
which have been held, they are grown, for ought I can see, on all sides at the
length to a general agreement, concerning that which alone is material, namely,
The Real Participation of Christ, and of Life in his Body and Blood, by means
of this Sacrament; Wherefore should the World continue still distracted, and
rent with so manifold Contentions, when there remains now no Controversy,
saving only about the subject where Christ is? Yea, even in this point no side
denies, but that the Soul of Man is the receptacle of Christ's presence.
Whereby the question is yet driven to a narrower issue, nor does any thing rest
doubtful but this, Whether when the Sacrament is administered, Christ be whole
within Man only, or else his Body and Blood be also externally seated in the
very Consecrated Elements themselves. Which opinion they that defend, are
driven either to Consubstantiate and Incorporate Christ with Elements
Sacramental, or to Transubstantiate and change their substance into his; and so
the one to hold him really, but invisibly, molded up with substance of those
Elements; the other to hide him under the only visible show of Bread and Wine,
the substance whereof, as they imagine, is abolished, and his succeeded in the
same room. All things considered, and compared with that success, which Truth
has hitherto had by so bitter Conflicts with Errors in this point, Shall I
wish that men would more give themselves to meditate with silence, what we have
by the Sacrament, and less to dispute of the manner how? If any man suppose
that this were too great stupidity and dullness, let us see whether the Apostles
of our Lord themselves have not done the like. It appears by many examples,
that they of their own disposition were very scrupulous and inquisitive, yea,
in other cases of less importance, and less difficulty, always apt to move
questions. How comes it to pass, that so few words of so high a Mystery being
uttered, they receive with gladness the gift of Christ, and make no show of
doubt or scruple? The reason hereof, is not dark to them which have any thing
at all observed how the powers of the mind are wont to stir, when that which
we infinitely long for, presents it self above and besides expectation.
Curious and intricate speculations do hinder, they abate, they quench such
inflamed motions of delight and joy, as Divine Graces use to raise when
extraordinarily they are present. The mind therefore feeling present joy, is
always mavelous unwilling to admit any other cogitation, and in that case,
casts off those disputes whereunto the intellectual part at other times
easily draws. A manifest effect whereof may be noted, if we compare with our
Lords Disciples in the Twentieth of John, the people that are said in the Sixth
of John, to have gone after him to Capernaum. These leaving him on the one side
the Sea of Tiberias, and finding him again as soon as themselves by ship were
arrived on the contrary side, whither they knew that by ship he came not, and
by Land the journey was longer then according to the time he could have to
travel, as they wondered; so they asked also, John 6.25.
Rabbi, when came thou hither? The Disciples, when Christ appeared to them in
far more strange and miraculous manner, moved no question, but rejoiced greatly
in that they saw. For why? The one sort beheld only, that in Christ, which
they knew was more then natural, but yet their affection was not rapt therewith
through any great extraordinary gladness; the other, when they looked on
Christ, were not ignorant that they saw the Wellspring of their own
Everlasting felicity; the one, because they enjoyed not, disputed; the other
disputed not, because they enjoyed. If then the presence of Christ with them,
did so much move, Judge what their thoughts and affections were at the time of
this new presentation of Christ; not before their Eyes, but within their Souls.
They had learned before, That his Flesh and Blood are the true cause of Eternal
Life, that this they are not by the bate force of their own substance, but
through the dignity and worth of His Person, which offered them up by way of
Sacrifice, for the Life of the whole World, and does make them still effectual
thereunto: Finally, that to us they are Life in particular, by being
particularly received. Thus much they knew, although as yet they understood not
perfectly, to what effect or issue the same would come, till at the length,
being assembled for no other cause which they could imagine, but to have eaten
the Passover only that Moses appointed; when they saw their Lord and Master,
with hands and eyes lifted up to Heaven, first bless and consecrate, for the
endless good of all Generations till the Worlds end, the chosen Elements of
Bread and Wine, which Elements, made for ever the Instruments of Life by virtue
of his Divine Benediction, they being the first that were commanded to receive
from him, the first which were warranted by his promise, that not only unto
them at the present time, but to whomsoever, they and their Successors after
them, did duly administer the same, those Mysteries should serve as Conducts of
Life, and Conveyances of his Body and Blood unto them: Was it possible they
should hear that voice, Take, eat, This is my Body; Drink ye all of this, This
is my Blood? Possible, that doing what was required, and believing what was
promised, the same should have present effect in them, and not fill them with a
kind of fearful admiration at the Heaven which they saw in themselves? They
had at that time a Sea of Comfort and Joy to wade in, and we, by that which
they did, are taught, that this Heavenly Food is given for the satisfying of
our empty Souls, and not for the exercising of our curious and subtle wits. If
we doubt what those admirable words may import, let him be our Teacher for the
meaning of Christ, to whom Christ was himself a Schoolmaster, let our Lords
Apostle be his Interpreter, content we our selves with his Explication; My
Body, The Communion of my Body: My Blood, The Communion of my Blood. Is there
any thing more expedite, clear, and easy, then that as Christ is termed our
Life, because through him we obtain life; so the parts of this Sacrament are
his Body and Blood, for that they are so to us; who receiving them, receive
that by them which they are termed? The Bread and Cup are his Body and Blood,
because they are causes instrumental, upon the receipt whereof, the
Participation of his Body and Blood ensues. For that which produces any
certain effect, is not vainly nor improperly said to be, that very effect
whereunto it tends. Every cause is in the effect which grows from it. Our
Souls and Bodies quickened to Eternal Life, are effects; the cause whereof, is
the Person of Christ: His Body and Blood are the true Wellspring, out of
which, this Life flows. So that his Body and Blood are in that very subject
whereunto they minister life: Not only by effect or operation, even as the
influence of the Heavens is in Plants, Beasts, Men, and in every thing which
they quicken; but also by a far more Divine and Mystical kind of Union, which
makes us one with him, even as He and the Father are one. The Real Presence of
Christ's most Blessed Body and Blood, is not therefore to be sought for in the
Sacrament, but in the worthy Receiver of the Sacrament. And with this the very
order of our Saviors words agrees, first, Mark 14. 12.
Take and eat; then, This is my Body which was broken for you: First, Drink ye
all of this; then follows, This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is
shed for many for the remission of sins. I see not which way it should be
gathered by the Words of Christ, when and where the Bread, is his Body, or the
Cup, his Blood; but only in the very Heart and Soul of him which receives
them. As for the Sacraments, they really exhibit; but, for ought we can gather
out of that which is written of them, they are not really, nor do really
contain in themselves, that Grace, which with them, or by them, it pleases God
to bestow. If on all sides it be confessed, That the Grace of Baptism is poured
into the Soul of Man; that by Water we receive it, although it be neither
seated in the Water, nor the Water changed into it; what should induce men to
think, that the Grace of the Eucharist must needs be in the Eucharist, before
it can be in us that receive it? The fruit of the Eucharist is the
Participation of the Body and Blood of Christ. There is no sentence of holy
Scripture which says, That we cannot by this Sacrament be made partakers of
his Body and Blood, except they be first contained in the Sacrament, or the
Sacrament converted into them. This is my Body, and This is my Blood, being
words of promise, since we all agree, That by the Sacrament, Christ does really
and truly in us, perform his promise; why do we vainly trouble our selves with
so fierce Contentions, whether by Consubstantiation, or else by
Transubstantiation the Sacrament it self be first possessed with Christ, or no?
A thing which no way can either further or hinder us, howsoever it stand,
because our Participation of Christ in this Sacrament, depends on the
cooperation of his Omnipotent Power, which makes it his Body and Blood to us;
whether with change or without alteration of the Element, such as they imagine,
we need not greatly to care or inquire. Take therefore that wherein all agree,
and then consider by it self, what cause, why the rest in question should not
rather be left as superfluous, then urged as necessary. It is on all sides
plainly confessed, first, That this Sacrament is a true and a real Participation
of Christ, who thereby imparteth himself, even his whole entire Person, as a
Mystical Head, unto every Soul that receives him, and that every such Receiver
does thereby incorporate or unite himself unto Christ as a Mystical Member of
him, yea, of them also whom he acknowledges to be his own. Secondly, That to
whom the Person of Christ is thus communicated, to them he gives by the same
Sacrament his holy Spirit to sanctify them, as it sanctifies him which is
their Head. Thirdly, That what merit, force, or virtue soever there is in his
Sacrificed Body and Blood, we freely, fully, and wholly have it by this
Sacrament. Fourthly, That the effect thereof in us, is a real transmutation of
our Souls and Bodies, from sin to righteousness, from death and corruption to
immortality and life. Fifthly, That because the Sacrament being of it self, but
a corruptible and earthly Creature, must needs be thought an unlikely
Instrument to work so admirable effects in Man; we are therefore, to rest our
selves altogether upon the strength of his glorious power, who is able, and
will bring to pass, That the Bread and Cup which he gives us, shall be truly
the thing he promises. It seems therefore much amiss, that against them whom
they term Sacramentaries, so many invective Discourses are made, all ranning
upon two points, That the Eucharist is not bare a Sign or Figure only, and
that the efficacy of his Body and Blood is not all we receive in this
Sacrament. For no man, having read their Books and Writings which are thus
traduced, can be ignorant that both these Assertions they plainly confess to be
most true. They do not so interpret the words of Christ, as if the name of his
Body did import but the figure of his Body; and to be, were only to signify
his Blood. They grant, that these holy Mysteries received in due manner, do
instrumentally both make us partakers of the Grace of that Body and Blood which
were given for the Life of the World; and besides, also impart unto us, even in
true and real, though mystical manner, the very Person of our Lord himself,
whole, perfect, and entire, as has been showed. Now whereas all three opinions
do thus far accord in one, that strong conceit which two of the three have
embraced, as touching a Literal, Corporal, and Oral Manducation of the very
Substance of his Flesh and Blood, is surely an opinion no where delivered in
holy Scripture, whereby they should think themselves bound to believe it, and
(to speak with the softest terms we can use) greatly prejudiced in that, when
some others did so conceive of eating his Flesh, our Savior to abate that
error in them, gave them directly to understand, how his Flesh so eaten could
profit them nothing, because the words which he spoke were Spirit; that is to
say, they had a reference to a Mystical Participation; which Mystical
Participation gives life. Wherein there is small appearance of likelihood,
that his meaning should be only to make them Marcionites by inversion, and to
teach them that, as Marcion did think, Christ seemed to be Man, but was not; so
they contrariwise should believe. That Christ in Truth would so give them, as
they thought, his Flesh to eat; but yet left the horror thereof should offend
them, he would not seem to do that he did. When they which have this opinion of
Christ, in that Blessed Sacrament, go about to explain themselves, and to open
after what manner things are brought to pass, the one sort lay the Union of
Christ's Deity with his Manhood, as their first foundation and ground: From
thence they infer a power which the Body of Christ has, thereby to present it
self in all places; out of which Ubiquity of his Body, they gather the presence
thereof with that sanctified Bread and Wine of our Lords Table: The Conjunction
of his Body and Blood with those Elements they use as an Argument, to show how
the Bread may as well in that respect be termed his Body, because his Body is
therewith joined, as the Son of God may be named Man, by reason, that God and
Man in the Person of Christ are united: To this they add, how the Words of
Christ commanding us to eat, must needs import, That as he has coupled the
Substance of his Flesh, and the Substance of Bread together, so we together
should receive both: Which Labyrinth, as the other sort does justly shun, so
the way which they take to the same In^ is somewhat more short, but no whit
more certain. For through Gods Omnipotent Power, they imagine that
Transubstantiation follows upon the words of Consecration; and, upon
Transubstantiation, the Participation of Christ's both Body and Blood, in the
only shape of Sacramental Elements. So that they all three do plead Gods
Omnipotency: Sacramentaries, to that Alteration, which the rest confess he
accomplisheth; the Patrons of Transubstantiation, over and besides that, to the
change of one substance into another; the Followers of Consubstantiation, to
the kneading of both Substances, as it were, into one lump: Touching the
sentence of Antiquity in this cause; first, For as much as they knew, that the
force of this Sacrament does necessarily presuppose the Verity of Christ's both
Body and Blood, they used oftentimes the same as an Argument to prove, That
Christ has as truly the substance of Man as of God, because here we receive
Christ, and those Graces which flow from him, in that he is Man. So that if he
have no such Being, neither can the Sacrament have any such meaning, as we all
confess it has. Thus Acceprum panem and distributum discipulis Corpus suum
illum secit, hoe est. Corpus meum dicendo, id est, figura corpori^mei. Figura
autem non suisset nisi veritatis esset Corpus, cum vacua res quod est phateasma
Figuram capere non posset. Tertul. contra Marc. lib. 4. cap. 40.
Tertullian, thus Secundum haec (that is to say, If it should be true which
Heretics have taught, denying that Christ took upon him the very nature of
Man) nec Dominus sanguine suo redemit nos, neque Colix Eucharistiae
communicatio senguinis ejuserit, ne^ panis quem frangimus communicatio corporis
ejus est. Sanguis enim non est, nisi a venis and carnibus and a reliqua quae,
est secondum hominem substantia, Iren. lib. 5. cap. 1.
Irenaeus, thus Es (...) Theod. Dialog. (...)
Theodoret disputes. Again, as evident it is how they teach, that Christ is
personally there present, yea present whole, albeit a part of Christ be
corporally absent from thence, that Sacramenta quidem Quantom in se est sine
propri^ virture esse non possunt, nec ullo modo ^^ absentat majestas mysteriis.
Cypr. de Coen. cap. 7.
Christ assisting this Heavenly Banquet with his Personal and true Presence,
Sacramento visibili inesfabiliter divina se insundit essentia ut esset ^
Religioni circa Sacramenta devotio. Idem, cap. 6. Invisibilis ^^. cerdos
visibiles creaturas in substantiam corporis and sanguinis, sui verbo suo
secreta poiestare convercit. In spiritualibus Sacramentis, verbi praecipit
virtus and servit effectus, Eusebius. Emissen. Hom. 5 de Pasch.
does by his own Divine Power, add to the Natural Substance thereof,
Supernatural Efficacy, which (...) Theodor. Ex quo a Domino dictum est, Hoc
facite in meam commemorationem, Haec est caro mea, and hic est sanguis meus;
quotiescunque his verbis and hac fide actum est, panis isle supersubstantialis,
and calix benedictione solenni sacrarus, ad totius hominis vitam, salumtemique
proficit, Cypr. de Coen. cap. 3. Immortalitatis alimonia datur. a communibus
cibis differens, corporalis substantiae retinens speciem, sed virtutis divinae
invisibili efficientia probans adesse praetentiam. Ibid. cap. ^.
addition to the Nature of those consecrated Elements, changes them, and
makes them that unto us, which otherwise they could not be, that to us they
are thereby made such Instruments, as Sensibilibus Sacramentis inest vitae
aeternae effectus, and non tam corporali quam spirituali trans^ione Christo
unimor. Ipse enim, and ponis and caro, and sanguis Idem cibus, and substantia
and vita factus est Ecclesiae suae quam corpus suum appellat dans ei
participationem spiritius, Ibid. cap.5. Nostra and Ipsius conjunctio nec miscet
personas, nec unit substan^i^s, sed effectus consaciar and confoederat
voluntares. Ibid. cap.6. Mansio nostra in ipso est manducatio, and potus quasi
quaedam incorporatio, Ibid. cap. 9. Ille est in Patte per Naturam diu^nitaris,
nos in eo per corporalem ejus Nativitatem, ille rursus in nobis per
Sacramentorum mysterium. Hilar, de Trin lib. 8.
mystically, yet truly; invisibly, yet really; work our Communion or Fellowship
with the Person of Jesus Christ, as well in that he is Man as God, our
Participation also in the Fruit, Grace, and Efficacy of his Body and Blood;
whereupon there ensues a kind of Transubstantiation in us, a true Panis hic
azymus, cibus verus and fincerus per speciem and Sacramentum nos ractu
sanctificat, side illuminat, veritate Christo conformat. Cypr. de Coen. Cap.6.
Non aliud agit participatio corporis and sanguinis Christi, quam ut in id quod
sumimus transeamus, and in quo mor^ui and sepulti and corresuscirati sumus,
ipsum per omnia and spiritu and carne gestemus, Leo de Pasch. Sermon. 14.
Quemadmodum qui est a terra panis percipiens Dei vocationem (id est facta
invocatione divini numinis) jam non communis pajo est, sed Eucharistia ex
duabus rebus constans, terrena and coelesti: Sic and corpora nostra
percipientia Eucharistiam, jam non sunt corruptibilia spem ressurectionis
habentia Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34. Quoniam salutaris caro verbo Dei quod
naturaliter vita est conjuncta, vivifica effecta est: Quindo eam comedimus,
tune vitam habemus in nobis: illi carni conjuncti, quae vita effecta est,
Cyril. in Io^an. lib. 4. cap. 14.
change, both of Soul and Body, an alteration from death to life. In a word, it
appears not, that of all the ancient Fathers of the Chruch, any one did ever
conceive or imagine other then only a Mystical Participation of Christ's both
Body and Blood in the Sacrament, neither are their speeches concerning the
change of the Elements themselves, into the Body and Blood of Christ such, that
a man can thereby, in Conscience, assure himself it was their meaning, to
persuade the World, either of a Corporal Consubstantiation of Christ, with
those Sanctified and Blessed Elements, before we receive them; or of the like
Transubstantiation of them into the Body and Blood of Christ. Which both to our
Mystical Communion with Christ, are so unnecessary, that the Fathers, who
plainly hold but this Mystical Communion, cannot easily be thought to have
meant any other change of Sacramental Elements, then that which the same
Spiritual Communion did require them to hold. These things considered, how
should that Mind, which, loving Truth, and seeking Comfort out of Holy
Mysteries, has not perhaps the leisure, perhaps nor the wit nor capacity to
tread out so endless Mazes, as the intricate Disputes of this cause have led
men into, how should a virtuously disposed mind better resolve with it self
then thus? Variety of Judgments and Opinions argues obscurity in those things
whereabout they differ. But that which all parts receive for Truth, that which
every one having sifted, is by no one denied or doubted of, must needs be
matter of infallible certainly. Whereas therefore there are but three
Expositions made of, This is my Body; The first, This is in it self before
participation really and truly the Natural Substance of my Body, by reason of
the coexistence which my Omnipotent Body has with the sanctified Element of
Bread, which is the Lutherans Interpretation. The second, This is in itself and
before participation the very true and Natural Substance of my Body, by force
of that Deity, which with the words of Consecration, abolisheth the Substance
of Bread, and substituteth in the place thereof my Body, which is the Popish
construction. The last, This Hallowed Food, through concurrence of Divine
Power, is in verity and truth, unto faithful Receivers, instrumentally a cause
of that Mystical Participation, whereby as I make my self wholly theirs; so I
give them in hand an actual possession of all such saving Grace, as my
Sacrificed Body can yield, and as their Souls do presently need: This is to
them, and in them, my Body. Of these three rehearsed Interpretations, the last
has in it nothing but what the rest do all approve and acknowledge to be most
true; nothing but that which the words of Christ are on all sides confessed to
enforce; nothing but that which the Church of God has always thought
necessary; nothing but that which alone is sufficient for every Christian man
to believe, concerning the use and force of this Sacrament: Finally, Nothing
but that wherewith the Writings of all Antiquity are consonant, and all
Christian Confessions agreeable. And as Truth, in what kind soever, is by no
kind of Truth gainsaid; so the mind which rests it self on this, it never
troubled with those perplexities which the other do both find, by means of so
great contradiction between their opinions, and true principles of Reason
grounded upon Experience, Nature, and Sense. Which albeit, with boisterous
courage and breath, they seem oftentimes to blow away; yet whosoever observes, how
again they labor and sweat by subtilty of wit, to make some show of agreement
between their peculiar conceits, and the general Edicts of Nature, must needs
perceive they struggle with that which they cannot fully master. Besides, since
of that which is proper to themselves, their Discourses are hungry and
unpleasant, full of tedious and irksome labor, heartless, and hitherto without
Fruit; on the other side, read we them, or hear we others, be they of our own
or of ancienter times, to what part soever they be thought to incline, touching
that whereof there is controversy; yet in this, where they all speak but one
thing, their Discourses are Heavenly, their Words sweet as the Honeycomb,
their Tongues melodiously tuned Instruments, their Sentences mere Consolation
and Joy: Are we not hereby almost, even with voice from Heaven admonished,
which we may safeliest cleave unto? He which has said of the one Sacrament,
Wash and be clean, has said concerning the other likewise, Eat and live. If
therefore without any such particular and solemn warrant as this is, that poor
distressed Woman coming unto Christ for health, could so constantly resolve her
self, May I but touch the skirt of his Garment, I shall be whole, what moves
us to argue of the manner how Life should come by Bread? our duty being here,
but to take what is offered, and most assuredly to rest persuaded of this,
that, can we but eat, we are safe? When I behold with mine eyes, some small and
scarce discernable Grain or Seed, whereof Nature makes a promise, that a Tree
shall come; and when afterward of that Tree, any skilful Artificer undertaketh
to frame some exquisite and curious work, I look for the event, I move no
question about performance, either of the one, or of the other. Shall I simply
credit Nature in things natural? Shall I in things artificial, rely my self on
Art, never offering to make doubt? And in that which is above, both Art and
Nature refuse to believe the Author of both, except he acquaint me with his
ways, and lay the secret of his skill before me? Where God himself does speak
those things, which, either for height and sublimity of Matter, or else for
secrecy of Performance, we are not able to reach unto, as we may be ignorant
without danger, so it can be no disgrace to confess we are ignorant. Such as
love Piety will, as much as in them lies, know all things that God commands,
but especially the duties of Service which they ow to God. As for his dark and
hidden works, they prefer, as becomes them in such cases, simplicity of Faith
before that Knowledge, which curiously sisting what it should adore, and
disputing too boldly of that which the wit of man cannot search, chilleth for
the most part all warmth of zeal, and brings soundness of belief many times
into great hazard. Let it therefore be sufficient for me, presenting my self at
the Lords Table, to know what there I receive from him; without searching or
enquiring of the manner, how Christ performs his promise? Let Disputes and
Questions, Enemies to Piety, abatements of true Devotion, and hitherto, in this
cause, but over-patiently heard, let them take their rest: Let curious and
sharp-witted Men, beat their Heads about what Questions themselves will; the
very Letter of the Word of Christ, gives plain security, that these Mysteries
do, as Nails, fasten us to his very Cross, that by them we draw out, as
touching Efficacy, Force, and Virtue, even the Blood of his goared side: In the
Wounds of our Redeemer, we there dip our Tongues, we are died red, both within
and without; our hunger is satisfied, and our thirst for ever quenched; they
are things wonderful which he feels, great which he sees, and unheard of
which he utters, whose Soul it possessed of this Paschal Lamb, and made joyful
in the strength of this new Wine: This Bread has in it more then the substance
which our eyes behold; this Cup hallowed with solemn Benediction, avails to
the endless life and welfare both of Soul and Body, in that it serves as well
for a Medicine to heal our infirmities and purge our sins; as for a Sacrifice
of Thanksgiving: With touching it sanctifies, it enlightneth with belief, it
truly conformeth us unto the image of Jesus Christ. What these Elements are in
themselves, it skilleth not, it is enough, that to me which take them, they are
the Body and Blood of Christ; his Promise, in witness hereof suffices; his
Word, he knows which way to accomplish; why should any cogitation possess the
mind of a Faithful Communicant, but this. O my God, thou art true; O my Soul,
thou art happy! Thus therefore we see, that howsoever Men's opinions do
otherwise vary; nevertheless, touching Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, we
may with consent of the whole Christian World conclude they are necessary; the
one to initiate or begin, the other to consummate or make perfect our life in
Christ.

68. In Administering the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ; Of Faults
noted in the Form of Administering the holy Communion.
the supposed faults of the Church of England are not greatly material, and
therefore it shall suffice to touch them in few words. The first is, That we do
not use in a generality once for all to say to Communicants, Take, eat, and
drink; but unto every particular person, Eat thou, drink thou, which is
according to the Popish manner, and not the Form that our Savior did use. Our
second oversight is, by Gesture. For in Kneeling there has been Superstition;
Sitting agrees better to the action of a Supper; and our Savior using that
which was most fit, did himself not kneel. A third accusation is, for not
examining all Communicants, whose knowledge in the Mystery of the Gospel,
should that way be made manifest; a thing every where, they say, used in the
Apostles times, because all things necessary were used; and this in their
opinion is necessary, yea, it is commanded, 2 Chro. 3^. ^.
in as much as the Levites are commanded to prepare the people for the
Passover; and Examination is a part of their Preparation, our Lords Supper in
place of the Passover. The fourth thing misliked is, 1 Cor. 5. 11.
That, against the Apostles prohibition^ to have any familiarity at all with
notorious Offenders, Papists being not of the Church are admitted to our very
Communion, before they have by their Religious and Gospel-like behavior, purged
themselves of that suspicion of Popery, which their former life has caused.
They are Dogs, Swine, unclean Beasts, Foreigners and Strangers from the Church
of God; and therefore ought not to be admitted, though they offer themselves.
We are, fifthly, condemned, in as much as when there have been store of people
to hear Sermons and Service in the Church, we suffer the Communion to be
ministered to a few. It is not enough, that our Book of Common Prayer has godly
Exhortations to move all thereunto which are present. For it should not suffer
a few to Communicate, it should by Ecclesiastical Discipline, and Civil
punishment provide, that such as would withdraw themselves, might be brought to
Communicate, according both to the Numb 9.13. C^n. 9. Apost. Council. 2. Brac.
cap. 83.
Law of God, and the ancient Church Canons. In the sixth and last place, comes
the enormity of imparting this Sacrament privately unto the sick. Thus far
accused, we answer briefly to the first T.C. lib. 3. page 166. Be^ules that, it
is good to leave the P^pish (...) in those things, which we may so conveniently
do, it is b^st to co^^t as near ^he manner of celebration of the Supper which
our Savior Christ used, as may be. And if it be a good Argument to pro^e that
therefore we must rather sa^, Take th^^, th^n Take ^^ because the Sacrament is
as Application of the benefits of Christ's, it be hoveth, that the Preacher
should direct his Admonitions particularly one after another, unto all those
which hear his Sermon, which is a thing absurd.
That seeing God by Sacraments, does apply in particular unto every man's
person, the Grace which himself has provided for the benefit of all mankind;
there is no cause, why, Administering the Sacraments, we should forbear to
express that in our forms of Speech, which he by his Word and Gospel teaches
all to believe. In the one Sacrament, I Baptize thee, displeases them not. If
^at thou, in the other, offend them, their fancies are no rules for Churches to
follow. Whether Christ at his last Supper did speak generally once to all, or
to every one in particular, is a thing uncertain. His words are recorded in
that Form which serves best for the setting down with Historical brevity, what
was spoken; they are no manifest proof, that he spoke but once unto all, which
did then Communicate, muchless, that we in speaking unto every Communicant
severally do amiss; although it were clear, that we herein do otherwise then
Christ did. Our imitation of him, consists not in tying scrupulously our
selves unto his syllables, but rather in speaking by the Heavenly Direction of
that inspired Divine Wisdom, which teaches diverse ways to one end; and does
therein control their boldness, by whom any profitable way is censured, as
reprovable, only under color of some small difference from great examples
going before; to do throughout every the like circumstance, the same which
Christ did in this action, were by following his footsteps in that sort, to err
more from the purpose he aimed at, then we now do by not following them with so
nice and severe strictness. They little weigh with themselves, how dull, how
heavy, and almost, how without sense, the greatest part of the common multitude
every where is, who think it either unmeet or unnecessary to put them, even man
by man, especially at that time, in mind whereabout they are. It is true, That
in Sermons we do not use to repeat our sentences severally to every particular
he^er; a strange madness it were, if we should. The softness of Wax may induce
a wise man to set his stamp or image therein; it persuades no man, that
because Wool has the like quality, it may therefore receive the like
impression. So the reason taken from the use of Sacraments, in that they are
Instruments of Grace, unto every particular man, may with good congruity, lead
the Church to frame accordingly her words in Administration of Sacraments,
because they easily admit this Form; which being in Sermons, a thing
Impossible, without apparent ridiculous absurdity, agreement of Sacraments with
Sermons, in that which is alleged as a reasonable proof of convenience for the
one, proves not the same Allegation impertinent, because it does not enforce
the other to be administered in like sort. For equal principles do then avail
unto equal conclusions, when the matter whereunto we apply them, is equal, and
not else. T. C. lib. 1. p. 165. Kneeling carries a show of worship. Sitting
agrees better with the Action of the Supper, Christ and his Apostles kneeled
not.
Our Kneeling at Communions, is the gesture of Piety. If we did there present
our selves, but to make some show or dumb resemblance of a Spiritual Feast, it
may be that Sitting were the fitter Ceremony; but coming as Receivers of
inestimable Grace at the Hands of God, what does better beseem our bodies at
that hour, then to be sensible Witnesses of minds unfeignedly humbled? Our
Lord himself did that which custom and long usage had made fit; We, that which
fitness and great decency has made usual. The trial of our selves, before we
Eat of this Bread, and Drink of this Cup, is by express Commandment, every man's
precise Duty. As for necessity of calling others unto account besides our
selves, albeit we be not thereunto drawn by any great strength which is in
their Arguments, who first press us with it, as a thing necessary, by
affirming, That the Apostles, did use it, and then prove T. C. lib. 1. page
164. All things necessary were used in the Churches of God in the Apostles
times; but Examination was a necessary thing, therefore used. In the Book of
Chronicles, ^ Chro 35 6. the Levites were commanded to prepare the people to
the receiving of the Passover, in place whereof we have the Lords Supper Now
Examination being a part of Preparation, it follows that here is Commandment
of the Examination.
the Apostles to have used it, by affirming it to be necessary: Again, albeit
we greatly muse how they can avouch, That God did command the Levites to
prepare their Brethren against the Feast of the Passover, and that the
Examination of them, was a part of their Preparation, when the place alleged
to this purpose, does but charge the Levite, saying, Make ready L^ahhechem for
your Brethren, to the end, they may do according to the Word of the Lord by
Moses. Wherefore in the self-same place it follows, how Lambs, and Kids, and
Sheep, and Bullocks, were delivered unto the Levites, and that thus the Service
was made ready: It follows likewise, how the Levites having in such sort
provided for the people, they made provision for themselves, and for the
Priests, the Sons of Aaron: So that confidently from hence to conclude the
necessity of Examination, argues their wonderful great forwardness in framing
all things to serve their turn; nevertheless, the Examination of Communicants
when need requires, for the profitable use it may have in such cases, we
reject not. Our fault in admitting Popish Communicants, Is it in that we are 1
Cor ^ 11. T. C. lib. 1. page 1^7.
forbidden to eat, and therefore much more to communicate with notorious
Malefactors? The name of a Papist is not given unto any man for being a
notorious Malefactor. And the crime wherewith we are charged, is suffering of
Papists to communicate; so that, be their life and conversation whatsoever in
the fight of man, their Popish opinions are in this case laid as Bars and
Exceptions against them, yea, those opinions which they have held in former
times, Although they would receive the Communion, yet they ought to be kept
back, until such time, as by their Religious and Gospel-like behavior, they
have purged themselves of that suspicion of Popery, which their former life and
conversation has caused to be conceived. T. C. lib 1. page 167.
although they now both profess by word, and offer to show by fact the
contrary. All this does not justify us, which ought not (they say) to admit
them in any wise, till their Gospel-like behavior have removed all suspicion of
Popery from them, because Papists are Dogs, Swine, Beasts, Foreigners and
Strangers from the House of God; in a word, they are not of the Church. What
the terms of Gospel-like behavior may include, is obscure and doubtful. But of
the Visible Church of Christ in this present World, from which they separate
all Papists, we are thus persuaded. Church is a word which Art has devised,
thereby to sever and distinguish that Society of Men, which professes the true
Religion from the rest which profess it not. There have been in the World, from
the very first foundation thereof, but three Religions, Paganism, which lived
in the blindness of corrupt and depraved Nature; Judaism, embracing the Law
which Reformed Heathenish Impiety, and taught Salvation to be looked for
through One, whom God in the last days would send and exalt to be Lord of all.
Finally, Christian Belief, which yields obedience to the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, and acknowledges him the Savior whom God did promise. Seeing then
that the Church is a name, which Art has given to Professors of true Religion.
As they which will define a Man, are to pass by those qualities wherein one man
does excel another, and to take only those Essential Properties, whereby a Man
does differ from Creatures of other kinds: So he that will teach what the
Church is, shall never rightly perform the work whereabout he goes, till in
Matter of Religion he touch that difference which severeth the Churches
Religion from theirs who are not the Church. Religion being therefore a matter
partly of contemplation, partly of action; we must define the Church, which is
a Religious Society, by such differences as do properly explain the Essence of
such things, that is to say, by the Object or Matter whereabout the
Contemplations and Actions of the Church are properly conversant. For so all
Knowledges and all Virtues are defined. Whereupon, because the only Object
which separateth ours from other Religions, is Jesus Christ, in whom, none but
the Church does believe; and whom, none but the Church does worship; we find
that accordingly the Apostles do every where distinguish hereby the Church from
Infidels and from Jews, accounting them which call upon the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ to be his Church. If we go lower, we shall but add unto this
certain casual and variable accidents, which are not properly of the Being, but
make only for the happier and better Being of the Church of God, either
indeed, or in men's opinions and conceits. This is the Error of all Popish
definitions that hitherto have been brought. They define not the Church by that
which the Church essentially is, but by that wherein they imagine their own
more perfect then the rest are. Touching parts of eminency and perfection,
parts likewise of imperfection and defect in the Church of God, they are
infinite, their degrees and differences no way possible to be drawn unto any
certain account. There is not the least contention and variance, Romans 15. 5. 1
Cor. 1. 10.
but it blemisheth somewhat the Unity that ought to be in the Church of Christ,
which notwithstanding may have not only without offense or breach of concord,
her manifold varieties in Rites and Ceremonies of Religion, but also her
Strifes and Contentions many times, and that about matters of no small
importance; yea, her Schisms, Factions, and such other evils whereunto the Body
of the Church is subject, sound and sick, remaining both of the same Body; as
long as both parts retain by outward profession, that vital substance of truth,
which makes Christian Religion to differ from theirs, which acknowledge not
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Blessed Savior of Mankind, give no crecit to his
glorious Gospel, and have his Sacraments, the Seals of Eternal Life, in
derision. Now the privilege of the visible Church of God (for of that we
speak) is to be herein like the Ark of Noah, that, for any thing we know to the
contrary, all without it are lost sheep; yet in this, was the Ark of Noah
privileged above the Church, that whereas none of them which were in the one
could perish, numbers in the other are cast away, because to Eternal Life our
Profession is not enough. Many things exclude from the Kingdom of God, although
from the Church they separate not. In the Church there arise sundry grievous
storms, by means whereof, whole Kingdoms and Nations professing Christ, both
have been heretofore, and are at this present day, divided about Christ. During
which Divisions and Contentions amongst men, albeit each part do justify it
self, yet the one of necessity must needs err, if there be any contradiction
between them, be it great or little; and what side soever it be that has the
truth, the same we must also acknowledge alone, 1 John ^. 19.
to hold with the true Church in that point, and consequently, reject the other
as an enemy, in that case fallen away from the true Church. Wherefore of
Hypocrites and Dissemblers, whose profession at the first, was but only from
the teeth outward, when they afterward took occasion to oppugn certain
principal Articles of Faith, the Apostles which defended the truth against
them, pronounce them gone out from the Fellowship of sound and sincere
Believers, when as yet the Christian Religion they had not utterly cast off. In
like sense and meaning throughout all ages, Heretics have justly been hated,
as Branches cut off from the Body of the true Vine; yet only so far forth cut
off, as they Heresies have extended. Both Heresy, and many other crimes, which
wholly sever from God, do sever from God the Church of God in part only. The
Mystery of Piety, says the Apostle, is without peradventure great, 1 Timothy 3 14.
God has been manifested in the Flesh, has been justified in the Spirit, has
been seen of Angels, has been preached to Nations, has been believed on in
the World, has been taken up into Glory. The Church a Pillar and Foundation of
this Truth, which no where is known or professed, but only within the Church,
and they all of the Church that profess it. In the mean while, it cannot be
denied, that many profess this, who are not therefore cleared simply from all
either faults or errors, which make separation between us and the Wellspring
of our happiness. Idolatry severed of old, the Israelites; Iniquity, those
Scribes and Pharisees from God, who notwithstanding were a part of the Seed of
Abraham, a part of that very Seed which God did himself acknowledge to be his
Church. The Church of God may therefore contain both them which indeed are not
his, yet must be reputed his, by us that know not their inward thoughts; and
them, whose apparent wickedness testifies even in the sight of the whole
World, that God abhors them. For to this and no other purpose, are meant
those Parables, Matthew. 13. ^4, 47.
which our Savior in the Gospel has concerning mixture of Vice with Virtue,
Light with Darkness, Truth with Error, as well and openly known and seen, as a
cunningly cloaked mixture. That which separateth therefore utterly, that which
cutteth off clean from the visible Church of Christ, is plain Apostasy, direct
denial, utter rejection of the whole Christian Faith, as far as the same is
professedly different from Infidelity. Heretics, as touching those points of
doctrine wherein they fail: Schismatics, as touching the quarrels for which,
or the duties wherein they divide themselves from their Brethren: Loose,
licentious, and wicked persons, as touching their several offenses or crimes,
have all forsaken the true Church of God; the Church which is sound and sincere
in the Doctrine that they corrupt; the Church that keeps the Bond of Unity,
which they violate; the Church that walks in the Laws of Righteousness, which
they transgress: This very true Church of Christ they have left, howbeit, not
altogether left, nor forsaken simply the Church; upon the main. Foundations
whereof they continue built, notwithstanding these breaches whereby they are
rent at the top asunder. Now because for redress of professed Errors, and open
Schisms, it is, and must be the Churches care, that all may in outward
Conformity be one, as the laudable Polity of former Ages; even so our own, to
that end and purpose, has established diverse Laws, the moderate severity
whereof is a mean both to stay the rest, and to reclaim such as heretofore have
been led awry. But seeing that the Offices which Laws require, are always
definite, and when that they require is done, they go no farther, whereupon
sundry ill-affected persons to save themselves from danger of Laws, pretend
obedience, albeit inwardly they carry still the same hearts which they did
before; by means whereof, it falls out, that receiving unworthily the Blessed
Sacrament at our hands, they eat and drink their own damnation: It is for
remedy of this mischief T. C. lib. 1. page 167. If the place of the Fifth to
the Corinthians, do forbid that we should have any familiarity with notorious
offenders, it does more forbid, that they should he received to the Communion:
And therefore Papists being such, as which are notoriously known to hold
Heretical Opinions, ought not to be admired, much less compelled to the Supper.
For seeing that our Savior Christ did i^stitute his Supper amongst his
Disciples, and those only which were, on St. Paul speaks, within; it is
evident, that the Papists, being without, and Foreigners and Strangers from the
Church of God, ought not to be received, if they would offer themselves: And
that Minister that shall give the Supper of the Lord to him, which is known to
be a Papist, and which has a (...) made any clear renouncing of Popery, with
which he has been defil^d; does profane the Table of the Lord, and does give
the Meat that is prepared for the Children, unto Dog; and he brings into the
Pasture which is provided for the Sheep, Swine and unclean Beasts, contrary to
the Faith and Trust that ought to be in a Steward of the Lords House, as he is.
For albeit, that I doubt not, but many of those which are now Papists, pertain
to the Election of God, which God also in his good time will call to the
knowledge of his Truth: Yet notwithstanding, they ought to be unto the Minister
and unto the Church, touching the Ministering of Sacraments, as Strangers, and
as unclean Beasts. The Ministering of the holy Sacraments unto them, is a
Declaration and Seal of Gods favor and reconciliation with them, and a plain
Preaching, partly, that they be wash^d already from their sin, partly, that
they are of the Household of God, and such as the Lord will feed to Eternal
Life; which is not lawful to be done unto those which are not of the Household
of Faith. And therefore I conclude, That the compelling of Papists unto the
Communion, and the dismissing and letting of them go, when as they be to be
punished for their stubbornness in Popery (with this condition, if they will
receive the Communion) is very unlawful; when as, although they would receive
it, yet they ought to be kept back, till such time as by their Religious and
Gospel-like behavior, etc.
here determined, that whom the Law of the Realm does punish unless they
communicate, such if they offer to obey Law, the Church notwithstanding should
not admit without probation before had of their Gospel-like behavior. Wherein
they first set no time, how long this supposed probation must continue; again,
they nominate no certain judgment, the verdict whereof shall approve men's
behavior to be Gospel-like; and, that which is most material, whereas they seek
to make it more hard for dissemblers to be received into the Church, then Law
and Polity as yet has done; they make it in truth more easy for such kind of
persons, to wind themselves out of the Law, and to continue the same they
were. The Law requires at their hands, that duty which in conscience does
touch them nearest, because the greatest difference between us and them, is the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, whose Name in the Service of our
Communion, we celebrate with due honor, which they in the Error of their Mass
profane. As therefore on our part to hear Mass, were an open departure from
that sincere Profession wherein we stand; so if they on the other side, receive
our Communion, they give us the strongest pledge of fidelity that man can
demand. What their hearts are, God does know. But if they which mind treachery
to God and Man, shall once apprehend this advantage given them, whereby they
may satisfy Law, in pretending themselves conformable, (for what can Law with
Reason or Justice require more?) and yet be sure the Church will accept no such
offer, till their Gospel-like behavior be allowed, after that our own
simplicity has once thus fairly eased them from the sting of Law; it is to be
thought they will learn the Mystery of Gospel-like behavior, when leisure
serves them. And so while without any cause, we fear to profane Sacraments, we
shall not only defeat the purpose of most wholesome Laws, but lose or wilfully
hazard those Souls; from whom, the likeliest means of full and perfect
recovery, are by our indiscretion withheld. For neither does God thus bind us
to dive into men's consciences, nor can their fraud and deceit hurt any man but
themselves. To him they seem such as they are, but of us they must be taken for
such as they seem. In the Eye of God they are against Christ, that are not
truly and sincerely with him; in our eyes, they must be received as with
Christ, that are not to outward show against him. The case of impenitent and
notorious sinners, is not like unto theirs, whose only imperfection is Error,
severed from Pertinacy; Error in appearance content to submit it self to better
instruction; Error so far already cured, as to crave at our hands that
Sacrament, the hat^ed and utter refusal whereof, was the weightiest point
wherein heretofore they swerved and went astray. In this case therefore, they
cannot reasonably charge us with remiss dealing, or with carelessness to whom we
impart the Mysteries of Christ; but they have given us manifest occasion to
think it requisite, that we earnestly advise rather, and exhort them to consider
as they ought, their sundry over-sights; First, In equalling undistinctly
Crimes with Errors, as touching force to make incapable of this Sacrament:
Secondly, In suffering indignation at the faults of the Church of Rome, to
blind and withold their judgments from seeing that which withal they should
acknowledge, concerning so much, nevertheless, still due to the same Church, as
to be held and reputed a part of the House of God, a Limb of the Visible Church
of Christ: Thirdly, In imposing upon the Church a burden, to enter farther
into men's hearts, and to make a deeper search of their Consciences, then any
Law of God, or Reason of Man inforceth: Fourthly and lastly, In repelling under
color of longer trial, such from the Mysteries of Heavenly Grace, as are both
capable thereof by the Laws of God, for any thing we hear to the contrary; and
should, in diverse considerations, be cherished according to the merciful
Examples and Precepts, whereby the Gospel of Christ has taught us toward
such, to show compassion, to receive them with lenity and all meekness; if any
thing be shaken in them, to strengthen it, not to quench with delays and
jealousies, that feeble smoke of Conformity which seems to breathe from them;
but to build wheresoever there is any Foundation, to add Perfection unto
slender beginnings, and that as by other offices of Piety, even so by this very
Food of Life, which Christ has left in his Church, not only for preservation
of strength, but also for relief of weakness: But to return to our own selves,
in whom the next thing severely reproved, T. C. lib. 1. page 147. 2 Chro. 30.13.
is the Paucity of Communicants. If they require at Communions frequency, we
wish the same, knowing how acceptable unto God such service is, when multitudes
cheerfully concur unto it; if they encourage men thereunto, we also (themselves
acknowledge it) are not utterly forgetful to do the like; if they require some
public coaction for remedy of that, Psalm 12^. 1.
wherein by milder and softer means, little good is done, they know our Laws
and Statutes provided in that behalf, whereunto whatsoever convenient help may
be added more by the wisdom of man, what cause have we given the World to
think, that we are not ready to hearken to it, and to use any good means of
sweet compulsion, to have this high and heavenly Banquet largely furnished?
Luke 14. 23.
Only we cannot so far yield, as to judge it convenient, that the holy desire
of a competent number should be unsatisfied, because the greater part is
careless and undisposed to join with them. Men should not (they say) be
permitted a few by themselves to communicate, when so many are gone away,
because this Sacrament is a token of our conjunction with our Brethren, and
therefore by communicating apart from them, we make an apparent show of
distraction: I ask then, on which side Unity is broken, whether on theirs that
depart, or on theirs, who being left behind, do communicate? First, In the one
it is not denied, but that they may have reasonable causes of departure, and
that then even they are delivered from just blame. Of such kind of causes, two
are allowed, namely, danger of impairing health, and necessary business
requiring our presence otherwhere. And may not a third cause, which is
unfitness at the present time, detain us as lawfully back, as either of these
two? True it is, that we cannot hereby altogether excuse our selves, for that
we ought to prevent this, and do not: But if we have committed a fault in not
preparing our minds before, shall we therefore aggravate the same with a
worse; the crime of unworthy participation? He that abstaineth, does want for
the time that Grace and Comfort which Religious Communicants have, but he that
eats and drinks unworthily, receives death; that which is life to others,
turns in him to poison. Notwithstanding, whatsoever be the cause, for which
men abstain, were it reason that the fault of one part, should any way abridge
their benefit that are not faulty? There is in all the Scripture of God, no one
syllable which does condemn communicating a t^ngst a few, when the rest are
departed from them. T. C. lib 1. page 145.
As for the last thing, which is our imparting this Sacrament privately unto
the sick, whereas there have been of old (they grant) two kinds of necessity,
wherein this Sacrament might be privately administered; of which two, the one
being erroniously imagined, and the other (they say) continuing no longer in
use, there remains unto us no necessity at all, for which, that custom should
be retained. The falsely surmised necessity, is that, whereby some have thought
all such excluded from possibility of salvation, as did depart this life, and
never were made partakers of the holy Eucharist. The other case of necessity
was, When men which had fallen in time of persecution, and had afterward
repented them, but were not as yet received again unto the Fellowship of this
Communion, did at the hour of their death request it, that so they might rest
with greater quietness and comfort of mind, being thereby assuted of
departure, in unity of Christ's Church; which virtuous desire, the Fathers did
think it great impiety, not to satisfy. This was Serapions case of necessity.
Serapion a faithful aged person, and always of very upright life, till fear of
persecution in the end, caused him to shrink back; after long sorrow for his
scandalous offense, and suit oftentimes made to be pardoned of the Church, fell
at length into grievous sickness, and being ready to yield up the ghost, was
then more instant then ever before to receive the Sacrament. Which Sacrament
was necessary in this case, not that Serapion had been deprived of Everlasting
Life without it, but that his end was thereby to him made the more comfortable.
And do we think, that all cases of such necessity are clean vanished? Suppose
that some have by mis-perswasion lived in Schism, withdrawn themselves from
holy and public Assemblies, hated the Prayers, and loathed the Sacraments of
the Church, falsely presuming them to be fraught with impious and Antichristian
corruptions: Which Error, the God of Mercy and Truth, opening at the length
their eyes to see, they do not only repent them of the evil which they have
done, but also in token thereof, desire to receive comfort by that whereunto
they have offered disgrace (which may be the case of many poor seduced souls,
even at this day.) God forbid, we should think that the Church does sin, in
permitting the wounds of such to be suppled with that Oil, which this gracious
Sacrament does yield, and their bruised minds not only need but beg. There is
nothing which the Soul of Man does desire in that last hour so much, as comfort
against the natural terrors of Death, and other scruples of Conscience, which
commonly do then most trouble and perplex the weak; toward whom, the very Law
of God does exact at our hands, all the helps that Christian lenity and
indulgence can afford. Our general consolation departing this life, is, the
hope of that 1 Cor. 15. 21.
glorious and blessed Resurrection, which the Apostle Saint Paul Phil. 3. 11.
names (...)
(...) to note, That, as all Men shall have their (...) Theophyl.(...) Ammon.
Vide 1 These. 4. 17.
(...), and be raised again from the dead; so the just shall be taken up and
exalted above the rest, whom the power of God does but raise, and not exalt.
This Life, and this Resurrection our Lord Jesus Christ is, for all men, as
touching the sufficiency of that he has done; but that which makes us
partakers thereof, is our particular Communion with Christ; and this Sacrament
a principal Mean, as well to strengthen the Bond, as to multiply in us the
Fruits of the same Communion: For which cause Saint Cyprian Maturatae
Resurrection's laethunila solemnia, Cypr. de Coea. Deuteronomy. cap. 1^.
terms it a joyful solemnity of expedite and speedy Resurrection; Ignatius
(...) Ignat. Epist. ad Ephesians. Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
, a Medicine which procures Immortality, and preventeth Death; Irenaeus E^st
^ih I serile murandum est ex solemnibus, tamen ubi aequiras evidens praser
s^^ir^iendum est. Lib. 183. ff. de Reg. Jur.
, the nourishment of our Bodies to Eternal Life, and their preservative from
corruption. Now because that Sacrament, which at all times we may receive unto
this effect, is then most acceptable and most fruitful, when any special
extraordinary occasion, nearly, and presently urging, kindles our desires
toward it, their severity, who cleave unto that alone, which is generally fit
to be done, and so make all men's conditions alike, may add much affliction to
diverse troubled and grieved minds, of whose particular estate particular
respect being had, according to the charitable order of the Church wherein we
live, there ensues unto God that glory, which his righteous Saints comforted
in their greatest distresses do yield; and unto them which have their
reasonable Petitions satisfied, ^^^e same contentment, tranquillity and joy,
that others before them, by means of like satisfaction, have reaped, and
wherein we all are, or should be desirous, finally, to take our leave of the
World, whenever our own uncertain time of most assured departure shall come.
Concerning therefore both Prayers and Sacraments, together with our usual and
received Form of administering the same in the Church of England, let thus much
suffice.

Of Festival Days, and the Natural cause of their convenient Institution.
69. As the Substance of God alone is infinite, and has no kind of limitation;
so likewise his Continuance is from everlasting to everlasting, and knows
neither Beginning nor End. Which demonstrable conclusion being presupposed, it
follows necessarily, that, besides him, all things are finite, both in
substance and in continuance. If in Substance all things be finite, it cannot
be, but that there are bounds without the compass whereof, their substance does
not extend; if in continuance also limited, they all have, it cannot be denied,
their set and their certain terms, before which they had no Being at all. This
is the reason, why first we do most admire those things which are Greatest; and
secondly, those things which are Ancientest, because the one are least distant
from the infinite Substance; the other from the infinite Continuance of God.
Out of this we gather, that only God has true Immortality or Eternity, that
is to say, Continuance wherein there grows no difference by addition of
Hereafter unto Now, whereas the noblest and perfectest of all things besides,
have continually through continuance, the time of former continuance lengthned;
so that they could not heretofore be said to have continued so long as now,
neither now so long as hereafter, Gods own Eternity, is the Hand which leads
Angels in the course of their Perpetuity; their Perpetuity the Hand that
draws out Celestial Motion; the Line of which Motion, and the Thread of Time,
are spun together. Now as Nature brings forth Time with Motion, so we by
Motion have learned how to divide Time, and by the smaller parts of Time, both
to measure the greater, and to know how long all things else endure. For, Time,
considered in it self, is but the Flux of that very instant, wherein the Motion
of the Heaven began; being coupled with other things, it is the quantity of
their continuance measured by the distance of two instants: As the time of a
man, is a man's continuance from the instant of his first breath, till the
instant of his last gasp. Hereupon, some have defined Time to be the Measure of
the Motion of Heaven; because the first thing which Time does measure, is that
Motion wherewith it began, and by the help whereof it measures other things;
as when the Prophet David says, That a man's continuance does not commonly
exceed Threescore and ten years, he uses the help, both of Motion and Number,
to measure Time. They which make Time an effect of Motion, and Motion to be in
Nature before Time, ought to have considered with themselves, that albeit we
should deny, as Melissus did, all Motion, we might notwithstanding acknowledge
Time, because Time does but signify the quantity of Continuance, which
Continuance may be in things that rest, and are never moved. Besides, we may
also consider in Rest, both that which is past, and that which is present, and
that which is future; yea, farther, even length and shortness in every of
these, although we never had conceit of Motion. But to define, without Motion,
how long, or how short such Continuance is, were impossible. So that herein we
must of necessity use the benefit of Years, Days, Hours, Minutes, which all
grow from Celestial Motion. Again, for as much as that Motion is Circular,
whereby we make our Divisions of Time, and the Compass of that Circuit such,
that the Heavens which are therein continually moved, and keep in their Motions
uniform Celerity, must needs touch often the same points, they cannot choose but
bring unto us by equal distances, frequent returns of the same times.
Furthermore, whereas Time is nothing but the mere quantity of that Continuance
which all things have, that are not as God is, without beginning, that which is
proper unto all quantities agrees also to this kind; so that Time does but
measure other things, and neither works in them any real effect, nor is it
self ever capable of any. And therefore when commonly we use to say, That Time
does eat or fret out all things; that Time is the wisest thing in the World,
because it brings forth all Knowledge; and that nothing is more foolish then
Time, which never holds any thing long, but whatsoever one day learneth, the
same another day forgets again; that some men see prosperous and happy days,
and that some men's days are miserable: In all these, and the like speeches,
that which is uttered of the Time, is not verified of Time it self; but agrees
unto those things which are in Time, and do by means of so near conjunction,
either lay their burden upon the back, or set their Crown upon the Head of
Time. Yea, the very opportunities which we ascribe to Time, (...) Hipp^^. l.qua
Praterpro^^ in ^^abitur.
do in truth cleave to the things themselves, wherewith Time is joined: As for
Time, it neither causes things, nor opportunities of things, although it
comprize and contain both. All things whatsoever having their time, the Works
of God have always that time which is seasonablest and fittest for them. His
Works are, some ordinary, some more rare; all worthy of observation, but not
all of like necessity to be often remembered; they all have their times, but
they all do not add the same estimation and glory to the times wherein they
are. For as God by being every where, yet does not give unto all places, one
and the same degree of holiness; so neither one and the same dignity to all
times by working in all. For it all, either places or times were in respect of
God alike; wherefore was it said unto Moses, by particular designation, Exodus
3. 5.
That very place wherein thou stand, is holy ground? Why does the Prophet
David choose out of all the days of the year, but one, whereof he speaks by
way of principal admiration, Psalm. 118 24.
This is the day the Lord has made? No doubt, as Gods extraordinary presence,
has hallowed and sanctified certain places, so they are his extraordinary
works, that have truly and worthily advanced certain times; for which cause,
they ought to be with all men that honor God, more holy then other days. The
Wise man therefore compares herein, not unfitly the times of God, with the
persons of men. If any should ask how it comes to pass, that one day does
excel another, seeing the light of all the days in the year proceeds from one
Sun, to this he answers, Ecclus. 33. 5.
That the knowledge of the Lord has parted them asunder, he has by them
disposed the times and solemn Feasts; some he has chosen out and sanctified,
some he has put among the days, to number: Even as Adam and all other men are
of one substance, all created of the Earth: But the Lord has divided them by
great knowledge, and made their ways diverse; some he has blessed and exalted,
some he has sanctified and appropriated unto himself, some he has cursed,
humbled, and put them out of their dignity. So that the cause being natural and
necessary, for which there should be a difference in days, the solemn
observation whereof, declares Religious thankfulness toward him, whose works
of principal reckoning, we thereby admire and honor, it comes next to be
considered, what kinds of duties and services they are, wherewith such times
should be kept holy.

70. The Sanctification of Days and Times, is a token of that Thankfulness, The
manner of celebrating Festival Days.
and a part of that public honor which we ow to God for admirable benefits,
whereof it does not suffice, that we keep a secret Calendar, taking thereby our
private occasions as we lift our selves, to think how much God has done for
all men; but the days which are chosen out to serve as public Memorials of
such his Mercies, ought to clothed with those outward Robes of Holiness,
whereby their difference from other days, may be made sensible. But because
Time in it self, as has been already proved, can receive no alteration; the
hallowing of Festival days, must consist in the shape or countenance, which we
put upon the affairs that are incident into those days. This is the day which
the Lord has made, says the Prophet David, Let us rejoice and be glad in it.
So that generally Offices and Duties of Grande vialr^^cer octiciurn, seces se
choros in pub. licurn endurete vicatim epuia^ ebitatem ta^^rna ^alun ^ole ^^^
vino luc^^ cugr^e, catervarim cursirare ad injurias, ad iniurin, ad
impu^^citias, ad I^bi^inis illecebras. Siccine exprimi^^ publicum qan^inst per
publicum dedecus? Tert. Apol. ^p. 35. Dies sellos Majestiri alti^same dedicar^s
^ulli. ^^^^^us voluptati^^tes accup^ri. ^l 12. tit. 12. lib. 1 (...) These. ^^
^ira^. li^i^. Ser. 9.
Religious Joy, are that wherein the hallowing of Festival times consists.
The most Natural Testimonies of our rejoicing in God, are first, his Praises
set forth with cheerful alacrity of mind: Secondly, Our comfort and delight
expressed by a charitable largeness of somewhat more then common bounty: (...)
Philo. lib. de Ab^aba.
Thirdly, Sequestration from ordinary labors, the toyls and cares whereof are
not meet to be companions of such gladness. Festival solemnity therefore, is
nothing but the due mixture, as it were, of these three Elements, Praise,
Bounty, and Rest. Touching Praise, for as much as the Jews, who alone knew the
way how to magnify God aright, did commonly (as appeared by their wicked
lives) more of custom, and for fashion sake execute the services of their
Religion, then with hearty and true devotion (which God especially requires)
he therefore protests against their Sabbaths and Solemn Days, as being
therewith much offended. Plentiful and liberal expense is required in them that
abound, party as a sign of their own joy, in the goodness of God toward them,
and partly as a mean, whereby to refresh those poor and needy, who being,
especially at these times, made partakers of relaxation and joy with others,
Deuteronomy. 15. 14. Nehe 8. 9.
do the more religiously bless God, whose great Mercies were a cause thereof,
and the more contentedly endure the burden of that hard estate wherein they
continue. Rest is the end of all Motion, and the last perfection of all things
that labor. Labors in us are journeys, and even in them which feel no weariness
by any work; yet they are but ways whereby to come unto that which brings not
happiness, till it do bring Rest. For as long as any thing which we desire is
unattained, we rest not. Let us not here take Rest for Idleness. They are Idle,
whom the painfulness of action causes to avoid those Labors, whereunto both
God and Nature binds them; they Rest, which either cease from their work,
when they have brought it unto perfection, of else give over a meaner labor,
because a worthier and better is to be undertaken. God has created nothing to
be idle or ill employed. As therefore, Man does consist of different and
distinct parts, every part endued with manifold abilities, which all have their
several ends and actions thereunto referred; so there is in this great variety
of duties which belong to men, that dependency and other; by means whereof, the
lower sustaining always the more excellent, and the higher perfecting the more
base; they are in their times and seasons continued with most exquisite
correspondence: Labors of bodily and daily toil, purchase freedom for actions
of Religious Joy, which benefit these actions requite with the gift of desired
Rest: A thing most natural and fit to accompany the solemn Festival duties of
honor, which are done to God. For if those principal works of God, the memory
whereof we use to celebrate at such times, be but certain tastes and ^^says, as
it were, of that final benefit, wherein our perfect felicity and bliss lies
folded up, seeing that the presence of the one, does direct our cogitations,
thoughts and desires toward the other, it gives surely a kind of life, and
adds inwardly no small delight to those so comfortable expectations, when the
very outward countenance of that we presently do, represents after a sort
that also whereunto we tend, (...) Arist.
as Festival Rest does that Celestial estate whereof the very Heathens
themselves which had not the means whereby to apprehend much, did
notwithstanding imagine, that it needs must consist in Rest, and have therefore
taught, that above the highest moveable sphere, there is nothing which feels
alteration, motion or change, but all things immutable, unsubject to passion,
blessed with eternal continuance in a life of the highest perfection, and of that
complete abundant sufficiency within it self, which no possibility of want,
maim, or defect can touch. Besides, whereas ordinary labors are both in
themselves painful, and base in comparison of Festival Services done to God,
does not the natural difference between them, show that the one, as it were, by
way of submission and homage, should surrender themselves to the other,
wherewith they can neither easily concur, because painfulness and joy are
opposite, nor decently, because while the mind has just occasion to make her
abode in the House of Gladness, the Weed of ordinary toil and travel, becomes
her not? Wherefore, even Nature has taught the Heathens, and God the Jews, and
Christ us, first, that Festival Solemnities are a part of the public exercise
of Religion: secondly, that Praise, Liberality, and Rest, are as Natural
Elements whereof Solemnities consist. But these things the Heathens converted
to the honor of their false gods: And, as they failed in the end it self; so
neither could they discern rightly what form and measure Religion therein
should observe. Whereupon, when the Israelites impiously followed so corrupt
example, they are in every degree noted to have done amiss; their Hymns of
Songs of Praise, were Idolatry, their Bounty, Excess; and their Rest,
wantonness. Therefore the Law of God which appointed them days of Solemnity,
taught them likewise in what manner the same should be celebrated: According to
the pattern of which Institution, David establishing the state of Religion,
ordained Praise to be given unto God in the Sabbaths, 1 Chro. 23.30.
Months, and appointed Times, as their custom had been always before the Lord.
Now, besides the times which God himself in the Law of Moses particularly
specified, there were, through the Wisdom of the Church, certain other devised
by occasion of like occurents to those whereupon the former had risen; as
namely, that which Mordecai and Esther did first celebrate, Es^h 9. 27.
in memory of the Lords most wonderful protection, when Haman had laid his
inevitable Plot, to man's thinking, for the utter extirpation of the Jews even
in one day. This they call the Feast of Lots, because Haman had cast their
life, and their death, as it were, upon the hazard of a Lot. To this may be
added, that other also of Dedication, mentioned in the Tenth of St. John's
Gospel, Joh. 10. 21. 1 Mac. 4. 3^.
the institution whereof is declared in the History of the Maccabees. But for
as much as their Law by the coming of Christ is changed, and we thereunto no
way bound, St. Paul, although it were not his purpose to favor invectives
against the special Sanctification of days and times to the Service of God, and
to the honor of Jesus Christ, does notwithstanding bend his forces against that
opinion, which imposed on the Gentiles the Yoke of Jewish Legal observations,
as if the whole World ought for ever, and that upon pain of condemnation, to
keep and observe the same. Such as in this persuasion hallowed those Jewish
Sabbaths, the Apostle sharply reproves, saying, Gal 4. 10.
Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years; I am in fear of you, lest
I have bestowed upon you labor in vain. Howbeit, Si omnem la torum devotionem
temporum and dierum and menlium and annorum eralis Apostolus ear P^neta
celebramus nanca cire^^ in mense primo? Cur quinquagi^ta. ^xinde ^^^bus in omai
exulrainne decu^rimi^? Lib adver. Psyth Aug. de Civir. Dci. lib 10. cap. 4.
so far off was Tertullian from imagining how any man could possibly hereupon
call in question such days as the Church of Christ does observe, that the
observation of these days, he uses for an Argument whereby to prove, it could
not be the Apostles intent and meaning to condemn simply, all observing of such
times, Generally therefore touching Feasts in the Church of Christ, they have
that profitable use whereof Saint Augustine speaks, By Festival Solemnities
and Set-days, we dedicate and sanctify to God, the memory of his benefits,
lest unthankful forgetfulness thereof, should creep upon us in course of time.
And concerning particulars, their Sabbath the Church has changed into our
Lords day, that is, as the one did continually bring to mind the former World
finished by Creation; so the other might keep us in perpetual remembrance of a
far better World, begun by him which came to restore all things, to make both
Heaven and Earth new. For which cause they honored the last day, we the first,
in every seven, throughout the year, The rest of the days and times which we
celebrate, have relation all unto one head. We begin therefore our
Ecclesiastical year, Luk 1. 25.
with the glorious Annuntiation of his Birth, by Angelical Embassage. There
being hereunto added, his Blessed Nativity it self; the Mystery of his Legal
Circumcision, Luke 2. 21.
the Testification of his true Incarnation, by the Purification of her, which
brought him in the World, his Resurrection, his Ascension into Heaven, the
admirable sending down of his Spirit upon his chosen, and (which consequently
ensued) the notice of that incomprehensible Trinity thereby given to the Church
of God. Again, for as much as we know, that Christ has not only been
manifested great in himself, but great in other his Saints also, the days of
whose departure out of the World, are to the Church of Christ, as the Birth and
Coronation days of Kings or Emperors; therefore especial choice being made of
the very flower of all occasions in this kind, there are annual selected times
to meditate of Christ glorified in them, which had the honor to suffer for his
sake, before they had age and ability to know him; glorified in them, which
knowing him as Stephen, had the sight of that before death, whereinto so
acceptable death did lead, glorified in those Sages of the East, that came from
far to adore him, and were conducted by strange light; glorified in the second
Elias of the World, sent before him to prepare his way, glorified in every of
those Apostles, whom it pleased him to use as Founders of his Kingdom here;
glorified in the Angels, as in Michael, glorified in all those happy Souls,
that are already possessed of Heaven. Over and besides which number not great,
the rest be but four other days heretofore annexed to the Feast of Easter and
Pentecost, by reason of general Baptism, usual at those two Feasts; which also
is the cause why they had not, as other days, any proper name given them. Their
first Institution was therefore through necessity, and their present
continuance is now for the greater honor of the Principals, whereupon they
still attend. If it be then demanded, Whether we observe these times as being
thereunto bound by force of Divine Law, or else by the only Positive
Ordinances of the Church; I answer to this, That the very Law of Nature it
self, which all men confess to be Gods Law, requires in general no less the
Sanctification of Times, then of Places, Persons and Things, unto Gods honor.
For which cause it has pleased him heretofore, as of the rest; so of times
likewise, to exact some parts by way of perpetual homage, never to be dispensed
withal, nor remitted: Again To require some other parts of time with as strict
exaction, but for less continuance; and of the rest which were left
arbibitrary, to accept what the Church shall in due consideration consecrate
voluntarily, unto like Religious uses. Of the first kind, amongst the Jews,
was the Sabbath Day; of the second, Those Feasts which are appointed by the Law
of Moses; the Feast of Dedication, invented by the Church, stands in the
number of the last kind. The Moral Law requiring therefore a seventh part
throughout the age of the whole World, to be that way employed, although with
us the day be changed, in regard of a new Revolution begun by our Savior
Christ; yet the same proportion of time continues which was before, because in
reference to the benefit of Creation, and now much more of Renovation thereunto
added by him which was Prince of the World to come; we are bound to account the
Sanctification of one day in seven, a duty which Gods Immutable Law does exact
for ever. The rest, they say, we ought to abolish, because the continuance of
them does nourish wicked Superstition in the minds of men; besides, they are
all abused by Papists, the enemies of God; yea, certain of them, as Easter and
Pentecost, even by the Jews.

Exceptions against our keeping of other Festival days, besides the Sabbath.
71. Touching Jews, their Easter and Pentecost have with ours as much affinity,
as Philip the Apostle, with Philip the Macedonian King. As for imitation of
Papists, and the breeding of Superstition, they are now become such common
guests, that no man can think it discourteous to let them go as they came. The
next is a rare Observation and Strange; you shall find, if you mark it (as it
does deserve to be noted well) that many thousands there are, who if they have
virtuously during those times behaved themselves, T. C. lib. 6. page 151. If
they had been never abused, neither by the Papists, nor by the Jews, as they
have been, and are daily; yet such making of Holidays, is never without some
great danger of bringing in some evil and currupt opinions into the minds of
men. I will use an example in one, and that the chief of Holidays, and most
generally, and of longest time observed in the Church, which is the Feast of
Easter, which was kept of some more days, of some sewer. How many thousands are
there, I will not say of the ignorant Papists, but of those also which profess
the Gospel, which when they have celebrated those days with diligent heed taken
unto their life; and with some earnest devotion in praying, and hearing the
Word of God, do not by and by, think that they have well celebrated the Feast
of Easter; and yet have they thus notably deceived themselves. For Saint Paul
reaches, 1 Cor. 5. 8. That the celebrating of the Feast of the Christians
Easter, is not, as the Jews was for certain days, but shows, That we must
keep this Feast all the days of our life in the Unleavened Bread of Sincerity
and of Truth. By which we see, that the observing of the Feast of Easter, for
certain days in the year, does pull out of our minds, ere ever we he aware,
the Doctrine of the Gospel, and causes us to rest in that near consideration
of our duties, for the space of a few days, which should be extended in all our
life.
if their devotion and zeal in Prayer have been fervent, their attention to the
Word of God, such as all Christian men should yield, imagine, that herein they
have performed a good duty; which notwithstanding to think, is a very
dangerous: Error, in as much as the Apostle Saint Paul has taught, That we
ought not to keep our Easter as the Jews did for certain days; but, in the
Unleavened Bread of Sincerity and of Truth, to feast continually: Whereas the
restraint of Easter to a certain number of days, causes us to rest for a short
space in that near consideration of our duties, which should be extended
throughout the course of our whole lives, and so pulls out of our minds, the
Doctrine of Christ's Gospel ^re we be aware. The Doctrine of the Gospel, which
here they mean, or should mean, is, That Christ having finished the Law, there
is no Jewish Paschal Solemnity, nor abstinence from sour Bread, now required at
our hands; there is no Leaven which we are bound to cast out, but malice, sin,
and wickedness; no Bread but the food of sincere Truth, wherewith we are tied
to celebrate our Passover. And seeing no time of sin is granted us, neither any
intermission of sound belief, it follows, That this kind of feasting ought
to endure always. But how are standing Festival Solemnities against this? That
which the Gospel of Christ requires, is the perpetuity of virtuous duties; not
perpetuity of exercise or action; but disposition perpetual, and practice as
often as times and opportunities require. Just, valiant, liberal, temperate, and
holy men are they, which can whenever they will, and will whenever they
ought, execute what their several perfections import. If Virtues did always
cease to be, when they cease to work, there should be nothing more pernicious
to Virtue then Sleep: Neither were it possible that men, as Zachary and
Elizabeth, should in all the Commandments of God, walk unreprovable; or that
the Chain of our Conversation should contain so many Links of Divine Virtues,
as the Apostles in diverse places have reckoned up; if in the exercise of each
virtue, perpetual continuance were exacted at our hands. Seeing therefore all
things are done in time, and many offices are not possible at one and the same
time to be discharged; duties of all forms must have necessarily their several
successions and seasons: In which respect the Schoolmen have well and soundly
determined, That Gods Affirmative Laws and Precepts, the Laws that enjoin any
actual duty, as Prayer, Alms, and the like, do bind us ad semper velle, but
not ad semper agere; we are tied to iterate and resume them when need is,
howbeit not to continue them without any intermission. Feasts, whether God
himself has ordained them, or the Church by that Authority which God has
given, they are of Religion such public services, as neither can, nor ought to
be continued otherwise then only by iteration. Which iteration is a most
effectual mean to bring unto full maturity and growth those Seeds of Godliness,
that these very men themselves do grant to be sown in the hearts of many
Thousands, during the while that such Feasts are present. The constant habit of
well-doing, is not gotten, without the custom of doing well, neither can Virtue
be made perfect, but by the manifold works of Virtue often practiced. Before
the powers of our minds be brought unto some perfection, our first assays and
offers toward Virtue, must needs be raw; yet commendable, because they tend
unto ripeness. For which cause, and Wisdom of God has commanded, especially
this circumstance amongst others in solemn Feasts, That to Children and Novices
in Religion, they minister the first occasion to ask and enquire of God.
Whereupon, if there follow but so much Piety as has been mentioned, let the
Church learn to further imbecility with Prayer. Preserve, Lord, these good and
gracious beginnings, that they suddenly dry not up like the morning dew, but
may prosper and grow as the Trees, which Rivers of Waters keep always
flourishing. Let all men's acclamations be, Grace, Grace unto it, as to that
first laid Corner Stone in Zerubbabels Buildings. For who has despised the day
of those things which are small? Or, how dare we take upon us to condemn that
very thing which voluntarily we grant, makes as of nothing, somewhat; seeing
all we pretend against it, is only, that as yet this somewhat, is not much?
The days of solemnity which are but few, cannot choose but soon finish that
outward exercise of Godliness, which properly appertains to such times;
howbeit, men's inward disposition to Virtue, they both augment for the present,
and by their often returns, bring also the same at the length unto that
perfection which we most desire. So that although by their necessary short
continuance, they abridge the present exercise of Piety in some kind; yet
because by repetition they enlarge, strengthen, and confirm the habits of all
Virtue; it remains, that we honor, observe and keep them as Ordinances, many
ways singularly profitable in Gods Church. This Exception being taken against
Holidays, for that they restrain the Praises of God unto certain times, another
follows condemning restraint of men, from their ordinary Trades and Labors at
those times.

T. C. lib. 1. Page 152. I confess that it is in the power of the Church to
appoint so many days in the Week, or in the Year (in the which, the
Congregation shall assemble to hear the Word of God, and receive the
Sacraments, and offer up Prayers unto God) as it shall ^hink s^^l according to
the Rules which are before alleged. But that it has power to make so many
Holidays as we have, wherein men are commanded to ^^^se from their daily
Vocation of^ l^ughing, and exercising their Malie^^^s, ^^^ 1 d^ny to be in the
power of the Church For proof whereof, I will take the Fourth Commandment and
no other interpretation of it, then Mr. Doctor allows of, which is. That God
lir^^o^^th and lea^eth it at the liberty of every man, to work six days in the
Week, so that he rest the Seventh day. Seeing therefore, that the Lord has
lest it to all Men at Liberty, that they might Labor, if they think good, Six
days: I say, the Church nor no Man can take this Liberty away from them, and
drive them to a necessary Rest of the ^^^ly. And if it be lawful to abridge the
Liberty of the Church in this point; and instead, that the Lord says, Six days
thou ^^ist labor, if thou will to say. Thou shall not labor Six days: I do not
see, why the Church may not as well, whereas the Lord says, Thou shall rest
the Seventh day, command, That thou shall not rest the Seventh day. For, if the
Church may ^^ strain the Liberty which God has given them, it may take away
the yoke also, which God has put upon them. And whereas you say, That
notwithstanding this Fourth Commandment the Jews has certain other Feast which
they observed; indeed, the Lord which gave this General Law, might make as many
Exceptions as he thought good, and so long as he thought good. But it follows
not, because the Lord did it, that therefore the Church may do it, unless it
has Commandment and Authority from God so to do. As when there is any General
Plague or Judgment of God, either upon the Church, or coming toward it, the
Lord commands in such a case, Joel 2. 15. That they should sanctify a
General ^a^^, and proclaim G^matisa^a^, which sign; fieth a Prohibition, or
forbidding of ordinary works; and is the same Hebrew word wherewith those
Feasts days are noted in the Law, wherein they should rest. The reason of which
Commandment of the Lord was, that they abstained that day as much as might be
conveniently from Meats; so they might abstain from their daily works, to the
end they might bestow the whole day in hearing the Word of God, and humbling
themselves in the Congregation, confessing their faults, and desiring the Lord
to turn away from his fierce wrath. In this case the Church having Commandment
to make a Holiday, may, and ought to do it, as the Church which was in Babylon,
did during the time of their Captivity; but where it is destitute of a
Commandment, it may not presume by any Decree to restrain that liberty which
the Lord has given.
It is not (they say) in the Power of the Church to command Rest, because God
has left it to all men at liberty, that if they think good to bestow Six whole
days in labor, they may; neither is it more lawful for the Church to abridge
any man of that liberty which God has granted, then to take away the yoke
which God has laid upon them, and to countermand what he does expressly enjoin.
They deny not, but in times of public calamity, that men may the better
assemble themselves to fast and pray, the Church, because it has received
Commandment from God, to proclaim a Prohibition from ordinary works, stands
bound to do it, as the Jews afflicted did in Babylon. But without some express
Commandment from God, there is no power, they say, under Heaven, which may
presume by any Decree to restrain the liberty that God has given. Which
opinion, albeit applied here no farther then to this present cause, shakes
universally the Fabric of Government, tends to Anarchy, and mere confusion,
dissolveth Families, dissipateth Colleges, Corporations, Armies; overthrows
Kingdoms, Churches, and whatsoever is now, through the providence of God, by
Authority and Power upheld. For whereas God has foreptized things of the
greatest weight, and has therein precisely defined, as well that which every
man must perform, as that which no man may attempt, leaving all sorts of men in
the Rest, either to be guided by their own good discretion, if they be free
from subjection to others, or else to be ordered by such Commandments and Laws,
as proceed from those Superiors under whom they live; the Patrons of Liberty
have here made Solemn Proclamation, that all such Laws and Commandments are
void, in as much as every man is left to the freedom of his own mind, in such
things as are not either exacted or prohibited by the Law of God. And because,
only in these things, the Positive Precepts of men have place; which Precepts
cannot possibly be given without some Abridgment of their Liberty, to whom they
are given: Therefore if the Father command the Son, or the Husband the Wife; or
the Lord the Servant, or the Leader the Soldier, or the Prince the Subject; to
go or stand, sleep or wake, at such times, as God himself in particular
commands neither; they are to stand in defense of the Freedom which God has
granted, and to do as themselves list, knowing, that men may as lawfully
command them things utterly forbidden by the Law of God, as tie them to any
thing which the Law of God leaves free. The plain contradictory whereunto is
unfallibly certain. Those things which the Law of God leaves Arbitrary and at
Liberty, are all subject to the Positive Laws of Men; which Laws for the common
benefit, abridge particular Men's Liberty in such things, as far as the Rules of
Equity will suffer. This we must either maintain, or else over-turn the World,
and make every man his own Commander. Seeing then that Labor and Rest upon any
one day of the Six, throughout the year, are granted free by the Law of God,
how exempt we them from the force and power of Ecclesiastical Law, except we
deprive the World of Power, to make any Ordinance or Law at all? Besides, Is it
probable that God should not only allow, but command concurrency of Rest, with
extraordinary occasions of doleful events, befalling (peradventure) some one
certain Church, or not extending unto many, and not as much as permit or
license the like; when Piety, triumphant with Joy and Gladness, makes solemn
commemoration of Gods most rare and unwonted Mercies, such especially as the
whole race of mankind does or might participate? Of vacation from labor in
times of sorrow, the only cause is, for that the general public Prayers of
the whole Church, and our own private business, cannot both he followed at
once; whereas of Rest in the famous solemnities of public Joy, there is both
this consideration the same; and also farther a kind of natural repugnancy,
which makes labors (as has been proved) much more unfit to accompany Festival
Praises of God, then Offices of Humiliation and Grief. Again, If we sift what
they bring for proof and approbation of Rest with Fasting, does it not in all
respects as fully warrant, and as strictly command Rest, whenever the Church
has equal reason by Feasts, and gladsome solemnities to testify public
thankfulness toward God? I would know some cause, why those words of the
Prophet Joel, Jo^l 12. 15.
Sanctify a Fast, call a solemn Assembly; which words were uttered to the
Jews, in misery and great distress, should more bind the Church to do at all
times after the like, Exodus 13 3.
in their like perplexities, then the words of Moses, to the same people, in a
time of joyful deliverance from misery. Remember this day, may warrant any
annual celebration of benefits, no less importing the good of men; and also
justify, as touching the manner and form thereof, what circumstance soever we
imitate only in respect of natural fitness or decency, without any Jewish
regard to Ceremonies, such as were properly theirs, and are not by us expedient
to be continued. Esib. 9.
According to the Rule of which general directions, taken from the Law of God,
no less in the one, then the other, the practice of the Church, commended unto
us in holy Scripture, does not only make for the justification of black and
dismal days (as one of the Fathers terms them) but plainly offers it self
to be followed by such Ordinances (if occasion require) as that which Mordecai
did sometimes devise, Esther what lay in her power help forward, and the rest
of the Jews establish for perpetuity, namely, That the Fourteenth and fifteenth
days of the Month Adar, should be every year kept throughout all Generations;
as days of Feasting and Joy, wherein they would rest from bodily labor, and
what by gifts of Charity bestowed upon the poor, what by other liberal signs of
Amity and Love; all restifie their thankful minds toward God, which almost
beyond possibility, had delivered them all, when they all were as men dead. T.
C. lib. 3. page 193. The example out of Esther is no sufficient warrant for
these Feasts n question. For first, as in other cases, so in this case of days,
the estate of Christians, under the Gospel, ought not to be so ceremonious, as
was theirs, under the Law. Secondly, That which was done there, was done by a
special direction of the Spirit of God, either through the ministry of the
Prophets, which they had, or by some other extraordinary means, which is not to
be followed by us. This may appear by another place, Za^h 8. where the Jews
changed their Fasts into Feasts, only by the mouth of the Lord, through the
ministry of the Prophet. For further pr^ol whereof, first, I take the ^^.
Verse, where it appears, that this was an order to en^ure always, even as
long as the other Feast days, which were instituted by the Lord himself. So
that what abuses soever were of that Feast, yet as a perpetual Decree of God,
it ought to have remained; whereas our Churches can make no such Decree, which
may not upon change of times, and at her circumstances, be altered. For the
other proof hereof. I take the last Verse: For the Prophet contenteth not
himself with that, that he had rehearsed the Decree, as he does sometimes the
Decree of propane Kings, but oditeth precisely, that as soon as ever the Decree
was made, it was Registered in this Book of Esther, which is one of the B^oks of
Canonical Scripture, declaring thereby in what esteem they had it. If it had
been of no further Authority, then on Decree, or then a Canon of one of the
Councils, it had been presumption to have brought it into the Library of the
Holy Ghost. The sum of my Answer is, That this Decree was Divine, and not
Ecclesiastical only.
But this Decree, they say, was Divine, not Ecclesiastical, as may appear in
that there is another Decree in another Book of Scripture; which Decree is
plain, no^ to have proceeded from the Churches Authority, but from the mouth of
the Prophet only; and, as a poor simple man sometime was fully persuaded, That
it Pontius Pilate had not been a Saint, the Apostles would never have suffered
his name to stand in the Creed; so these men have a strong opinion, that
because the Book of Esther is Canonical, the Decree of Esther cannot be
possibly Ecclesiastical: If it were, they ask how the Jews could bind
themselves always to keep it, seeing Ecclesiastical Laws are mutable? As though
the purposes of men might never intend constancy in that, the nature whereof is
subject to alteration. Does the Scripture it self make mention of any Divine
Commandment? Is the Scripture witness of more, then only that Mordecai was the
Author of this Custom, that by Letters written to his brethren the Jews,
throughout all Provinces under Darius, the King of Persia; he gave them charge
to celebrate yearly those two days, for perpetual remembrance of Gods
miraculous deliverance and mercy; that the Jews hereupon undertook to do it,
and made it with general consent, an order for perpetnity; that Esther,
secondly, by her Letters confirmed the same which Mordecai had before decreed;
and that finally, the Ordinance was written to remain for ever upon Record? Did
not the Jews, in Provinces abroad, observe at the first the Fourteenth day, the
Jews in Susis the Fifteenth? Were they not all reduced to an uniform order, by
means of those two Decrees, and so every where three days kept; the first with
fasting, in memory of danger; the rest, in token of deliverance, as festival
and joyful days? Was not the first of these three afterward, the day of sorrow
and heaviness, abrogated, when the same Church saw it meet that a better day, a
day in memory of like deliverance, 2 Mac. 15 34.
out of the bloody hancs of Nicanor, should succeed in the room thereof? But
for as much as there is no end of answering fruitless oppositions, let it
suffice men of sober minds, to know, that the Law both of God and Nature
allows generally, days of rest and festival solemnity, to be observed by way
of thankful and joyful remembrance, if such miraculous favors be showed toward
mankind, as require the same; that such Graces, God has bestowed upon his
Church, ^ Mac. 4. 55.
as well in latter, as in former times; that in some particulars, when they
have fallen out, himself has demanded his own honor, and in the rest, has lest
it to the Wisdom of the Church, directed by those precedents, and enlightened by
other means, always to judge when the like is requisite. About questions
therefore, concerning Days and Times, our manner is not to stand at bay with
the Church of God, demanding, Wherefore the memory of Commemoratio Apostolica
passionis, to^las Christianitatis magistra a cunctis jure celebratur. Cod. l.3.
ti^. 12.l.7.
Paul should be rather kept, then the memory of T. C. lib. 1. page 153. For so
much as the old people did never keep any Feast or Holiday for remembrance,
either of Moses, etc.
Daniel: We are content to imagine, it may be perhaps true, that the least in
the Kingdom of Christ, is greater then the greatest of all the Prophets of God
that have gone before: We never yet saw cause to despair, but that the T. C.
lib. 1. page 153. The people when it is called St. Paul's day, or the Blessed
Virgin Mary's day, can understand nothing thereby, but that they are instituted
to the honor of St. Paul, or the Virgin Mary, unless they be otherwise taught.
And if you say Let them to be taught, I have answered. That the teaching in
this Land, cannot by any other which is yet taken, come to the most part of
those which have drunk this poison, etc.
simplest of the people might be taught the right construction of as great
Mysteries, as the Scilicet ignorant nos nec Christum unquam relinquere, qui pro
totius servandorum mundi salu^e passus est, nec alium quempiam colere posse.
Nam hunc quidem tanquam Filium Dei a loramus, Martyrs vero tanquam Discipulos
and Imitatores Domini digne proptet insuperabilem in Regem ipsorum ac
Praeceprorem benevolenuam diligismus, quorum and nos consories and dicipulos
fieri optamus. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 15.
Name of a Saints day does comprehend, although the times of the year go on in
their wonted course: We had rather glorify and bless God, for the Fruit we
daily behold, reaped by such Ordinances, as his gracious Spirit makes the ripe
Wisdom of this National Church to bring forth, then vainly boast of our own
peculiar and private inventions, as if the skill of T. C. lib. 1. page 153. As
for all the Commodities, etc.
profitable Regiment had left her public habitation, to dwell in retired
manner with some few men of one Livery: We make not our childish T. C. lib. 1.
page 154.
appeals, sometimes from our own to Foreign Churches, sometime from both unto
Churches ancienter then both are, in effect always from all others to our own
selves; but, as becomes them that follow with all humility the ways of Peace,
we honor, reverence, and obey, in the very next degree unto God, the voice of
the Church of God wherein we live. They, whose wits are too glorious to fall to
so low an ebb; they which have risen and swollen so high, that the Walls of
ordinary Rivers are unable to keep them in; they whose wanton contentions in
the cause whereof we have spoken, do make all where they go, a Sea, even they,
at their highest float, are constrained both to see and T. C. lib. 1. page 154.
We condemn not the Church of England neither in this, nor in other things.
Which are meet to be Reformed. For it is one thing to mislike, another thing to
condemn; and it is one thing to condemn something in the Church, and another
thing to condemn the Church for it.
grant, -that what their fancy will not yield to like, their judgment cannot
with reason condemn. Such is evermore the final victory of all Truth, that they
which have not the hearts to love her, acknowledge, that to hate her, they have
no cause. Touching those Festival days therefore which we now observe, their
number being no way felt (...) De Clau^io dictum apud Dionys. lib. 50.
discommodious to the Commonwealth, and their grounds such as hitherto has
been showed; what remains, but to keep them throughout all generations holy,
severed by manifest notes of difference from other times, adorned with that
which most may betoken true, virtuous, and celestial joy? To which intent,
because surcease from labor is necessary, yet not so necessary, no not on the
Sabbath or Seventh day, it self, but that rarer occasions in men's particular
affairs, subject to manifest detriment unless they be presently followed, may
with very good conscience draw them sometimes aside from the ordinary rule,
considering the favorable dispensation which our Lord and Savior groundeth on
this Axiom, Mark 2. 27. Numb. 15.32.
Man was not made for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath ordained for Man; so far
forth as concerns Ceremonies annexed to the principal Sanctification thereof,
howsoever the rigor of the Law of Moses may be thought to import the contrary;
if we regard with what severity the violation of Sabbaths has been sometime
punished, a thing perhaps the more requisite at that instant, both because the
Jews by reason of their long abode in a place of continual servile toil, could
not suddenly be wained and drawn unto contrary offices, without some strong
impression of terror; and also for that there is nothing more needful, then to
punish with extremity the first transgressions of those Laws, that require a
more exact observation for many ages to come; therefore as the Jews,
superstitiously addicted to their Sabbaths rest for a long time, not without
danger to themselves, and Hi vacare consueti sunt seprima die, and neque a^ma
porta^e in praedictis dieb^s, neque terrae culturam contingere neque alterius
cujuspiam curam habere parluntur, sed ^^ templis extenden^es mano^ adorare
usque ad vesperam solitisunt. Ingrediente verb in civi^a^em Piolem^o Lago ^um
exerci^ and mul^is hominibus, cum custodi^e dobueri^t civi^a^em, ipsis
^^^titiam observantibus, provinci^ quidem dominum suscepit amarissimum, Lex
vero manifes^^ta est, mala^^ habere solennitatem. Agath^r^bid. apu^ Joseph.
lib. 1. co^^r. Appi^^. Vide and Dionys. lib. 37.
obloquy to their very Law, did afterward perceive and amend wisely their
former Error, not doubting, that bodily labors are made by 1 Mac. 2.40.
accessity venial, though otherwise especially on that day, rest be more
convenient: So at all times, the voluntary scandalous contempt of that rest
from labor, wherewith publiclkly God is served, we cannot too Nehe. 13. 15.
severely correct and bridle. The Emperor Constantine Co^. l.3. ^^. 12.l.3.
having with overgreat facility licenced Sundays labor in Country Villages,
under that pretense, whereof there may justly no doubt sometime consideration
be had, namely, left any thing which God by his providence has bestowed,
should miscarry, not being taken in due time, Leo, which afterward saw that
this ground would not bear so general and large indulgence as had been granted,
does by a contrary Edict, both reverse and severely censure his Predecessors
remissness, saying, Leo Consti^, 54.
We ordain, according to the true meaning of the Holy Ghost, and of the
Apostles thereby directed, That on the Sacred day, wherein our own integrity
was restored, all do rest and surcease labor, That neither Husbandman, nor
other, on that day, put their hands to forbidden works. For if the Jews did so
much reverence their Sabbath, which was but a shadow of ours, are not we which
inhabit the Light and Truth of Grace, bound to honor that day which the Lord
himself has honored, and has therein delivered us both from dishonor and from
death? Are we not bound to keep it singular and inviolble, well contenting our
selves with so liberal a grant of the rest, and not incroaching upon that one
day, which God has chosen to his own honor? Were it not wretchless neglect of
Religion, to make that very day common, and to think we may do with it as with
the rest? Imperial Laws which had such care of hallowing, especially our Lords
day, did not omit to provide, that T. C. lib. 3. ^^. ^2. Dies ses^o^.
other Festival times might be kept with vacation from labor, whether they were
days appointed on the sudden, as extraordinary occasions fell out, or days
which were celebrated yearly, for Politic and Civil considerations; or
finally, such days as Christian Religion has ordained in Gods Church. The joy
that sets aside labor, disperseth those things which labor gathers. For
gladness does always rise from a kind of fruition and happiness, which
happiness banisheth the cogitation of all want, it needs nothing but only
the bestowing of that it has, in as much as the greatest felicity that
felicity has, is to spread and enlarge it self; it comes hereby to pass, that
the first effect of joyfulness, is to rest, because it seeks no more; the
next, because it abounds, to give. The Root of both, is the glorious presence
of that joy of mind, which rises from the manifold considerations of Gods
unspeakable Mercy, into which considerations we are led by occasion of Sacred
times. For, how could the Jewish Congregations of old, be put in mind by their
weekly Sabbaths, what the World reaped through his goodness, which did of
nothing create the World; by their yearly Passover, what farewell they took of
the Land of Egypt; by their Pentecost, what Ordinances, Laws, and Statutes,
their Fathers received at the hands of God; by their Feast of Tabernacles, with
what protection they journeyed from place to place, through so many fears and
hazards, during the tedious time of forty years travel in the Wildeness; by
their Annual solemnity of Lots, how near the whole Seed of Israel was unto
utter extirpation, when it pleased that Great God which guides all things in
Heaven and Earth, so to change the counsels and purposes of men, that the same
Hand which had signed a Decree in the opinion, both of them that granted, and
of them that procured it, irrevocable, for the general massacre of Man, Woman,
and Child, became the Buckler of their preservation, that no one hair of their
heads might be touched: The same days which had been set for the pouring out of
so much innocent blood, were made the days of their execution, whose malice had
contrived the plot thereof; and the self-same persons that should have endured
whatsoever violence and rage could offer, were employed in the just revenge of
cruelty, to give unto blood-thirsty men the taste of their own Cup; or how can
the Church of Christ now endure to be so much called on, and preached unto, by
that which every Matthew. 28.1. Mark 16.1. Luke 24.1. John 20.1. 1 Cor. 16.2.
Apoc. 1.10.
Dominical day throughout the year, that which year by year so many Festival
times, Apostolis pr^^csi^om sui^. ^on u^ beges de sestis diebus celebr^nd;
sancirent; ied u^recte vivendi ca^io^^ ^^^ and pie (...)bis authors essent.
Socra. Hill. lib. cap. 23.
if not commanded by the Apostles themselves, whose care at that time was of
greater things, yet instituted, either by such Quae toto tertarum or he
servantur. vel db ips^s Apostolis vel Consilus g^neralibus quorum (...) rimain
in Ecclesia authoritas ^^^ stratuts est;ntelligere lice^^ Sicu^^, qu^d Domini
Passio and Resurrectio, and in Coelum Ascensus, and Adventus Spiritus Sancti,
anniversaria solemnita^e celebrarenu^ August. Epist. 118.
Universal Authority, as no Men, or at the least such as we, with no reason,
may despise, do as sometime the holy Angels did from Heaven, sing, Luk 2.14
Glory be unto God on High, Peace on Earth, toward Men good Will, (for this in
effect, is the very Song that all Christian Feasts do apply as their several
occasions require) how should the days and times continually thus inculcate
what God has done, and we refuse to agnize the benefit of such remembrances;
that very benefit which caused Moses to acknowledge those Guides of Day and
Night, the Sun and Moon which enlighten the World, not more profitable to
nature, by giving all things life, then they are to the Church of God, by
occasion of the use they have, in regard of the appointed Festival times? That
which the head of all Philosophers has said of Women, If they be good, the
half of the Commonwealth is happy, wherein they are; the same we may fitly
apply to times: Well to celebrate these Religious and Sacred days, is, to spend
the flower of our time happily. They are the splendour and outward dignity of
our Religion, forcible Witnesses of Ancient Truth, provocations to the
Exercises of all Piety, shaddows of our endless Felicity in Heaven, on Earth
Everlasting Records and Memorials, wherein they which cannot be drawn to
hearken unto that we teach, may only by looking upon that we do, in a manner
read whatsoever we believe.

Of Days app^inted as well for ordinary, as for extraordinary Fasts in the
Church of God.
72. The matching of contrary things together, is a kind of illustration to
both. Having therefore spoken thus much of Festival Days, the next that offer
themselves to hand, are days of Pensive Humiliation and Sorrow. Fastings are
either of men's own free and voluntary accord, as their particular devotion does
move them thereunto; or else they are publicly enjoined in the Church, and
required at the hands of all men. There are, which altogether disallow not the
former kind; and the latter they greatly commend; so that it be upon
extraordinary, occasions only, T. C. lib. 1. page 30. I will not enter now to
discuss. whether it were well done to Fast i^ a^l places according to the
custom of the place. You oppose Ambrose and Augustine, I could oppose Ignatius
and Tertullian whereof the one says, it is aefos, a de^^^ble thing to Fast
upon the Lords Day, the other, That it is to kill the Lord, Tertul^ the Coron.
il Ignatius: Epist de Phillips. And although Ambese and Augustine, being
private men at Rome, would have so done; yet it follows not, That if they had
been Citizens and Ministers there, that they would have done And if they had
done so, yet it follows (...) but they would hase spoken against that
appointment of days, and (...), of Fasting, whereof Eusebius says, that
Mo^ta^^^ was the first Author. I speak of that which they ought to have done.
For otherwise I know, they both thought corruptly of Fastings: when as the one
says, It was a remedy or reward to Fast other days. ^ in (...) not in Fast,
was in and the others asks, What Salvation we can obtain, if we blot not our
^^^ sins by Fasting, seeing that the Scripture says, That Fasting and Amiss,
does deliv^r from sin; and therefore calls them new Teachers, they that out
the merit of Fastings. August. de Temp. 62. ^^m. Aub. lib. 10. Epist.
and after one certain manner exercised. But Yearly or Weekly Fasts, such as
ours in the Church of England, they allow no farther, then as the Temporal
State of the Land does require the same, for the maintenance of Sea-faring-men,
and preservation of Cattle, because the decay of the one, and the waste of the
other, could not well be prevented but by a Politic Order, appointing some
such usual change of Diet as ours is. We are therefore the rather to make it
manifest in all men's eyes, That Set-times of Fasting, appointed in Spiritual
Considerations to be kept by all sorts of men, took not their beginning, either
from Montanus, or any other, whose Heresies may prejudice the credit and due
estimation thereof, but have their ground in the Law of Nature, are allowable
in Gods sight, were in all ages heretofore, and may till the Worlds end be
observed, not without singular use and benefit. Much hurt has grown to the
Church of God, through a false imagination, that Fasting stands men in no
stead for any spiritual respect, but only to take down the frankness of
Nature, and to tame the wildeness of flesh. Whereupon the World being bold to
surfeit, does now blush to fast, supposing, that men when they fast, do rather
bewray a Disease, then exercise a Virtue. I much wonder what they, who are thus
persuaded, do think, what conceit they have concerning the Fasts of the
Patriarks, the Prophets, the Apostles, our Lord Jesus Christ himself. The
affections of Joy and Grief are so knit unto all the actions of man's life, that
whatsoever we can do, or may be done unto us, the sequel thereof is
continually, the one or the other affection. Wherefore considering, that they
which grieve and joy as they ought, cannot possibly otherwise live then as they
should, the Church of Christ, the most absolute and perfect School of all
Virtue, has by the special direction of Gods good Spirit, hitherto always
inured men from their infancy; and partly with days of Festival Exercise, for
the framing of the one affection; partly with times of a contrary sort, for the
perfecting of the other. Howbeit, over and besides this, we must note, that as
Resting, so Fasting likewise attends sometimes no less upon the Actions of
the higher, then upon the Affections of the lower part of the mind. Fasting,
says Tertullian, is a work of reverence toward God. The end thereof,
sometimes elevation of mind; sometime the purpose thereof clean contrary. The
cause why Moses in the Mount did so long fast, was mere divine Speculation; the
cause why David, Tertul. de ^ejun. Neque enim c^bi tempus in periculo: Semper
inedia mo^^ori^ sequela est.
Humiliation. Our life is (...) Philo. 1. de Abrah.
a mixture of good with evil. When we are partakers of good things, we joy,
neither can we but grieve at the contrary. If that befall us which makes glad,
our Festival Solemnities declare our rejoicing to be in him, whose mere
undeserved Mercy is the Author of all happiness; if any thing be either
imminent or present, which we shun, our Watchings, Fastings, Cries, and Tears,
are unfeigned Testimonies, that our selves we condemn as the only causes of
our own misery, and do all acknowledge him no less inclinable, then able to
save. And because as the memory of the one, though past, renews gladness; so
the other, called again to mind, does make the wound of our just remorse to
bleed anew; which wound needs often touching the more, for that we are
generally more apt to Calendar Saints, then sinners days, therefore there is in
the Church a care, not to iterate the one alone, but to have frequent
repetition of the other. Never to seek after God, saving only when either the
Crib or the Whip does constrain, were brutish servility, and a great derogation
to the worth of that which is most predominant in men, if sometime it had not a
kind of voluntary access to God, and of conference, as it were, with God; all
these inferior considerations laid aside. In which sequestration, for as much
as John 4.31.
higher cogitations do naturally drown and bury all inferior cares, the mind
may as well forget natural, both food and sleep, by being carried above it self
with serious and heavenly Meditation, as by being cast down with heaviness,
drowned and swallowed up of sorrow. Albeit therefore, concerning Jewish
Abstinence from certain kinds of meats, as being unclean, the Apostle does
reach, That the Romans 14. 19.
Kingdom of Heaven is not meat nor drink, that food commends us not unto God,
whether we take it, or abstain from it, that if we eat, we are not thereby the
more acceptable in his sight, nor the less, if we eat not: His purpose
notwithstanding was far from any intent to derogate from that Fasting, which is
no such scrupulous Abstinence, as only refuses some kinds of meats and
drinks, lest they make them unclean that taste them, but an Abstinence whereby
we either interrupt, or otherwise abridge the careof our bodily sustenance, to
show by this kind of outward exercise, the serious intention of our minds,
fixed on Heavenlier and better desires, the earnest hunger and thirst whereof,
depriveth the body of those usual contentments, which otherwise are not denied
unto it. These being in Nature the first causes that induce fasting, the next
thing which follows to be considered, is the ancient practice thereof amongst
the Jews. Touching whose private voluntary Fasts, the Precept which our Savior
gave them, was, When ye fast, look not sour, as Hypocrites: For they dis-figure
their faces, that they might seem to men to fast. Matthew. 6. 16.
Verily, I say unto you, they have their reward. When thou fastest, anoint thy
head, and wash thy face, that thou seem not unto men to fast, but unto thy
Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret, will reward
thee openly. Our Lord and Savior would not teach the manner of doing, much
less propose a reward for doing that, which were not both holy and acceptable
in Gods sight. The Pharisees weekly bound themselves unto double Fasts, neither
are they for this reproval. Often Fasting, which was a virtue in John's
Disciples, could not in them of it self be a vice; and therefore not the
oftenness of their Fasting, but their hypocrisy therein was blamed. Of public
enjoined Fasts 2 Chro. 20. Jere. 36. Ezra. 8. ^ Sam. 7.
, upon causes extraordinary, the examples in Scripture are so far frequent,
that they need no particular rehearsal. Public extraordinary Fastings, were
sometimes for Julg. 20. 26.
one only day, sometimes for 2 Mac 13 11.
three, sometimes for 1 Samuel 31. 13. 1 Chro 10. 12.
seven. Touching Fasts not appointed for any such extraordinary causes, but
either yearly, or monthly, or weekly observed and kept: First, Upon the Le^it.
1^. Levit. 16. Philo d hujus festit jejuniosra loquitur. (...) Page 44^.
nineth day of that month, the tenth whereof was the Feast of Expiation, they
were commanded of God, that every Soul, year by year, should afflict it self.
Their yearly Fasts every fourth month, in regard of the City of Jerusalem,
entered by the Enemy, every fifth, for the memory of the overthrow of their
Temple; every seventh, for the treacherous destruction, and death of Gedaliah,
the very last stay which they had to lean unto in their greatest misery; every
tenth, in remembrance of the time when siege began first to be laid against
them: All these not commanded by God himself, but ordained by a public
Constitution of their own; the Prophet Zach. 8. 1^. Exodus 32. Numh. 14.
Zachary expressly touches. That St. Jerome, following the Tradition of the
Hebrews, does make the first, a memorial of the breaking of those Two Tables,
when Moses descended from Mount Senai; the second, a memorial as well of Gods
indignation, condemning them to forty years travel in the Desert, as of his
wrath, in permitting Chaldeans to waste, burn and destroy their City; the last,
a memorial of heavy tidings, brought out of Jury to Ezekiel and the rest, which
lived as Captives in foreign parts; the difference is not of any moment,
considering, that each time of sorrow, is naturally evermore a Register of all
such grievous events as have happened, either in, or near about the same time. To
these I might add Vide Riber. lib. 5. cap. 11. Dan. 10. 23.
sundry other Fasts, above twenty in number, ordained amongst them by like
occasions, and observed in like manner, besides their weekly Abstinence,
Mundays and Thursdays, throughout the whole year. When men fasted, it was not
always after one and same sort; but either by depriving themselves wholly of
all food, during the time that their Fasts continued, or by abating both the
quantity and kind of Diet. We have of the one, a plain example in the
Ninivites Fasting, and as plain a president for the other in the Prophet
Daniel, I was (says he) in heaviness for three weeks of days; I eat no
pleasant Bread, neither tasted Flash nor Wine. Their Tables, when they gave
themselves to fasting, had not that usual furniture of such Dishes as do
cherish blood with blood; but Puram and sine animalibus coenam. Apu^. in
Aselep. in sine. Pastum and potum pura nosse. non ventris scilicet sed animae
cause. Tertul. de Poenit. Vide Phil. lib. de veta contempl. Romans 14. 2. Hieron.
lib. ^. cont^. Ievinian. Judith 8 6. A. ^os. in ^isne. Tora. lib. 3. Quiest de
tempor. cap. de S^b. and cap. de Je^us.
for food, they had Bread; for suppage, Salt; and for sauce, Herbs. Whereunto
the Apostle may be thought to allude saying, One believes he may eat all
things, another which is weak (and makes a conscience of keeping those Customs
which the Jews observe) eats Herbs. This austere repast they took in the
Evening, after Abstinence the whole day: For, to forfeit a Noons meal, and then
to recompense themselves at night, was not their use. Nor did they ever
accustom themselves on Sabbaths, or Festivals days to fast. And yet it may be a
question, whether in some sort they did not always fast the Sabbath. Their
Fastings were partly in token of Penitency, Humiliation, Grief, and Sorrow,
partly in sign of devotion and reverence toward God. Which second
consideration (I dare not peremptorily and boldy affirm any thing) might induce
to abstain till noon, as their manner was on Fasting days, to do till night.
May it not very well he thought, that hereunto the Sacred Neh. 8. 3. 12. Hora
si^^^a qu^ (...)it is nos^^ is ad prandium voca^e soler, supervenit. Joseph. lib.
de vira (...).
Scripture does give some secret kind of Testimony? Josephus is plain, That
the sixth hour (the day they divided into twelve) was wont on the Sabbath,
always to call them home unto meat. Neither is it improbable, but that the
Sabbat^ Juda^oram a Mose in umne x^um jejunio dicara. Iusti^. lib. 35. Ne
ju^aus quidem, mi T^^eri, ^om libenter Sabbat^ ^ junium i^^^a quam eg^ hostie
^e^ravi. Sueton. in Octav. c. 76.
Heathens did therefore so often upbraid them with Fasting on that day.
Besides, they which found so great fault with our Lords Disciples, for rubbing
a few Ears of Corn in their hands on the Sabbath day, are not unlikely to have
aimed also at the same mark. For neither was the bodily pain so great, that it
should offend them in that respect, and the very manner of defense which our
Savior there uses, is more direct and literal to justify the breach of the
Jewish custom in Fasting, then in working at that time. Finally, the Apostles
afterward themselves, when God first gave them the gift of Tongues, whereas
some in disdain and spite, termed Grace, Drunkenness, it being then the day of
Pentecost, and but only a fourth part of the day spent, they use this as an
argument against the other cavil, Act^ 2. 5.
These men, says Peter, are not drunk as you suppose, since as yet the third
hour of the day is not over-past. Howbeit, leaving this in suspense, as a thing
not altogether certainly known, and to come from Jews to Christians, we find
that of private voluntarily Fastings, the Apostle Saint Paul speaks 1 Cor. 7
^. 2 Cor. 6 ^ and 11. 27. Col. 4 4.
more then once. And (says Tertullian) they are sometime commanded throughout
the Church, Ex aliqua sellicitudinis Ecclesiastica causa, the care and fear of
the Church so requiring. It does not appear, that the Apostles ordained any set
and certain days to be generally kept of all. Notwithstanding, for as much as
Christ has fore-signified, that where. himself should be taken from them, his
absence would soon make them apt to fast, it seems, that even as the first
Festival day appointed to be kept of the Church, was the day of our Lords
return from the dead; so the first sorrowful and mourning day, was, That which
we now observe in memory of his departure o^t of this World. And because there
could be no abatement of grief, till they saw him raised, whose death was the
occasion of their heaviness; therefore the day he lay in the Sepulcher has
been also kept and observed as a weeping day. The Custom of Fasting these two
days before Easter, is undoubtedly most ancient; in so much, Ignat. Epist. ad
Philip.
that Ignatius not thinking him a Catholic Christian man which did not abhor,
and (as the state of the Church was then) avoid fasting on the Jews Sabbath,
does notwithstanding except for ever, that one Sabbath or Saturday which
falls out to be the Easter-Eve, as with us it always does, and did sometimes
also with them which kept at that time their Easter the Fourteenth day of
March, as the custom of the Jews was. It came afterward to be an order, that
even as the day of Christ's Resurrection, so the other two, in memory of his
death and burial, were weekly. But this, when Saint Ambrose lived, had not as
yet taken place throughout all Churches, no not in Millan, where himself was
Bishop. And for that can^^, he says, that although at Rome he observed the
Saturdays fast, because such was then the custom in Rome, nevertheless in his
own Church at home he did otherwise. The Churches which did not observe that
day, had another instead thereof, which was the Wednesday, for that when they
judged it meet to have weekly a day of Humiliation, besides that whereon our
Savior suffered death, it seemed best to make their choice of that day
especially, whereon the Jews are thought to have first contrived their treason
together with Judas against Christ. So that the instituting and ordaining both
of these, and of all other times of like exercise, is as the Church shall judge
expedient for men's good. And concerning every Christians man's duty herein,
surely that which Augustine and Ambrose are before alleged to have done, is
such, as all men favoring Equity, must needs allow, and follow, if they affect
peace. As for their specified Errors, I will not in this place dispute, whether
voluntarily Fasting with a virtuous purpose of mind, be any medicinable remedy
of evil, or a duty acceptable unto God, and in the World to come even
rewardable, as other offices are which proceed from Christian Piety; whether
wilfully to break and despise the wholesome laws of the Church herein, be a
thing which offends God; whether truly it may not be said, that penitent both
weaping and fasting, are means to blot out sin, means whereby through Gods
unspeakable and undeserved mercy, we obtain or procure to our selves pardon;
which attainment unto any gracious benefit by him bestowed, the phrase of
Antiquity uses to express by the name of Merit; but if either Saint Augustine,
or Saint Ambrose, have taught any wrong opinion, seeing they which reprove them
are not altogether free from Error; I hope they will think it no error in us so
to censure men's smaller faults, that their virtues be not thereby generally
prejudiced. And if in Churches abroad, where we are not subject to Power or
Jurisdiction, discretion should teach us for Peace and Quietness sake, to frame
our selves to other men's example, Is it meet that at home where our freedom is
less, our boldness should be more? Is it our duty to oppugn, in the Churches
whereof we are Ministers, the Rites and Customs which in Foreign Churches Piety
and Modesty did teach us, as strangers not to oppugn, but to keep without show
of contradiction or dislike? Why oppose they the name of a Minister in this
case, unto the state of a private man? Does their order exempt them from
obedience to Laws? That which their Office and place requires, is to show
themselves patterns of reverend subjection, not Authors and Masters of contempt
toward Ordinances, the strength whereof, when they seek to weaken, they do but
in truth discover to the World their own imbecillities, which a great deal
wiselier they might conceal. But the practice of the Church of Christ, we shall
by so much the better, both understand and love, if to that which hitherto has
been spoken, there be somewhat added for more particular declaration, how
Heretics have partly abused Fasts, and partly bent themselves against the
lawful use thereof in the Church of God. Whereas therefore Ignatius has said,
If any keep Sundays or Saturdays Fasts (one only Saturday in the year
excepted) that man is no better then a murderer of Christ; (...) Epist. ad.
Philip.
the cause of such his earnestness at that time, was the impiety of certain
Heretics, which thought Vide Ire^^. lib. 1. cap. 20, 21. ^9. 23. 24. 25.
Epiph. ^aeres. 21. 2. 23, 24, 27^ 28. etc. 41. 42.
that this World being corruptible, could not be made but a very evil Author.
And therefore as the Jews did by the Festival Solemnity of their Sabbath,
rejoice in the God that created the World, as in the Author of all Goodness; so
those Heretics in hatred of the Maker of the World, sorrowed, wept, and fasted
on that day, as being the birthday of all evil. And as Christian men of sound
belief, did solemnize the Sunday, in joyful memory of Christ's Resurrection, so
likewise at the self-same time such Heretics as denied his Resurrection, did
the contrary to them which held it: When the one sort rejoiced, Vide Canon.
Ap^st. 55.
the other fasted. Against those Heretics which have urged perpetual
abstinence from certain Meats, as being in their very nature unclean, the
Church has still bent herself as an enemy; Saint Paul giving charge to take
heed of them, which under any such opinion, should utterly forbid the use of
Meats or Drinks. The Apostles themselves forbad some, as the order taken at
Jerusalem declares. But the cause of their so doing, we all know. Again, when
Tertullian, together with such as were his followers, began to Montanize, and
pretending to perfect the severity of Christian Discipline, brought in sundry
unaccustomed days of Fasting, continued their Fasts a great deal longer, and
made them more rigorous then the use of the Church had been; the minds of men
being somewhat moved at so great, and so sudden novelty, the cause was
presently inquired into. After notice taken how the Montanists held these
Additions to be Supplements of the Gospel, whereunto the Spirit of Prophecy
did now mean to put, as it were, the last hand, and was therefore newly
descended upon Montanus, whose orders all Christian men were no less to obey,
then the Laws of the Apostles themselves; this Abstinence the Church abhorred
likewise, and that justly. Whereupon Tertullian proclaiming even open War of
the Church, maintained Montanism, wrote a Book in defense of the new Fast, and
entitled the same; A Treatise of Fasting against the opinion of the Carnal
sort. In which Treatise nevertheless, because so much is sound and good, as
does either generally concern the use, or in particular, declare the Custom of
the Churches Fasting in those times, men are not to reject whatsoever is
alleged out of that Book, for confirmation of the Truth. His error discloseth
it self in those places, where he defends Fasts to be duties necessary for
the whole Church of Christ to observe as commanded by the Holy Ghost, and that
with the same authority from whence all other Apostolical Ordinances came, both
being the Laws of God himself, without any other distinction or difference,
saving only, that he which before had declared his will by Paul and Peter, did
now farther reveal the same by Montanus also. Against us ye pretend, says
Tertullian, that the Public Orders which Christianity is bound to keep, were
delivered at the first, and that no new thing is to be added thereunto. Stand
if you can upon this point; for behold, I challenge you for Fasting more then
at Easter your selves. But in fine ye answer, That these things are to be done
as established by the voluntary appointment of men, and not by virtue or force
of any Divine Commandment. Well then (he adds) Ye have removed your first
footing, and gone beyond that which was delivered, by doing more then was at
the first imposed upon you. You say, you must do that which your own judgments
have allowed: We require your obedience to that which God himself does
institute. Is it not strange, that men to their own will, should yield that,
which to Gods Commandment they will not grant? Shall the pleasure of men
prevail more with you, then the power of God himself? These places of
Tertullian for Fasting, have worthily been put to silence. And as worthily
Aerius condemned for opposition against Fasting. The one endeavored to bring in
such Fasts as the Church ought not to receive; the other, to overthrow such as
already it had received and did observe: The one was plausible unto many, by
seeming to hate carnal looseness, and riotous excess, much more then the rest of
the World did; the other drew hearers, by pretending the maintenance of
Christian Liberty: The one thought his cause very strongly upheld by making
invective declamations with a pale and a withered countenance against the
Church, by filling the ears of his starved hearers with speech suitable to such
men's humors, and by telling them, no doubt, to their mavelous contentment and
liking, Our new Prophesies are refused, they are despised. It is because
Montanus does Preach some other God, or dissolve the Gospel of Jesus Christ, or
overthrow any Canon of Faith and Hope? No, our crime is, We teach that men
ought to Fast more often then Marry; the best Feast-maker is with them the
perfectest Saint, they are assuredly mere Spirit; and therefore these our
corporal devotions please them not: Thus the one for Montanus and his
Superstition. The other in a clean contrary tune against the Religion of the
Church. These Set-fasts away with them, for they are Jewish, and bring men
under the yoke of servitude: Epiph. ^^res. 75.
If I will fast, let me choose my time, that Christian Liberty be not abridged.
Hereupon their glory was to fast especially upon the Sunday, because the order
of the Church was on that day not to Fast. On Church Fasting days, and
especially the Week before Easter, when with us (says Epiphanius) Custom
admits nothing but lying down upon the Earth, abstinence from fleshly
delights and pleasures, sorrowfulness, dry and unsavory Diet, Prayer, Watching,
Fasting, all the Medicines which holy Affections can minister; they are up be
times to take in of the strongest for the belly; and when their veins are well
swollen, they make themselves mirth with laughter at this our service, wherein we
are persuaded we please God. By this of Epiphanius, it does appear, not only
what Fastings the Church of Christ in those times used, but also what other
parts of Discipline were together therewith in force, according to the ancient
use and custom of bringing all men at certain times, to a due consideration,
and an open Humiliation of themselves. Two kinds there were of Public
Penitency; the one belonging to notorious offenders, whose open wickedness had
been scandalous; the other appertaining to the whole Church, and unto every
several person whom the same contains. It will be answered. That touching
this latter kind, it may be exercised well enough by men in private. No doubt,
but Penitency is as Prayer, a thing acceptable unto God, be it in public or in
secret. Howbeit, as in the one, if men were wholly left to their own voluntary
Meditations in their Closets, and not drawn by Laws and Orders unto the open
Assemblies of the Church, that there they may join with others in Prayer; it
may be soon conjectured, what Christian devotion that way would come unto in a
short time: Even so in the other, We are by sufficient experience taught, how
little it booreth, to tell men of washing away their sins with tears of
Repentance, and so to leave them altogether unto themselves. O Lord, what heaps
of grievous transgressions have we committed, the best, the perfectest, the
most righteous amongst us all; and yet clean pass them over unsorrowed for, and
unrepented of, only because the Church has forgotten utterly how to bestow
her wonted times of Discipline wherein the public example of all was unto
every particular person, a most effectual mean to put them often in mind, and
even in a manner to draw them to that which now we all quite and clean forget,
as if Penitency were no part of a Christian man's duty. Again, besides our
private offenses which ought not thus loosly to be overslipt; suppose we the
Body and Corporation of the Church so just, that at no time it needs to show
it self openly cast down, in regard of those Faults and Transgressions; which
though they do not properly belong unto any one, had notwithstanding a special
Sacrifice appointed for them in the Law of Moses, and being common to the whole
Society which contains all, must needs so far concern every man in
particular, as at some time in solemn manner to require acknowledgment, with
more then daily and ordinary testifications of grief. There could not hereunto
a fitter preamble be devised, then that memorable Commination set down in the
Book of Common Prayer, if our practice in the rest were suitable. The Head
already so well drawn, does but wish a proportionable Body, And by the Preface
to that very part of the English Liturgy, it may appear, how at the first
setting down thereof, no less was intended. For so we are to interpret the
meaning of those words, wherein restitution of the Primitive Church Discipline
is greatly wished for, touching the manner of public penance in time of Lent.
Wherewith some being not much acquainted, but having framed in their minds,
the conceit of a new Discipline, far unlike to that of old, they make
themselves believe, it is undoubtedly this their Discipline, which at the first
was so much desired. They have long pretended, that the whole Scripture is
plain for them. If now the Communion Book make for them too (I well think the
one does as much as the other) it may be hoped, that being found such a
well-willer unto their cause, they will more favor it then they have done.
Having therefore hitherto spoken, both of Festival days, and so much of solemn
Fasts, as may reasonably serve to show the ground thereof in the Law of Nature;
the practice partly appointed, and partly allowed of God in the Jewish Church,
the like continued in the Church of Christ; together with the sinister
oppositions, either of Heretics erroneously abusing the same, or of others
thereat quarrelling without cause, we will only collect the chiefest points as
well of resemblance, as of difference between them, and so end. First, In this
they agree, that because Nature is the general Root of both; therefore both
have been always common to the Church with Infidels and Heathen men. Secondly,
They also herein accord, that as often as joy is the cause of the one, Con. Land.
c. ^. 52. Vetot N^tali^ia Mar^^su a in Qua^agesima cei bro^.
and grief the Wellspring of the other, they are incompatible. A third degree
of affinity between them, is, That neither being acceptable to God of it self,
but both tokens of that which is acceptable, their approbation with him, must
necessarily depend on that which they ought to import and signify: So that if
herein the mind dispose no it self aright, whether we ^ o^ 1. 13.
rest or Isai. 58 3.
fast we offend. A fourth thing common unto them, is, that the greatest part of
the World has always grossly and palpably offended in both; Infidels, because
they did all in relation to false gods; godless, sensual, and careless minds,
for that there is in them no constant, true, and sincere affection toward
those things which are pretended by such exercise; yea, certain flattering
over-sights there are, wherewith sundry, and they not of the worst sort, may be
easily in these cases led awry, even through abundance of love and liking to
that which must be embraced by all means, but with caution, in as much as the
very admiration of Saints, Whether we celebrate their glory, or follow them in
humility; whether we laugh or weep, mourn or rejoice with them, is, (as in all
things, the affection of Love) apt to deceive; and does therefore need the more
to be directed by a watchful guide, seeing there is manifestly both ways, even
in them whom we honor, that which we are to observe and shun. The best have not
still been sufficiently mindful, that Gods very Angels in Heaven, are but
Angels; and that bodily exercise, considered 1 Timothy 4. 8.
in it self, is no great matter. Finally, Seeing that both are Ordinances were
devised for the good of Man, and yet not Man created purposely for them, as for
Eccles. 12. 13. I^ai, ^^. 6,7. Romans 14. ^7. Sam. 1. 27. Heb. 12 14. ^^^. 24
other Offices of Virtue, whereunto Gods immutable Law for ever tieth; it is
but equity to wish or admonish that, where, by uniform order, they are not as
yet received, the example of ^useb. Eccle. ^^. ^ lib. 5. ^ 23
Victors extremity in the one, and of Matthew. ^. 14.
John's Disciples curiosity in the other, be not followed; yea, where they are
appointed by Law, Col. 8. 15.
that notwithstanding we avoid Judaism: and, as in Festival days, men's
necessities for matter of labor, so in times of Fasting, regard be had to
their imbecillities, lest they should suffer harm, doing good. Thus therefore
we see how these two Customs are in diverse respects equal. But of Fasting the
use and exercise, though less pleasant, Mat. 6. 4. Eccles. 7. 4.
is by so much more requisite than the other, as grief of necessity is a more
familiar guest then the contrary passion of mind, albeit gladness to all men be
naturally more welcome. For first, We our selves do many ^o things amiss than
well, and the fruit of our own ill doing is remorse, because nature is
conscious to it self that it should do the contrary. Again, forasmuch as the
world over-aboundeth with malice, and few are delighted in doing good unto
other men; there is no man so seldom crossed as pleasured at the hands of others;
whereupon it cannot be chosen, but every man's Woes must double in that respect
the number and measure of his delights. Besides, concerning the very choice
which oftentimes we are to make, our corrupt inclination well considered, there
is cause why our Savior should account them the happiest that do most mourn,
and why Solomon might judge it better to frequent mourning then
Feasting-houses; not better simply and in it self (for then would Nature that
way incline) but in regard of us and our common weakness better. Job 1. 5.
Job was not ignorant that his Childrens Banquets, though te^di^g to amity,
needed Sacrifice. Neither does any of us all need to be taught that in things
which delight, (...)Arist. Eth. 2. cap. 13.
we easily swerve from mediocrity, and are not easily led by a right direct
line. On the other side, the Sores and Diseases of mind which inordinante
pleasure breeds, are by Dolor and Grief cured. For which cause as all
offenses use to seduce by pleasing, so all punishments endeavor by vexing to
reform transgressions. We are of our own accord apt enough to give
entertainment to things delectable, but patiently to lack what flesh and blood
does desire, and by Virtue to forbear, what by Nature we covet; this no man
attaineth unto, but with labor and long practice. From hence it rises that,
in former Ages, abstinence and Fasting more then ordinary was always a special
branch of their praise, in whom it could be observed and known, were they such
as continually gave themselves to austere life, of men that took often
occasions in private virtuous respects to lay Solomon's counsel aside, Eccles.
9.7. Psalm. 35. 15^.
Eat thy bread with joy, and to be followers of David's Example, which says, I
humbled my soul with fasting; or but they who otherwise worthy of no great
commendation, have made of hunger, some their Gain, some their Physic, some
their Art, that by mastering sensual Appetites without constraint, they might
grow able to endure hardness whenever need should require: For the body
accustomed to emptiness pineth not away so soon as having still used to fill it
self. Many singular Effects there are which should make Fasting even in public
Considerations the rather to be accepted. For I presume we are not altogether
without experience how great their advantage is in martial Enterprises, that
lead Armies of men trained in a School of Abstinence. It is therefore noted at
this day in some, that patience of hunger and thirst has given them many
Victories; in others, that because if they want, there is no man able to rule
them, not they in plenty to moderate themselves; he which can either bring them
to hunger or overcharge them, is sure to make them their own overthrow. What
Nation soever does feel these dangerous inconveniences, may know that sloth and
fullness in peaceable times at home is the cause thereof, and the remedy a
strict Observation of that part of Christian Discipline, which teaches men in
practice of Ghostly warfare against themselves, those things that afterward
may help them, justly assaulting or standing in lawful defense of themselves
against others. The very purpose of the Church of God, both in the number and
in the order of her Fasts, has been not only to preserve thereby throughout
all Ages, the remembrance of miseries heretofore sustained, and of the causes
in our selves out of which they have risen, that men considering the one, might
fear the other the more, but farther also to temper the mind, lest contrary
affections coming in place should make it too profuse and dissolute, in which
respect it seems that Fasts have been set as Ushers of Festival days, for
prevention of those disorders, as much as might be; wherein, notwithstanding,
the World always will deserve, Valde absurdum est nimia sito^itate ^el^e honora
re mar^ytem quem scias Deo placuisse jejunus, Hier. Epist. ad Eust.
as it has done, blame; because such evils being not possible to be rooted
out, the most we can do, is in keeping them low; and (which is chiefly the
fruit we look for) to create in the minds of men a love toward a frugal and
severe life, to undermine the Palaces of wantonness, to plant Parsimony as
Nature, where Riotousness has been studied; to harden whom pleasure would
melt; and to help the tumors which always Fullness breeds, that Children, as
it were in the Wool of their Infancy dyed with hardness, may never afterward
change color; that the poor whose perpetual Fasts are of Necessity, may with
better contentment endure the hunger which Virtue causes others so often to
choose, and by advice of Religion it self so far to esteem above the contrary,
that they which for the most part do lead sensual and easy lives; they which,
as the Prophet David describes them, Psalm. ^3. 5^
are not plagued like other men, may by the public spectacle of all be still
put in mind what themselves are; Finally, that every man may be every man's
daily guide and example, as well by fasting to declare humility, as by praise
to express joy in the sight of God, although it have herein befallen the
Church, as sometimes David; so that the speech of the one may be truly the
voice of the other, My soul fasted, and even that was also turned to my
reproof. Psalm. 69. 10.


The celebration of Matrimony. T.C.l. 1. p. 199.
73. In this world there can be no Society durable, otherwise then only by
propagation. Albeit therefore single Life be a thing more Angelical and Divine,
yet since the replenishing first of Earth with blessed Inhabitants, and then of
Heaven with Saints everlastingly praising God, did depend upon conjunction of
Man and Woman, he which made all things complete and perfect, saw it could not
be good to leave men without any Helper, unto the sore-alledged end: In things
which some farther and does cause to be desired, choice seeks rather
proportion, then absolute perfection of goodness. So that Woman being created
for man's sake to be his Helper, in regard of the end before mentioned; namely,
the having and bringing up of Children, whereunto it was not possible they
could concur, unless there were subalternation between them, which
subalternation is naturally grounded upon inequality, because things equal in
every respect are never willingly directed one by another. Woman therefore was
even in her first estate framed by Nature, not only after in time, but
inferior in excellency also unto Man, howbeit in so due and sweet proportion,
as being presented before our eyes, might be sooner perceived then defined. And
even herein does lie the Reason why that kind of love which is the perfectest
ground of Wedlock is seldom able to yield any reason of it self. Now, that
which is born of Man must be nourished with far more travel, as being of
greater price in Nature, and of slower pace to perfection, then the Offspring
of any other Creature besides. Man and Woman being therefore to join themselves
for such a purpose, they were of necessity to be linked with some straight and
insoluble knot. The bond of Wedlock has been always more or less esteemed of,
as a thing Religious and Sacred. The Title which the very Heathens themselves
do thereunto oftentimes give, Tus (...) Dionys. a^^. l. 2.
is, Holy. Those Rites and Orders which were instituted in the Solemnization of
Marriage, the Hebrews term by the Name of Conjugal Ki^l^oshin. in Ri^uili Heb.
de benedictio. ^e nuptiarum Eccles. 3. 1. Joel 2. 16. 1 Cor. 7. ^.
Sanctification. Amongst our selves, because sundry things appertaining unto
the Public Order of Matrimony, are called in Question by such as know not from
whence those Customs did first grow, to show briefly some true and sufficient
Reason of them shall not be superfluous; although we do not hereby intend, to
yield so far unto Enemies of all Church-Orders saving their own, as though
every thing were unlawful, the true Cause and Reason whereof at the first might
hardly perhaps be now rendered. Wherefore, to begin with the times wherein the
liberty of Marriage is restrained; There is, says Solomon, a time for all
things; a time to laugh, and a time to mourn. That duties belonging unto
Marriage, and Offices appertaining to Penance, are things unsuitable and unfit
to be matched together, the Prophets and Apostles themselves do witness. Upon
which ground, as we might right well think it mavelous absurd to see in a
Church a Wedding on the day of a public Fast, so likewise in the self-same
consideration, our Predecessors thought it not amiss to take away the common
liberty of Marriages, during the time which was appointed for preparation unto,
and for exercise of General Humiliation by Fasting and praying, weeping for
sins. As for the delivering up of the woman either by her Father, or by some
other, we must note that in ancient times, Mulieres antiquo jure tutela
perpetua continebat. Recedebant vero and tutoris potestate, quae in manum,
convenissent. Boet. in Topic. Ci^.
all women which had not Husbands nor Fathers to govern them, had their Tutors,
Nullam eo privatam quidem rem foeminas sine auctore agere, majores nost^i
voluerunt. Live. l. 4. The reason yielded by Tully this, Propter infirmitatem
consilii. Cic. pro Mur. Vide leg. Saxon. tit. 6. and 17.
without whose Authority there was no act which they did, warrantable: And for
this cause, they were in Marriage, delivered unto their Husbands by others.
Which custom retained, has still this use, that it puts Women in mind of a
duty, whereunto the very imbecility of their nature and Sex does bind them;
namely, to be always directed, guided, and ordered by others, although our
Positive Laws do not tie them now as Pupils. The custom of laying down Money
seems to have been derived from the Saxons, whose manner was to buy their
Wives. But, seeing there is not any great cause wherefore the memory of that
custom should remain, it skilleth not much, although we suffer it to lie dead,
even as we see it in a manner already worn out. The Ring has been always used
as an especial pledge of Faith and Fidelity: Nothing more fit to serve as a
token of our purposed endless continuance in that which we never ought to
revoke. This is the cause wherefore the Heathens themselves did in such cases
use the Ring, whereunto Tertullian alluding, says; That in ancient times,
Aurum nulla norat praeter unico digiro quem sponsus oppignorasset pro nubo
annulo Tertul. Apol. c. 6.
No Woman was permitted to wear gold, saving only upon one finger, which her
Husband had fastened unto himself, with that Ring which was usually given for
assurance of future Marriage. The cause why the Christians use it, as some of
the Fathers think, is Isidor. de. Eccles. Offic, l. 2. c. 19.
either to testify mutual love, or rather to serve for a pledge of conjunction
in heart and mind agreed upon between them. But what right and custom is there
so harmless, wherein the wit of man bending it self to derision may not easily
find out somewhat to scorn and jest at? He that should have beheld the Jews
when they stood with Elias Thesb. in dict. Hupha.
a four-cornered Garment, spread over the heads of Espoused Couples, while
their Espousals were in making: He that should have beheld their In Ritual. de
benedict. nuptiarum.
praying over a Cup, and their delivering the same at the Marriage Feast, with
set Forms of Benediction, as the Order amongst them was, might being lewdly
affected, take thereat as just occasion of scornful cavil, as at the use of the
Ring in Wedlock amongst Christians. But of all things the most hardly taken, is
the uttering of these words, With my body I thee worship; In which words when
once they are understood, there will appear as little cause as in the rest, for
any wise man to be offended. First, therefore, inasmuch as unlawful copulation
does pollute and Romans 1. 24. 1 Cor. 7. 4.
dishonor both parties, this Protestation that we do worship and honor
another with our bodies, may import a denial of all such Lets and Impediments
to our knowledge, as might cause any stain, blemish, or disgrace that way;
which kind of construction being probable, would easily approve that speech to
a peaceable and quiet mind. Secondly, in that the Apostle does so expressly
affirm, that parties unmarried have not any longer entire power over
themselves, but each has interest in others person, it cannot be thought an
absurd construction to say, that worshipping with the body, is the imparting of
that interest in the body unto another, L. penul^^, de concub.
which none before had, save only our selves. But if this were the natural
meaning, the words should perhaps be as requisite to be used on the one side as
on the other; and therefore a third sense there is, which I rather rely upon.
Apparent it is, that the ancient difference between a lawful Wife and a
Concubine was only in the different purpose of man betaking himself to the one
or the other. If his purpose were only fellowship, there grew to the Woman by
this means no worship at all, but the contrary. In professing that his intent
was to add by his person honor and worship unto hers, he took her plainly and
clearly to Wife. This is it which the Civil Law does mean, when it makes a
Wife to differ from a Concubine in L. item legato sect. penult. D de leg. 3.
dignity; a Wife to be taken where L. Donationes D. donationibus.
Conjugal honor and affection do go before. The worship that grew unto her
being taken with declaration of this intent, was, that her children became by
this mean legitimate and free; her self was made a Mother over his Family: Last
of all, she received such advancement of state, as things annexed unto his
person might augment her with; yea, a right of participation was thereby given
her both in him, and even in all things which were his. This does somewhat the
more-plainly appear, by adding also that other Clause, With all my worldy goods
I thee endow. (...) Dionys. Hal. Anriq. lib. 2. Tertul. lib. 2. ad lixorem.
The former branch having granted the principal, the latter grants that which
is annexed thereunto. To end the Public Solemnity of Marriage, with receiving
the Blessed Sacrament, is a Custom so Religious, and so holy; that, if the
Church of England be blameable in this respect, it is not for suffering it to
be so much, but rather for not providing that it may be more put in Me. The
Laws of Romulus concerning Marriage, are therefore extolled above the rest
amongst the Heathens which were before, in that they established the use of
certain special Solemnities, whereby the minds of men were drawn to make the
greater conscience of Wedlock, and to esteem the Bond thereof, a thing which
could not be without impiety dissolved. If there be any thing in Christian
Religion, strong and effectual to like purpose, it is the Sacrament of the holy
Eucharist; in regard of the force whereof, Tertullian breaks out into these
words, concerning Matrimony therewith sealed, Unde sufficiam ad enarrandam
faelicitatem ejus Matrimonii quod Ecclesia conciliat and confirmat Oblatio? I
know not which way I should be able to show the happiness of that Wedlock, the
knot whereof the Church does fasten, and the Sacrament of the Church confirm.
Touching Marriage therefore, let thus much be sufficient.

Churching of Women T C. lib. 1 page 150.
74. The Fruit of Marriage, is Birth; and the Companion of Birth, Travail; the
grief whereof being so extreme, and the danger always so great: Dare we open
our mouths against the things that are holy, and presume to censure it, as a
fault in the Church of Christ, That Women after their Deliverance, do publicly
show their thankful minds unto God? But behold, What reason there is against
it! Fors^^th, if there should be solemn and express giving of Thanks in the
Church for every benefit, either equal, or greater then this, which any
singular person in the Church does receive? We should not only have no
Preaching of the Word, nor Ministering of the Sacraments; but we should not have
so much leisure as to do any corporal or bodily work, but should be like those
Massilian Heretics which do nothing else but pray. Surely, better a great deal
to be like unto those Heretics which do nothing else but pray, then those
which do nothing else but quarrel. Their heads it might happily trouble
somewhat more then as yet they are aware of, to find out so many benefits
greater then this, or equivalent thereunto; for which, if so be our Laws did
require solemn and express Thanksgivings in the Church, the same were like to
prove a thing so greatly cumbersome as is pretended. But if there be such store
of Mercies, even inestimable, poured every day upon thousands (as indeed the
Earth is full of the Blessings of the Lord, which are day by day renewed
without number, and above measure) shall it not be lawful to cause solemn
Thanks to be given unto God for any benefit, then which greater, or whereunto
equal are received, no Law binding men in regard thereof to perform the like
duty? Suppose that some Bond there be, that tieth us at certain times to
mention publicly the names of sundry our Benefactors. Some of them, it may be,
are such, That a day would scarcely serve to reckon up together with them the
Catalogue of so many men besides, as we are either more, or equally beholden
unto. Because no Law requires this impossible labor at our hands, shall we
therefore condemn that Law, whereby the other being possible, and also dutiful,
is enjoined us? So much we ow to the Lord of Heaven, that we can never
sufficiently praise him, nor give him thanks for half those benefits, for which
this Sacrifice were most due. Howbeit, God forbid, we should cease performing
this duty, when public Order does draw us unto it, when it may be so easily
done, when it has been so long executed by devout and virtuous people. God
forbid, that being so many ways provoked in this case unto so good a duty, we
should omit it, only because there are other cases of like nature, wherein we
cannot so conveniently, or at leastwise do not perform the same most virtuous
Office of Piety. Wherein we trust, that as the action it self pleases God, so
the order and manner thereof, is not such as may justly offend any. It is but
an overflowing of Gall, which causes the Woman's absence from the Church,
during the time of her lying in, to be traduced and interpreted, as though she
were so long judged unholy, and were thereby shut out, or sequestered from the
House of God, according to the ancient Levitical Law. Whereas the very Canon
Law it self does not so hold, but directly professes the contrary Dict. 5.
cap. Haec quae. In legs praecipicbatur, ut mulier si mas^ulum pare^er 40 so
soeminam 80. diebus a ^e^^. pli cessarer ingre^^i^. Nunc autem st^rim post
partum, Ecclesiam Ingredi non prohibetur.
; She is not barred from thence in such sort as they interpret it, nor in
respect of any unholiness forbidden entrance into the Church, although her
abstaining from public Assembles, and her abode in separation for the time be
most convenient Leo. Constable. 17. Quod prof^cto non ram propter muliebrem
immunditiem, quam ob alias causas in incima legis ratione recondiras, and
vere^i prohibitum esse lege, and gratiae tempus traditionis loco suscepisse
pu^^. Existimo siquidem sacram legem id praescripsisse, quo prote^vam eorum qui
intemperanter viverent concupiscentiam castigarer, quem^admodum and alia multa
per alia praecepta ordinantur and praescribuntur, quo indomitus quorundam in
mulleres stimolus ^e^uandatur. Quin and haec providentiae quae legem constituit
velu^as esto ut parius a depravatione liberi sint. Quia enim quicquid natura
supervacan^um est, idem corruptivum est and in^tile, quod hic sangius
superfluus fit, quae illi obnoxi^ essen^ in immunditie ad id temporis vivere
illa Lex jubet, quo ipso etiam nominis sono lascivi concupiscentia ad
temperantim redigatur, es est inutili and corrupta materi^ ipsum animans
coagmentetur.
. To scoff at the manner of attire, then which, there could be nothing devised
for such a time, more grave and decent, to make it a token of some folly
committed; for which, they are loath to show their faces, argues, that great
Divines are sometime more merry then wise. As for the Women themselves, God
accepting the service which they faithfully offer unto him, it is no great
disgrace, though they suffer pleasant witted men, a little to intermingle with
zeal, scorn. The name of Oblations, applied not only here to those small and
petit payments which yet are a part of the Ministers right, but also generally
given unto all such allowances as serve for their needful maintenance, is both
ancient and convenient. For as the life of the Clergy is spent in the Service
of God, so it is sustained with his Revenue. Nothing therefore more proper then
to give the name of Oblations to such payments, in token that we offer unto him
whatsoever his Ministers receive.

75. But to leave this, there is a duty which the Church does ow to the
faithful departed, Of the ^ite^ of Burial. T. C. lib. 3. page 236.
wherein for as much as the Church of England is said to do those things which
are, though not unlawful, yet inconvenient; because it appoints a prescript
Form of Service at Burials, suffers mourning Apparel to be worn, and
permits Funeral Sermons; a word or two concerning this point will be
necessary, although it be needless to dwell long upon it. The end of Funeral
duties is, first, to show that love toward the party deceased, which Nature
requires; then to do him that honor which is fit both generally for man, and
particularly for the quality of his person: Last of all, to testify the care
which the Church has to comfort the living, and the hope which we all have
concerning the Resurrection of the dead. For signification of love toward them
that are departed, Mourning is not denied to be a thing convenient; as in
truth, the Scripture every where does approve lamentation made unto this end.
The Jews by our Saviors tears therefore, gathered in this case, that his love
toward Lazatus was great. And that as Mourning at such times is fit, John
11.36.
so likewise, that there may be a kind of Attire suitable to a sorrowful
affection, and convenient for Mourners to wear; 2 Samuel 1^. 30.
how plainly does David's example show, who being in heaviness, went up to the
Mount with his head covered, and all the people that were with him in like
sort? White Garments being fit to use at Marriage Feasts, and such other times
of joy; whereunto Solomon alluding, when he requires continual cheerfulness of
mind, speaks in this sort, Let thy Garments be always white? Eccles. 9. ^.
What does hinder the contrary from being now as convenient in grief, as this
heretofore in gladness has been? If there be no sorrow, they say, it is
hypocritical to pretend it; and if there be, to provoke it by wearing such
attire, is dangerous. Nay, if there be, to show it is natural; and if there be
not, yet the signs are meet to show what should be, especially, since it does
not come oftentimes to pass, that men are fain to have their Mourning Gowns
pulled off their backs, for fear of killing themselves with sorrow that way
nourished. The honor generally due unto all men, makes a decent interring of
them to be convenient, even for very humanities sake. And therefore, Luke 7. 1^.
so much as is mentioned in the Burial of the Widows Son, the carrying of him
forth upon a Bier, and the accompanying of him to the Earth, has been used
even amongst Infidels; all men accounting it a very extreme destitution, not to
have at the least this honor done them. Some man's estate may require a great
deal more, according as the fashion of the Country where he dies, does afford.
And unto this appertained the ancient use of the Jews, Psalm. ^9. 3. John 19.40.
Matthew. 23 2^.
to embalm the Corpse with sweet Odors, and to adorn the Sepulchers of certain.
In regard of the quality of men, it has been judged fit to commend them unto
the World at their death, 2 Samuel 1. 19.
amongst the Heathen in Funeral Orations, amongst the Jews in Sacred Poems; and
why not in Funeral Sermons also amongst Christians? ^s it suffices, that the
known benefit hereof does countervail Millions of such inconveniences as are
therein surmised, although they were not surmised only, but found therein. The
life and the death of Saints is precious in Gods sight. Let it not seem odious
in our eyes, if both the one and the other he spoken of, then especially, when
the present occasion does make men's minds the more capable of such speech. The
care, no doubt, of the living, both to live and to die well must needs be
somewhat increased, when they know that their departure shall not be folded up
in silence, but the ears of many be made acquainted with it. Moreover, when
they hear how mercifully God has dealt with their Brethren in their last need,
besides the praise which they give to God, and the joy which they have of
should have by reason of their Fellowship and Communion with Saints; Is not
their hope also much confirmed against the day of their own dissolution? Again,
the sound of these things does not so pass the ears of them that are most loose
and dissolute in life, but it causes them one time or other to wish, O that I
might die the death of the righteous, and that my end might be like this! Thus
much peculiar good there does grow at those times by speech concerning the
dead, besides the benefit of public instruction common unto Funeral with other
Sermons. For the comfort of them whose minds are through natural affection
pensive in such cases, no man can justly mislike the custom which the Jews had
to end their Burials with Funeral Banquets, in reference whereunto the Prophet
Jeremy spoke, concerning the people whom God had appointed unto a grievous
manner of destruction, saying, Jere. 16. 7.
That men should not give them the Cup of Consolation to drink for their
Father, or for their Mother, because it should not be now with them, as in
peaceable times with others, who bringing their Ancestors unto the Grave with
weeping eyes, have notwithstanding means wherewith to be re-comforted. Prove.
31. 6. 1 Chronicles. 19. 2. Job 2. 11.
Give Wine, says Solomon, unto them that have grief of heart. Surely, he that
ministers unto them comfortable speech, does much more then give them Wine.
But the greatest thing of all other about this duty of Christian Burial, is an
outward testification of the hope which we have touching the Resurrection of
the Dead. For which purpose, let any man of reasonable judgment examine,
whether it be more convenient for a company of men, as it were, in a dumb show,
to bring a Corse to the place of Burial, there to leave it covered with Earth,
and so end, or else to have the Exequies devoutly performed with solemn recital
of such Lectures, Psalms, and Prayers, as are purposely framed for the stirring
up of men's minds unto a careful consideration of their estate, both here and
hereafter. Whereas therefore it is objected, that neither the people of God
under the Law, nor the Church in the Apostles times, did use any form of
Service in Burial of their dead; and therefore, that this order is taken up
without any good example or precedent followed therein: First, while the World
does stand, they shall never be able to prove, that all things which either the
one or the other did use at Burials, are set down in holy Scripture, which does
not any where of purpose deliver the whole manner and form thereof, but
touches only sometime one thing, and sometime another which was in use, as
special occasions require any of them to be either mentioned or insinuated.
Again, if it might be proved, that no such thing was usual amongst them, has
Christ so deprived his Church of Judgment, that what Rites and Orders soever
the latter Ages thereof, have devised, the same must needs be inconvenient?
Furthermore, that the Jews before our Saviors coming had any such form of
service, although in Scripture it be not affirmed; yet neither is it there
denied (for, the ^orbidding of Priests to be present at Burials, lets not
but that others might discharge that duty, seeing all were not Priests which
had rooms of Public Function in their Synagogues) and if any man be of
opinion, that they had no such form of Service; thus much there is to make the
contrary more probable. The Jews at this day have, as appears is their form
of Funeral Prayers, and in certain of their Funeral Sermons published; neither
are they so affected toward Christians, as to borrow that order from us;
besides that, the form thereof is such as both in it sundry things, which the
very words of the Scripture it self does seem to allude unto, us namely, after
departure from the Sepulcher unto the House whence the dead was brought, it
shows the manner of their Burial-feast, and a consolatory form of Prayer,
appointed for the Master of the Synagogue thereat to utter; albeit I may not
deny, but it has also some things which are not perhaps so antsient as the Law
and the Prophets. But whatsoever the Jews custom was before the days of our
Savior Christ, has it once at any time been heard of, the either Church or
Christian man of sound belief did ever judge this a thing unmeet, undecent,
unfit for Christianity, till these miserable days, wherein, under the color
of removing superstitious abuses, the most effectual means, both to testify
and to strengthen true Religion, are plucked at, and in some places even pulled
up by the very roots^ Take away this which was ordained to show at Burials the
peculiar hope of the Church of God concerning the dead; and in the manner of
those dumb Funerals, what one one thing is there whereby the World may perceive
we are Christian men?

76. I come now unto that Function which undertaketh the public Ministry of
holy things, Of the na^^^^ of that Ministry, what s^^veth the performance of
divine duties in the Church of Go^^^^ (...) happiness, not eternal only, but
also re^^poral, does, depend upon it.
according to the Laws of Christian Religion. And because the nature of things
consisting, as this does, in action, is known by the object whereabout they are
conversant, and by the end or scope whereunto they are referred, we must know
that the object of this Function in both God and Men; God, in that he is
publicly worshipped of his Church; and Men, in that they are capable of
happiness, by means which Christian Discipline appoints. So that the sum
of our whole labor in this kind, is to honor God, and to save men. For
whether we severally take, and consider men one by one, or else gather them
into one Society and Body, as it has been before declared, that every man's
Religion is in him the Wellspring of all other sound and sincere virtues, from
whence both here in some sort, and hereafter more abundantly, their full joy
and felicity arises; because while they live, they are blessed of God, and
when they dye, their works follow them: So at this present we must again call
to mind how the very worldly peace and prosperity, the secular happiness, the
temporal and natural good estate both of all Men, and of all Dominions, hangs
chiefly upon Religion, and does evermore give plain testimony, that as well in
this as in other considerations the Priest is a pillar of that Commonwealth,
wherein he faithfully serves God. For if these Assertions be true, first, that
nothing can be enjoyed in this present world against his will which has made
all things: secondly, that albeit God does sometime permit the impious to have,
yet impiety permits them not to enjoy, no not temporal blessings on earth:
thirdly, that God has appointed those blessings to attend as Handmaids upon
Religion: and fourthly, that without the work of the Ministry, Religion by no
means can possibly continue, the use and benefit of that sacred Function, even
toward all men's worldly happiness, must needs be granted. Now the Si creature
Dei, merito and dispensatio Dei sum^^: Qui^ enim magis diligit, quom ille qui
fecit? Quis autem ordinatius regit quam is qui and fec^ 1 and di^. (...) Quis
vero sapi^^tius and fo^tiur ordinare and regere facta potest, quam qui and
fa^ienda providit and provisa perfecit? Quapi op^er omnem potestarem a Deo esse
omnemque ordinationem. and qui non ^e^eruat sentin^e, and quilegerunt
cognoscunt. Paul O^^s. ^^s. advers. Pagan. lib. ^. (...) Eurip. Phoenis.
first being a Theoreme both understood and confessed by all, to labor in proof
thereof were superfluous. The second perhaps may be called in question, except
it be perfectly understood. By good things temporal therefore we mean length of
days, health of body, store of friends and well-willers, quietness; prosperous
success of those things we take in hand; riches with fit opportunities to use
them during life, reputation following us both alive and dead, children, or
such as instead of children, we wish to leave Successors and Partakers of our
happiness. These things are naturally every man's desire, because they are
good. And on whom God bestows the same, them we confess he graciously
blesses; Of earthly blessings the meanest is wealth, reputation the chiefest.
For which cause we esteem the gain of honor an ample recompense for the loss
of all other worldly benefits. But for as much as in all this there is no
certain perpetuity of goodness, nature has taught to affect these things, not
for their own sake, but with reference and relation to somewhat independently
good, as is the exercise of virtue and speculation of truth. None, whose
desires are rightly ordered, would wish to live, to breathe, and move, without
performance of those actions which are beseeming man's excellency^ Wherefore
having not how to employ it, we wax weary even of life it self. Health is
precious, because sickness does breed that pain which disableth action. Again,
why do men delight so much in the multitude of friends; but for that the
actions of life, being many, do need many helping hands to further them?
Between troublesome and quiet days we should make no difference, if the one
did not hinder and interrupt, the other uphold our liberty of action.
Furthermore, if those things we do, succeed, it rejoices us not so much for
the benefit we thereby reap, as in that it probably argues our actions to have
been orderly and well-guided. (...)Eurip. Heracl.
As for riches, to him which has and does nothing with them, they are a
contumely. Honor is commonly presumed a sign of more than ordinary virtue and
merit, by means whereof when ambitious minds thirst after it, their endeavors
are testimonies how much it is in the eye of nature to possess that Body, the
very shadow whereof is set at so high a rate. Finally, such is the pleasure and
comfort which we take in doing, that when life forsakes us, still our desires
to continue action, and to work; though not by our selves, yet by them whom we
leave behind us, causes us providently to resign into other men's hands, the
helps we have gathered for that purpose, devising also the best we can to make
them perpetual. It appears therefore, how all the parts of temporal felicity
are only good in relation to that which rises them as instruments, and that
they are no such good as wherein a right desire does ever stay or rest it self.
Now temporal blessings are enjoyed of those which have them, know them, esteem
them according to that they are in their own nature. Wherefore of the wicked
whom God does hate, his usual and ordinary speeches are; That blood-thirsty and
deceitful men shall not live out half their days; Psalm. 55. 23.
that God shall cause a pestilence to cleave unto the wicked, and shall strike
them with consuming grief, Deuteronomy 28. 22.
with Fevers, burning diseases, and sores which are past cure; that when the
impious are fallen; all men should tread them down, and none show countenance
of love toward them, as much as by pitying them in their misery; that the
sins of the ungodly shall be^eave them of peace; that all counsels, complots,
and practices against God shall come to nothing; that the lot and inheritance
of the unjust is beggary; that the name of unrighteous Persons shall purify,
Prove. 1^.
and the posterity of Robbers starve. If any think that Iniquity and Peace,
Sin and Prosperity can dwell together, they err; because they distinguish
not aright between the matter, and that which gives it the form of happiness,
between possession and fruition, between the having and the enjoying of good
things. The impious cannot enjoy that they have, partly because they receive it
not as at God's hands, which only consideration makes temporal blessings
comfortable; and partly because through error, placing it above things of far
more price and worth, they turn that to Poison which might be Food, they make
their prosperity their own snare; in the nest of their highest growth they lay
foolishly those Eggs, out of which their woeful overthrow is afterward
hatched. Hereby it comes to pass, that wise and judicious men observing the
vain behavior of such as are risen to unwonted greatness, have thereby been
able to prognosticate their ruin. So that in very truth no impious or wicked
man does prosper on earth, but either sooner or later the world may perceive
easily, how at such time as others thought them must fortunate, they had but
only the good estate which fat Oxen have above lean; Prove. 16.1^. Ante tuinam
clatio (...)Harodor. lib. 7.
when they appeared to grow, their climbing was toward ruin. The gross and
bestial conceit of them which want understanding, is only, that the fullest
bellies are happiest. Therefore the greatest felicity they wish to the
Commonwealth wherein they live, is that it may but abound and stand, that they
which are riotous may have to pour out without stine; that the poor may ^leep,
and the rich feed them; that nothing unpleasant may be commanded, nothing
forbidden men which themselves have a lust to follow; that Kings may provide
for the ease of their Subjects, and not be too curious about their manners;
that wantonness, excess, and lewdness of life may be left free; and that no
fault may be capital, besides dislike of things settled in so good terms. But
be it far from the Just to dwell either in or near to the Tents of these so
miserable felicities. Now whereas we thirdly affirm, that Religion and the Fear
of God, as well induces secular prosperity as everlasting bliss in the world
to come, this also is true. For otherwise godliness could not be said to have
the promises of both lives; to be that ample Revenue, wherein there is always
sufficiency; and to carry with it a general discharge of want, even so general,
that David himself should protest, he never saw the Just forsaken. Howbeit to
this we must add certain special limitations; as first, that we do not forget
how crazed and diseased minds (whereof our heavenly Physician must judge)
receive oftentimes most benefit by being deprived of those things which are to
others beneficially given, as appears in that which the Wiseman has noted
concerning them whose lives God mercifully does abridge, lest wickedness should
alter their understanding; again, that the measure of our outward prosperity be
taken by proportion with that which every man's estate in this present life
requires. External abilities are instruments of action. It contenteth wise
Artificers to have their Instruments proportionable to their Work, rather fit
for use, than huge and goodly to please the eye: Seeing then the actions of a
Servant do not need that which may be necessary for men of Calling and Place in
the World, neither men of inferior condition many things which greater
Personages can hardly want, surely they are blessed in worldly respects, that
have wherewith to perform, (...)Eurip. Phoenis.
sufficiently what their station and place asks, though they have no more.
For by reason of man's imbecility and proneness to elation of mind, (...)Greg.
Nazian: Apol. ^^. They may happily the most deject, but they are the wisest for
their own safety, which fear claming, no less then f^lling. Arist. Polit. lib.
^. c. 1^.
too high a flow of prosperity is dangerous, too low an ebb again as
dangerous; for that the virtue of patience is rare, and the hand of necessity
stronger, than ordinary virtue is able to withstand; Solomon's discreet and
moderate desire we all know: Give me, O Lord, neither riches nor penury. Men
over-high exalted either in honor, or in power, or in nobility, or in wealth;
they likewise that are as much on the contrary hand sunk either with beggary,
or through dejection, or by baseness, do not easily give ea^ to reason; but the
one exceeding apt unto outrages, and the other unto petty mischiefs. For
greatness delights to show it self by effects of power, and baseness to help
it self with shifts of malice. For which cause, a moderate, indifferent temper,
between fullness of bread, and emptiness has been evermore thought and found
(all circumstances duly considered) the safest and happiest for all Estates,
even for Kings and Princes themselves. Again, we are not to look, that these
things should always concur, no not in them which are accounted happy, neither
that the course of men's lives, or of public affairs should continually be
drawn out as an even thread (for that the nature of things will not suffer) but
a just survey being made, as those particular men are worthily reputed good,
whose virtues be great, and their faults tolerable; so him we may register for
a man fortunate, and that for a prosperous and happy State, which having
flourished, does not afterward feel any tragical alteration, such as might
cause them to be a spectacle of misery to others. Besides, whereas true
felicity consists in the highest operations of that nobler part or man, which
shows sometime greatest perfection, not in using the benefits which delight
nature, but in suffering what nature can hardless endure, there is no cause why
either the loss of good, if it tend to the purchase of better, or why any
misery, the issue whereof is their greater praise and honor that have sustained
it, should be thought to impeach that temporal happiness, wherewith Religion,
we say, is accompanied, but yet in such measure, as the several degrees of men
may require by a competent estimation, and unless the contrary do more advance,
as it has done those most Heroical Saints, whom afflictions have made
glorious. In a word, not to whom no calamity falls, but whom neither misery
nor prosperity is able to move from a right mind, them we may truly pronounce
fortunate, and whatsoever does outwardly happen without that precedent
improbity, for which it appears in the eyes of sound and unpartial Judges to
have proceeded from Divine revenge, it passes in the number of humane
casualties whereunto we are all alike subject. No misery is reckoned more than
common or humane, if God so dispose that we pass through it, and come safe so
shore, even as contrariwise, men do not use to think those flourishing days
happy, which do end with tears. It stands therefore with these cautions firm
and true, yea, ratified by all men's unfeigned confessions drawn from the very
heart of experience, that whether we compare men of note in the world with
others of like degree and state, or else the same men with themselves, whether
we conferr one Dominion with another, or else the different times of one and
the same Dominion, the manifest odds between their very outward condition, as
long as they steadfastly were observed to honor God, and their success being
fallen from him, are remonstrances more than sufficient, how all our welfare even
on earth depends wholly upon our Religion. Heathens were ignorant of true
Religion. Yet such as that little was which they knew, it much impaired, or
bettered always their worldy affairs, as their love and zeal toward it did
wain or grow. Of the Jews, did not even their most malicious and mortal
Adversaries all acknowledge, that to strive against them it was in vain, as
long as their amity with God continued, that nothing could weaken them but
Apostasy? In the whole course of their own proceedings, did they ever find it
otherwise, but that, during their faith and fidelity toward God, every man of
them was in war as a thousand strong; and as much as a grand Senate for counsel
in peaceable deliberations; contrariwise, that if they swarved, as they often
did, their wonted courage and magnanimity forsook them utterly, their Soldiers
and military men trembled at the sight of the naked sword; when they entered
into mutual conference, and sat in counsel for their own good, that which
Children might have seen, their gravest Senators could not discern; their
Prophets saw darkness instead of Visions; the wise and prudent were as men
bewitched, even that which they knew (being such) as might stand them in stead)
they had not the grace to utter, or if any thing were well proposed, it took no
place, it entered not into the minds of the rest to approve and follow it, but
as men confounded with strange and unusual ama^^ments of spirit, they attempted
tumultuously they saw not what; and, by the issues of all attempts, they found
no certain conclusion but this, God and Heaven are strong against as in all we
do. The cause whereof was secret fear, which took heart and courage from them,
and the cause of their fear, an inward guiltiness that they all had offered God
such apparent wrongs as were not pardonable. But it may be, the case is now
altogether changed, and that in Christian Religion there is not the like force
toward Temporal felicity. Search the ancient Records of time, look what has
happened by the space of these sixteen hundred years, see if all things to this
effect be not Inculent and clear; yea, all things so manifest, that for
evidence and proof herein; we need not by uncertain dark conjectures surmise
any to have been plagued of God for contempt, or blessed in the course of
faithful obedience toward true Religion, more than only them, whom we find
in that respect on the one side, guilty by their own confessions, and happy on
the other side by all men's acknowledgement, who beholding that prosperous
estate of such as are good and virtuous, impute boldly the same to God's most
especial favor, but cannot in like manner pronounce, that whom he afflicts
above others, with them he has cause to be more offended. For Virtue is always
plain to be seen, rareness causes it to be observed, and goodness to be
honored with admiration. As for iniquity and sin, it lies, many times hid,
and because we be all offenders, it becomes us not to incline toward hard and
severe sentences touching others, unless their notorious wickedness did
sensibly before proclaim that which afterward came to pass. Wherefore the sum
of every Christian man's duty is, to labor by all means toward that which
other men seeing in us may justify; and what we our selves must accuse, if we
fall into it, that by all means we can to avoid, considering especially, that
as hitherto upon the Church there never yet fell tempestuous storm, the vapors
whereof were not first noted to rise from coldness in affection, and from
backwardness is duties of service toward God, so if that which the tears of
antiquity have untered concerning this point should be here set down, it were
assuredly enough to soften and to mollify an Heart of steel. On the contrary
part, although we confess with Saint Augustine most willingly, that the
chiefest happiness for which we have some Christian Kings in so great
admiration above the rest, is not because of their long Reign; their calm and
quiet departure out of this present life; the settled establishment of their
own flesh and blood, succeeding them in Royalty and Power; the glorious
overthrow of foreign enemies, or the wise prevention of inward danger, and so
secret attempts at home; all which solaces and comforts of this our unquiet
life, it pleases God oftentimes to bestow on them which have no society or
part in the joys of Heaven, giving thereby to understand, that these in
comparison are toys and trifles, far under the value and price of that which
is to be looked for at his hands: but in truth the reason wherefore we most
extol their felicity, is, if so be they have virtuously reigned, if honor have
not filled their hearts with pride, if the exercise of their power have been
service and attendance upon the Majesty of the Most High, if they have feared
him as their own inferiors and subjects have feared them, if they have loved
neither pomp nor pleasure more than Heaven, if revenge have slowly proceeded
from then, and mercy willingly offered it self, if so they have tempered rigor
with lenity, that neither extreme severitie might utterly cut them off in whom
there was manifest hope of amendment, nor yet the easiness of pardoning
offenses imbolden offenders; if, knowing that whatsoever they do their potency
may bear it out, they have been so much the more careful are to do any thing
but that which is commendable in the best, rather than usual with greatest
Personages; if the true knowledge of themselves have humbled them in God's
sight, no less than God in the eyes of men has raised them up; I say, albeit
we reckon such to be the happiest of them that are mightiest in the World, and
albeit those things alone are happiness, nevertheless, considering what force
there is even in outward blessings, to comfort the minds of the best disposed,
and to give them the greater joy, when Religion and Peace, Heavenly and Earthly
happiness are wreathed in one Crown, as to the worthiest of Christian Princes
it has by the providence of the Almighty hitherto befallen: let it not seem
unto any man a needless and superfluous waste of labor; that there has been
thus much spoken, to declare how in them especially it has been so observed,
and withal universally noted even from the highest to the very meanest, how
this peculiar benefit, this singular grace and pre-eminence Religion has, that
either it guardeth as an heavenly shield from all calamities, or else
conducteth us safe through them, and permits them not to be mise^ it either
gives honors, promotions, and wealth, or else more benefit by wanting them
than if we had them at will, it either fills our Houses with plenty of all
good things; or makes a Sallad of green herbs more sweet than all the
Sacrifices of the ungodly. Our fourth Proposition before set down was, that
Religion without the help of spiritual Ministry is unable to plant it self,
the fruits thereof not possible to grow of their own accord. Which last
Assertion is herein as the first, that it needs no farther confirmation: If
it did, I could easily declare, how all things which are of God, he has by
wonderful art and wisdom sodered, as it were, together with the glue of mutual
assistance, appointing the lowest to receive from the nearest to themselves,
what the influence of the highest yields. And therefore the Church being the
most absolute of all his works, was in reason to be also ordered with like
harmony, that what he works, might no less in grace than in nature be
effected by hands and instruments duly subordinated unto the power of his own
Spirit. A thing both needful for the humiliation of man, which would not
willingly be debtor to any, but to himself; and of no small effect to nourish
that divine love, which now makes each embrace other, not as Men, but as
Angels of God: Ministerial actions tending immediately unto God's honor, Luke
12. 4^^ 1 Cor. 4. 1. Tir. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 4, 10, Ephesians 3. 2.
and man's happiness, are either as contemplation, which helps forward the
principal work of the Ministry, or else they are parts of that principal work
of Administration it self, which work consists in doing the service of God's
House, and in applying unto men the sovereign medicines of Grace already spoken
of the more largely, to the end it might thereby appear, that we (...) Epist.
ad Philem.
owe to the Guides of our Souls even as much as our Souls are worth, although
the debt of our Temporal blessings should be stricken off.

77. The Ministry of things divine is a Function, which as God did himself
institute, Of power given unto men to execute that heavenly Office, of the gift
of the Holy Ghost in Ordinarion; and whether conveniently the power of Order
may be sought o^ sued for.
so neither may men undertake the same but by Authority and Power given them
in lawful manner. That God, which is no way deficient or wanting unto Man in
necessaries, and has therefore given us the light of his heavenly Truth,
because without that inestimable benefit we must needs have wandered is
darkness, to out endless perdition and woe, has in the like abundance of
mercies ordained certain to attend upon the due execution of requisite Parts
and Offices therein prescribed for the good of the whole World, which men,
thereunto assigned, do hold their authority from him, whether they be such as
himself immediately, or as the Church in his name investeth; it being neither
possible for all, not for every men without distinction convenient to take upon
him a Charge of so great importance. They are therefore Ministers of God, not
only by way of subordination as Princes and Civil Magistrates, whose execution
of Judgment and Justice the supreme hand of divine providence does uphold, but
Ministiers of God, as from whom their anthority is derived, and not from men.
For in that they are Christ's Ambassadors, and his Laborers, Who should give
them their Commission, but he whose most inward affairs they manage? Is not
God alone the Father of Spirits? Are not Souls the purchase of Jesus Christ?
What Angel in Heaven could have said to Man, as our Lord did unto Peter, Feed
my Sheep? Preach? Baptize? Do this in remembrance of me? Whose Sins ye retain,
they are retained, and their offenses in Heaven pardoned, whose faults you
shall in earth forgive? What think we? Are these terrestrial sounds, or else
are they voices uttered out of the clouds above? The power of the Ministry of
God translateth out of darkness into glory; it rayseth men from the Earth, and
brings God himself from Heaven; by blessing visible Elements it makes them
invisible grace; it gives daily the Holy Ghost, it has to dispose of that
flesh which was given for the life of the World, and that blood which was
poured out to redeem Souls; when it pours malediction upon the heads of the
wicked, they perish; when it revoketh the same, they revive. O wreched
blindness, if we admire not so great power; more wretched if we consider it
aright; and notwithstanding imagine that any but God can bestow it! To whom
Christ has imparted power, both over that mystical Body which is the society
of Souls, and over that natural, which is himself for the knitting of both in
one, (a work which antiquity does call the making of Christ's Body the same
power is in such not amiss both termed a kind of mark or Character, and
acknowledged to be indelible. Ministerial power is a mark of separation,
because it severeth them that have it from other men, and makes them a special
order consecrated unto the service of the most High, in things wherewith others
may not meddle. Their difference therefore from other men, is in that they are
a distinct order. Tertul. de Adhort. Castit.
So Tertullian calls them. And Saint Paul himself dividing the body of the
Church of Christ into two Moyeties, names the one part (...), which is as much
as to say, the order of the Laity, the opposite part whereunto we in like sort
term the order of God's Clergy; Heb. 2. 7.
and the Spiritual power which he has given them, the power of their order, so
far forth as the same consists in the bare execution of holy things, called
properly the affairs of God. For of the Power of their jurisdiction over men's
persons we are to speak in the Books following. They which have once received
this power, may not think to put it off and on, like a Cloak, as the weather
serves, to take it, reject and resume it as often as themselves list; of which
profane and impious contempt these latter times have yielded, as of all other
kinds of Iniquity and Apostasy, strange examples: but let them know which put
their hands unto this Plough, that once consecrated unto God, they are made his
peculiar Inheritance for ever. Suspensions may stop, and degradations utterly
cut off the use or exercise of Power before given, but voluntarily it is not in
the power of man to separate and pull asunder what God by his authority
coupleth. So that although there may be through mis-desert degradation, Matthew.
19.
as there may be cause of just separation after Matrimony; yet if (as sometime
it does) restitution to former dignity, or reconciliation after breach does
happen, neither does the one nor the other ever iterate the first knot. Much
less is it necessary, which some have urged, concerning the reordination of
such, as others in times more corrupt did consecrate heretofore. Which Error
already quelled by Saint Jerome, does not now require any other refutation.
Examples I grant there are which make for restraint of those men from
admittance again into rooms of Spiritual function, whose fall by Heresy, or
want of constancy in professing the Christian Faith, has been once a disgrace
to their calling. Nevertheless, as there is no Law which binds, so there is
no cause that should always lead to show one and the same severity toward
Persons culpable. Goodness of nature it self more inclines to clemency than
rigor. And we in other men's offenses do behold the plain image of our own
imbecility. Besides also them that wander out of the way, In ^2. tabul^^
caucum est, or idom juris offet sana^tibus quod so^^bus, id est bonis ^e qui
^u^quam desecrun^ Il populo Romano. Fest. in der Satanites
it cannot be unexpedient to win with all hopes of favor, left strictness used
toward such as reclaim themselves should make others more obstinate in error.
Wherefore ^ usses. (...) E^ccl. lib. e. ^1.
after that the Church of Alexandria had somewhat recovered it self from the
tempests and storms of Artianism, being in consultation about the
re-establishment of that which by long disturbance had been greatly decayed and
hindered, the ferventer sort gave quick sentence, that touching them which were
of the Clergy, and had stained themselves with Heresy, there should be none so
received into the Church again, as to continue in the order of the Clergy. The
rest which considered how many men's cases it did concern, thought it much more
safe and consonant to bend somewhat down toward them which were fallen, to
show severity upon a few of the chiefest Leaders, and to offer to the rest a
friendly reconciliation, without any other demand, saving only the abjuration
of their error; as in the Gospel that wastful young man which returned home to
his Father's house, was with joy both admitted and honored, his elder Brother
hardly thought of for repining thereat; neither commended so much for his own
Fidelity and virtue, as blamed for not embracing him freely, whose unexpected
recovery ought to have blotted out all remembrance of misdemeanors and faults
past. But of this sufficient. A thing much stumbled at in the manner of giving
Orders, is our using those memorable words of our Lord and Savior Christ
Receive the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost, they say, we cannot give, and therefore
we Papisticus quidam virtue, stoled quidemoh illis be fine ^llo Scripture
fundamento inflicutas and ^ diciplina nostrate autoribus (pce illorum dixerim)
non magno primum judicio accoptus, mimora adhuc in Ecclesia nostra ret^enur.
Eecclesiast. discrip. p. 53.
foolishly bid men receive it. Wisemen, for their Authorities sake, must have
leave to befool them whom they are able to make wise by better instruction.
Notwithstanding, if it may please their wisdom, as well to hear what Fools can
say, as to control that which they do, thus we have heard some Wisemen teach,
namely, That the Ecceles. discrip. sol. ^^, p. 2. l. 1.
Holy Ghost may be used to signify not the Person alone, but the Gift of the
Holy Ghost; and we know that Spiritual gifts are not only abilities to do
things miraculous, as to speak with Tongues which were never taught us, to cure
Diseases without art, and such like; but also that the very authority and power
which is given men in the Church to be Ministers of holy things, this is
contained within the number of those Gifts whereof the Holy Ghost is Author;
and therefore he which gives this Power, may say without absurdity or folly,
Receive the Holy Ghost, such power as the Spirit of Christ has endued his
Church withal, such Power as neither Prince not Potentate, King nor Caesar on
Earth can give. So that if men alone had devised this form of speech, thereby
to express the heavenly wellspring of that Power which Ecclesiastical
Ordinations do bestow, it is not so foolish but that Wisemen might bear with
it. If then our Lord and Savior himself have used the self-samen form of
words, and that in the self-same kind of action, although there be but the
least show of probability, yea, or any possibility, that his meaning might be
the same which ours is, It should teach sober and grave men not to be too
venturous in condemning that of folly, which is not impossible to have in it
more profoundness of wisdom than flesh and blood should presume to control. Our
Savior after his resurrection from the dead, gave his Apostles their
Commission, saying, Matthew. 28. 18.
All power is given me in Heaven and in Earth: Go therefore and teach all
Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghosts, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. In
sum, As my Father sent me, John 20. 21.
so send I you. Whereunto Saint John does add farther, that having thus spoken
he breathed on them and said, Receive the Holy Ghost. By which words he must of
likelihood understand some gift of the Spirit which was presently at that time
bestowed upon them, as both the speech of actual delivery in saying Receive,
and the visible sign thereof, his Breathing did show. Absurd it were to imagine
our Savior did both to the ear, and also to the very eye, express a real
donation, and they at that time receive nothing. It rests then that we search
what special grace they did at that time receive. Touching miraculous power of
the Spirit, most apparent it is, that as then they received it not, but the
promise thereof was to be shortly after performed. The words of Saint Luke
concerning that Power, are therefore set down with signification of the time to
come, Behold I will send the promise of my Father upon you, but carry you in
the City of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high. Wherefore,
undoubtedly, it was some other effect of the Spirit, the Holy Ghost, in some
other kind which our Savior did then bestow. What other likelier than that
which himself does mention, as it should seem of purpose to take away all
ambiguous constructions, and to declare that the Holy Ghost, which he then
gave, was an holy and a ghostly authority, authority over the souls of men,
authority, a part whereof consists in power to remit and retain sins?
Receive the Holy Ghost? Whose sins server ye remit, they are remitted; John
10. 23.
whose sins ye retain, they are retained. Whereas therefore the other
Evangelists had set down, that Christ did before his suffering promise to give
his Apostles the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and being risen from the dead,
promised moreover at that time a miracolous power of the Holy Ghost: Saint John
adds, that he also invested them even then with the power of the Holy Ghost
for castigation and relaxation of sin, wherein was fully accomplished that
which the promise of the Keys did import. Seeing therefore that the same power
is now given, why should the same form of words expressing it be thought
foolish? The cause why we breathe not as Christ did on them unto whom he
imparted power, is, for that neither Spirit nor Spiritual authority may be
thought to proceed from us, who are but Delegates of Assigns to give men
possession of his Graces. Now besides that the power and authority delivered
with those words is it self (...), a gracious donation which the Spirit of God
does bestow, we may most assuredly persuade our selves, that the hand which
imposes upon us the function of our Ministry, does under the same form of
words so tie it self thereunto, that he which receives the burden, It si
necessarium est ^repidare de mo^ito, religio^ism est tamen gaudere de dono:
quonium qui mihi oneru est ^^ tor, ipse ster administrationis adjuron; and the
magnitudi ne gratiz A^ccumbat infirrano, dabir virtorem qui conulic dignitatem.
L^^ ^ev. 1. In Anniver. dia A. (...)Nazian. Number. 11. 17. Author. libei.
discripl. Ecclesiast.
is thereby for ever warranted to have the Spirit with him, and in him for his
assistance, aid, countenance and support in whatsoever he faithfully does to
discharge duty. Knowing therefore that when we take Ordination, we also receive
the presence of the Holy Ghost, partly to guide, direct, and strengthen us in
all our ways, and partly to assume unto it self for the more authority, those
actions that appertain to our Place and Calling, can our ears admit such a
speech uttered in the reverend performance of that Solemnity; or can we at any
time renew the memory, and enter into serious cogitation thereof, but with much
admiration and joy? Remove what these foolish words do imply, and what has the
Ministry of God besides wherein to glory? Whereas now, forasmuch as the Holy
Ghost, which our Savior in his first Ordinations gave, does no less concur
with Spiritual vocations throughout all ages, than the Spirit which God derived
from Moses to them that assisted him in his Government, did descend from them
to their Successors in like Authority and Place, we have for the least and
meanest Duties, performed by virtue of Ministerial power, that, to dignifie,
grace, and authorize them, which no other Offices on Earth can challenge.
Whether we Preach, Pray, Baptize, Communicate, Condemn, give Absolution, or
whatsoever, as Disposers of God's Mysteries; ourwords, judgemnts, acts, and
deeds are not ours, but the Holy Ghost's. Enough If unfeigaedly and in heart we
did believe it, enough to banish whatsoever may justly be thought corrupt,
either in bestowing, or in using, or in esteeming the same otherwise than is
meet. For profanely to bestow, or loosely to use, or vilely to esteem of the
Holy Ghost, we all in show and profession abhor. Now because the Ministry is
an Office of dignity and honor, some are doubtful whether any man may seek
for it without offense; or, to speak more properly, doubtful they are not, but
rather bold to accuse our Discipline in this respect, as not only permitting,
but requiring also ambitious suits, or other oblique ways or means whereby to
obtain it. Against this they plead, that our Savior did stay till his Father
sent him, and the Apostles till he them, that the ancient Bishops in the Church
of Christ were examples and patterns of the same modesty. Whereupon in the end
they insert, Let see therefore at the length amend that custom of repairing
from all parts unto the Bishop at the day of Ordination, and of seeking to
obtain Orders; Let the custom of bringing commendatory Letters be removed; let
men keep themselves at home, expecting there the voice of God, and the
authority of such as may call them to undertake charge. Thus severely they
censure and control ambition, if it be ambition which they take upon them to
reprehend. For of that there is cause to doubt. Ambition, as we understand it,
has been accounted a Vice which seeks after Honors inordinately, Ambitious
minds esteeming it their greatest happiness to be admired, reverenced, and
adored above others, use all means lawful and unlawful which may bring them to
high rooms. But as for the power of Order considered by it self, and as in this
case it must be considered, such reputation it has in the eye of this present
World, that they which affect it, rather need encouragement to bear contempt,
than deserve blame as men that carry aspiring minds. The work whereunto this
power serves is commended, 1 Timothy 3. 1.
and the desire thereof allowed by the Apostle for good. Nevertheless because
the burden thereof is heavy, and the charge great, it comes many times to
pass, that the minds even of virtuous men are drawn into clean contrary
affections; some in humility declining that by reason of hardness, which others
in regard of goodness only do with servent alacrity cover. So that there is
not the least degree in this service, but it may be both in (...), Greg.
Nazian. Apolog^^.
reverence shunned, and of very devotion longed for. If then the desire thereof
may be holy, religious, and good, may not the profession of that desire be so
likewise? We are not to think it so long good as it is dissembled, and evil if
once we begin to open it. And allowing that it may be opened without ambition,
what offense, I beseeth you, is there in opening it, there where it may be
furthered and satisfied, in case they to whom it appertains think meet? In
vain are those desires allowed, the accomplishment whereof it is not lawful for
men to seek. Power therefore of Ecclesiastical order may be desired, the desire
thereof may be professed, they which profess themselves that way inclined, may
endeavor to bring their desires to effect, and in all this no necessity of
evil. Is it the bringing of testimonial Letters wherein so great obliquity
consists? What more simple, more plain, more harmless, more agreeable with
the law of common humanity, than that men where they are not known, use for
their easier access the credit of such as can best give testimony of them?
Letters of any other construction our Church Discipline allows not; and these
to allow, is neither to require ambitious saings; not to approve any indirect
or unlawful act. The Prophet Esaias receiving his message at the hands of God,
and his charge by heavenly vision, heard the voice of the Lord, Esaias 6. 8.
saying, Whom shall I send, Who shall go for us? Whereunto he records his own
answer, Then I said, Here Lord I am, send me. Which in effect is the Rule and
Canon whereby touching this point the very order of the Church is framed.

The appointment of times for solemn Ordination, is but the public demand of
the Church in the name of the Lord himself, Heb. 10. 8.
Whom shall I send, who shall go for us? The confluence of men, whose
inclinations are bent that way, is but the answer thereunto, whereby the
labors of sundry being offered, the Church has freedom to take whom her
Agents in such case think meet and requisite. As for the example of our Savior
Christ who took not to himself this honor to be made our High Priest, but
received the same from him which said: Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedec, Heb. 5. 5.
his waiting, and not attempting to execute the Office till God saw convenient
time, may serve in reproof of usurped honors, for as much as we ought not of
our own accord to assume dignities, whereunto we are not called as Christ was.
But yet it should be withal considered, that a proud usurpation without any
orderly calling is one thing, and another the bare declaration of willingness
to obtain admittance; which Willingness of mind, I suppose, did not want in
him whose answer was to the voice of his heavenly calling, Behold I am come to
do thy will. And had it been for him, as it is for us, expedient to receive his
Commission signed with the hands of men, to seek it, might better have beseemed
his humility, than it does our boldness, to reprehend them of Pride and
Ambition, that make no worse kind of suits than by Letters of information.
Himself in calling his Apostles prevented all cogitations of theirs that way,
to the end it might truly be said of them, Ye chose not me, but I of mine own
voluntary motion made choice of you. Which kind of undesired nomination to
Ecclesiastical Places hefell diverse of the most famous amongst the ancient
Fathers of the Church in a clean contrary consideration. For our Savior's
election respected not any merit or worth, but took them which were farthest
off from likelihood of fitness; that afterward their supernatural ability and
performance, beyond hope, might cause the greater admiration; whereas in the
other, mere admiration of their singular and rare virtues was the reason why
honors were enforced upon them, which they of meekness and modesty did what
they could to avoid. But did they ever judge it a thing unlawful to wish or
desire the Office, the only charge and bare Function of the Ministry? Toward
which labor, what does the blessed Apostle else but encourage, saying, He
which desires it, is desirius of a good work? What does he else by such
sentences but stir, kindle and inflame ambition; if I may term that desire
ambition, which coveteth more to testify love by painfulness in God's service,
than to reap any other benefit? Although of the very honor it self, and of
other emoluments annexed to such labors, for more encouragement of man's
industry, we are not so to conceive neither; as if no affection could be cast
toward them without offense. Only as the Wiseman gives counsel: Eccles. 7.
6.
Seek not to be made a Judge, lest thou be not able to take away iniquity, and
lest thou fearing the person of the mighty, should commit an offense against
thine uprightness; so it always behooves men to take good heed, lest affection
to that, which has in it as well difficulty as goodness, sophisticate the true
and sincere judgment which beforehand they ought to have of their own
ability, for want whereof, many forward minds have found in stead of
contentment repentance. But for as much as hardness of things in themselves
most excellent cools the fervency of men's desires, unless there be somewhat
naturally acceptable to incite labor (for both the method of speculative
knowledge does by things which we sensibly perceive conduct to that which is in
nature more certain, though less sensible, and the method of virtuous actions
is also to train Beginners at the first by things acceptable unto the taste of
natural appetite, till our minds at the length be settled to embrace things
precious in the eye of reason, merely and wholly for their own sakes) howsoever
inordinate desires do hereby take occasion to abuse the Polity of God, and
Nature, either affecting without worth, or procuring by unseemly means that
which was instituted, and should be reserved for better minds to obtain by
more approved courses, in which consideration the Emperors Anthemius and Leo
did worthily oppose against such ambitious practices that ancient and famous
Constitution; wherein they have these sentences: Let not a Prelate be ordained
for reward or upon request, who should be so far sequestered from all ambition,
that they which advance him might be fain to search where he hides himself, to
entreat him drawing back, and to follow him till importunity have made him
yield, let nothing promote him but his excuses to avoid the burden, they are
unworthy of that Vocation which are not thereunto brought unwillingly;
notwithstanding, we ought not therefore with the odious name of Ambition, to
traduce and draw into hatred every poor request or suit wherein men may seem to
affect honor, seeing that Ambition and Modesty do not always so much differ in
the mark they shoot at, as in the manner of their Prosecution. Yea, even in
this may be error also, if we still imagine them least ambitious, which most
forbear to stir either hand or foot toward their own Preserments. For there
are that make an Idol of their great sufficiency, and because they surmise the
place should be happy that might enjoy them, they walk every where like grave
Pageants, observing whether men do not wonder why so small account is made of
so rare worthiness; and in case any other man's advancement be mentioned, they
either smile or blush at the mavelous folly of the world, which sees not
where dignities should offer themselves. Seeing therefore that suits after
spiritual Functions may be as ambitiously forborne as prosecuted, it remains
that the Mi^es^ ^iui (...) Greg. Nazian. Apologe^.
everest line of moderation between both, is, neither to follow them, without
conscience; not of pride, to withdraw our selves utterly from them.

Of Degrees, whereby the power of Order is distinguished; and concerning the
attire of Ministers.
78. It pleased Almighty God to choose to himself, for discharge of the (...)
Philo. p. 29^.
legal Ministry, one only Tribe out of twelve others, the Tribe of Levi; not
all unto every divine service, but Aaron and his Sons to one charge; the rest
of that sanctified Tribe to another. With what Solemnities they were admitted
into their Functions, in what manner Aaron and his successors the Highpriests
ascended every Sabbath and Festival day, offered, and ministered in the Temple;
with what Sinoffering once every year they reconciled first themselves and
their own house, afterward the People unto God, how they confessed all the
iniquities of the Children of Israel, laid all their trespasses upon the head
of a sacred Goat, and so carried them one of the City; how they purged the Holy
place from all uncleanness, with what reverence they entered within the Vail,
presented themselves before the Mercy-seat, and consulted with the Oracle of
God: What service the other Priests did continually in the Holy Place, how they
ministered about the Lamps, Morning and Evening, how every Sabbath they placed
on the Table of the Lord those twelve Loaves with pure incense, in perpetual
remembrance of that mercy which the Fathers, the twelve Tribes had found by the
providence of God for their food, when hunger caused them to leave their
natural soil, and to seek for sustenance in Egypt; how they employed themselves
in sacrifice day by day; finally, what Offices the Levites discharged, and what
Duties the rest did execute, it were a labor too long to enter into it, if I
should collect that which Scriptures and other ancient Records do mention.
Besides these, there were indifferently out of all Tribes from time to time
some called of God as Prophets, fore-shewing them things to come, and giving
them counsel in such particulars as they could not be directed in by the Law;
some chosen men to read, study, and interpret the Law of God, as the Soones or
Scholars of the old Prophets, in whose room afterward Scribes and Expounders
of the Law succeeded. And, because where so great variety is, if there should
be equality, confusion would follow, the Levites were in all their Service at
the appointment and direction of the Sons of Aaron, or Priests; they subject to
the principal Guides and Leaders of their own Order; and they all in obedience
under the High Priest. Which difference does also manifest it self in the very
Titles, that men for Honors sake gave unto them, terming Aaron and his
Successors, High or Great; the Ancients over the Companies of Priests,
Arch-Priests, Prophets, Fathers, Scribes and Interpreters of the Law, Masters.
Touching the Ministry of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the whole Body of the
Church being divided into Laity and Clergy, the Clergy are either Presbyters or
Deacons. I rather term the one sort. Presbyters than T. C. l. 1. p. 198. For so
much as the common and usual speech of England is to note by the word Priest
not a Minister of the Gospel, but a Sacrificer, which the Minister of the
Gospel is not, therefore we ought not to call the Ministers of the Gospel
Pri^sts. And that this is the English speech, it appears by all the English
Translations, which translate always isque. which were Sacrificers, Priests,
and do not on the other fute, for any that ever I read, translate we^^ Ci^nen a
Priest. Seeing therefore a Priest with us, and in our Tongue, does signify
both by the Papists Judgment, in respect of their abominable Ma^^, and also by
the Judgment of the Protestants, in respect of the Peasts which were offered
in the Law, a sacrificing Office, which the Minister of the Gospel neither does
nor can execu^es; It is manifest, that it cannot be without great essence so
used.
Priests, because in a matter of so small moment, I would not willingly offend
their ears, to whom the name of Priesthood is odious, though without cause.
For as things are distinguished one from another by those true essential forms,
which being really and actually in them, do not only give them the very last
and highest degree of their natural perfection, but are also the knot,
foundation and root whereupon all other inferior perfections depend: so if
they that first do impose names, did always understand exactly the nature of
that which they nominate, it may be that then, by hearing the terms of vulgar
speech, we should still be taught what the things themselves most properly are.
But because words have so many Artificers by whom they are made, and the things
whereunto we apply them are fraught with so many varieties, it is not always
apparent, what the first Inventers respected, much less what every man's inward
conceit is which uses their words. For any thing my self can discern herein, I
suppose that they which have bent their study to search more diligently such
matters, do, for the most part, find that Name's advisedly given, had either
regard unto that which is naturally most proper; or if perhaps, to some other
speciality, to that which is sensibly most eminent in the thing signified, and
concerning popular use of words, that which the wisdom of their Inventors did
intend thereby, is not commonly thought of, but by the name the thing
altogether conceived in gross, as may appear in that if you ask of the common
sort what any certain word, for example, what a Priest does signify, their
manner is not to answer, a Priest is a Clergyman which offers sacrifice to
God, but they show some particular Person, whom they use to call by that name.
And if we lift to descend to Grammar, we are told by masters in those Schools,
E^^m. magn.
that the word Priest has his right place (...) (...), in him whose mere
Function or Charge is the service of God. Howbeit, because the eminentest part
both of Heathenish and Jewish service did consist in Sacrifice, when
Learned-men declare what the word Priest does properly signify, according to
the mind of the first imposer of that name, their ordinary (...).
Schools do well expound it to imply Sacrifice. Seeing then that Sacrifice is
now no part of the Church-Ministry, how should the name of Priesthood be
thereunto rightly applied? Surely even as Saint Paul applies the name of Hesy.
Chriflus homo dicitur, quia notus est; Propheta quia sutura ^evelarit;
Sacerdos. quia pro nobis hossiam se ob^^. lit. Isid. Orig. l. 7. c. ^.
Flesh unto that very substance of Fishes, which has a proportionable
correspondence to Flesh, although it be in nature another thing. Whereupon,
when Philosophers will speak warily, they 1 Cor. 15.39.
make a difference between Flesh in one sort of living Creatures, and that
other substance in the rest which has but a kind of analogy to Flesh: the
Apostle contrariwise having matter of greater importance whereof to speak,
names indifferently both Flesh. The Fathers of the Church of Christ with like
security of speech call usually the Ministry of the Gospel Priesthood, Eyes
(...) Arist. de Anim. ^. 2. c. ^^.
in regard of that which the Gospel has proportionable to ancient Sacrifices,
namely, the Communion of the blessed Body and Blood of Christ, although it has
properly now no Sacrifice. As for the People, when they hear the name, it
draws no more their Minds to any cogitation of Sacrifice, than the name of a
Senator or of an Alderman causes them to think upon old age, or to imagine
that every one so termed must needs be ancient, because years were respected in
the first nomination of both. Wherefore, to pass by the name, let them use what
dialect they will, whether we call it a Priesthood, a Presbytership, or a
Ministry, it skilleth not: Although in truth the word Presbyter does seem more
fit, and in propriety of speech more agreeable than Priest with the drift of
the whole Gospel of Jesus Christ. For what are they that embrace the Gospel but
Sons of God? What are Churches but his Families? Seeing therefore we receive
the Adoption and state of Sons by their Ministry whom God has chosen out for
that purpose: seeing also that when we are the Sons of God, our continuance is
still under their care which were our Progenitors, what better Title could
there be given them than the reverend name of Presbyters, or fatherly Guides?
The Holy Ghost throughout the body of the New Testament, making so much mention
of them, does not any where call them Priests. The Prophet Esaias, Esaias 66. 21.
I grant, does, but in such sort as the ancient Fathers, by way of analogy. A
Presbyter, according to the proper meaning of the New Testament, is he unto
whom our Savior Christ has communicated the power of Spiritual procreation.
Out of twelve Patriarks issued the whole multitude of Israel according to the
flesh. And, according to the mystery of heavenly birth, our Lord's Apostles we
all acknowledge to be the Patriarks of his whole Church. St. John therefore
beheld sitting about the Throne of God in Heaven four and twenty Presbyters,
Revel. 4. 4. Rev. 20. 14. Mat. 19. 28. 1 Per. 3. 1.
the one half Fathers of the old, the other of the new Jerusalem. In which
respect the Apostles likewise gave themselves the same Title, albeit that name
were not proper, but common unto then with others. For of Presbyters, some were
greater, some less in power, and that by our Savior's own appointment; the
greater they which received fullness of Spiritual power, the less they to whom
less was granted. The Apostle's peculiar charge was to publish the Gospel of
Christ unto all Nations, and to deliver them his Ordinances received by
immediate revelation from himself. (...)Dio^. is. Areep p. 113. Acts 2. 4, 47.
Which pre-eminence excepted, to all other Offices and Duties incident unto
their Order, it was in them to Ordain and Consecrate whomsoever they thought
meet, even as our Savior did himself assign seventy other of his own
Disciples, inferior Presbyters, whose Commission to Preach and Baptize, was
the same which the Apostles had. Whereas therefore we find, that the very
first Sermon which the Apostles did publicly make, was, the conversion of
above three thousand Souls, unto whom there were every day more and more added,
they having no open place permitted them for the exercise of Christian
Religion, think we that Twelve were sufficient to teach and administer
Sacraments in so many private places, as so great a multitude of People did
require? This harvest, our Savior (no doubt) foreseeing, provided accordingly
Laborers for it before hand. By which means it came to: pass, that the growth
of that Church being so great and so sudden, they had notwithstanding in a
readiness Presbyters enough to furnish it. And therefore the History does make
no mention by what occasion Presbyters were instituted in Jerusalem, only we
read of things which they did, and how the like were made afterward elsewhere.
To these two Degrees appointed of our Lord and Savior Christ, his Apostles
soon after annexed Deacons: Deacons therefore must know, says Cyprian, Cypr.
Ep. 9. 1. 3 ad Rogatianum.
that our Lord himself did elect Apostles; but Deacons, after his ascension
into Heaven, the Apostles ordained: Deacons were Stewards of the Church, unto
whom at the first was committed the distribution of Church-goods, the care of
providing therewith for the Poor, and the charge to see that all things of
expeace might be religiously and faithfully dealt in. A part also of their
Office, was attendance upon their Presbyters at the time of Divine Service.
^^^. ^ylst. ad Tral.
For which cause Ignatius, to set forth the dignity of their Calling, says,
that they are in such case to the Bishop, as if Angelical Powers did serve him.
These only being the uses for which Deacons were first made, if the Church
have sithence extended their Ministry further than the circuit of their labor
at the first was drawn, we are not herein to think the Ordinance of Scripture
violated, except there appear some prohibition, which has abridged the Church
of that liberty. Which I note chiefly, in regard of them to whom it seems a
thing so monstrous, that Deacons should sometime be licensed to preach, whose
institution was at the first to another end. To charge them for this as men not
contented with their own Vocations, and as breakers into that which
appertains unto others, is very hard. For when they are thereunto once
admitted, it is part of their own Vocation, it appertains now unto them as
well as others; neither is it intrusion for them to do it being in such sort
called, but rather in us it were temerity to blame them for doing it. Suppose
we the Office of Teaching to be so repugnant unto the Office of Deaconship,
that they cannot concur in one and the same Person? What was there done in the
Church by Deacons, which the Apostles did not first discharge being Teachers?
Yea, but the Apostles found the burden of Teaching so heavy, that they judged
it meet to cut off that other charge, and to have Deacons which might
undertake it. Be it so. The multitude of Christians increasing in Jerusalem,
and waxing great, it was too much for the Apostles to teach, and to minister
unto Tables also. The former was not to be slacked, that this latter might be
followed. Therefore unto this they appointed others. Whereupon we may rightly
ground this Axiom, that when the subject wherein one man's labors of sundry
kinds are employed, does wax so great, that the same men are no longer able to
manage it sufficiently as before, the most natural way to help this, is, by
dividing their Charge into slipes, and ordaining of Underofficers; as our
Savior under twelve Apostle, seventy Presbyters, and the Apostles by his
example seven Deacons to be under both. Neither ought it to seem less
reasonable, that when the same men are sufficient both to continue in that
which they do, and also to undertake somewhat more, a combination be admitted
in this case, as well as division in the former. We may not therefore disallow
it in the Church of Geneva, that Calvin and Beza were made both Pastors and
Readers in Divinity, being men so able to discharge both. To say they did not
content themselves with their Pastoral vocations, but brake into that which
belongs to others; Romans 1^. 8.
to allege against them, He that exhorts on exhortation, as against us, He
that distributeth in simplicity, is alleged in great dislike of granting
license for Deacons to preach, were very hard. The ancient custom of the
Church, was to yield the poor much relief, especially Widows. But as poor
people are always querulous and apt to think themselves less respected then
they should be, we see that when the Apostles did what they could without
hindrance to their weightier business, yet there were which grudged that others
had too much, and they too little, the Grecian Widows shorter Commons than the
Hebrews. By means whereof the Apostles saw it meet to ordain Deacons. Now tract
of time having clean worn out those first occasions, for which the Deaconship
was then most necessary, it might the better be afterward extended to other
Services, and so remain, as at this present day, a Degree in the Clergy of God
which the Apostles of Christ did institute. That the first seven Deacons were
chosen out of the seventy Disciples, is an error in Epiphanius. Epiph. l. 1.
c. 21.
For to draw men from places of weightier, unto rooms of meaner labor, had not
been fit. The Apostles, to the end they might follow teaching with more
freedom, committed the ministry of Tables unto Deacons. And shall we think
they judged it expedient to choose so many out of those seventy to be ministers
unto Tables, when Christ himself had before made them Teachers? It appears
therefore, how long these three degrees of Ecclesiastical Order have continued
in the Church of Christ; the highest and largest, that which the Apostles, the
next that which Presbyters, and the lowest that which Deacons had. Touching
Prophets, they were such men as having otherwise learned the Gospel, had from
above bestowed upon them a special gift of expounding Scriptures, and of
foreshewing things to come. Acts 21. 10. Acts 11. 27.
Of this sort Agabus was, and besides him in Jerusalem sundry others, who
notwithstanding are not therefore to be reckoned with the Clergy, because no
man's gifts or qualities can make him a Minister of holy things, unless
Ordination do give him power. And we nowhere since Prophets to have been made
by Ordination; but all whom the Church did ordain, where either to serve as
Presbyters or as Deacons. Evangelists were Presbyters of principal sufficiency,
whom the Apostles sent abroad, and used as Agents in Ecclesiastical affairs
wheresoever they saw need. They whom we find to have been named in Scripture,
Evangelists, Acts 9. 18.
Ananias, Acts 18. 24.
Apollos, Tim. 4.5.9. 1 Timothy 3. 15. 5. 14. 1. 8. Eusebius. Eccles. Hit^. l. 3. c.
36.
Timothy, and others were thus employed. And concerning Evangelists, afterward
in Trajans days, the History Ecclesiastical notes that many of the Apostle's
Disciples and Scholars which were then alive, and did with singular love of
Wisdom affect the Heavenly Word of God, to show their willing minds in
executing that which Christ first of all requires at the hands of men, they
sold their Possessions, gave them to the Poor, and, betaking themselves to
travel, undertook the labor of Evangelists, that is, they painfully preached
Christ, and delivered the Gospel to them, who as yet had never heard the
Doctrine of Faith. Finally, whom the Apostle names Pastors and Teachers, what
other were they than Presbyters also, howbeit settled in some certain charge,
and thereby differing from Evangelists? I beseech them therefore which have
hitherto troubled the Church with questions, about Degrees and Offices of
Ecclesiastical Calling, because they principally ground themselves upon two
places, that, all partiality laid aside, they would sincerely weigh and
examine, whether they have not mis-interpreted both places, and all by
surmising incompatible Offices, where nothing is meant but sundry graces, gifts
and abilities which Christ bestowed. To them of Corinth, his words are these,
God placed in the Church, 1 Cor. 2. 28.
first of all, some Apostles; Secondly, Prophets; Thirdly, Teachers; after them
Powers, then gifts of Cures, Aides Governments, kinds of Languages. Are all
Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all Teachers? Is there power in all? Have all
grace to cure? Do all speak with Tongues? Can all interpret? But be you
desirous of the better graces. They which plainly discern first, that some one
general thing there is which the Apostle does here divide into all these
branches, and do secondly conceive that general to be Church-Offices, besides a
number of other difficulties, can by no means possibly deny but that many of
these might concur in one man, and peradventure, in some one all; which
mixture notwithstanding, their form of discipline does most shun. On the other
side, admit that Communicants of special infused grace, for the benefit of
Members knit into one body, the Church of Christ, are here spoken of, which was
in truth the plain drift of that whole Discourse; and see if every thing do not
answer in due place with the fitness, which shows easily what is likeliest to
have been mean. For why are Apostles the first, but because unto them was
granted the Revelation of all Truth from Christ immediately? Why Prophets the
second, but because they had of some things knowledge in the same manner?
Teachers the next, because whatsoever was known to them it came by hearing, yet
God withal made them able to instruct, which every one could not do that was
taught. After Gifts of Edification there follow general abilities to work
things above Nature, Grace to cure men of bodily Diseases, Supplies against
occurrent defects and impediments, Dexterities to govern and direct by counsel;
Finally, aptness to speak or interpret foreign tongues. Which Graces, not
poured out equally, but diversely sorted and given, were a cause why not only
they all did furnish up the whole Body, but each benefit and help other. Again,
the same Apostle, other-where in like sort, Ephesians. 4. 7. Psalm. 68. 18.
To every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. Wherefore he says, When he ascended up on high, he led Captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men. He therefore gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
gathering together of Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edification of the Body of Christ. In this place none but gifts of Instruction
are expressed. And because of Teachers some were Evangelists which neither had
any part of their knowledge by Revelation as the Prophets, and yet in ability
to teach were far beyond other Pastors, they are, as having received one way
less than Prophets, and another way more than Teachers, set accordingly between
both. For the Apostle does in neither place respect what any of them were by
Office or Power given them through Ordination, but what by grace they all had
obtained through miraculous infusion of the Holy Ghost. For in Christian
Religion, this being the ground of our whole Belief, that the promises which
God of old had made by his Prophets concerning the wonderful Gifts and graces
of the Holy Ghost, wherewith the Reign of the true Messiah should be made
glorious, were immediately after our Lord's Ascension performed, there is no
one thing whereof the Apostles did take more often occasion to speak. Out of
men thus endued with gifts of the Spirit upon their Conversion to Christian
Faith, the Church had her Ministers chosen, unto whom was given Ecclesiastical
power by Ordination. Now, because the Apostle in reckoning degrees and
varieties of Grace, does mention Pastors and Teachers, although he mention them
not in respect of their Ordination to exercise the Ministry, but as examples
of men especially enriched with the gifts of the Holy Ghost, diverse learned and
skillful men have so taken it, as if those places did intend to teach what
Orders of Ecclesiastical Persons there ought to be in the Church of Christ,
which thing we are not to learn from thence but out of other parts of holy
Scripture, whereby it clearly appears, that Churches Apostolic did know but
three degrees in the power of Ecclesiastical Order; at the first Apostles,
Presbyters, and Deacons; afterward in stead of Apostles, Bishops, concerning
whose Order we are to speak in the seventh Book. There is an error which
beguileth many who do much entangle both themselves and others by not
distinguishing Services, Offices, and Orders Ecclesiastical: the first of which
three, and in part the second may be executed by the Laity; whereas none have,
or can have the third but the Clergy. Catechists, Exorcists, Readers, Singers,
and the rest of like sort, if the nature only of their labors and pains be
considered, may in that respect seem Clergymen, even as the Fathers for that
cause term them usually Clerks; as also in regard of the end whereunto they
were trained up, which was to be ordered when years and experience should make
them able. Notwithstanding, in as much as they no way differed from others of
the Laity longer than during that work of Service, which at any time they might
give over, being thereunto but admitted, not tied by irrevocable Ordination, we
find them always exactly severed from that body whereof those three before
rehearsed Orders alone are natural parts. Touching Widows, of whom some men are
persuaded, that if such as Saint Paul describes may be gotten, we ought to
retain them in the Church for ever. T.C.l. 1. p. 191 1 Timothy 5. 9.
Certain mean Services there were of Attendance; as about Women, at the time of
their Baptism, about the Bodies of the sick and dead, about the necessities of
Travelers, Wayfaring men, and such like, wherein the Church did commonly life
them when need required, because they lived of the Alms of the Church, and were
fittest for such purposes; Saint Paul does therefore, to avoid scandal, require
that none but Women wellexperienced and virtuously given, neither any under
threescore years of age should be admitted of that number. Widows were never in
the Church so highly esteemed as Virgins. But seeing neither of them did or
could receive Ordination, to make them Ecclesiastical Persons were absurd. The
antientest therefore of the Fathers mention those three degrees of
Ecclesiastical Order specified, and no more. When your Captain (says
Tertullian) that is to say, Tertul. de Persecur.
the Deacons, Presbyters, and Bishops fly, who shall teach the Laity, that they
must be constant? Again, What should I mention Laymen (says Optatus) yea, or
diverse of the Ministry it self? To what purpose Deacons, which are in the
third, or Presbyters in the second degree of Priesthood, when the very Heads
and Princes of all, even certain of the Bishops themselves were content to
redeem life with the loss of Heaven? Heaps of Allegations in a case so evident
and plain are needless. I may securely therefore conclude, that there are at
this day in the Church of England, no other than the same Degrees of
Ecclesiastical Order, namely, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, which had their
beginning from Christ, and his blessed Apostles themselves. As for Deans,
Prebendaries, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Archdeacons, Chancellours, Officials,
Commissaries, and such other the like names, which being not found in holy
Scripture, we have been thereby through some men's error thought to allow of
Ecclesiastical Degress not known, nor ever heard of in the better ages of
former times; all these are in truth but Titles of Office, whereunto partly
Ecclesiastical Persons, and partly others are in sundry forms and conditions
admitted, as the state of the Church does need degrees of Order, still
continuing the same they were from the first beginning. Now what habit or
attire does beseem each Order to use in the course of common life, both for the
gravity of his Place, and for Example-sake to other men, is a matter frivolous
to be disputed of. A small measure of wisdom may serve to teach them how they
should cut their coats. But seeing all well-ordered Polities have ever judged
it meet and fit by certain special distinct Ornaments to sever each sort of men
from other when they are in public, to the end that all may receive such
Complements of Civil Honor, as are due to their Rooms and Callings, even
where their Persons are not known, it argues a disproportioned mind in them
whom so decent Orders displease.

Of Oblations, Foundations, Endow.ments, tithes, all intended for perpetury of
Religion, which purpose being chi^fly fulfilled by the Clergies cerr^in and
suffici^nt maintenance, must needs by alieration of Church. It was be made for
state.
79. We might somewhat marvel, what the Apostle Saint Paul should mean to say
that Covetousness is Idolatry, if the daily practice of men did not show, that
whereas Nature requires God to be honored with wealth, we honor for the most
part Wealth as God. Fain we would teach our selves to believe, that for worldly
goods it suffices frugally and honestly to use them to our own benefit,
without detriment and hurt of others; or if we go a degree farther, and perhaps
convert some small contemptible portion thereof to Charitable uses, the whole
duty which we owe unto God herein is fully satisfied. But for as much as we
cannot rightly honor God, unless both our Souls and Bodies be sometime
employed merely in his Service; Again, since we know that Religion requires at
our hands the taking away of so great a part of the time of our lives quite and
clean from our own business; and the bestowing of the same in his; Suppose we
that nothing of our wealth and substance is immediately due to God, but all our
own to bestow and spend as our selves think meet? Are not our riches as well
his, as the days of our life are his? Wherefore, unless with part we
acknowledge his Supreme Dominion, by whose benevolence we have the whole, how
give we Honor to whom Honor belongs, or how has God the things that are
God's? I would know what Nation in the World did ever honor God, and not think
it a point of their duty to do him honor with their very goods. So that this
we may boldly set down as a Principle clear in Nature, an Axiom which ought not
to be called in question, a Truth manifest and infallible, that men are
eternally bound to honor God with their substance, in token of thankful
acknowledgement that all they have is from him. To honor him with our worldly
goods, not only by spending them in lawful manner, and by using them without
offense, but also by alienating from our selves some reasonable part or portion
thereof, and by offering up the same to him as a sign that we gladly confess
his sole and Sovereign Dominion over all, is a duty which all men are bound
unto, and a part of that very Worship of God; which, as the Law of God and
Nature it self requires, so we are the rather to think all men no less
strictly bound thereunto than to any other natural duty, in as much as the
hearts of men do so cleave to these earthly things, so much admire them for the
sway they have in the World, impute them so generally either to Nature, or to
Chance, and Fortune, so little think upon the Grace and Providence from which
they come, that unless by a kind of continual tribute we did acknowledge God's
Dominion, it may be doubted that short in time men would learn to forget whose
Tenants they are, and imagine that the World is their own absolute, free, and
independent inheritance. Now, concerning the kind or quality of gifts which
God receives in that sort, we are to consider them, partly as first they
proceed from us, and partly as afterward they are to serve for divine uses. In
that they are testimonies of our affection toward God, there is no doubt, but
such they should be as beseems most his Glory to whom we offer them. In this
respect the fatness of Abel's Sacrifice is commended; the flower of all men's
increase assigned to God by Solomon; the Gifts and Donations of the People
rejected as often as their cold affection to Godward made their Presents to be
little worth. Somewhat the Heathens saw touching that which was herein fit, and
therefore they unto their gods did not think they might consecrate any thing
which was impure or unsound, Par^m, probam, profan^m, saun, ^est. lib. 14.
or already given, or else not truly their own to give. Again, in regard of
use, forasmuch as we know that God has himself no need of worldly commodities,
but takes them because it is our good to be so exercised, and with no other
intent accepts, them, but to have them used for the endless continuance of
Religion; there is no place left of doubt or controversy, but that we in the
choice of our gifts, are to level at the same mark, and to frame our selves to
his known intents and purposes. Whether we give unto God therefore that which
himself by commandment requires; or that which the public consent of the
Church thinks good to allot, or that which every man's private devotion does
best like, in as much as the gift which we offer, proceeds not only as a
testimony of our affection toward God, but also as a mean to uphold Religion,
the exercise whereof cannot stand without the help of temporal commodities: if
all men be taught of Nature to wish, and, as much as in them lies, to procure
the perpetuity of good things; if for that very cause we honor and admire
their wisdom, who having been Founders of Common-weals, could devise how to
make the benefit they lest behind them durable; if, especially in this respect,
we prefer Lycurgus before Solon, and the Spartan before the Athenian Polity, it
must needs follow, that as we do unto God very acceptable service in honoring
him with our substance, so our service that way is then most acceptable, when
it tends to perpetuity. The first permanent donations of honor in this kind
are Temples. Which works do so much set forward the exercise of Religion, that
while the World was in love with Religion, it gave to no sort greater reverence
than to whom it could point and say, These are the men that have built us
Synagogues. But of Churches we have spoken sufficiently heretofore. The next
things to Churches are the Ornaments of Churches, memorials which men's devotion
has added to remain in the treasure of God's House, not only for uses wherein
the exercise of Religion presently needs them, but also partly for supply of
future casual necessities, whereunto the Church is on earth subject, and partly
to the end, that while they are kept they may continually serve as testimonies,
giving all men to understand, that God has in every Age and Nation, such as
think it no burden to honor him with their substance. The riches first of the
Tabernacle of God, and then of the Temple of Jerusalem, arising out of
voluntary Gifts and Donations, were, as we commonly speak, a Nemo scit, the
value of them above that which any man would imagine. After that the Tabernacle
was made, furnished with all necessaries, and set up, although in the
wilderness their ability could not possibly be great, the very metal of those
Vessels which the Princes of the twelve Tribes gave to God for their first
Presents, Number. 7. ^5. 85.
amounted even then to two thousand and four hundred shekels of Silver, an
hundred and twenty shekels of Gold, every shekel weighing half an ounce. What
was given to the Temple which Solomon erected, 1 Chronicles. 28. Exodus 25. 28, and
37. 24. Ezra 1. ^8, 69. Hag. 2. 40. Ezra 9. 24.
we may partly conjecture, when over and besides Wood, Marble, Iron, Brass,
Vestments, Precious Stones, and Money; the sum which David delivered into
Solomon's hands for that purpose, was of Gold in mass eight thousand, and of
Silver seventeen thousand Cichars, every Cichar containing a thousand and eight
hundred shekels, which rises to nine hundred Ounces in every one Cichar:
whereas the whole charge of the Tabernacle did not amount unto thirty Cichars.
After their return out of Babylon, they were not presently in case to make
their second Temple of equal magnificence and glory with that which the enemy
had destroyed. Notwithstanding what they could, they did. Insomuch that, the
building finished, there remained in the Coffers of the Church to uphold the
fabric thereof, six hundred and fifty Cichars of Silver, one hundred of Gold.
Whereunto was added by Nehemias of his own gift a thousand drams of Gold, fifty
vessels of Silver, Nehem. 7. 50.
five hundred and thirty Priests vestments; by other the Princes of the Fathers
twenty thousand drams of Gold, two thousand and two hundred pieces of Silver;
by the rest of the People twenty thousand of Gold, two thousand of Silver,
threescore and seven attires of Priests. And they furthermore bound themselves
toward other Charges to give by the Pole in what part of the World soever they
should dwell, Nehem. 10. 32
the third of a shekel, that is to say, the sixth part of an ounce yearly. Cic.
oral. pro L. Flac. Cum aurum Julaorum n^mine quotannis ex Italia ^^ an omnibus
vestrio Provincils H^erosely. mam expartal soleret Flaccus sanxie edicto, ne
est Asia exporta ^^licertes.
This out of foreign Provinces, they always sent in Gold. Whereof Joseph. Anti.
l. 4. c. 12. Every ruicat in value 600. Crown: Number. 35. Levit. 25. 34. and 29.
38.
Nithridates is said to have taken up by the way before it could pass to
Jerusalem from Asia, in one adventure eight hundred talents; Crassus after that
to have borrowed of the Temple it self eight thousand: at which time Eleazar
having both many other rich Ornaments, and all the Tapestry of the Temple under
his custody, thought it the safest way to grow unto some composition, and so to
redeem the residue by parting with a certain beam of Gold about seven hundred
and an half in weight, a prey sufficient for one man, as he thought, who had
never bargained with Crassus till then, and therefore upon the confidence of a
solemn Oath that no more should be looked for, he simply delivered up a large
morsel, whereby the value of that which remained was betrayed, and the whole
lost. Such being the casualties whereunto moveable Treasures are subject, the
Law of Moses did both require eight and twenty Cities, together with their
Fields and whole Territories in the Land of Jury, to be reserved for God
himself; and not only provide for the liberty of farther additions, if men of
their own accord should think good, but also for the safe preservation thereof
unto all Posterities, that no man's avarice or fraud, by defeating so virtuous
intents, might discourage from like purposes. God's third indowment did
therefore of old consist in Lands. Furthermore, some cause no doubt there is,
why besides sundry other more rare Donations of uncertain rate, the Tenth
should be thought a Revenue so natural to be allotted out unto God. For of the
spoils which Abraham had taken in War, he delivered unto Melchisedeck the
Titles. The vow of Jacob, at such time as he took his journey toward Haran,
was, Genesis 14. 20. Genesis 28. 20.
If God will be with me, and will keep me in this voyage which I am to go, and
will give me Bread to eat, and Clothes to put on, so that I may return to my
Father's house in safety, then shall the Lord be my God; and this Stone which I
have set up as a Pillar, the same shall be God's House, and of all thou shall
give me I will give unto thee the Tithe. And as Abraham gave voluntarily, as
Jacob vowed to give God Tithes, so the Law of Moses did require at the hands of
all men the self-same kind of Tribute, Deuteronomy. 14. 27.
the Tenth of their Com, Wine, Oil, Fruit, Cattle, and whatsoever increase his
heavenly Providence should send. Plin. hist. nur. l. 12. c. 14.
In so much, that Painims being herein followers of their steps, paid Tithes
likewise: Imagine we that this was for no cause done, or that there was not
some special inducements to judge the Tenth of our Worldly profits the most
convenient for God's Portion? Are not all things by him created in such sort,
that the forms which give them their distinction are number, their operations
measure, and their matter weight? Three being the mystical number of God's
unsearchable perfection within himself; Seven the number whereby our own
perfections, (...). Philo (...) A^u^.
through grace, are most ordered; and Ten the number of Nature's perfections
(for the beauty of Nature, is Order; and the foundation of Order, Number; and
of Number, Ten the highest we can rise unto without iteration of numbers under
it) could Nature better acknowledge the power of the God of nature, than by
assigning unto him that quantity which is the continent of all she possesses?
There are in Philo the Jew, many Arguments to show the great congruity and
fitness of this number in things consecrated unto God. But because over-nice
and curious speculations become not the earnestness of holy things, I omit
what might be farther observed, as well out of others, as out of him, touching
the quantity of this general sacred Tribute; whereby it comes to pass, that
the meanest and the very poorest amongst men, yielding unto God as much in
proportion as the greatest, and many times in affection more, have this as a
sensible token always assuring their minds, that in his sight, from whom all
good is expected, they are concerning acceptance, protection, divine
privileges and preheminencies whatsoever, Equals and Peers with them unto whom
they are otherwise in earthly respects inferiors; being furthermore well
assured that the top as it were thus presented to God is neither lost, nor
unfruitfully bestowed, but does sanctify to them again the whole Mass, and
that he by receiving a little undertaketh to bless all. In which consideration
the Jews were accustomed to name their Tithes, the Massoreth sepes est legis
divitiarum sepes decimae. R. Aquiba in Pirk. Aboth.
hedge of their Riches. Albeit a hedge do only fence and preserve that which
is contained, whereas their Tithes and Offerings did more, because they
procured increase of the heap out of which they were taken. God demands no
such debt for his own need, but for their only benefit that owe it. Wherefore
detaining the same, they hurt not him whom they wrong; and themselves whom they
think they relieve, they wound; except men will happily affirm, that God did by
fair speeches, and large promises, delude the world in saying, Bring ye all the
Tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in mine House, (deal truly,
defraud not God of his due, but bring all) Mal. 3.
and prove if I will not open unto you the Windows of Heaven, and power down
upon you an immeasurable blessing. That which Saint, James has concerning the
effect of our Prayers unto God, is for the most part of like moment in our
gifts: We pray and obtain not, because he which knows our hearts, does know
our desires are evil. In like manner we give, and we are not the more accepted,
because he beholds how unwisely we spill our Gifts in the bringing. It is to
him which needs nothing, Nemo libenter dedit quod non accepit sed expressit.
Sen. de Benef, l. 1. c. 1.
all one whether any thing or nothing be given him. But for our own good, it
always behooves that whatsoever we offer up into his hands, we bring it
seasoned with this cogitation, Thou Lord art worthy of all honor. With the
Church of Christ touching these matters, it stands as it did with the whole
World before Moses. Whereupon for many years men being desirous to honor God
in the same manner, as other virtuous and holy Personages before had done, both
during the time of their life, and, if farther ability did serve, by such
devise as might cause their works of piety to remain always, it came by these
means to pass that the Church from time to time, had. Treasure, proportionable
unto the poorer or wealthier estate of Christian men. And, as soon as the state
of the Church could admit thereof, they easily condescended to think it most
natural and most fit, that God should receive, as before, of all men his
ancient accustomed Revenues of Tithes. Thus therefore both God and Nature have
taught to convert things temporal to eternal uses, and to provide for the
perpetuity of Religion, even by that which is most transitory. For, to the end
that, in worth and value, there might be no abatement of any thing once
assigned to such purposes, the Law requires precisely the best of what we
possess; and, to prevent all damages by way of commutation, where in stead of
natural Commodities, or other rights, the price of them might be taken, the Law
of Moses determined their rates, and the payments to be always made by the
Sickle of the Sanctuary, Levit. 27. 29.
wherein there was great advantage of weight above the ordinary current Sickle.
The truest and surest way for God to have always his own, is by making him
payment in kind out of the very self-same riches, which through his gracious
benediction the earth does continually yield. This, where it may be without
inconvenience, is for every man's Conscience sake. That which comes from God
to us, by the natural course of his providence, which we know to be innocent
and pure, is perhaps best accepted, because least spotted with the stain of
unlawful, or indirect procurement. Besides, whereas prices daily change,
Nature, which commonly is one, must needs be the most indifferent, and
permanent Standard between God and Man. But the main foundation of all,
whereupon the security of these things depends, as far as any thing may be
ascertained amongst men, is, that the Title and Right which man had in every of
them before Donation, does by the Act, and from the time of any such Donation,
Dedication, or Grant, remain the proper possession of God till the World's end,
unless himself renounce or relinquish it. For if equity have taught us, that
every one ought to enjoy his own; that what is ours no other can alienate from
us, but with our Lib. 11. de Reg. Jur.
own Cujus per errorem deci repetitio est, ejus coas^lio dari donatio est, l.
1. D. de con. 1. indeb. This is the ground of Consideration in alienations from
man to man.
deliberate consent, finally, that no man having past his consent or deed, may
Nemo petest mutare consi lium s^um in alteius praejudiciam, l. 75. de Reg. Jur.
Acts. 3 4. Exodus 22. 29. 30. Matthew. 21. 13. Mal 3.8.
change it to the prejudice of any other, should we perfume to deal with God
worse than God has allowed any man to deal with us? Albeit therefore we be now
free from the Law of Moses, and consequently, not thereby bound to the payment
of Tithes; yet because Nature has taught men to honor God with their
Substance, and Scripture has left us an example of that particular proportion,
which for moral considerations has been thought sit by him whose wisdom
could best judge; furthermore, seeing that the Church of Christ has long
sithence entered into like obligation, it seems in these days a question
altogether vain and superfluous, whether Tithes be a matter of Divine Right:
because howsoever at the first, it might have been thought doubtful, our case
is clearly the same now with theirs, unto whom Saint Peter sometime spoke,
saying, While it was whole, it was whole thine. When our Tithes might have
probably seemed our own, we had color of liberty to use them as we our selves
saw good. But having made them His whose they are, let us be warned by other
men's example what it is (...) to wash or clip that come which has on it the
mark of God. For that all these are his possessions, and that he does himself
so reckon them, appears by the form of his own speeches. Touching Gifts and
Oblations, Thou shall give them me; touching Oratories and Churches, My House
shall be called the House of Prayer; touching Tithes, Will a man spoil God? Yet
behold, even me your God ye have Non vusentur rem atmi^t^ere quibus propria non
suit. l. dg. de Reg. Jur. Ezech. 45. 1. 4.
spoiled, notwithstanding ye ask wherein, as though ye were ignorant, what
injury there has been offered in Tithes: ye are heavily accursed, because with
a kind of public consent ye have joined your selves in one to rob me,
imagining the commonness of your offense to be every man's particular
justification; touching Lands, Ye shall offer to the Lord a sacred portion of
ground, and that sacred portion shall belong to the Priests. Neither did God
only thus ordain amongst the Jews, but the very purpose, intent, and meaning
of all that have honored him with their substance, was to invest him with the
property of those benefits, the use whereof must needs be committed to the
hands of men. In which respect the style of ancient Grants and Charters, is,
^^g. Char. ^. 1
We have given unto God both for Us and our Hews for ever, Yea, We know, says
Charles the Great, that the goods of the Church are the sacred indowments of
God, to the Lord our God we offer and dedicate whatsoever we deliver unto his
Church. Capit. Ca^d. l. 2. c. 284.
Whereupon the Laws Imperial do likewise divide all things in such sort, that
they make some to belong by right of Nature indifferently unto every man, some
to be the certain goods and possessions of Common-weals, some to appertain unto
several Corporations or Companies of men, some to be privately men's own in
particular, and some to be separated quite Nullins a^tem far; ^ae and relig^o
and ^a^ etc. Quod enam evini juris est, ad nu ^^ in b^^erf., Inst. l. 2. tit. 1.
from all men; which last branch comprizeth things sacred and holy, because
thereof God alone is Owner. The sequel of which received opinion, as well
without as within the Walls of the House of God touching such possessions as
has been ever, that there is not an act more honorable, than by all means to
amplify and to defend the patrimony of Religion, not any more ^ li cum D^s
sedilegi pugnant Curt. l. 7. Sacrum sacreve c^minen^^cum qui dempset it
^a^^ave, pur ie daci^, Leg ^g. ^ab. Ca^^^, Catul. l 6. c 2^5.
impious and hateful, than to impair those possessions which men in former
times, when they gave unto holy uses, were wont at the Altar of God, and in
presence of their ghostly Superiors, to make, as they thought, inviolable, by
words of fearful execration, saying, These things we offer to God, from whom if
any take them away (which we hope no man will attempt to do) but if any shall,
Let his account be without favor in the last day, when he comes to receive
the doom which is due for Sacrilege against that Lord and God unto whom we
dedicate the same. The best and most renowned Prelates of the Church of Christ
have in this consideration rather sustained the wrath, than yielded to satisfy
the hard desire of their greatest Commanders on earth, coveting with ill advice
and counsel that which they willingly should have suffered God to enjoy. There
are of Martyrs, whom posterity does much honor, for that having under their
hands the custody of such Dep. led puer in. T^rul. Apologet. Prudent. Perd^eph.
treasures, they could by virtuous delusion invent how to save them from prey,
even when the safety of their own lives they gladly neglected; as one, sometime
an Archdeacon under Xistne the Bishop of Rome, did: whom when his Judge
understood to be one of the Church-Stewards, thirst of blood began to slake,
and another humor to work, which first by a favorable countenance, and then
by quiet speech did thus calmly disclose it self. You that profess the
Christian Religion, make great complaint of the wonderful cruelty we show
toward you. Neither peradventure altogether without cause. But for my self, I
am far from any such bloody purpose. Ye are not so willing to love, as I
unwilling that out of these lips should proceed any capital sentence against
you. Your Bishops are said to have rich Vessels of Gold and Silver, which they
use in the exercise of their Religion; besides, the fame is, that numbers sell
away their Lands and Livings, the huge prices whereof are brought to your
Church-coffers; by which means the devotion, that makes them and their whole
Posterity poor, must needs mightily enrich you, whose God we know was no Coyner
of Money, but left behind him many wholesome and good Precepts, at namely,
that Caesar should have of you the things that are fit for, and due to Caesar.
His Wars are costly and chargeable unto him. That which you suffer to rust in
corners, the affairs of the Commonwealth do need. Your Profession is not to
make account of things transitory. And yet if ye can be contented but to forego
that which ye care not for, I dare undertake to warrant you both safety of
life, and freedom dom of using your conscience, a thing more acceptable to you
than wealth. Which sait' Parley the happy Martyr quietly hearing, and
perceiving it necessary to make some shift for the safe concealment of that
which being now desired was not unlikely to be more narrowly afterward sought,
he craved respite for three days, to gather the riches of the Church together,
in which space against the time the Governor should come to the doors of the
Temple, bigg with hope to receive his prey, a miserable rank of poor, lame, and
impotent Persous was provided, their names delivered him up in writing as a
true Inventory of the Churches goods, and some few words used to signify how
proud the Church was of these Treasures. If men did not naturally abhor
Sacrilege, to resist or to defeat so impious attempts would deserve small
praise. But such is the general detestation of rapine in this kind, that
whereas nothing does either in Peace or War more uphold men's reputation than
prosperous success, because in common construction, unless notorious improbity
be joined with prosperity, it seems to argue favor with God; they which once
have stained their hands with these odious spoils, do thereby fasten unto all
their actions an eternal prejudice, in respect whereof, for that it passes
through the World as an undoubted Rule and Principle, that Sacrilege is open
defiance to God, whatsoever afterward they undertake, if they prosper in it,
men reckon it but Dionysius his Navigation, and if any thing befall them
otherwise, it is not, as commonly: so in them ascribed to the great uncertainty
of casual events, wherein the providence of God does control the purposes of
men oftentimes; much more for their good than if all things did answer fully
their hearts desire, but the censure of the World is ever directly against them
both Novimen mulio tegra, and viges little, propecrea cecki ^^ quia Ecclesias
spolia^^tuat, resque earum vestaverunt, abendtetunc vel di ipucrunt,
Episcopis^ue and Socerdoribus, oiq ie, quod magi^ est, Eccless. eorum 1
^^uletuer, and pugnanthus dedetuat. Quapropter nee forces in bello, ^re in fide
fiabiles suount, nec victores exticerunt, sed reegs multi vulnerati, and plures
interlecti v^rterunt, reg^aq and regiones, and quod pejus est, regno co^lectia
perd^lerunt, arquc proptiis ^^tediratibus corurrunt, and ha^er^^ corent. Verba
Carol, Ma. in Cajira. Ca al. l. 7. c. 1^4.
bitter and peremptoty. To make such actions therefore less odious, and to
mitigate the envy of them, many colorable shifts and inventions have been
used, as if the World did hate only Wolves, and think the Fox a goodly
Creature. The Turno rempus erie magoo cum^ opeaverk emptum lotactum Pallen^o,
and cum spolia ista d^^eluque O^erk. Virg. AE^ lib. 10.
time it may be will come, when they that either violently have spoiled, or
thus smoothly defrauded God, shall find they did but deceive themselves. In
the mean while there will be always some skilful Persons, which can teach a way
how to grind treatably the Church with jaws that shall scarce move, and yet
devour in the end more than they that come ravening with open mouth, as if they
would worry the whole in an instant; others also, who having wastfully eaten
out their own Patrimony, would be glad to repair, if they might, their decayed
Estates, with the ruin they care not of what nor of whom, so the spoil were
theirs, whereof in some part if they happen to speed, yet commonly they are men
born under that constellation which makes them, I know not how, as unapt to
enrich themselves, as they are ready to impoverish others; it is their lot to
sustain during life, both the misery of Beggars, and the infamy of Robbers. But
though no other Plague and Revenge should follow sacrilegious violations of
holy things, the natural secret disgrace and ignominy, (...) Demost.
the very turpitude of such actions in the eye of a wise understanding heart,
is it self a heavy punishment. Men of virtuous quality are by this sufficiently
moved to beware how they answer and requite the mercies of God with injuries,
whether openly or indirectly offered. I will not absolutely say concerning the
goods of the Church, that they may in no case be seized on by men, or that no
Obligation, Commerce and Bargain made between man and man, Poenam non dico
legum quas saepe perrumpunt, sed ipsius turpitud^ni^ quae acerbissima est est
mon vident Cir. Ofical. 3.
can never be of force to alienate the property which God has in them. Certain
cases I grant there are, wherein it is not so dark what God himself does
warrant, but that we may safely presume him as willing to forego for our
benefit, as always to use and convert to our benefit whatsoever our Religion
has honored him withal. But surely under the name of that which may be, many
things that should not be are often done. By means whereof the Church most
commonly for Gold has Flanel; and whereas the usual Saw of old was Glaucus his
change, the Proverb is now, A Church-bargain. And for fear left Covetousness
alone should linger out the time too much, Imponita tu credes else quae
invisasent? six ullem supplicium gravius existimas publico odio? Sen. de Benes.
l. 3. c. 17.
and not be able to make havoc of the House of God with that expedition, which
the mortal enemy thereof did vehemently wish, he has by certain strong
enchantments so deeply bewitched Religion it self, as to make it in the end an
earnest Sollicitour, and an eloquent Perswader of Sacrilege, urging
confidently, that the very best service which men of Power can do to Christ, is
without any more Ceremony, to sweep all, and to leave the Church as hare as in
the day it was first born; that fullness of bread having made the Children of
the Household wanton, Iren. l.4 c. 34. Orig. in 18. Number. hom. 11
it is without any scruple to be taken away from them, and thrown to Dogs;
that they which laid the prices of their Lands as offerings at the Apostles
feet, did but sow the seeds of Superstition; that they which endowed Churches
with Lands, poisoned Religion; that Tithes and Oblations are now in the sight
of God as the sacrificed blood of Goats; that if we give him our hearts and
affections, our goods are better bestowed otherwise; that Irenaus Polycarp's
Disciple should not have said, We offer unto God our goods as tokens of
thankfulness for that we receive; neither Origin, He which worshippeth God,
must by Gifts and oblations acknowledge him the Lord of all; In a word, that to
give unto God is error; reformation of error, to take from the Church that
which the blindness of former Ages did unwisely give: By these or the like
suggestions, received with all joy, and with like sedulity practiced in certain
parts of the Christian world, they have brought to pass, that as David does
say of Man, so it is in hazard to be verified concerning the whole Religion and
Service of God: Psalm. ^0. 10.
The time thereof may peradventure fall out to be threescore and ten years, or
if strength do serve unto fourscore, what follows, is likely to be small joy
for them whatsoever they be that behold it. Thus have the best things been
overthrown, not so much by puissance and might of Adversaries, as through
defect of counsel, in them that should have upheld and defended the same.

Of Ordination lawful without title and without any popular election precedent,
but in no case without regard of due information what their quality is, that
cross into holy Orders.
80. There are in a Minister of God these four things to be considered, his
Ordination which gives him power to meddle with things sacred, the charge or
portion of the Church allotted unto him for exercise of his Office; the
performance of his Duty, according to the exigence of his Charge; and lastly,
the maintenance which in that respect he receives. All Ecclesiastical Laws
and Canons which either concern the bestowing or the using of the power of
Ministerial Order, have relation to these four. Of the first we have spoken
before at large. Concerning the next, for more convenient discharge of
Eclcesiastical Duties, as the body of the People must needs be severed by
diverse Precincts, so the Clergy likewise accordingly distributed. Whereas
therefore Religion did first take place in Cities, and in that respect was a
cause why the name of Pagans, which properly signifies a Country people, came
to be used in common speech for the same that Infidels and Unbelievers were; it
followed thereupon that all such Cities had their Ecclesiastical Colleges,
consisting of Deacons and of Presbyters, whom first the Apostles or their
Delegates the Evangelists, did both ordain and govern. Such were the Colleges
of Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Rome, Corinth, and the rest, where the Apostles
are known to have planted our Faith and Religion. Now because Religion and the
cure of Souls was their general charge in common over all that were near about
them, neither had any one Presbyter his several Cure apart, till Evaristus
Bishop in the Sea of Rome, about the year 112. began to assign Precincts unto
every Church, or Title, which the Christians held, and to appoint unto each
Presbyter a certain compass, whereof himself should take charge alone; the
commodiousnesse of this invention caused all parts of Christendom to follow it,
and at the length, amongst the rest our own Churches, about the year 636.
became divided in like manner. But other distinction of Churches there does not
appear any in the Apostles Writings, save only, according to those Acts 15 2^.
Apt. 1. ^2.
Cities wherein they planted the Gospel of Christ, and erected Ecclesiastical
Colleges. Wherefore to ordain The. 8. 6.
(...) throughout every City, and (...) throughout every Church, do in them
signify the same thing. Acts 14. 21
Churches then neither were, nor could be in so convenient sort limited as now
they are; first, by the bounds of each state, and then within each state by
more particular Precincts, till at the length we descend unto several
Congregations, termed Parishes, with far narrower restraint, than this Name at
the first was used. And from hence has grown their error, who, as often as they
read of the duty which Ecclesiastical Persons are now to perform toward the
Church, their manner is always to understand by that Church, some particular
Congregation, of Parish Church. They suppose that there should now be no man of
Ecclesiastical Order, which is not tied to some certain Parish. Because the
names of all Church Officers are words of relation, because a Shepherd must
have his Flock, a Teacher his Scholars, a Minister his Company which he
ministers unto, therefore it seems a thing in their eyes absurd and
unreasonable, that any man should be ordained a Minister, otherwise, than only
for some particular Congregation. Perceive they not, how by this mean they
make it unlawful for the Church to employ men at all, in converting Nations?
For if so be the Church may not lawfully admit to an Ecclesiastical Function,
unless it tie the party admitted unto some particular Parish, then surely a
thanklesse labor it is, whereby men seek the Conversion of Infidels, which
know not Christ, and therefore cannot be as yet divided into their special
Congregations and Flocks: But, to the end it may appear how much this one thing
amongst many more has been mistaken, there is first no Precept, requiring that
Presbyters and Deacons be made in such sort, and not otherwise. Albeit
therefore the Apostles did make them in that order, yet is not their Example
such a Law, as, without all exception, binds to make them in no other order
but that. Again, if we will consider that which the Apostles themselves did,
surely, no man can justly say, that herein we practice any thing repugnant to
their example. For by them there was ordained only in each Christian City a
College of Presbyters and Deacons to administer holy things. Evaristus did a
hundred years after the birth of our Savior Christ begin the distinction of
the Church into Parishes. Presbyters and Deacons having been ordained before to
exercise Ecclesiastical Functions in the Church of Rome promiscuously, he was
the first that tied them each one to his own station. So that of the two,
indefinite Ordination of Presbyters and Deacons does come more near the
Apostles Example, and the tying of them to be made only for particular
Congregations, may more justly ground it self upon the Example of Evaristus
than of any Apostle of Christ. It has been the opinion of wise and good men
heretofore, that nothing was ever devised more singularly beneficial unto God's
Church, than this which our honorable Predecessors have to their endless
praise found out by the erecting of such Houses of Study, as those two most
famous Universities do contain, and by providing that choice Wits, after
reasonable time spent in contemplation, may at the length either enter into
that holy Vocation, for which they have been so long nourished and brought up,
or else give place, and suffer others to succeed in their rooms, that so the
Church may be always furnished with a number of men, whose ability being first
known by public trial in Church-labours there where men can best judge of
them, their calling afterward unto particular charge abroad may be
accordingly. All this is frustrate, those worthy Foundations we must dissolve,
their whole device and religious purpose which did erect them is made void,
their Orders and Statutes are to be cancelled and disannulled, in case the
Church be forbidden to grant any power of Order, unless it be with restraint to
the Party ordained unto some particular Parish or Congregation. Nay, might we
not rather affirm of Presbyters and of Deacons, that the very nature of their
Ordination is unto necessary local restraint a thing opposite and repugnant?
The Emperor Justinian does say of Tutors, Just. lib. 1 tir. 14. sect. 4.
Certa rei vel causae tutor dari non potest, quia personae non causae vel rei
tutor datur. He that should grant a Tutorship, restraining his grant to some
one certain thing or cause; should do but idly, because Tutors are given for
personal defense generally, and not for managing of a few particular things or
causes. So he that ordaining a Presbyter, or a Deacon, should, in the form of
Ordination, restrain the one or the other to a certain place, might, with much
more reason, be thought to use a vain and a frivolous addition, than they
reasonably to require such local restraint, as a thing which must of necessity
concur evermore with all lawful Ordinations. Presbyters and Deacons are not
by Ordination consecrated unto Places, but unto Functions. In which respect,
and in no other it is, that since they are by virtue thereof bequeathed unto
God, severed and sanctified to be employed in his Service, which is the highest
advancement that mortal Creatures on Earth can be raised unto, the Church of
Christ has not been acquainted in former Ages with any such propane and
unnatural Custom, as does hallow men with Ecclesiastical Functions of Order
only for a time, and then dismiss them again to the common Affairs of the
World. Whereas, contrariwise, from the Place or Charge where that Power has
been exercised, we may be by sundry good and lawful occasions translated,
retaining nevertheless the self-same Power which was first given. It is some
grief to spend thus much labor in refuting a thing that has so little ground
to uphold it, especially since they themselves that teach it do not seem to
give thereunto any great credit, if we may judge their minds by their actions.
There are amongst them that have done the work of Ecclesiastical Persons,
sometime in the Families of Noblemen, sometime in much more public and
frequent Congregations; there are that have successively gone through perhaps
seven or eight particular Churches after this sort; yea, some that at one and
the same time have been, some which at this present hour are, in real
obligation of Ecclesiastical duty, and possession of Commodity thereto
belonging, even in sundry particular Churches within the Land; some there are
amongst them which will not so much abridge their liberty, as to be fastened or
tied unto any place; some which have bound themselves to one place, only for a
time, and that time being once expired, have afterward voluntarily given unto
other places the like experience and trial of them. All this I presume they
would not do, if their persuasion were as strict as their words pretend. But
for the avoiding of these and such other the like confusisions as are incident
unto the cause and question whereof we presently treat, there is not any thing
more material, than first to separate exactly the nature of the Ministry from
the use and exercise thereof; Secondly, to know that the only true and proper
Act of Ordination is, to invest men with that power which does make them
Ministers by consecrating their Persons to God, and his Service in holy things
during term of life, whether they exercise that power or no; Thirdly, that to
give them a Title or Charge where to use their Ministry, concerns not the
making, but the placing of God's Ministers; and therefore the Laws which
concern only their Election or Admission unto place of Charge, are not
applyable to infringe any way their Ordination; Fourthly, that as often as any
ancient Constitution, Law, or Cannon is alleged, concerning either Ordinations
or Elections, we forget not to examine whether the present case be the same
which the ancient was, or else do contain some just reason for which it cannot
admit altogether the same Rules which former Affairs of the Church, now
altered, did then require. In the question of making Ministers without a Title,
which to do, they say, is a thing unlawful, they should at the very first have
considered what the name of Title does imply, and what affinity or coherence
Ordinations have with Titles, which thing observed would plainly have showed
them their own error. They are not ignorant, that when they speak of a Title,
they handle that which belongs to the placing of a Minister in some charge,
that the Place of Charge wherein a Minister does execute his Office, requires
some House of God for the People to resote unto, some definite number of Souls
unto whom he there administreth holy things, and some certain allowance whereby
to sustain life, that the Fathers at the first named oratories, and Houses of
Prayer; Titles, thereby signifying how God was interessed in them, and held
them as his own Possessions? But because they know that the Church had
Ministers before Christian Temples and Oratories were, therefore some of them
understand by a Title, a definite Congregation of People only, and so deny
that any Ordination is lawful which makes Ministers, that have no certain
Flock to attend: forgetting how the Seventy whom Christ himself did ordain
Ministers, had their Calling in that manner, whereas yet no certain Charge
could be given them. Others referring the name of a Title, especially to the
maintenance of the Minister, Unlawful to ordain a Minister without a Title.
Abs^^a page 242. and page 246. The Law requires, that every one admitted unto
Orders, having for his present Relief some Ecclesiastical ^^eached, should also
have some other Title unto some Annual Renter Persian whereby he might be
relieved in case he were not able through infirmity, sickness, or other lawful
impediment to execute his Ecclesiastical Office and Function.
infringe all Ordinations made, except they which receive Orders be first
entitled to a competent Ecclesiastical Benefice, and (which is most
ridiculously strange) except besides their present Title to some such Benefice,
they have likewise some other Title of Annual Rent or Pension whereby they may
he relieved, in case through infirmity, sickness, or other lawful impediment
they grow unable to execute their Ecclesiastical Function. So that every man
lawfully ordained must bring a Bow which has two strings, a Title of present
Right, and another to provide for future possibility or chance. Into these
absurdities and follies they slide by mis-conceiving the true purpose of
certain Canons, which indeed have forbidden to ordain a Minister without a
Title, not that simply it is unlawful so to ordain, but because it might grow
to an inconvenience, if the Church did not somewhat restrain that liberty. For,
seeing they which have once received Ordination; cannot again return into the
World, it behooves them which Ordain, to foresee how such shall be afterward
able to live, lest their poverty and destitution should redound to the disgrace
and discredit of their Calling. Which evil prevented, those very Laws which in
that respect forbid, do expressly admit Ordinations to be made at large, and
without Title, namely, if the Party so ordained have of his own for the
sustenance of this life; or if the Bishop which gives him Orders will find
him competent allowance, till some place of Ministration, from whence his
maintenance may arise, be provided for him; or if any other fit and sufficient
means be had against the danger before mentioned. Absolutely therefore it is
not true, that any ancient Canon of the Church which is, or ought to be with us
in force, does make Ordinations at large unlawful, and, as the state of the
Church does stand, they are most necessary. If there be any conscience in men
^ouching that which they write or speak, let them consider, as well what the
present condition of all things does now suffer, as what the Ordinances of
former Ages did appoint, as well the weight of those Causes, for which our
Affairs have altered, as the reasons in regard whereof our Fathers and
Predecessors did sometime strictly and severely keep that, which for us to
observe now, is neither meet nor always possible. In this our present Cause
and Controversy, whether any not having Title of Right to a Benefice, may be
lawfully ordained a Minister, is it not manifest in the eyes of all men, that
whereas the name of a Benefice does signify some standing Ecclesiastical
Revenue, taken out of the Treasure of God, and allotted to a Spiritual Person,
to the end he may use the same, and enjoy it as his own for term of life,
unless his default cause Deprivation? The Clergy for many years after Christ
had no other Benefices, but only their Canonical Portions, or monthly
Dividends allowed them according to their several degrees and qualities, out of
the Common Stock of such Gifts, Oblations, and Tithes, as the servour of
Christian Piety did then yield. Yea, that even when Ministers had their
Churches and Flocks assigned unto them in several; yet for maintenance of life,
their former kind of allowance continued, till such time as Bishops and
Churches Cathedral being sufficiently endowed with Lands, other Presbyters
enjoyed in stead of their first Benefices, the Tithes and Profits of their own
Congregations whole to themselves? Is it not manifest, that in this Realm, and
so in other the like Dominions, where the tenure of Lands is altogether
grounded on Military Laws, and held as in Fee under Princes which are not made
Heads of the People by force of voluntary Election, but born the Sovereign
Lords of those whole and entire Territories, which Territories their famous
Progenitors obtaining by way of Conquest, retained what they would in their
own hands, and divided the rest to others with reservation of Sovereignty and
Capital Interest; the building of Churches, and consequently the assigning of
either Parishes or Benefices was a thing impossible without consent of such as
were principal Owners of Land; in which consideration, for their more
encouragement hereunto, they which did so far benefit the Church, had by
common consent granted (as great equity and reason was) a right for them and
their Heirs till the Worlds end, to nominate in those Benefices men whose
quality the Bishop allowing might admit them thereunto? Is it not manifest,
that from hence inevitably such inequality of Parishes has grown, as causes
some through the multitude of people which have refort unto one Church, to be
more than any one man can welld, and some to be of that nature by reason of
Chapels annexed, that they which are Incumbents should wrong the Church, if so
be they had not certain Stipendaries under them, because where the Crops of the
Profit or Benefice is but one, the Title can be but one man's, and yet the
charge may require more? Not to mention therefore any other reason whereby it
may clearly appear how expedient it is, and profitable for this Church to admit
Ordinations without Title, this little may suffice to declare, how impertinent
their allegations against it are out of ancient Canons, how untrue their
confident asseverations, that only through negligence of Popish Prelates the
custom of making such kind of Ministers has prevailed in the Church of Rome
against their Canons, and that with us it is expressly against the Laws of our
own Government, when a Minister does serve as a Stipendary Curate, which kind
of Service nevertheless the greatest Rabbis of that part do altogether
follow. For howsoever they are loath peradventure to be named Curates,
Stipendaries they are, and the labor they bestow is in other men's Cures; a
thing not unlawful for them to do, yet unseemly for them to condemn which
practice it. I might here discover the like oversight throughout all their
Discourses, made in behalf of the Peoples pretended right to elect their
Ministers before the Bishop may lawfully ordain. But because we have otherwhere
at large disputed of popular Elections, and of the right of Patronage, wherein
is drowned whatsoever the people under any pretense of color may seem to
challenge about Admission and Choice of the Pastors that shall feed their
Souls, I cannot see what one Duty there is which always ought to go before
Ordination, but only care of the Partie's worthiness, as well for integrity
and virtue, as knowledge, yea; for virtue more: in as much as defect of
knowledge may sundry ways be supplied, but the scandal of vicious and wicked
life is a deadly evil.

Of the Leo ^^ing in Ministers, their residence, and the number of their
Livings.
81. The truth is, that of all things hitherto mentioned, the greatest is that
threefold blott or blemish of notable ignorance, unconscionable absence from
the Cures whereof men have taken charge, and unsatiable hunting after Spiritual
preferments without either care or conscience of the public good. Whereof, to
the end that we may consider as in Gods own sight and presence with all
uprightness, sincerity, and truth, let us particularly weigh and examine in
every of them; First, how far forth they are reproveable by Reasons and Maxims
of Common right; Secondly, whether that which our Laws do permit, be repugnant
to those Maxims, and with what equity we ought to judge of things practiced in
this case, neither on the one hand defending that which must be acknowledged
out of square, nor on the other side condemning rashly whom we list, for
whatsoever we disallow. Touching Arguments therefore, taken from the principles
of Common right, to prove that Ministers should T. C l. 1. p. ^0.
be learned, that they ought to be 68.
Resident upon their Livings, and that 69. 1 Timothy 3. 2. Titus 1. 9. 2 Timothy 2.
15. Hosea 4. 5. Mar. 15. 14. Luke 2. 8. Acts 20. 9. 1 Samuel 1. 19, 1 Timothy 4. 18.
John 10. 4. 1 Peter 5. 1. Acts 80. 28, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 17. Council. Nic. cap. 15.
Matthew. 6. 24. 1 Cor. 7. 14.
more than one only Benefice or Spiritual Living may not be granted unto one
man; the first, because Saint Paul requires in a Minister ability to teach, to
convince, to distribute the Word rightly, because also the Lord himself has
protested, they shall be no Priests to him which have rejected knowledge, and
because if the blince lead the Blind, they must both needs fall into the Pit;
the second, because Teachers are Shepherds, whose Flocks can be at no time
secure from danger; they are Watchmen whom the Enemy does always besiege,
their labors in the Word and Sacraments admit no intermission; their duty
requires instruction and conference with men in private; they are the living
Oracles of God, to whom the People must resort for counsel; they are commanded
to be Patterns of Holiness, Leaders, Feeders, Supervisors amongst their own; it
should be their grief, as it was the Apostles, to be absent, though
necessarily, from them over whom they have taken charge; finally, the last,
because Plurality and Residence are opposite, because the placing of one Clark
in two Churches is a point of Merchandise and filthy gain, because no man can
serve two Masters, because every one should remain in that Vocation whereto he
is called; What conclude they of all this? Against Ignorance, against
Non-residence, and against Plurality of Livings, is there any man so raw and
dull, but that the Volumes which have been written, both of old and of late,
may make him in so plentiful a cause eloquent? For if by that which is
generally just and requisite, we measure what knowledge there should be in a
Minister of the Gospel of Christ; the Arguments which Light of Nature offers;
the Laws and Statutes which Scripture has; the Canons that are taken out of
ancient Synods; the Decrees, and Constitutions of sincerest Times; the
Sentences of all Antiquity; and in a word, even every man's full consent and
conscience is against Ignorance in them that have Charge and Cure of Souls.
Again, what avails it if we be Learned and not Faithful? or what benefit has
the Church of Christ, if there be in us sufficiency without endeavor or care
to do that good which our place exacteth? Touching the pains and industry
therefore, wherewith men are in conscience bound to attend the work of their
Heavenly Calling, even as much as in them lies, bending thereunto their whole
endeavor, without either fraud, sophistication, or guile; I see not what more
effectual Obligation or Bond of Duty there should be urged, than their own
only Vow and Promise made unto God himself, at the time of their Ordination.
The work which they have undertaken requires both care and fear. Their sloth
that negligently perform it makes them subject to malediction. Besides, we
also know that the fruit of our pains in this Function is life both to our
selves and others. And do we yet need incitements to labor? Shall we stop our
ears both against those conjuring exhortations which Apostles, and against the
fearful comminations which Prophets, have uttered out of the mouth of God; the
one for prevention, the other for reformation of our sluggishness in this
behalf? Saint Paul, Acts 10. 17.
Attend to your selves, and to all the Flock, whereof the Holy Ghost has made
you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood. Again, I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall
judge the quick and the dead at his coming, preach the Word; be instant.
Jeremiah, Jer. 23. 2.
We unto the Pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my Pasture; I will
visit you for the wickedness of your Works, says the Lord; the remnant of my
Sheep, I will gather together out of all Countries, and will bring them again
so their solds, they shall grew and increase, and I will set up Shepherds over
them which shall feed them. Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 34. 2.
Should not the Shepherds, should they not feed the Flocks? Ye eat the fat,
andye clothe your selves with the wool, but the weak ye have not strengthened,
the sick ye have not cured, neither have ye bound up the broken, nor brought
home again that which was driven away; ye have not inquired after that which
was lost, but with cruelty and rigor ye have ruled. And verse 8. Wheresore, as
I live, I will require, etc. Nor let us think to excuse our selves, if happily we
labor, though it be at random, and sit not altogether idle abroad. For we are
bound to attend that part of the flock of Christ, whereof the Holy Ghost has
made us Overseers. The residence of Ministers upon their own peculiar Charge,
is by so much the rather necessary; for that absenting themselves from the
place where they ought to labor, they neither can do the good which is looked
for at their hands, nor reap the comfort which sweetneth life to them that
spend it in these cravels upon their own. For it is in this, as in all things
else, which are through private interest dearer than what concerns either
others wholly, or us but in part, and according to the rate of a general
regard. As for plurality, it has not only the same inconveniences which are
observed to grow by absence; but over and besides, at the least in common
construction, a show of that worldly humor which men do think should not reign
so high. Now from hence their Collections are, as follows, first, a
repugnancy or contradiction between the Principles of common right, and that
which our Laws in special considerations have allowed: secondly, a nullitie or
frustration of all such acts, as are by them supposed opposite to those
Principles, and invalidity in all Ordinations of men unable to preach, and in
all dispensations which mitigate the Law of Common right for the other two:
Abstract. p 117
And why so? Forsooth, because whatsoever we do in these three cases, and not
by virtue of Common-right, we must yield it of necessity done by warrant of
peculiar right or privilege. Now a Privilege is said to be that, that for
favor of certain persons comes forth against Common-right; things prohibited
are dispensed with, because things permitted are dispatched by Common-right,
but things forbidden require Dispensations. By which descriptions of a
Privilege and Dispensation it is (they say) apparent, that a Privilege must
license and authorize the same, which the Law against ignorance, non-residence,
and plurality does infringe; and so be a Law contrariant or repugnant to the
Law of Nature, and the Law of God, because all the reasons whereupon the
Positive Law of man against these three was first established, are taken and
drawn from the Law of Nature, and the Law of God. For answer whereunto, we will
but lead them to answer themselves. First therefore if they will grant (as they
must) that all direct oppositions of speech require one and the self-same
subject, to be meant on both parts where opposition is pretended, it will
follow that either the Maxims of Common right do enforce the very same things
not to be good which we say are good, grounding our selves on the reasons, by
virtue whereof our privileges are established; or if the one do not reach
unto that particular subject for which the other have provided, then is there
no contradiction between them. In all contradictions, if the one part be true,
the other eternally must be false. And therefore if the Principles of Common
right, do at any time truly enforce that particular not to be good, which
Privileges make good, it argues invincibly, that such privileges have been
grounded upon error. But to say, that every Privilege is opposite unto the
Principles of Common right, because it dispenses with that which Common right
does prohibit, has gross absurdity. For the voice of Equity and Justice is,
that a general Law does never derogate from a special Privilege; whereas if
the one were contrariant to the other, a general Law being in force should
always dissolve a Privilege. The reason why many are deceived by imagining
that so it should do, and why men of better insight conclude directly it
should not, does rest in the subject or matter it self, which matter
indefinitely considered in Laws of Common right, is in Privileges considered
as beset and limited with special circumstances, by means whereof to them which
respect it, but by way of generality, it seems one and the same in both,
although it be not the same, if once we descend to particular consideration
thereof. Precepts do always propose perfection, not such as none can attain
unto, for then in vain should we ask or require it at the hands of men, but
such perfection as all men must aim at; to the end that as largely as human
providence and care can extend it, it may take place. Moral laws are the rules
of Politic; those Politic, which are made to order the whole Church of God,
rules unto all particular Churches; and the Laws of every particular Church,
Rules unto every particular man, within the body of the same Church; Now,
because the higher we ascend in these Rules, the further still we remove from
those specialities, which being proper to the subject, whereupon our actions
must work, are therefore chiefly considered by us, by them least thought upon
that wade altogether in the two first kinds of general directions, their
judgment cannot be exact and sound, concerning either laws of Churches, or
actions of men in particular, because they determine of effects by a part of
the causes only out of which they grow, they judge conclusions by demipremises
and half-principles, they lay them in the balance stripped from those necessary
material circumstances which should give them weight, and by show of falling
uneven with the scale of most universal and abstracted rules, they pronounce
that too light which is not, if they had the skill to weigh it. This is the
reason why men altogether conversant in study do know how to teach, but not how
to govern; men experienced contrariwise govern well, yet know not which way to
set down orderly the precepts and reasons of that they do. He that will
therefore judge rightly of things done, must join with his forms and conceits
of general speculation, the matter wherein our actions are conversant. For by
this shall appear what equity there is in those Privileges and peculiar grants
or favors, which otherwise will seem repugnant to justice, and because in
themselves considered, they have a show of repugnancy; this deceives those
great Clerks, which hearing a Privilege defined to be an especial right
brought in by their power and authority, that make it for some public benefit
against the general course of reason, Jussingulare est, quod contra tenorem
gationis propter aliquam scilitatem authoritate constiruentinus introductum
est. Paulus ^^. de Leg^b.
are not able to comprehend how the word against does import exception, without
any opposition at all. For inasmuch as the hand of Justice must distribute to
every particular what is due, and judge what is due with respect had, no less
of particular circumstances than of general rules and axioms; it cannot fit all
sorts with one measure, the wills, counsels, qualities and states of men being
diverse. For example, the Law of Common right binds all men to keep their
Promises, perform their Compacts, and answer the Faith they have given either
for themselves, or others. Notwithstanding he which bargaineth with one under
years, can have no benefit by this allegation, because he brings it against a
Person which is exempt from the Common rule. Shall we then conclude, that thus
to exempt certain men from the Law of Common right, is against God, against
Nature, against whatsoever may avail to strengthen and justify that Law before
alleged, or else acknowledge (as the truth is) that special causes are to be
ordered by special rules, that is men grown unto ripe age, disadvantage
themselves by bargaining, yet what they have wittingly done, is strong, and in
force against them, because they are able to dispose and manage their own
affairs, whereas youth for lack of experience and judgment, being easily
subject to circumvention, is therefore justly exempt from the Law of
Common-right, whereunto the rest are justly subject. This plain inequality
between men of years, and under years, is a cause why Equity and Justice cannot
apply equally the same general rule to both, but orders the one by Common
right, and grants to the other a special privilege. Privileges are either
transitory or permanent: Privilegium personale cum persona extinguitur, and,
previle^gium ditum a^ioal granlit cum action. Op. de Regulis. part. 1. 227.
Transitory, such as serve only some one turn, or at the most extend no
farther than to this or that man, with the end of whose natural life they
exp^e; Permanent, such as the use whereof does continue still, for that they
belong unto certain kinds of men and causes which never dye. Of this nature
are all immunities and preheminencies, which, for just considerations, one sort
of men enjoys above another, both in the Church and Commonwealth, no man
suspecting them of contrariety to any branch of those Laws or Reasons,
whereupon the general right is grounded. Now there being general Laws and Rules
whereby it cannot be denied, but the Church of God stands bound to provide,
that the Ministry may be learned, that they which have charge may reside upon
it, and that it may not be free for them in scandalous manner to multiply
Ecclesiastical Livings; it remains in the next place to be examined, what the
Laws of the Church of England do admit, which may be thought repugnant to any
thing hitherto alleged, and in what special consideration they seem to admit
the same. Considering therefore, that to furnish all places of Cure in this
Realm, it is not an Army of twelve thousand Learned men that would suffice, nor
two Universities that can always furnish as many as decay in so great a number,
nor a fourth part of the Livings with Cure, that when they fall are able to
yield sufficient maintenance for Learned men, is it not plain, that unless the
greatest part of the People should be left utterly without the public use and
exercise of Religion, there is no remedy but to take into the Ecclesiastical
Order, a number of men meanly qualified in respect of Learning? For whatsoever
we may imagine in our private Closers, or talk for Communication-sake at our
Boords, yea, or write in our Books, through a notional conceit of things
needful for performance of each man's duty, if once we come from the Theory of
Learning, to take out so many Learned men, let them be diligently viewed, out
of whom the choice shall be made, and thereby an estimate made, what degree of
skill we must either admit, or else leave numbers utterly destitute of Guides;
and I doubt not but that men endued with sense of common equity, will soon
discern, that, besides eminent and competent knowledge, we are to descend to a
lower step, receiving knowledge in that degree which is but tolerable. When we
commend any man for learning, our speech imports him to be more than meanly
qualified that way; but when Laws do require learning as a quality, which
makes capable of any Function, our measure to judge a learned man by, must be
some certain degree of learning, beneath which we can hold no man so qualified.
And if every man that lists may set that degree himself, how shall we ever
know when Laws are broken, when kept, seeing one man may think a lower degree
sufficient, another may judge them unsufficient that are not qualified in some
higher degree. Wherefore of necessity either we must have some Judge, in whose
conscience they that are thought and pronounced sufficient, are to be so
accepted and taken, or else the Law it self is to set down the very lowest
degree of fitness that shall be allowable in this kind. So that the question
does grow to this issue. Saint Paul requires Learning in Presbyters, yea such
Learning as does enable them to exhort in Doctrine which is sound, and to
disprove them that gainsay it. What measure of ability in such things shall
serve to make men capable of that kind of Office, he does not himself
precisely determine, but refers it to the Conscience of Titus, Tit. 1. 9.
and others, which had to deal in ordaining Presbyters. We must therefore of
necessity make this demand, whether the Church, lacking such as the Apostle
would have chosen, may with good conscience take out of such as it has in a
meaner degree of fitness, them that may serve to perform the service of public
Prayer, to minister the Sacraments unto the People, to solemnize Marriage, to
visit the Sick, and bury the Dead, to instruct by reading, although by
Preaching they be not as yet so able to benefit and feed Christ's flock. We
constantly hold, that in this case the Apostles Law is not broken. Herequireth
more in Presbyters than there is found in many whom the Church of England
allows. But no man being tied unto impossibilities, to do that we cannot we
are not bound. It is but a stratagem of theirs therefore, and a very indirect
practice, when they publish large declamations to prove that Learning is
required in the Ministry, and to make the silly people believe that the
contrary is maintained by the Bishops, and upheld by the Laws of the Land;
whereas the question in truth is not whether Learning be required, but whether
a Church, wherein there is not sufficient store of Learned men to furnish all
Congregations, should do better to let thousands of Souls grow savage, to let
them live without any public service of God, to let their Children dye
unbaptised, to withold the benefit of the other Sacrament from them, to let
them depart this World like Pagans, without any thing, so much as readd unto
them, concerning the way of life, than, as it does in this necessity, to make
such Presbyters as are so far forth sufficient, although they want that
ability of Preaching which someothers have. In this point therefore we obey
necessity, and of two evils we take the less; in the rest a public utility is
sought, and in regard thereof some certain inconveniences tolerated, because
they are recompensed with greater good. The Law gives liberty of Non-residence
for a time to such as will live in Universities, if they faithfully there
labor to grow in knowledge, that so they may afterward the more edify and
the better instruct their Congregations. The Church in their absence is not
destitute, the Peoples salvation not neglected for the present time, the time
of their absence is in the intendment of Law bestowed to the Churches great
advantage and benefit, those necessary helps are procured by it, which turn by
many degrees more to the Peoples comfort in time to come, than if their
Pastors had continually abidden with them. So that the Law does hereby provide
in some part to remedy and help that evil which the former necessity has
imposed upon the Church. For compare two men of equal meanness, the one
perpetually resident, the other absent for a space, in such sort as the Law
permits. Allot unto both some nine years continuance with Cure of Souls. And
must not three years absence in all probability and likelihood make the one
more profitable than the other unto God's Church, by so much as the increase of
his knowledge, gotten in those three years, may add unto six years travel
following? For the greater ability there is added to the instrument, wherewith
it pleases God to save Souls, the more facility and expedition it has to work
that which is otherwise hardlier effected. As much may be said touching absence
granted to them that attend in the families of Bishops; which Schools of
gravity, discretion, and wisdom, preparing men against the time that they come
to reside abroad, are, in my poor opinion, even the fittest places that any
ingenious mind can with to enter into, between departure from private study
and access to a more public charge of Souls; yea no less expedient, for men of
the best sufficiency and most maturity in knowledge, than the very Universities
themselves are for the ripening of such as be raw. Employment in the Families
of Noblemen, or in Princes Courts, has another end, for which the self-same
leave is given, not without great respect to the good of the whole Church. For
assuredly, whosoever does well observe, how much all inferior things depend
upon the orderly courses and motions of those greater Orbs, will hardly judge
it either meet or good, that the Angels assisting them should be driven to
betake themselves unto other stations, although by nature they were not tied
where now they are, but had charge also elsewhere, as long as their absence
from beneath might but tolerably be supplied, and by descending their rooms
above should become vacant. For we are not to dream in this case of any
platform, which brings equally high and low unto Parish Churches, nor of any
constraint to maintain at their own charge men sufficient for that purpose; the
one so repugnant to the Majesty and Greatness of English Nobility, the other so
improbable and unlikely to take effect, that they which mention either of both,
seem not indeed to have conceived what either is. But the eye of Law is the eye
of God, it looks into the hearts and secret dispositions of men, it beholds
how far one star differs from another in glory, and, as men's several degrees
require, accordingly it guides them; granting unto principal Personages
privileges correspondent to their high Estates, and that not only in Civil,
but even in Spiritual Affairs, to the end they may love that Religion the more,
which no way seeks to make them vulgar, no way diminishes their dignity and
greatness, but to do them good does them honor also, and by such extraordinary
favors teaches them to be in the Church of God the same which the Church of
God esteems them, more worth than thousands. It appears therefore in what
respect the Laws of this Realm have given liberty of non-residence to some,
that their knowledge may be increased, and their labors by that mean be made
afterward the more profitable to others, left the Houses of Great-men should
want that daily exercise of Religion, wherein their example avails as much,
yea many times peradventure more than the Laws themselves, with the common
sort. A third thing respected both in permitting absence, and also in granting
to some that liberty of addition or plurality, which necessarily inforceth
their absence, is a mere both just and conscionable regard, that as men are in
quality, and as their services are in weight for the public good, so likewise
their rewards and encouragements by special privilege of Law might somewhat
declare how the State it self does accept their pains, much abhorring from
their bestial and savage rudeness, which think that Oxen should only labor,
and Asses feed. Thus to Readers in Universities, whose very Paper and
Book-expences, their ancient allowances and stipends at this day do either not,
or hardly sustain; to Governors of Colleges, lest the great overplus of
charges necessarily enforced upon them, by reason of their place, and very
slenderly supplied, by means of that change in the present condition of things,
which their Founders could not foresee; to men called away from their Cures,
and employed in weightier business, either of the Church or Commonwealth,
because to impose upon them a burden which requires their absence, and not to
release them from the duty of Residence, were a kind of cruel and barbarous
injustice; to Residents in Cathedral Churches, or upon Dignities
Ecclesiastical, forasmuch as these being rooms of greater Hospitality, places
of more respect and consequence than the rest, they are the rather to be
furnished with men of best quality, and the men for their qualities-sake, to be
favored above others: I say unto all these, in regard of their worth and
merit, the Law has therefore given leave while themselves bear weightier
burdens, to supply inferior by deputation; and in like consideration partly,
partly also by way of honor to Learning, Nobility and Authority permits,
that men which have taken Theological degrees in Schools, the Suffragans of
Bishops, the Houshold-Chaplains of men of Honor, or in great Offices, the
Brethren and Sons of Lords Temporal, or of Knights, if God shall move the
hearts of such to enter at any time into Holy Orders, may obtain to themselves
a faculty or license to hold two Ecclesiastical Livings, though having Cure;
any Spiritual Person of the Queens Council, three such Livings; her Chaplains,
what number of promotions her self in her own Princely wisdom thinks good to
bestow upon them. But, as it fares in such cases, the gap which for just
considerations we open unto some, lets in others through corrupt practices,
to whom such favors were neither meant, nor should be communicated. The
greatness of the Harvest, and the scarcity of able Workmen has made it
necessary, that Law should yield to admit numbers of men but slenderly and
meanly qualified. Hereupon, because whom all other worldly hopes have forsaken,
they commonly reserve Ministerial Vocation, as their last and surest refuge
ever open to forlorn men; the Church that should nourish them, whose service
she needs, has obtruded upon her their service, that know not otherwise how
to live and sustain themselves. These finding nothing more easy than means to
procure the writing of a few lines to some one or other which has authority;
and nothing more usual than too much facility in condescending unto such
requests; are often received into that Vocation whereunto their unworthiness is
no small disgrace. Did any thing more aggravate the crime of Ieroboams profane
Apostasy, than that he chose to have his Clergy the scum and reffuse of his
whole Land; Let no man spare to tell it them, they are not faithful toward
God, that burden wilfully his Church with such swarms of unworthy Creatures. I
will not say of all degrees in the Ministry, that which Saint Chrysostom does
of the highest, Chrysostom. de Sacerd. l. 3. c. 13.
He that will undertake so weighty a charge, had need to be a man of great
understanding, rarely assisted with Divine grace, for integrity of manners,
purity of life, and for all other virtues, to have in him more than a man; But
surely this I will say with Chrysostom, We need not doubt whether God be highly
displeased with us, or what the cause of his anger, is, if things of so great
fear and holiness at are the least and lowest duties of his service, be thrown
wilfully on them whose not only mean, but bad and scandalous quality does
defile whatsoever they handle. These eye-sores and blemishes, in continual
attendants about the Service of God's Sanctuary, do make them every day fewer
that willingly resort unto it, till at length all affection and zeal toward
God be extinct in them through a wearisom contempt of their Persons, which for
a time only live by Religion, and are for recompense, in fine, the death of
the Nurse that feeds them. It is not obscure, how incommodious the Church
has found both this abuse of the liberty, which Law is enforced to grant; and
not only this, but the like abuse of that favor also, which Law in other
considerations already mentioned, affords touches Residence and plurality of
Spiritual Livings. Now that which is practiced corruptly to the detriment and
hurt of the Church, against the purpose of those very Laws, which
notwithstanding are pretended in defense and justification thereof, we must
needs acknowledge no less repugnant to the grounds and principles of Common
right, than the fraudulent proceedings of Tyrants, to the principles of just
Sovereignty. Howbeit not so those special privileges which are but instruments
wrested and forced to serve malice. There is in the Patriark of Heathen
Philosophers this Precept, (...) Arist. P^. 7. c. 6
Let us Husbandman nor no Handy-craftsman be a Priest. The reason whereupon he
groundeth, is a maxim in the Law of Nature^ It imports greatly the good of
all men that God be reverenced, with whose honor it stands not that they
which are publicly employed in his service should live of base and manuary
Trades. Now compare herewith the Apostle's words, Act. 10. 3^. 1 Cor. 4. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 2 ^. 2 Thessalonians 3. 8.
Ye know that these hands have ministered to my necessities, and them that are
with me. What think we? Did the Apostle any thing opposite herein, or repugnant
to the Rules and Maxims of the Law of Nature? The self-same reasons that accord
his actions with the Law of Nature, shall declare our Privileges and his Laws
no less consonant. Thus therefore we see, that although they urge very
colourably the Apostles own Sentences, requiring that a Minister should be able
to divide rightly the Word of God, that they who are placed in Charge should
attend unto it themselves, which in absence they cannot do, and that they which
have diverse Cures must of necessity be absent from some, whereby the Law
Apostolic seems apparently broken, which Law requiring attendance cannot
otherwise be understood, than so as to charge them with perpetual Residence:
Again, though in every of these causes, they infinitely heap up the Sentences
of Fathers, the Decrees of Popes, the ancient Edicts of Imperial authority, our
own National Laws and Ordinances prohibiting the same, and grounding evermore
their Prohibitions, partly on the Laws of God, and partly on reasons drawn from
the light of Nature, yet hereby to gather and infer contradiction between
those Laws which forbid indefinitely, and ours which in certain cases have
allowed the ordaining of sundry Ministers, whose sufficiency for Learning is
but mean; Again, the licensing of some to be absent from their Flocks, and of
others to hold more than one only Living which has Cure of Souls, I say, to
conclude repugnancy between these especial permissions, and the former general
prohibitions, which set not down their own limits, is erroneous, and the
manifest cause thereof ignorance in differences of matter which both sorts of
Law concern. If then the considerations be reasonable, just and good, whereupon
we ground whatsoever our Laws have by special right permitted; if only the
effects of abused Privileges be repugnant to the Maxims of Common right, this
main foundation of repugnancy being broken, whatsoever they have built
thereupon falls necessarily to the ground. Whereas therefore, upon surmise,
or vain supposal of opposition between our special, and the principles of
Common right, they gather that such as are with us ordained Ministers, before
they can Preach, be neither lawful, because the Laws already mentioned forbid
generally to create such, neither are they indeed Ministers, although we
commonly so name them, but whatsoever they execute by virtue of such their
pretended Vocation is void^ that all our grants and tolerations, as well of
this as the rest, are frustrate and of no effect; the Persons that enjoy them
possess them wrongfully, and are deprivable at all hours; finally, that other
just and sufficient remedy of evils there can be none, besides the utter
abrogations of these our mitigations, and the strict establishment of former
Ordinances to be absolutely executed whatsoever follow: albeit the Answer
already made in discovery of the weak and unsound foundation whereupon they
have built these erroneous collections may be thought sufficient; yet because
our desire is rather to satisfy, if it be possible, than to shake them off, we
are with very good will contented to declare the causes of all particulars more
formally and largely than the equity of our own defense does require.

There is crept into the minds of men, at this day, a secret pernicious and
pestilent conceit, that the greatest perfection of a Christian man does consist
in discovery of other men's faults, and in wit to discourse of our own
profession. When the World most abounded with just, righteous and perfect men,
their chiefest study was the exercise of piety, wherein for their safest
direction, they reverently hearkened to the Readings of the Law of God, they
kept in mind the Oracles and Aphorisms of wisdom, which tended unto virtuous
life; if any scruple of conscience did trouble them for matter of Actions which
they took in hand, nothing was attempted before counsel and advice were had,
for fear left rashly they might offend. We are now more confident, not that our
knowledge and judgment is riper, but because our desires are another way.

Their scope was obedience, ours is skill; their endeavor was reformation of
life, (...) Arist. Et^. l. 2. c. ^.
our virtue nothing but to hear gladly the reproof of vice; they in the
practice of their Religion wearied chiefly their knees and hands, we especially
our ears and tongues. We are grown, as in many things else, so in this, to a
kind of intemperancy, which (only Sermons excepted) has almost brought all
other duties of Religion out of taste. At the least they are not in that
account and reputation which they should be. Now, because men bring all
Religion in a manner to the only Office of hearing Sermons, if it chance that
they who are thus conceited do embrace any special opinion different from other
men, the Sermons that relish not that opinion, can in no wise please their
appetite. Such therefore as preach unto them, but hit not the string they look
for, are rejected as unprofitable; the rest as unlawful, and indeed no
Ministers, if the faculty of Sermons want. For why^ A Minister of the Word
should, they say, be able rightly to divide the Word. Which Apostolic Canon
many think they do well observe, when in opening the Sentences of holy
Scripture, they draw all things favorably spoken unto one side; but whatsoever
is reprehensive, severe, and sharp, they have others on the contrary part whom
that must always concern, by which their over-partial and un-indifferent
proceeding, while they thus labor amongst the people to divide the Word, they
make the Word a mean to divide and distract the People. (...) to divide aright,
does note in the Apostle's Writings, soundness of Doctrine only; and in
meaning stands opposite to (...) the broaching of new opinions against that
which is received. For questionless the first things delivered to the Church of
Christ, were pure and sincere Truth. Which whosoever did afterward oppugn,
could not choose but divide the Church into two moyeties; in which division,
such as taught what was first believed, held the truet part; the contrary side,
in that they were teachers of novelty, etred. For prevention of which evil
there are in this Church many singular and well devised remedies, as namely the
use of subscribing to the Articles of Religion before admission of degrees to
Learning, or to any Ecclesiastical Living, the custom of reading the same
Articles, and of approving them in public Assemblies wheresoever men have
Benefices with Cure of Souls, the order of testifying under their hands
allowance of the Book of Common Prayer, and the Book of ordaining Ministers;
finally, the Discipline and moderate severity which is used either in other
wise correcting or silencing them that trouble and disturb the Church with
Doctrines which tend unto Innovation; it being better that the Church should
want altogether the benefit of such men's labors, than endure the mischief of
their inconformity to good Laws; in which case, if any repine at the course and
proceedings of Justice, Valor. l. 6. c. 3.
they must learn to content themselves with the answer of M. Curious, which had
sometime occasion to cut off one from the Body of the Commonwealth: in whose
behalf because it might have been pleaded that the party was a man serviceable,
he therefore began his judicial sentence with this preamble, Non esse open
Reip. to cive qui parers nescires; The Commonwealth needs men of quality,
yet never those men which have not learned how to obey. But the ways which the
Church of England has taken to provide that they who are Teachers of others
may do it soundly, that the Purity and Unity as well of ancient Discipline as
Doctrine may be upheld, that avoiding singularities, we may all glorify God
with one heart and one tongue, they of all men do least approve, that do most
urge the Apostle's Rule and Canon. For which cause they allege it not so much
to that purpose, as to prove that unpreaching Ministers (for so they term them)
can have no true nor lawful calling in the Church of God. Sainst Augustine has
said of the will of man, that simply to will proceeds from Nature, but our
well-willing is from Grace. We say as much of the Minister of God publicly to
teach and instruct the Church, is necessary in every Ecclesiastical Minister;
but ability to teach by Sermons is a Grace which God does bestow on them whom
he makes sufficient for the commendable discharge of their duty. Ox. men. p.
21.
That therefore wherein a Minister differs from other Christian men, is not
as some have childishly imagined, the sound-preaching of the Word of God, but
as they are lawfully and truly Governors to whom authority of Regiment is
given in the Commonwealth, according to the order which Polity has set, so
Canonical Ordination in the Church of Christ is that which makes a lawful
Minister, as touching the validity of any Act which appertains to that
Vocation. The cause why Saint Paul willed Timothy not to be overhasty in
ordaining Ministers, was (as we very well may conjecture) because imposition of
hands does consecrate and make them Ministers, whether they have gifts and
qualities fit for the laudable discharge of their Duties or no. If want of
Learning and skill to preach did frustrate their Vocation, Ministers ordained
before they be grown unto that maturity should receive new Ordination,
whenever it chances that study and industry does make them afterward more
able to perform the Office; than which what conceit can be more absurd? Was not
Saint Augustine himself contented to admit an Assistant in his own Church, a
man of small Erudition, considering that what he wanted in knowledge was
supplied by those virtues which made his life a better Orator, than more
Learning could make others whose conversation was less Holy? Were the Priests,
fithence Moses, all able and sufficient men, learnedly to interpret the Law of
God? Or was it ever imagined, that this defect should frustrate what they
executed, and deprive them of right unto any thing they claimed by virtue of
their Priesthood? Surely, as in Magistrates, the want of those Gifts which
their Office ne^deth, is cause of just imputation of blame in them that
wittingly choose unsufficient and unfit men when they might do otherwise, and
yet therefore is not their choice void, nor every action of Magistracy
frustrate in that respect: So whether it were of necessity, or even of very
carelessness, that men unable to Preach should be taken in Pastors rooms;
nevertheless, it seems to be an error in them which think that the lack of
any such perfection defeateth utterly their Calling. To wish that all men were
so qualified, as their Places and Dignities require, to hate all sinister and
corrupt dealings which hereunto are any let, to covet speedy redress of those
things whatsoever, whereby the Church sustaineth detriment, these good and
virtuous desires cannot offend any but ungodly minds. Notwithstanding, some in
the true vehemence, and others under the fair pretense of these desires, have
adventured that which is strange, that which is violent and unjust. There are
which in confidence of their general allegations concerning the knowledge, The
Author of the Abstract.
the Residence and the single Livings of Ministers, presume not only to
annihilate the solemn Ordinations of such as the Church must of force admit,
but also to urge a kind of universal proscription against them, to set down
Articles, to draw Commissions, and almost to name themselves of the Quorum, for
inquiry into men's estates and dealings, whom at their pleasure they would
deprive and make obnoxious to what punishment themselves list, and that not for
any violation of Laws, either Spiritual or Civil, but because men have trusted
the Laws too far, because they have held and enjoyed the liberty which Law
grants, because they had not the wit to conceive as these men do, that Laws
were made to entrap the simple, by permitting those things in show and
appearance, which indeed should never take effect, for as much as they were but
granted with a secret condition to be put in practice, If they should be
profitable and agreeable with the Word of God: which condition failing in all
Ministers that cannot Preach, in all that are absent from their Livings, and in
all that have diverse Livings (for so it must be presumed, though never as yet
proved) therefore as men which have broken the Law of God and Nature, they are
depriveable at all hours. Is this the Justice of that Discipline whereunto all
Christian Churches must stoop and sabmit themselves? Is this the equity
wherewith they labor to reform the World? I will no way diminish the force of
those Arguments whereupon they ground. But if it please them to behold the
visage of these Collections in another Glass, there are Civil as well as
Ecclesiastical Unsufficiencies, Non residences, and Pluralities^ yea, the
reasons which Light of Nature has ministered against both, are of such
affinity, that much less they cannot enforce in the one than in the other. When
they that bear great Offices be Persons of mean worth, the contempt whereinto
their authority grows (...) Ari^ot. Polit. 2. c. 11.
weakneth the sinews of the whole State. Notwithstanding, where many Governors
are needful, and they not many, whom their quality cannot commend, Nec ign^eo
maximo^ honores ad parum diguo^ penu^la ^^liorum solire deferri. Mamerrio
puneg. ad Julian.
the penury of worthier must needs make the meaner sort of men capable: Cities,
in the absence of their Governors, are as Ships wanting Pilots at Sea. But
were it therefore Neque enim aquam visum est absentem Reipub. racsa lo^er r^os
rek^^t dua^ Reip^b. operatur. Vlpian. l. 83. Si maricus a^ legem. Julian de
adulter.
Justice to punish whom Superior Authority pleases to call from home, or
allows to be employed elsewhere? In committing Arist. Polk. l. 1. c. 11. See
the like Prean his, ^ramed by the Author of the Abstract, where he saneleth ^
Bishop deposing one unapt to preach, whom himself had before ordained.
many Offices to one man, there are apparently these inconveniences; the
Common wealth does lose the benefit of serviceable men, which might be trained
up in those rooms; it is not easy for one man to discharge many men's duties
well, in service of Warfare and Navigation, were it not the overthrow of
whatsoever is undertaken, if one or two should ingrosse such Offices, as being
now divided into many hands, are discharged with admirable both perfection and
expedition? Nevertheless, be it far from the mind of any reasonable man to
imagine, that in these considerations Princes either ought of duty to revoke
all such kind of Grants, though made with very special respect to the
extraordinary merit of certain men, or might in honor demand of them the
resignation of their Offices, with speech to this or the like effect; For as
much as you A. B. by the space of many years, have done us that faithful
service in most important affairs, for which we always judging you worthy of
much honor, have therefore committed unto you from time to time, very great
and weighty Offices, which hitherto you quietly enjoy: we are now given to
understand, that certain grave and learned men have found in the Books of
ancient Philosophers, diverse Arguments drawn from the common light of Nature,
and declaring the wonderful discommodities which use to grow by Dignities thou
heaped together in one; For which cause, at this present, moved in conscience
and tender care for the Public good, we have summoned you hither, to
dis-possess you of those Places, and to depose you from those rooms, whereof
indeed by virtue of our own Grant, yet against Reason, you are possessed.
Neither ought you, or any other to think us rash, light, or inconstant, in so
doing: For we tell you plain, that herein we will both say and do that thing
which the noble and wife Emperor sometime both said and did, in a matter of
fair less weight than this; Quod inconsulto semicus, consulto revocamus, That
which we unadvisedly have done, we advisedly will revoke and undo. Now for mine
own part, the greatest harm I would wish them who think that this were
consonant with equity and right, is, that they might but live where all things
are with such kind of Justice ordered, till experience have taught them to see
their error. As for the last thing which is incident into the cause whereof we
speak, namely, what course were the best and safest whereby to remedy such
evils as the Church of God may sustain, where the present liberty of Law is
turned to great abuse, some light we may receive from abroad, not unprofitable
for direction of God's own sacred House and Family. The Romans being a People
full of generosity, and by nature courteous, did no way more show their gentle
disposition, than by easy condescending to see their Bondmen at liberty.
Which benefit in the happier and better times of the Commonwealth, was
bestowed for the most part as an ordinary reward of Virtue, some few now and
then also purchasing freedom with that which their just labors could gain, and
their honest frugality save. But as the Empire daily grew up, so the manners
and conditions of men decayed, Wealth was honored, and Virtue not cared for,
neither did any thing seem opprobrious out of which there might arise commodity
and profit, so that it could be no marvel in a State thus far degenerated, if
when the more ingenious sort were become base, the baser laying aside all shame
and face of honesty, did, some by Robberies, Burglaries, and prostitution of
their Bodies, gather wherewith to redeem liberty; others obtain the same at the
hands of their Lords, by serving them as vile Instruments in those attempts,
which had been worthy to be revenged with ten thousand deaths. A learned,
judicious, and polite Historian, having mentioned so soul disorders, gives his
judgment and censure of them in this sort: Dionys Hali^ar Romans ^nt ^. 1. 4.
Such eye-sores in the Commonwealth have occasioned many virtuous minds to
condemn altogether the custom of granting liberty to any Bond-slave, for as
much as it seemed a thing absurd, that a People which commands all the World
should consist of so vile Reffuse. But neither is this the only customs
wherein the profitable inventions of former are depraved by later Ages; and for
my self I am not of their opinion that wish the abrogation of so grossly used
Customs, which abrogation might peradventure be cause of greater
inconveniences ensuing: but as much as may be I would rather advise that
redress were sought, through the careful providence of Chief Rulers and
Overseers of the Commonwealth, by whom a yearly survey being made of all that
are manumissed, they which seem worthy might be taken and divided into Tribes
with other Citizens, the rest dispersed into Colonies abroad, or otherwise
disposed of, that the Commonwealth might sustain neither harm nor disgrace by
them. The ways to meet with disorders growing by abuse of Laws, are not so
intricate and secret, especially in our case, that men should need either much
advertisement or long time for the search thereof. And if counsel to that
purpose may seem needful, this Church (God be thanked) is not destitute of men
endued with ripe judgment, whenever any such thing shall be thought
necessary. For which end, at this present, to propose any special inventions of
my own, might argue in a man of my Place and Calling more presumption perhaps
than wit. I will therefore leave it entire unto graver consideration, ending
now with request only and most earnest suit; first, that they which give
Ordination, would, as they tender the very honor of Jesus Christ, the safety
of men, and the endless good of their own Souls, take heed, lest unnecessarily,
and through their default the Church be found worse, or less furnished than it
might be: Secondly, that they which by right of Patronage have power to present
unto Spiritual Livings, and may in that respect much damnifie the Church of
God, would, for the ease of their own account in that dreadful day, somewhat
consider what it is to betray for gain the Souls which Christ has redeemed
with blood, what to violate the sacred Bond of Fidelity and Solemn promise,
given at the first to God and his Church by them, from whose original interest
together with the self-same Title of Right, the same Obligation of Duty
likewise is descended: Thirdly, that they unto whom the granting of
Dispensations is committed, or which otherwise have any stroke in the
disposition of such Preferments as appertsin unto Learned men, would bethink
themselves what it is to respect any thing either above or besides Merit,
considering how hardly the World takes it, when to men of commendable note and
quality there is so little respect had, or so great unto them whose deserts are
very mean, that nothing does seem more strange than the one sort, because they
are not accounted of, and the other because they are; it being every man's hope
and expectation in the Church of God, especially that the only purchase of
greater rewards should be always greater deserts, and that nothing should ever
be able to plant a Thorn where a Vine ought to grow: Fourthly, that honorable
Personages, and they, who by virtue of any principal Office in the
Commonwealth are enabled to qualify a certain number, and make them capable
of favors or Faculties above others, suffer not their names to be abused,
contrary to the true intent and meaning of wholesome Laws, by men in whom there
is nothing notable besides Covetousness and Ambition: Fifthly, that the graver
and wiser sort in both Universities, or whosoever they be, with whose
approbation the marks and recognizances of all Learning are bestowed, would
think the Apostle's caution against unadvised Ordinations not impertinent or
unnecessary to be born in mind, even when they grant those degrees of Schools,
which degrees are not gratia gratis data, kindnesses bestowed by way of
humanity, but they are gratiae gratum sacientes, favors which always imply a
testimony given to the Church and Commonwealth, concerning men's sufficiency
for manners and knowledge; a testimony, upon the credit whereof sundry Statutes
of the Realm are built; a testimony so far available, that nothing is more
respected for the warrant of diverse men's ability to serve in the affairs of
the Realm; a testimony wherein if they violate that Religion wherewith it ought
to be always given, and thereby do induce into error such as deem it a thing
uncivil to call the credit thereof in question, let them look that God shall
return back upon their heads, and cause them in the state of their own
Corporations to feel either one way or other the punishment of those harms,
which the Church through their negligence does sustain in that behalf: Finally,
and to conclude, that they who enjoy the benefit of any special Indulgence or
Favor which the Laws permit, would as well remember what in duty toward the
Church, and in conscience toward God they ought to do, as what they may do by
using of their own advantage whatsoever they see tolerated; no man being
ignorant that the cause why absence in some cases has been yielded unto, and
in equity thought sufferable, is the hope of greater fruit through industry
elsewhere; the reason likewise wherefore pluralities are allowed unto men of
note, a very sovereign and special care, that as Fathers in the ancient World
did declare the pre-eminence of priority in birth, by doubling the worldly
portions of their firstborn; so the Church by a course not unlike in assigning
men's rewards, might testify an estimation had proportionably of their Virtues,
For the main Hypothesis or foundation of these conclusions, let that before ser
down in the 9. be read together with this last the 8^. Paragraph.
according to the ancient Rule Apostolic, They which excel in labor, ought to
excel in honor; and therefore unless they answer faithfully the expectation of
the Church herein, unless sincerely they bend their wits day and night, both to
sow because they reap, and to sow so much more abundantly as they reap more
abundantly than other men, whereunto by their very acceptance of such
benignities they formally bind themselves; let them be well assured that the
honey which they eat with fraud shall turn in the end into true gall, for as
much as Laws are the sacred Image of his wisdom who most severely punishes
those colorable and subtle crimes that seldom are taken within the walk of
human Justice: I therefore conclude, that the grounds and maxims of Common
right whereupon Ordinations of Ministers unable to Preach, tolerations of
absence from their Cures, and the multiplications of their Spiritual Livings
are disproved, do but indefinitely enforce them unlawful, not unlawful
universally and without exception; that the Laws which indefinitely are against
all these things, and the Privileges which make for them in certain cases are
not the one repugnant to the other, that the Laws of God and Nature are
violated through the effects of abused Privileges; that neither our
Ordinations of men unable to make Sermons, nor our dispensations for the rest,
can be justly proved frustrate by virtue of any such surmised opposition
between the special Laws of this Church which have permitted, and those general
which are alleged to disprove the same; that when Privileges by abuse are
grown in commodious, there must be redress; that for remedy of such evils,
there is no necessity the Church should abrogate either in whole or in part the
specialties before mentioned; and that the most to be desired were a voluntary
reformation thereof on all hands which may give passage unto any abuse.

OF THE LAWS OF Ecclesiastical Polity.
BOOK VI.
Containing their Fifth Assertion, That our Laws are Corrupt and Repugnant to
the Laws of God, in matter belonging to the Power of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, in that we have not throughout all Churches certain Lay Elders
established for the Exercise of that Power.

THE same Men which in heat of Contention, The question between u^^ whether all
Congregation, or Varishes ought to have Lay Elders invested with power of
Jurisdiction in spiritual causes.
do hardly either speak or give ear to reason, being after sharp and bitter
conflicts, retired to a calm remembrance of all their former proceedings; the
causes that brought them into quarrel, the course which their striving
affections have followed, and the issue whereunto they are come, may
peradventure as troubled wa^e^s, in small time of their own accord, by certain
easy degrees settle themselves again; and so recover that clearness of well
advised judgment, whereby they shall stand at the length indifferent, both to
yield and admit any reasonable satisfaction, where before they could not endure
with patience to be gainsaid. Neither will I despair of the like success in
these unpleasant Controversies touching Ecclesiastical Polity; the time of
silence, which both parts have willingly taken to breathe, seeming now as it
were a pledge of all Men's quiet Contentment, to hear with more indifferency,
the weightiest and last remains of that Cause, Lib. 6. Lib. 7. Lib. ^.
Jurisdiction, Dignity, Dominion Ecclesiastical. For, let any Man imagine, that
the bare and naked difference of a few Ceremonies, could either have kindled so
much fire, or have caused it to flame so long; but that the parties which
herein labored mightily for change and (as they say) for Reformation, had
somewhat more then this mark whereat to aim.

Having therefore drawn out a complete Form, as they suppose, of public
service to be done to God, and set down their Plot for the Office of the
Ministry in that behalf; they very well knew, how little their labors so far
forth bestowed, would avail them in the end, without a claim of Jurisdiction to
uphold the Fabric which they had erected; and this neither, likely to be
obtained, but by the strong hand of the people, not the people unlikely to
favor it; the more, if overture were made of their own Interest, right, and
title thereunto. Whereupon there are many which have conjectured this to be the
cause, why in all the projects of their Discipline, (it being manifest that
their drift is, to wrest the Key of Spiritual Authority out of the hands of
former Governors, and equally to possess therewith the Pastors of all several
Congregations) the people first for surer accomplishment, and then for better
defense thereof, are pretended necessary Actors in those things, whereunto
their ability for the most part is as slender, as their title and challenge
unjust.

Notwithstanding (whether they saw it necessary for them to persuade the
people, without whose help they could do nothing, or else (which I rather
think) the affection which they bear toward this new Form of Government, made
them to imagine it Gods own Ordinance,) Their Doctrine is, that, by the Law of
God, there must be for ever in all Congregations certain Lay Elders, Ministers
of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, in as much as our Lord and Savior by Testament
(for so they presume) has left all Ministers or Pastors in the Church
Executors equally to the whole power of Spiritual Jurisdiction, and with them
has joined the people as Colleagues. By maintenance of which Assertion, there
is unto that part apparently gained a twofold advantage, both because the
people in this respect are much more easily drawn to favor it, as a matter of
their own interest; and for that, if they chance to be crossed by such as
oppose against them, the color of Divine Authority, assumed for the Grace and
Countenance of that Power in the vulgar sort, furnishes their Leaders with
great abundance of matter behoveful of their encouragement, to proceed always
with hope of fortunate success in the end, considering their cause to be as,
David's was, a just defense of power given them from above, and consequently
their Adversaries quarrel the same with Readiness, by whom the Ordinance of God
was withstood.

Now, on the contrary side, if this their surmise prove false; if such, as in
Justification whereof no evidence sufficient, either has been or can be
alleged (as I hope it shall clearly appear after due examination and trial)
let them then consider whether those words of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,
against Moses, and against Aaron, Numb. 1^.
It is too much that ye take upon you, seeing all the Congregation is holy, be
not the very true Abstract and abridgment of all their published Admonitions,
Demonstrations, Supplications, and Treatises whatsoever, whereby they have
labored to void the rooms of their Spiritual Superiors before Authorized, and
to advance the new fancied Scepter of Lay Presbyterial Power.

The Nature of Spiritual Jurisdiction.
BUt before there can be any settled Determination, whether Truth do rest on
their part, or on ours, touching Lay Elders; we are to prepare the way
thereunto, by explication of some things requisite and very needful to be
considered, as first, how besides that Spiritual Power, which is of Order, and
was instituted for performance of those duties, whereof there has been Speech
already had, there is in the Church no less necessary, a second kind, which we
call the Power of Jurisdiction. When the Apostle does speak of ruling the
Church of God, and of receiving accusations, his words have evident reference
to the Power of Jurisdiction. Our Saviors words to the Power of Order, ^cts
20.21. 1 Timothy 5. 13. Marc. 6. 15. Mat. 28. 19. 1 Cor. 11.24.
when he gives his Disciples charge, saying, Preach, Baptize: Do this in
Remembrance of me. (...). Epist ad Smyrn. A Bishop says, ( Ignatius) does bear
the Image of God and of Christ, of God in ruling, of Christ in administering
holy things: By this therefore we see a manifest difference acknowledged
between the Power of Ecclesiastical Order, and the power of Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical.

The Spiritual Power of the Church, being such as neither can be challenged by
right of Nature, nor could by humane Authority be instituted, because the
forces and effects thereof are Supernatural and Divine; we are to make no doubt
or question, but that from him which is the Head, it has descended unto us
that are the Body now invested therewith. He gave it for the benefit and good
of Souls, as a mean to keep them in the path which leads unto endless
felicity, a bridle to hold them within their due and convenient bounds, and, if
they do go astray, a forcible help to reclaim them: Now although there be no
kind of Spiritual Power, for which our Lord Jesus Christ did not give both
commission to exercise, and direction how to use the same, although his Laws in
that behalf recorded by the holy Evangelists be the only ground and foundation,
whereupon the practice of the Church must sustain it self: yet, as all
multitudes once grown to the form of Societies are even thereby naturally
warranted, to enforce upon their own subjects particularly those things, which
public wisdom shall judge expedient for the common good: so it were absurd to
imagine the Church it self, the most glorious amongst them, abridged of this
liberty, or to think that no Law, Constitution or Canon, can be further made,
either for Limitation or Amplification, in the practice of our Saviors
Ordinances whatsoever occasion be offered through variety of times, and things,
during the state of this inconstant world, which brings forth daily such new
evils, as must of necessity by new remedies be redrest, did both of old
enforce our venerable Predecessor, and will always constrain others, sometime
to make, sometime to abrogate, sometime to augment, and again to abridge
sometime; in sum, often to vary alter and change Customs, incident unto the
manner of exercising that Power which does it self continue always one and the
same: I therefore conclude, that Spiritual Authority is a Power which Christ
has given to be used over them which are subject unto it for the eternal good
of their Souls according to his own most Sacred Laws, and the wholesome positive
Constitutions of his Church.

In Doctrine referred unto Action and Practice, as this is which concerns
Spiritual Jurisdiction, the first sound and perfect understanding is the
knowledge of the End, because thereby both Use does frame, and Contemplation
judge all things.

Of Penitency, the chiefest End propounded by Spiritual Jurisdiction. Two kinds
of Penitency, the one a Private Duty toward God, the other a Duty of external
Discipline. Of the virtue of Repentance from which the former Duty proceeds:
and of Contrition the first part of that Duty.
SEeing that the chiefest cause of Spiritual Jurisdiction is to provide for the
health and safety of Men's Souls, by bringing them to see and Repent their
grievous offenses committed against God, as also to reform all injuries offered
with the breach of Christian Love and Charity toward their brethren, in matters
of Ecclesiastical Cognizance; the use of this Power, shall by so much the
plainlier appear, if first the nature of Repentance it self be known.

We are by Repentance to appease whom we offend by Sin. For which cause,
whereas all Sin deprives us of the favor of Almighty God, our way of
Reconciliation with him, is the inward secret Repentance of the heart; which
inward Repentance alone suffices, unless some special thing, in the quality of
Sin committed, or in the Party that has done amiss, require more. For besides
our submission in Gods sight, Paenitentiae secundae, and ^nius, quinio in actu
negotium est, tanto potior probatio eshut non soia conscientia proferatur, sed
aliquo etiam actu administretur.
Repentance must not only proceed to the private contentation of Men, if the
Sin be a crime injurious; but also farther, where the wholesome Discipline of
Gods Church exacteth a more exemplary and open satisfaction. Now the Church
being satisfied with outward Repentance, as God is with inward, it shall not be
amiss, for more perspicuity to term this latter always the Virtue, that former
the Discipline of Repentance; which Discipline has two sorts of Penitents to
work upon, in as much as it has been accustomed to lay the Offices of
Repentance on some seeking, others shunning them, on some at their own
voluntary request, on others altogether against their Wills, as shall hereafter
appear by store of ancient examples. Second Penitency, following that before
Baptism, and being not more then once admitted in one man, requires by so much
the greater labor to make it manifest, for that it is not a work which can
come again in royal, but must be therefore with some open solemnity executed,
and not left to be discharged with the privity of Conscience alone. Tertul.
dep^.
Repentance being therefore either in the sight of God alone, or else with the
notice also of Men: Without the one, sometime thoroughly performed, by always
practiced more or less; in our daily devotions and Prayers, we have no remedy
for any fault. Whereas the other is only required in Sins of a certain degree
and quality; the one necessary for ever, the other so far forth as the Laws and
Orders of Gods Church shall make it requisite. The nature parts, and effects of
the one always the same; The other limited, extended, and varied by infinite
occasions.

The virtue of Repentance in the heart of Man is Gods handiwork, a fruit or
effect of Divine Grace, which Grace continually offers it self, even unto
them that have forsaken it, as may appear by the words of Christ in St John's
Revelation, I stand at the door and knock: Nor does he only knock without, but
also within assist to open, whereby access and entrance is given to the
heavenly presence, of that saving power, which makes man a repaired Temple for
Gods good Spirit again to inhabit. And albeit the whole train of virtues which
are implied in the name of Grace, be infused at one instant; yet because when
they meet and concur unto any effect in man, they have their distinct
operations rising orderly one from another; It is no unnecessary thing that we
note the way or method of the Holy Ghost, in framing man's sinful heart to
Repentance: A work, the first foundation whereof is laid by opening and
illuminating the eye of Faith, because by Faith are discovered the Principles
of this action, whereunto unless the understanding do first assent, there can
follow in the Will toward Penitency no inclination at all: Contrariwise, the
Resurrection of the dead, the Judgment of the World to come, and the endless
misery of sinners being apprehended, this works fear: such as theirs was, who
feeling their own distress and perplexity in that passion, besought our Lords
Apostles earnestly to give them counsel what they should do. For, fear is
impotent and unable to advise it self; yet this good it has, that men are
thereby made desirous to prevent, if possibly they may, whatsoever evil they
dread; The first thing that wrought the Ninivites, Repentance, was fear of
destruction within forty days; signs and miraculous works of God, being
extraordinary representations of Divine Power, are commonly wont to stir any
the most wicked with terror, lest the same Power should bend it self against
them: And because tractable minds, though guilty of much Sin, are hereby moved
to forsake those evil ways which make his power in such sort their
astonishment and fear; therefore our Savior denounced his curse against
Corazin and Bethsaida, saying, that if Tire and Sidon had seen that which they
did, those signs which prevailed little with the one, would have brought the
others to Repentance. As the like thereunto did in the men given to curious
Arts, of whom the Apostolic History says, that Fear came upon them, and many
which had followed vain sciences, burnt openly the very books out of which they
had learned the same; As fear of contumely and disgrace amongst men, together
with other civil punishments, are a bridle to restrain from any heinous Acts,
whereinto men's outrage would otherwise break; So the fear of Divine Revenge and
punishment where it takes place, does make men desirous to be rid likewise from
that inward guiltiness of Sin, wherein they would else securely continue.
Howbeit, when Faith has wrought a fear of the event of Sin, yet Repentance
hereupon ensues not, unless our belief conceive both the possibility and means
to avert evil: The possibility, in as much as God is merciful, and most willing
to have Sin cured: The means, because he has plainly taught what is requisite,
and shall suffice unto that purpose. The nature of all wicked men, is, for fear
of revenge to hate whom they most wrong? The nature of hatred, to wish that
destroyed which it cannot brook; And from hence arises the furious endeavors
of godless and obdurate sinners, to extinguish in themselves the opinion of
God, because they would not have him to Be, whom execution of endless woe does
not suffer them to Love.

Every Sin against God abateth, and continuance in Sin extinguisheth, our love
toward him: It was therefore said to the Angel of Ephesus having sinned, Thou
art fallen away from thy first love; so that, as we never decay in love till we
Sin, in like sort neither can we possibly forsake Sin, unless we first begin
again to love. What is love toward God, but a desire of union with God? And
shall we imagine a Sinner converting himself to God, in whom there is no desire
of union with God presupposed? I therefore conclude, that fear works no man's
inclination to Repentance, till somewhat else have wrought in us love also; Our
love and desire of union with God arises from the strong conceit which we
have of his admirable goodness: The goodness of God, which particularly moves
unto Repentance, is his mercy toward mankind, notwithstanding Sin: For, let it
once sink deeply into the mind of man, that howsoever we have injuried God, his
very nature is averse from revenge, except unto Sin we add obstinacy otherwise
always ready to accept our submission, as a full discharge or recompense for
all wrongs; and Can we choose but begin to Love him whom we have offended, or
can we but begin to grieve that we have offended him whom we love? Repentance
considers Sin as a breach of the Law of God, an act obnoxious to that
revenge, which notwithstanding may be prevented, if we pacify God in time.

The root and beginning of Penitency therefore, is the consideration of our own
Sin, as a cause which has procured the wrath, and a subject which does need
the mercy of God: For unto man's understanding, there being presented, on the
one side, tribulation and anguish upon every soul that does evil: On the other,
eternal life unto them which by continuance in well doing, seek Glory, and
Honor, and Immortality; On the one hand a curse to the Children of
disobedience; On the other, to lovers of righteousness, all grace and
benediction: Yet between these extremes, that eternal God from whose unspotted
justice and undeserved mercy, the lot of each inheritance proceeds, is so
inclinable, rather to show compassion then to take revenge, that all his
speeches in holy Scripture are almost nothing else but entreaties of men to
prevent destruction by amendment of their wicked lives; All the works of his
providence little other then mere allurements of the just to continue steadfast,
and of the unrighteous to change their course; All his dealings and proceedings
toward true Converts, as have even filled the grave writings of holy men, with
these and the like most sweet sentences: Repentance (if I may so speak)
stops God in his way, when being provoked by crimes past, he comes to
revenge them with most just punishments; Yea, it tyeth, as it were, the hands
of the Avenger, and does not suffer him to have his will. Again,

Basil. Epist. Selene. p. 106. (...) Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. Hom. 8. (...) Marc. Erem.
(...)
The merciful eye of God toward Men, has no power to withstand Penitency, at
what time soever it comes in presence. And again,

God does not take it so in evil part, though we wound that which he has
required us to keep whole; as that, after we have taken hurt, there should be
in us no desire to receive his help. Finally, lest I be carried too far in so
large a Sea, There was never any Man condemned of God, but for neglect; nor
justified, except he had care of Repentance.

From these considerations, setting before our eyes our inexcusable, both
unthankfulness in disobeying so merciful, foolishness in provoking so powerful
a God; there arises necessarily a pensive and corrosive desire that we had
done otherwise; a desire which suffers us to foreslow no time, to feel no
quietness within our selves, to take neither sleep nor food with contentment,
never to give over Supplications Confessions, and other penitent Duties, till
the light of Gods reconciled favor shine in our darkened soul.

Full. de remi. peccat. lib 2. cap. 15.
Fulgentius asking the question, Why David's confession should be held for
effectual Penitence, and not Readiness; answers, that the one hated Sin, the
other feared only punishment in this world: Saul's acknowledgement of Sin, was
Fear; David's, both fear and also love.

This was the Fountain of Peter's Tears, this the Life and Spirit of David's
eloquence, in those most admirable Hymns entitled Penitential, where the words
of sorrow for Sin, do melt the very Bowels of God remitting it; and the
Comforts of Grace in remitting Sin, carry him which sorrowed, rapt as it were
into Heaven, with ecstasies of joy and gladness. The first motive of the
Ninevites unto Repentance; was their belief in a Sermon of Fear, but the next
and most immediate, an Axiom of Love, Jon. c. 3.9.
Who can tell whether God will turn away his fierce wrath, that we perish not^
No conclusion such as theirs, Let every man turn from his evil way, but out of
premises such as theirs were, Fear and Love: Wherefore the Wellspring of
Repentance is Faith; first breeding Fear, and then Love, which Love causes
hope, hope resolution of Attempt: I will go to my Father, and say, I have
sinned against Heaven and against thee; that is to say, I will do what the Duty
of a Convert requires.

Now in a Penitent's or Convert's duty, there are included; first, the aversion
of the will from Sin; secondly, the submission of our selves to God, by
supplication and Prayer; thirdly, the purpose of a new life, testified with
present works of amendment: Which three things do very well seem to be
comprised in one definition, by them which handle Repentance, as a virtue that
hates, bewaileth, and shows a purpose to amend Sin: We offend God in
thought, word, and deed. To the first of which three, they make Contrition; to
the second, Confession; and to the last, our works of Satisfaction, answerable.

Contrition does not here import those sudden Pangs and Convulsions of the
mind, which cause sometimes the most forsaken of God, to retract their own
doings; it is no Natural passion, or anguish, which rises in us against our
wills; but a deliberate aversion of the Will of Man from Sin, which being
always accompanied with grief; and grief oftentimes partly with tears, partly
with other external signs; it has been thought, that in these things,
Contrition does chiefly consist: whereas the chiefest thing in Contrition, is,
that alteration whereby the Will which was before delighted with Sin, does now
abhor and shun nothing more. But forasmuch as we cannot hate Sin in our selves
without heaviness and grief, that there should be in us a thing of such
hateful quality, the Will averted from Sin, must needs make the affection
suitable; yea, great reason why it should so do: For since the Will by
conceiving Sin has deprived the Soul of Life, and of life there is not
recovery without Repentance the death of Sin; Repentance not able to kill Sin,
but by withdrawing the Will from it, the Will unpossible to be withdrawn,
unless it concur with a contrary affection to that which accompanied it before
in evil: Is it not clear, that as an inordinate delight did first begin sin,
so Repentance must begin with a just sorrow, a sorrow of heart, and such a
sorrow as renteth the heart; neither a feigned nor slight sorrow; not feigned,
blessed it increase Sin; nor slight, lest the pleasures of Sin overmatch it^^^ef

Where ore of Grace, the highest cause from which Man's Penitency does proceed;
of Faith, Fear, Love, Hope, what force and efficiency they have in Repentance;
of Parts and Duties thereunto belonging, comprehended in the Schoolmens
definitions; finally, of the first among those Duties, Contrition, which
disliketh and bewaileth iniquity, let this suffice.

And because God will have Offenses by Repentance, not only abhorred within our
selves, but also with humble Supplication displayed before Him; and a testimony
of amendment to be given, even by present works, worthy Repentance, in that
they are contrary to those we renounce and disclaim: Although the virtue of
Repentance do require, that her other two parts, Consession and Satisfaction
should here follow; yet seeing they belong as well to the Discipline as to the
virtue of Repentance, and only differ for that in the one they are performed to
Man, in the other to God alone; I had rather distinguish them in
joynt-handling, then handle them apart, because in quality and manner of
practice, they are distinct.

Of the Discipline of Repentance instituted by Christ, practiced by the
Fathers, converted by the Schoolmen into a Sacrament; and of Confession, that
which belongs to the virtue of Repentance, that which was used among the
Jews, that which the Papacy imagines a Sacrament, and that which Ancient
Discipline practiced.
1. OUr Lord and Savior in the sixteenth of St. Matthews Gospel, Mat. 16. 19.
gives his Apostles, Regiment in General over Gods Church. For they that have
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, are thereby signified to be Stewards of the
House of God, under whom they Guide, Command, Judge, and Correct his Family.
The Souls of Men are Gods Treasure, committed to the Trust and Fidelity of
such, as must render a strict account for the very least which is under their
Custody. God has not invested them with Power to make a Revenue thereof; but
to use it for the good of them whom Jesus Christ has most dearly bought.

And because their Office therein consists of sundry functions, some
belonging to Doctrine, some to Discipline, all contained in the Name of the
Keys, they have for matters of Discipline, as well Litigious as Criminal, Mat.
18. 17^
their Courts and Consistories erected by the heavenly Authority of his most
Sacred Voice, who has said, Dic Ecclesia, Tell the Church; against rebellious
and con^umacious Persons, which refuse to obey their Sentence, armed they are
with Power to eject such out of the Church, to deprive them of the Honors,
Rights, and Privileges of Christian Men, to, make them as Heathens and
Publicans, with whom society was hateful.

Furthermore, lest their Acts should be slenderly accounted of, or had in
contempt; Mat. 1^.1^. Job. 20.^^. 1 Cor 5. 3. 2 Cor. 2. 6 1 Timothy 1.20.
whether they admit to the Fellowship of Saints, or seclude from it, whether
they bind Offenders, or set them again at liberty, whether they remit, or
retain Sins, whatsoever is done by way of orderly and lawful proceeding, the
Lord himself has promised to ratify. This is that grand Original Warrant, by
force whereof the Guides and Prelates in Gods Church, first his Apostles, and
afterward others following them successively, did both use and uphold that
Discipline, the end whereof is to heal Men's Consciences, to cure their Sins, to
reclaim Offenders from iniquity, and to make them by Repentance just.

Neither has it of Ancient time, for any other respect, been accustomed to
bind by Ecclesiastical Censures, to retain so bound till tokens of manifest
Repentance appeared, and upon apparent Repentance to Release, saving only
because this was received as a most expedient method for the cure of sin.

The course of Discipline in former Ages reformed open Transgressors, by
putting them into Offices of open Penitence, especially Confession, whereby
they declared their own crimes in the hearing of the whole Church, and were not
from the time of their first Convention capable of the holy Mysteries of
Christ, till they had solemnly discharged this duty.

Offenders in secret knowing themselves altogether as unworthy to be admitted
to the Lords Table, as the other which were withheld; being also persuaded,
that if the Church did direct them in the Offices of their Penitency, and
assist them with public Prayer, they should more easily obtain that they
sought, than by trusting wholly to their own endeavors; finally, having no
impediment to stay them from it but bashfulness, which countervailed not the
former inducements; and besides, was greatly cased by the good construction,
which the charity of those times gave to such actions, wherein Men's piety and
voluntary care to be reconciled to God, did purchase them much more love than
their faults (the testimonies of common frailty) were able to procure disgrace,
they made it not nice to use some one of the Ministers of God, by whom the rest
might take notice of their faults, prescribe them convenient remedies, and in
the end after public Confession, all join in Prayer unto God for them.

The first beginner of this Custom, had the more followers by means of that
special favor which always was with good consideration showed toward
voluntary Penitents above the rest.

But as Professors of Christian belief, grew more in number, so they waxed
worse; when Kings and Princes had submitted their Dominions unto the Scepter of
Jesus Christ, by means whereof Persecution ceasing, the Church immediately
became subject to those evils which peace and security brings forth; there
was not now that love which before kept all things in tune, but every where
Schisms, Discords, Dissentions amongst Men. Conventicles of Heretics, bent
more vehemently against the sounder and better sort than very Infidels and
Heathens themselves; faults not corrected in Charity, but noted with delight,
and kept for malice to use when the deadliest opportunities should be offered.

Whereupon, forasmuch as public Confessions became dangerous and prejudicial
to the safety of well-minded Men, and in diverse respects advantageous to the
Enemies of Gods Church; it seemed first unto some, and afterward generally
requisite, that voluntary Penitents should surcease from open Confession.

Instead whereof, when once private and secret Confession had taken place with
the Latins; It continued as a profitable Ordinance, till the Lateran Council
had Decreed, that all Men once in a year at the least, should confess
themselves to the Priest.

So that being a thing thus made both general and also necessary, the next
degree of estimation whereunto it grew, was to be honored and and lifted up to
the Nature of a Sacrament^ that as Christ did institute Baptism to give life,
and the Eucharist to nourish life, so Penitence might be thought a Sacrament,
ordained to recover life, and Confession a part of the Sacrament.

Scotoin ^. seen d. 14. ^. 1. art. 1. In easl. did. ^. 7. art. 1.
They define therefore their private Penetency to be a Sacrament of remitting
sins after Baptism: The virtue of Repentance, a detestation of wickedness, with
full purpose to amend the same, and with hope to obtain pardon at Gods hands.

Wheresoever the Prophets cry Repent, and in the Gospel Saint Peter makes the
same Exhortation to the Jews, as yet unbaptized, they would have the virtue of
Repentance only to be understood, The Sacrament, where he advises Simon Magus
to repent, because the Sin of Simon Magus was after Baptism.

Now although they have only external Repentance for a Sacrament, internal for
a Virtue; yet make they Sacramental Repentance nevertheless to be composed of
three parts, Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction; which is absurd; because
Contrition being an inward thing, belongs to the Virtue, and not to the
Sacrament of Repentance, which must consist of external parts, if the nature
thereof be external. Besides, which is more absurd, they leave out Absolution,
Sont. lent. l. 4. d. ^^7. 4.
whereas some of their School Divines, handling Penance in the nature of a
Sacrament and being not able to epsy the least resemblance of a Sacrament,
save only in Absolution (for a Sacrament by their doctrine must both signify
and also confer, or bestow some special Divine Grace) resolved themselves, that
the duties of the Penitent could be but mere preparations to the Sacrament, and
that the Sacrament it self was wholly in Absolution. Sect. 14 e. 3. Docer
Sancta Synolus Sacramemi poenite ^tie formam, in quo praeripue ipsius vis stra
est. in illis Ministri verbis postram esse, Ego te absolva. Sunc sutem quasi
materia huiui Sacramenti ipsus paenitentis actus nempe Contritio, Confessio
etc. Satisfactio.
And albeit Thomas with his Followers have thought it safer, to maintain as
well the services of the Penitent, as the words of the Minister, necessary unto
the essence of their Sacrament; the services of the Penitent, as a cause
material; the words of Absolution, as a formal; for that by them all things
else are perfected to the taking away of Sin: which opinion, now reigns in
all their Schools, since the time that the Council of Trent gave it solemn
approbation, seeing they all make Absolution, if not the whole essence, yet the
very form whereunto they ascribe chiefly the whole force and operation of their
Sacrament; surely to admit the matter as a part, and not to admit the form,
has small congruity with reason.

Again, for as much as a Sacrament is complete, having the matter and form
which it ought, what should lead them to set down any other parts of
Sacramental Repentance, then Confession and Absolution, as Durandus has done?

For touching Satisfaction, the end thereof, as they understand it, is a
further matter, which rests after the Sacrament administered, and therefore
can be no part of the Sacrament.

Will they draw in Contrition with Satisfaction, which are no parts, and
exclude Absolution (a principal part,) yea, the very complement, form and
perfection of the rest as themselves account it? But for their breach of
precepts in art, it skilleth not, if their Doctrine otherwise concerning
Penitency, and in Penitency touching Confession might be found true.

We say, let no man look for pardon, which does sin other and conceal Sin,
where, in duty, it should be revealed.

The cause why God requires Confession to be made to him, is, that thereby
testifying a deep hatred of our own iniquity, the only cause of his hatred and
wrath toward us, we might because we are humble, be so much the more capable
of that compassion and tender mercy, which knows not how to condemn sinners
that condemn themselves.

If it be our Saviors own principle, that the conceit we have of our debt
forgiven, proportioneth our thankfulness and love to him, Luke ^. 47.
at whose hands we receive pardon; does not God foresee, that they which with
ill-advised modesty seek to hide their Sin like Adam, that they which rake it
up under ashes, and confess it not, are very unlikely to requite with offices
of love afterward, Tantum relevat Confessio delictorum, quantum dessimulatio
exaggerat. Confessio autem satisfactioni^ consi^un est, di^^mulirdo
con^^maciae. Ter. de ^e^m. ^h^y hom. 30. in Epist. 1. l. (...).
the grace which they show themselves unwilling to prize at the very time when
they sue for it, in as much as their not confessing what crimes they have
committed, is a plain signification how loath they are that the benefit of Gods
most gracious pardon should seem great. Nothing more true, then that of
Tertullian. Confession does as much abate the weight of men's offenses, as
Concealment does make them heavier. For he which confesses, has a purpose to
appease God; he, a determination to persist and continue obstinate, which keeps
them secret to himself St. Chrysostom almost in the same words, Wickedness is,
by being acknowledged lessened, and does but grow by being hid. If men having
done amiss, let it slip, as though they knew no such matter, what is there to
stay them from falling into one and the same evil? To call our selves Sinners
avails nothing, except we lay our faults in the balance, and take the weight
of them one by one. Confess thy crimes to God, disclose thy transgressions
before thy Judge by way of humble Supplication and suit, if not with tongue, at
the least with heart, and in this sort seek mercy. A general persuasion that
thou art a Sinner, will neither so humble, nor bridle thy Soul, as if the
Catalogue of thy Sins examined severally, be continually kept in mind.

This shall make thee lowly in thine own eyes; this shall preserve thy feet
from falling, and sharpen thy desires toward all good things. The mind, I
know, does hardly admit such unpleasant remembrances; but we must force it, we
must constrain it thereunto.

It is safer now to be bitten with the memory, then hereafter with the torment
of Sin.

The Jews with whom no Repentance for Sin is available without Confession,
Le^^. ^^. 21^
either conceived in mind or uttered) which latter kind they call usually (...)
Confession delivered by word of mouth) had first that general Confession which
once every year was made, All Israel is bound on the day of expiation to repent
and confess. ^^. Mos. in lib. Mi^^words haggadni. par. 2 pet. 1^.
both severally by each of the people for himself, upon the day of expiation,
and by the Priest for them all, On the day of expiation, the high Priest makes
three express Confessions, acknowledging unto God the manifold transgressions
of the whole Nation, his own personal offenses likewise, together with the
Sins, as well of his Family, as of the rest of his rank and order.

They had again their voluntary Confessions, at the times and seasons when men,
bethinking themselves of their wicked conversation past, were resolved to
change their course, the beginning of which alteration was still Confession of
Sins.

Thirdly, over and besides these, the Law imposed upon them also that special
Confession, which they in their book call (...) Confession of that particular
fault, for which we namely seek pardon at Gods hands.

Number. 5. 6.
The words of the Law concerning Confession in this kind are as follows: When
a Man or Woman shall commit any Sin, that Men commit, and transgress against
the Lord, their Sin which they have done (that is to say the very deed it self
in particular) they shall acknowledge.

Lev. ^. 5.
In Leviticus after certain transgressions there mentioned, we read the like:
When a Man has sinned in any one of these things, he shall then confess, how
in that thing he has offended. For such kind of special Sins, they had also
special Sacrifices, wherein the manner was that the Offender should lay his
hands on the head of the Sacrifice which he brought, and should there make.
Confession to God, saying, Mis^e Tora Tractan^ Te straba cap. 1. and K. M in.
lib. Misnoch. par. 2. chap. 6.
Now, O Lord, that I have offended, committed Sin, and done wickedly in thy
sight, this or this being my fault; behold, I repent me, and am utterly ashamed
of my doings; my purpose is, never to return more to the same crime.

None of them, whom either the house of judgment had condemned to die, or of
them which are to be punished with stripes, Mos. in Mis. ^oth, par 2. par. 16.
can be clear by being executed or scourged, till they repent and confess their
faults.

To him which is sick and draws toward death, they say. C^^^si Idem.
Finally there was no man amongst them at any time, either condemned to suffer
death, or corrected, or chastized with stripes, none ever sick and near his
end, but they called upon him to repent and confess his Sins.

Of Malefactors convict by witnesses, and thereupon either adjudged to die, or
otherwise chastized, their custom was to exact, as Joshua did of Achan, open
confession, My son, now give Glory to the Lord God of Israel, confess unto him,
and declare unto me what thou have committed, conceal it not from me, Jos. 7.
19.

Concerning injuries and trespasses which happen between men, they highly
commend such as will acknowledge before many.

It is, in him which repents, accepted as an high Sacrifice, if he will
confess before many, make them acquainted with his over-sights, and reveal the
transgressions which have passed between him and any of his brethren; saying, I
have verily offended this Man, thus and thus I have done unto him, but behold I
do now repent and am sorry. Contariwise, whosoever is proud, and will not be
known of his faults, but cloaketh them, is not yet come to perfect Repentance;
for so it is written, He that hides his Sins shall not prosper: which words of
Solomon they do not further extend, then only to Sins committed against Men,
which are in that respect meet before men to be acknowledged particularly. But
in Sins between Man and God, there is no necessity that Man should himself make
any such open and particular recital of them; to God they are known, and of us
it is required, that we cast not the memory of them carelessly and loosly behind
our backs, but keep in mind as near as we can, both our own debt, and his grace
which remitteth the same.

Wherefore to let pass Jewish confession, and to come unto them which hold
confession in the ear of the Priest commanded; yea, commanded in the nature of
a Sacrament, and thereby so necessary, that Sin without it cannot be pardoned;
let them find such a Commandment in holy Scripture, and we ask no more.

John the Baptist was an extraordinary person, his Birth, his Actions of Life,
his Office extraordinary,

It is therefore Recorded for the strangeness of the Act, but not set down as
an everlasting Law for the World; Mat. 3. 5.
That to him Jerusalem and all Judea made confession of their Sins: Besides, at
the time of this confession, their pretended Sacrament of Repentance, as they
grant, was not yet instituted, neither was it Sin after Baptism, which
Penitents did there confess; When that which befell the seven sons of Seeva, for
using the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in their conjurations, was notisied to
Jews and Grecians in Ephesus, Act. 19.18.
it brought an universal fear upon them, insomuch that diverse of them which had
believed before, but not obeyed the Laws of Christ, as they should have done,
being terrified by this example, came to the Apostle, and confessed their
wicked deeds.

Which good and virtuous act, no wise man, as I suppose, will disallow, but
commend highly in them, whom Gods good Spirit shall move to do the like when
need requires.

Yet neither has this example the force of any general Commandment, or Law to
make it necessary for every man, to pour into the ears of the Priest whatsoever
has been done amiss, or else to remain everlastingly culpable and guilty of
Sin; in a word, it proves Confession practiced as a virtuous act, but not
commanded as a Sacrament.

Now concerning St. James his Exhortation, Jam. 5. 15.
whether the former branch be considered, which says, Is any sick among you;
let him call for the Ancients of the Church, and let them make their prayers
for him; or the latter, which stirs up all Christian Men unto mutual
acknowledment of faults amongst themselves; Lay open your minds, make your
confessions one to another; is it not plain, Mat. 16. 1^.
that the one has relation to that gift of healing, which our Savior promised
his Church, saying, They shall lay their hands on the sick, and the sick shall
recover health? relation to that gift of healing, whereby the Apostle imposed
his hands on the Father of Publius, and made him miraculously a sound man;
relation finally to that gift of healing, Act. 18. 3.
which so long continued in practice after the Apostles times, that whereas the
Novatianists denied the power of the Church of God, in curing Sin after
Baptism, St. Ambrose asked them again, Amb. de p^em. l. 1. c. ^7.
Why it might not as well prevail with God for spiritual, as far corporal and
bodily health yea, wherefore (says he) do ye your selves lay hands on the
diseased and believe it to be a work of benediction or prayer, if happily the
sick person be restored to his former safety; And of the other member which
touches mutual confession, do not some of themselves, as namely Caje^an, deny,
that any other Confession is meant, then only that, which seeks either
association of Prayers, or reconciliation, or pardon of wrongs? is it not
confessed by the greatest part of their own retinue, An^o. Rhem. in Jac. 5.
that we cannot certainly affirm Sacramental Confession to have been meant or
spoken of in this place? Howbeit Bellarmine, delighted to run a course by
himself where colorable s^^ifts of wit will but make the way passable,
stands as formally for this place, and not less for that in St. John, than
for this: St. John says If we confess our Sins, God is faithful and just to
forgive our Sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; does St. John
say, John. 1. 19.
If we confess to the Priest, God is righteous to forgive; and if not, that our
Sins are unpardonable? No, but the titles of God just and righteous do import,
that he pardons Sin only for his promise sake; And there is not (they say)
any promise of forgiveness upon confession made to God without the Priest; Not
any promise, but with this condition, and yet this condition no where expressed.

Is it not strange that the Scripture speaking so much of Repentance, and of
the several duties which appertain thereunto, should ever mean, and no where
mention that one condition, without which all the rest is utterly of none
effect; or will they say, because our Savior has said to his Ministers, Whose
sins ye retain, etc. and because they can remit no more, than what the
offenders have confessed, that therefore by virtue of his promise, it stands
with the Righteousness of God, to take away no man's Sins, until by auricular
confession they be opened unto the Priest?

They are men that would seem to honor Antiquity, and none more to depend upon
the reverend judgment thereof. I dare boldly affirm, that for many hundred
years after Christ, the Fathers held no such opinion; they did not gather by
our Saviors words, any such necessity of seeking the Priests Absolution from
Sin, by secret and (as they now term it) sacramental confession: Public
confession they thought necessary by way of Discipline not private confession,
as in the nature of a Sacrament, necessary.

For to begin with the purest times it is unto them which read and judge
without partiality a thing most clear, that the ancient (...) or Confession,
defined by Tertullian to be a Discipline of humiliation, and submission,
framing men's behavior in such sort as may be fittest to move pity; the
confession which they use to speak of in the exercise of Repentance, was made
openly in the hearing of the whole both Ecclesiastical Consistory and Assembly.

This is the reason wherefore he perceiving, that diverse were better content
their sores should secretly fester, and eat inward, Pl^^o ^que hae (...).
then be laid so open to the eyes of many, blames greatly their unwise
bashfulness, and to reform the same, persuades with them saying, Amongst thy
brethren and fellow servants, which are partakers with thee of one and the same
nature, fear, joy, grief, sufferings (for us was common Lord and Father, we
have all received one spirit) why should thou not think with thy self, that
they are but thine own self? wherefore do thou avoid them, as likely to
insult over thee, whom thou know subject to the same haps? At that which
grieveth any one part, the whole body cannot rejoice, it must needs be that the
whole will labor and strive to help that wherewith a part of it self is
molested.

St. Cyprian being grieved with the dealings of them, who in time of
persecution had through fear betrayed their faith, and notwithstanding thought
by shift to avoid in that case the necessary Discipline of the Church, wrote
for their better instruction the book entitled De lapsis; a Treatise
concerning such as had openly forsaken their Religion, and yet were loath openly
to confess their fault, in such manner as they should have done: In which book
he compares with this sort of men, O^ nec^sitate in sacrineandi pecuris ^ pull
Magistra cem redimehanc ac^epta sermitath sta^aphs unellarus dice ^^thur.
certain others which had but a purpose only to have departed from the Faith;
and yet could not quiet their minds, till this very secret and hidden fault was
confessed, How much both greater in faith (says St. Cyprian) and also as
touching their fear, better, are those men, who although neither sacrifice, nor
libel could be objected against them, yet because they thought to have done
that which they should not, even this their intent they dolefully open unto
Gods Priests? They confess that whereof their conscience accuses them, the
burden that presses their minds they discover; they foreslow not of smaller
and slighter evils, to seek remedy: He says they declared their fault, not to
one only man in private, but revealed it to Gods Priests; they confessed it
before the whole Consistory of Gods Ministers.

Salvianus (for I willingly embrace their conjecture, who ascribe those
Homilies to him which have hitherto by common error past under the counterfeit
name of Eusebius Emesenus,) I say, Salvianus though coming long after Cyprian
in time, gives nevertheless the same evidence for his truth, in a case very
little different from that before alleged; his words are these, Hom. ^de
initio quadriges^^m^r.
Whereas (most dearly beloved) we see that penance oftentimes is sought and
sued for by holy souls, which even from their youth have bequeathed themselves
a precious treasure unto God, let us know that the inspiration of Gods good
Spirit moves them so to do for the benefit of his Church, and let such as are
wounded, learn to enquire for that remedy, whereunto the very soundest do thus
offer and obtrude as it were themselves, that if the virtuous do bewail^ small
offenses, the others cease not to lament great. And surely, when a man that
has less need, performs, sub oculis Ecclesiae, in the view, sight, and
beholding of the whole Church, an office worthy of his faith and compunction
for Sin, the good which others thereby reap is his own harvest, the heap of his
rewards grows by that which another gains, and through a kind of spiritual
usury from that amendment of life which others learn by him, there returns
lucre into his cossers.

The same Salvianus in another of his Homilies, Hom. 14. ^. 1 N^nach^s.
If faults happily be not great and grievous (for example, if a man have offended
in word, or in desire, worthy of reproof, if in the wantonness of his eye, or
the vanity of his heart) the stains of words and thoughts are by daily prayer
to be cleansed, and by private compunction to be scoured out: But if any man
examining inwardly his own Conscience, have committed some high and capital
offense, as if by hearing false witness, he have quelled and betrayed his
faith, and by rashness of perjury have violated the sacred name of Truth, if
with the mire of lustful uncleanness he have sullied the veil of Baptism, and
the gorgeous robe of Virginity; if by being the cause of any man's death, he
have been the death of the new man within himself, if by conference with
Southsayers, Wizards, Graviores and acriores, and publicaes, cuta^ requirunt.
Hom. 1. at Monach.
and Charmers, he has enthralled himself to Satan; These and such like
committed crimes, cannot thoroughly be taken away with ordinary, moderate, and
secret satisfaction; but greater causes do require greater and sharper
remedies, they need such remedies as are not only sharp, but solemn, open, and
public, Again, Let that soul (says he) answer me, which through pernicious
shame fastness it now so abasht to acknowledge his Sin in conspectu fratrum,
before his brethren, as he should have been abasht to commit the same, What
will be do in the presence of that Divine Tribunal where he is to stand
arraigned in the Assembly of a glorious and celestial host? I will hereunto
add but St. Ambrose's testimony: For the places which I might allege, are
more then the cause it self needs; There are many (says he) who, fearing the
judgment that is to come, and feeling inward remorse of conscience, when they
have offered themselves unto penitency, and are enjoined what they shall do,
give back for the only skar which they think that public supplication will put
them unto.

He speaks of them which sought voluntarily to be penanced; Lib. 2. de poe^.
cap. 9.
and yet withdrew themselves from open confession, which they that were
penitents for public crimes could not possibly have done, and therefore it
cannot be said, he means any other then secret Sinners in that place.
Gennadius a Presbyter of Marsiles in his book touching Ecclesiastical
assertions, makes but two kinds of confession necessary, the one in private to
God alone for smaller offenses; the other open, when crimes committed are
heinous and great, Although (says he) a man be bitten with conscience of Sin,
let his will be from thenceforward to Sin no more; let him before he
communicate, satisfy with tears and prayers, and then putting his trust in the
mercy of Almighty God (whose want is, to yield godly confession) let him boldly
receive the Sacrament. But I speak this of such as have not burdened
themselves with capital Sins. Them I exhort to satisfy, first by public
penance, that so being reconciled by the sentence of the Priest, they may
communicate safely with others. Thus still we hear of public confessions,
although the crimes themselves discovered were not public; we hear that the
cause of such confessions was not the openness, but the greatness of men's
offenses; finally, we hear that the same being now held by the Church of Rome
to be Sacramental, were the only penitential Confessions used in the Church
for a long time, and esteemed as necessary remedies against Sin.

Cypr. Epist. 12.
They which will find Auricular Confessions in St. Cyprian, therefore, must seek
out some other passage, Inspecta ^^^a. ^^^s qui agit poe^i ^^^tiam.
then that which Bellarmine alleges, Whereas in smaller faults which are not
committed against the Lord himself, there is a competent time assigned unto
Penitency; and that confession is made, after that observation and trial had
been bad of the Penitents behavior, neither may any communicate till the
Bishop and Clergy have laid their hands upon him; how much more ought all
things to be warily and stayedly observed, according to the Discipline of the
Lord, in these most grievous, and extreme crimes? S. Cyprians speech is against
rashness in admitting Idolaters to the holy Communion, before they had showed
sufficient Repentance, considering that other offenders were forced to stay out
their time, and that they made not their public confession, which was the last
act of Penitency, till their Life and Conversation had been seen into, not with
the eye of Auricular Scrutiny, but of Pastoral Observation, according to that
in the Council of Nice, where thirteen years, being set for the Penitency of
certain offenders; the severity of this Degree is mitigated with special
caution: Con. Nic par. a. c. 1. Profi^^^^ and conversatione Poenitentium n.
That in all such cases, the mind of the Penitent and the manner of his
Repentance is to be noted, that as many as with fear and tears, and meekness,
and the exercise of good works, declared themselves to be Converts indeed, and
not in outward appearance only, toward them the Bishop at his discretion might
use more lenity. If the Council of Nice suffice not, let Gratian the Founder of
the Canon Law expound Cyprian, who shows that the stine of time in Penitency,
is either to be abridged, or enlarged, as the Penitents Faith and behavior
shall give occasion; De poen. list. 1 cap. mensuram Ambor. de poen. lib. 2.c.
10.
I have easilier found out men (Says S. Ambrose) able to keep themselves free
from crimes, then conformable to the rules which in Penitency they should
observe. S. Gregory Bishop of Nisse complains and enveigheth bitterly against
them, who in the time of their Penitency, lived even as they had done always
before; Greg Niss erat In era qui slios ac^rbe fu licant.
Their countenance as cheerful, their attire is neat, their diet as costly, and
their sleep as secure as ever, their worldly business purposely followed, to
exile pensive thoughts for their minds, repentance pretended but indeed nothing
less express; These were the inspections of life, whereunto St. Cyprian
alludeth; as for Auricular Examinations he knew them not.

Were the Fathers then without use of private Confession as long as public was
in use? I affirm no such thing, The first and ancientest that mentions this
Confession, is Origin, by whom it may seem that men being loath to present
rashly themselves and their faults unto the view of the whole Church, thought
it best to unfold first their minds to some one special man of the Clergy,
which might either help them himself, or refer them to an higher Court if
need were; Orig. in Psalm. 37.
Be therefore circumspect (says Origin) in making choice of the party, to whom
thou meanest to confess thy Sin; know thy Physician before thou use him; If he
find thy malady, such as needs to be made public, that other may be the
better by it, and thy self sonner helped, his counsel must be obeyed. That which
moved sinners thus voluntarily to detect themselves both in private and in
public, was fear to receive with other Christian men, the mysteries of
heavenly grace, till Gods appointed Stewards and Ministers did judge them
worthy: It is in this respect that St. Ambrose finds fault with certain men,
which sought imposition of Penance, Amb. 1. 2. de poen. c. 9.
and were not willing to wait their time, but would be presently admitted
Communicants. S. n^n ram se solvere cupiunt quam Sac^rlot are ligare. Aug in
hom. de poen.
Such people (says he) do seek by so rash and preposterous desires, rather to
bring the Priest into bonds then to loose themselves: In this respect it is
that S. Augustine has likewise said, When the wound of Sin is so wide, and the
disease so far gone that the medicinable body and blood of our Lord may not be
touched, men are by the Bishops authority to sequester themselves from the
Altar, till such time as they have repented, and be after reconciled by the
same authority.

Furthermore, because the knowledge how to handle our own sores, is no vulgar
and common art, but we either carry toward our selves for the most part an
oversoft and gentle hand, fearful of touching too near the quick; or else,
endeavoring not to be partial, we fall into timorous scrupulosities, and
sometime into those extreme discomforts of mind, from which we hardly do ever
lift up our heads again, men thought it the safest way to disclose their secret
faults, and to crave imposition of Penance from them whom our Lord Jesus Christ
has left in his Church to be Spiritual and Ghostly Physicians, the Guides and
Pastors of redeemed Souls, whose Office does not only consist in general
persuasions unto amendment of life, but also, in the private particular cure of
diseased minds.

Howsoever the Novatianists presume to plead against the Church (says
Salvianus) that every man ought to be his own Penitentiary, and that it is a
part of our duty to exercise, but not of the Churches Authority to impose or
prescribe Repentance; the truth is otherwise, Him. de paen. Niniv.
the best and strongest of us may need in such cases, direction: What does the
Church in giving Penance, but show the remedies which Sin requires? or what do
we in receiving the same but fulfill her precept? what else but sue unto God
with tears, and salts, that his merciful ears may be opened? St. Augustines
exhortation is directly to the same purpose; Aug hom de poen. citatu a
Gra^dis^. 2.c. indlces. V praepolitis Sacrament orum accipiet satisfactionis
sue mosum.
Let every man whilst he has time judge himself, and change his life of his
own accord, and when this is resolved, Let him from the disposers of the holy
Sacraments, learn in what manner be is to pacify Gods displeasure: But the
greatest thing which made men forward and willing upon their knees to confess
whatsoever they had committed against God, and in no wise to be withheld from
the same, with any fear of disgrace, contempt, or obloquy, which might ensue,
was, their servent desire to be helped and assisted with the Prayers of Gods
Saints. Wherein, as St. James does exhort unto mutual confession, alleging
this only for a reason, Jam. 5. 25.
that just men's devout prayers are of great avail with God; so it has been
heretofore the use of Penitents for that intent to unburthen their minds, even
to private persons; and to crave their Prayers. Whereunto, Cassianus alluding,
counsels, Cassiq c^l.2. c. and. Greg. Niss oratione in ^os pui a^ios acerbe
iudicant.
That if men possessed with dullness of spirit be themselves unapt to do that
which is required, they should in meek affection seek health as the least by
good and virtuous men's prayers unto God for them. And to the same effect
Gregory Bishop of Nisse, Humble thy self, and take unto thee such of thy
brethren as are of one mind, and do bear kind affection toward thee, that they
may together mourn and labor for thy deliverance. Show me thy bitter and
abundant tears, that I may blend mine own with them.

But because of all men there is or should be none in that respect more fit for
troubled and distressed minds to repair unto, then Gods Ministers, he
proceeds further, Make the Priest, as a Father, partaker of thine affliction
and grief; be bold to impart unto him the things that are most secret, he will
have care both of thy safety, and of thy credit.

Confession (says Leo) is first to be offered to God, and then to the Priest,
as to one which makes supplication for the sins of Penitent offenders. Suppose
we, that men would ever have been easily drawn, Leo. 1. Ep. 73. ad Epis. Came.
pan eirat. a Grarale poen. d. 1. e. suffien.
much less of their own accord have come unto public Confession, whereby they
know they should sound the trumpet of their own disgrace; would they willingly
have done this, which naturally all men are loath to do, but for the singular
trust and confidence which they had in the public prayers of Gods Church?
Ambr. l. a. de poen c.10.
Let thy Mother the Church weep for thee (says Ambrose,) let her wash and
bathe thy faults with her tears: Our Lord does love that many should become
suppliant for one; In like sort long before him, Terral. de poea.
Tertullian, Some few assembled make a Church; and the Church is as Christ
himself; When thou do therefore put forth thy hands to the knees of thy
brethren, thou touchest Christ; it is Christ unto whom thou art a supplicant;
so when they pour one tears over them, it is even Christ that takes
compassion; Christ which prays when they pray: Neither can that easily be
denied, for which the Son is himself contented to become a suitor.

Whereas in these considerations therefore, voluntary Penitents, had been long
accustomed for great and grievous crimes, though secret, yet openly both to
repent and confess as the Canons of Ancient Discipline required; the Greek
Church first, and in process of time the Latin altered this order, judging it
sufficient and more convenient that such offenders should do Penance and make
confession in private only. The cause why the Latins did, Leo declares, Leo.
Ep. 28.
saying, Although the ripeness of faith be commendable, which for the fear of
God does not fear to incur shame before all men, yet because every ones crimes
are not such, that it can be free and safe for them to make publication of all
things, wherein repentance is necessary; let a custom, so unfit to be kept, be
abrogated, lest many forbear to use remedies of penitency, whilst they either
blush or are afraid to acquaint their enemies with those acts for which the
Laws may take hold upon them. Besides, it shall win the more Repentance, if the
Consciences of Sinners be not emptied into the peoples ears; And to this only
cause does Sozomen impure the change, which the Grecians made, by ordaining
throughout all Churches certain Penitentiaries to take the Confessions, and
appoint the Penances of secret offenders. Socrates, (for this also may be true
that more inducements then one, did set forward an alteration so generally
made) affirms the Grecians (and not unlikely) to have specially respected
therein the occasion, which the Novatianists took at the multititude of public
Penitents, to insult over the Discipline of the Church, against which they
still cried out, wheresoever they had time and place, He that shows Sinners
favor, does but teach the innocent to Sin: And therefore they themselves
admitted no man to their Communion upon any Repentance, which once was known to
have offended after Baptism, making Sinners thereby not the fewer, but the
closer, and the more obdurate, how fair soever their pretense might seem.

The Grecians Canon, for some one Presbyter in every Church to undertake the
charge of Penitency, and to receive their voluntary Confessions, which had
sinned after Baptism; continued in force for the space of above some hundred
years, till Nectarius, and the Bishops of Churches under him begun a second
alteration, abolishing even that Confession which their Penitentiaries took in
private. There came to the Penitentiary of the Church of Constantinople, a
certain Gentlewoman, and to him she made particular Confession of her faults
committed after Baptism, whom thereupon he advised to continue in Fasting and
Prayer, that as with tongue she had acknowledged her Sins, so there might
appear likewise in her some work worthy of Repentance: But the Gentlewoman
goes forward, and detecteth her self of a crime, whereby they were forced to
dis-robe an Ecclesiastical person, that is, to degrade a Deacon of the same
Church. When the matter by this mean came to public notice, the people were in
a kind of tumult offended, not only at that which was done, but much more,
because the Church should thereby endure open infamy and scorn. The Clergy was
perplexed and altogether doubtful what way to take, till one Eudemon born in
Alexandria, but at that time a Priest in the Church of Constantinople,
considering that the causes of voluntary Confession whether public or private,
was, especially to seek the Churches aid as has been before declared, lest men
should either not communicate with others, or wittingly hazard their Souls, if
so be they did communicate, and that the inconvenience which grew to the whole
Church was otherwise exceeding great, but especially grievous by means of so
manifold offensive detections, which must needs be continually more, as the
world did it self wax continually worse, for Antiquity together with the
gravity and severity thereof (says Sozomen) had already begun by little and
little to degenerate into loose and careless living, whereas before offenses
were less, partly through bashfulness in them which open their own faults, and
partly by means of their great austerity, which sat as judges in this
business; these things Eudaemon having weighed with himself, resolved easily
the mind of Nectarius, that the Penitentiaries office must be taken away, and
for participation in Gods holy mysteries every man be left to his own
Conscience, which was, as he thought, the only means to free the Church from
danger of Obloquie and Disgrace. Thus much (says Socrates) I am the bolder to
relate, because I received it from Eudaemons own mouth, to whom mine answer was
at that time; Whether your counsel, Sir, have been for the Churches good, or
otherwise, God knows. But I see, you have given occasion, whereby we shall
not now any more reprehend one another faults, nor observe that Apostolic
precept, which says, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
Darkness; but rather be ye also Reprovers of them. With Socrates, Sozomen both
agrees in the occasion of abolishing Penitentiaries; and moreover testifies
also, that in his time living with the younger Theodosius; the same Abolition
did still continue, and that the Bishops had in a manner every where followed
the example given them by Nectarius.

Wherefore to implead the truth of this History, Cardinal Baronius alledgeeth,
that Socrates, Sozomen, and Eudaemon were all Novatianists, and that they
falsify in saying, (for so they report) that as many as held the
Consubstantial Being of Christ, gave their assent to the abrogation of the
forehearsed Canon. The sum is, he would have it taken for a Fable, and the
World to be persuaded, Tanta haec Socrati restanti praestande est sides; quanta
caeteria herecide de suis dogmatibus tractandbus; quippe Novarianus, sectista
cum surrir, quam vere ac sincere haec scripscrit adversus poenitentiam in
Ecclesia administrari solleam. quemlihet credo posse facile judicare, Barwn. 1.
ann. Chr. 56.
that Nectarius did never any such thing. Why then should Socrates first, and
afterward Sozomen, publish it? To please their Pew-fellows, the Disciples of
Novatien. A poor gratification, and they very silly Friends, that would take
Lies for Good-turns: Sozomenum eandem prorsus causem sovisse certum est. Nee
Eudaemonen illum allium quom Novarianae sectae hominem sasse enlendum est.
ibidem.
For the more acceptable the Matter was, being deemed true, the less they must
needs (when they found the contrary) either credit, or affect him which had
deceived them. Notwithstanding, Sacerdos ille merito a Nectario est gradu amous
officioque depositus, quo sacto Novationi (ut mo^est haer eti little) quamcunque
licet levem, ur syncer is dogmatibus detrahant, accipete ausi occasionem, non
tantum Presbyterum Poenitenstarium in ordinem redaectum, sed and Poenitentiam
ipsam unu cum co suiffe proscripram, calumniose admodum coaclamarunt, cum tamem
illa potius Theacralis sieri interdum solits peccatorum so^ist abrogera. ibidem.
we know that joy and gladness rising from false information, do not only make
men so forward to believe that which they first hear, but also apt to scholie
upon it, and to report as true whatsoever they wish were true. But, so far is
Socrates from any such purpose, that the Fact of Nectarius, which others did
both like and follow, he does disallow and reprove. His speech to Eudemon
before set down, is proof sufficient that he writes nothing, but what was
famously known to all, and what himself did wish had been otherwise. As for
Sozomen his correspondency with Heretics; having showed to what end the Church
did first ordain Penitentiaries, he adds immediately, that Novatianists,
which had no care of Repentance, could have no need of this Office. Are these
the words of a Friend or Enemy? Besides, in the entrace of that whole
Narration: Not to sin (says he) at all, would require a Nature more divine
than ours is: But, God has commanded to pardon Sinners; yea, although they
transgress and offend often. Could there be any thing spoken more directly
opposite to the Doctrine of Novatian? Eudaemon was Presbyter under Nectarius.

To Novatianists the Emperor gave liberty of using their Religion quietly by
themselves, under a Bishop of their own, even within the City, for that they
stood with the Church in defense of the Catholic Faith against all other
Heretics besides. Had therefore Eudaemon favored their heresy; their Camps
were not pitched so far off, but he might at all times have found easy
access unto them. Is there any man that has lived with him, and has touched
him that way? if not, why suspect we him more than Nectarius? Their report
touching Grecian Catholic Bishops, who gave approbation to that which was
done, and did also the like themselves in their own Churches, we have no reason
to discredit without some manifest and clear evidence brought against it. For
of Catholic Bishops, no likelihood but that their greatest respect to
Nectarius, a man honored in those parts no less than the Bishop of Rome
himself in the Western Churches, brought them both easily and speedily unto
conformity with him, Arrians, Eunomians, Apollinarians, and the rest that stood
divided from the Church, held their Penitentiaries as before. Novatianists from
the beginning had never any, because their opinion touching Penitency, was
against the practice of the Church therein, and a cause why they severed
themselves from the Church; so that the very state of things, as they then
stood, gives great show of probability to his speech, who has affirmed, That
they only which held the Son consubstantial with the Father, and
Novatianists which joined with them in the same Opinion, had no Penitentiaries
in their Churches; the rest retained them. By this it appears therefore how
Baronius finding the Relation plain, that Nectarius did abolish even those
private secret Confessions which the People had been before accustomed to make
to him that was Penitentiary, labors what he may to discredit the Authors of
the Report, and to leave it imprinted in men's minds, that whereas Nectarius
did but abrogate public Confession, Novatianists have maliciously forged the
abolition of Private, as if the odds between these two were so great in the
balance of their Judgment, which equally hated or contemned both; or, as if
it were not more clear than light, that the first alteration which established
Penitentiaries, took away the burden of Public Confession in that kind of
Penitents; and therefore the second must either abrogate Private, or nothing.

Cardinal Bellarmine therefore finding that against the Writers of the History,
it is but in vain to stand upon so doubtful terms, and exceptions, endeavors
mightily to prove, even by their report, no other Confession taken away then
Public which Penitentiaries used in Private, to impose upon Public Offenders;
For why? It is (says he) very certain that the Name of Penitents in the
Fathers Writings signifies only Public Penitents; certain, that to hear the
Confessions of the rest now more than one could possibly have done; certain,
that Sozomen, to show how the Latin Church retained in his time what the Greek
had clean cast off, declares the whole Order of Public Penitency used in the
Church of Rome, but of Private he makes no mention. And, in these
Considerations, Bellarmine will have it the meaning both of Socrates and
Sozomen, that the former Episcopal Constitution, which first did erect
Penitentiaries, could not concern any other Offenders, than such as Publicly
had sinned after Baptism. That only they, were prohibited to come to the Holy
Communion, except they did first in secret confess all their Sins to the
Penitentiary, by his appointment openly acknowledge their open Crimes, and do
public Penance for them: That whereas before Novatian's uprising, no man was
constrainable to confess publicly any Sin, this Canon enforced Public
Offenders thereunto, till such time as Nectarius thought good to extinguish the
Practice thereof.

Let us examine therefore these subtle and fine Conjectures, whether they be
able to hold the touch, (...)
It seems good (says Socrates) to put down the office of these Priests which
had charge of Penitency; what charge that was, the kinds of Penitency then
usual must make manifest. There is often speech in the Fathers Writings, In
their Books frequent mention of Penitency; exercised within the Chambers of our
Heart, and seen of God, and not communicated to any other, the whole charge of
which Penitency is imposed of God, and does rest upon the Sinner himself. But
if Penitents in secret, being guilty of Crimes whereby they knew they had made
themselves unfit Guests for the Table of our Lord, did seek direction for their
better performance of that which should set them clear; it was in this case the
Penitentiaries Office to take their Confessions, to advise them the best way he
could for their Souls good, to admonish them, to counsel them, but not to lay
upon them more than private Penance. As for notorious wicked Persons, whose
Crimes were known, to convict, judge, and punish them, was the Office of the
Ecclesiastical Consistory; Penitentiaries had their Institution to another end:
But unless we imagine that the ancient time knew no other Repentance then
public, or that they had little occasion to speak of any other Repentance, or
else that in speaking thereof they used continually some other Name, and not
the name of Repentance whereby to express private Penitency, how stands it
with reason, that whenever they write of Penitents, it should be thought they
meant only Public Penitents? The truth is, they handle all three kinds, but
private and voluntary Repentance much oftener, as being of far more general
use, whereas Public was but incident unto few, and not oftener than once
incident unto any. Howbeit, because they do not distinguish one kind of
Penitency from another by difference of Names, our safest way for Construction,
is, to follow circumstance of Matter, which in this Narration will not yield it
self applyable only unto Public penance, do what they can, that would so
expound it.

They boldly and confidently affirm, That, no man being compellable to confess
publicly any Sin before Novatius time, the end of instituting Penitentiaries
afterward in the Church, was, that by them, men might be constrained unto
public Confession. Is there any Record in the World which does testify this
to be true? There is that testify the plain contrary; For Sozomen, declaring
purposely the cause of their Institution, says, That whereas men openly
craving Pardon at God's hands (for Public Confession, the last act of
Penitency, was always made in the form of a contrite Prayer unto God,) it
could not be avoided, but they must withal confess what their offenses were;
This, is the opinion of their Prelate, seemed, from the first beginning (as we
may probably think) to be somewhat burdensome, that men, whose Crimes were
unknown, should blaze their own Faults, as it were on the Stage, acquainting
all the People with whatsoever they had done amiss. And therefore to remedy
this Inconvenience, they laid the charge upon one only Priest, chosen out of
such as were of best Conversation, a silent and a discreet man, to whom they
which had offended might resort, and lay open their Lives. He, according to the
quality of every one's Transgressions, appointed what they should do or suffer,
and left them to execute it upon themselves. Can we wish a more direct and
evident testimony, that the Office here spoken of, was to ease voluntary
Penitents from the burden of public Confessions, and not to constrain
notorious Offenders thereunto? That such Offenders were not compellable to open
Confessions till Novatian's time, that is to say, till after the days of
Persecution under Decius the Emperor, they, of all men, should not so
peremptorily avouch; which whom, if Fabian Bishop of Rome, who suffered
Martyrdom in the first year of Decius, be of any authority and credit, it must
enforce them to reverse their Sentence; his words are so plain and clear
against them. Fab. Decret. Ep. 2. Tom. 1. Conc. p. 358.
For such as commit those Crimes, whereof the Apostle has said, They that do
them shall never inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, must (says he) be forced unto
amendment, because they slipp down to Hell, if Ecclesiastical Authority stay
them not. Their conceit of Impossibility that one man should suffice to take
the general charge of Penitency in such a Church as Constantinople, has risen
from a mere erroneous supposal, that the Ancient manner of private Confession
was like the Shrift at this day usual in the Church of Rome, which tyeth all
men at one certain time to make Confession, whereas Confession was then neither
looked for, till men did offer it, nor offered for the most part by any other,
than such as were guilty of heinous Transgressions, nor to them any time
appointed for that purpose. Finally, The drift which Sozomen had in relating
the Discipline of Rome, and the Form of public Penitency there retained even
till his time, is not to signify that only public Confession was abrogated
by Nectarius, but that the West or Latin Church held still one and the same
Order from the very beginning, and had not, as the Greek, first cut off public
voluntary Confession, by ordaining, and then private by removing
Penitentiaries. Wherefore, to conclude, It stands, I hope, very plain and
clear, first against the one Cardinal, that Nectarius did truly abrogate
Confession in such sort as the Ecclesiastical History has reported; and,
secondly, as clear against them both, that it was not public Confession only
which Nectarius did abolish.

The Paradox in maintenance whereof Hessels wrote purposely a Book touching
this Argument, Nec est quod sibi blandiantur illi de facto Nectarii cum id
potius secretorum peccatorum confessionem comprobet, and non aliud quam
Presbyterum panitentialem illo officio suo moverit, uti amplissirme deducit D.
Johannes Hasselus Paniel. in Cypr. lib. de anno^. 98. and in lib. Tertul. de
poen. annor. 1.
to show that Nectarius did but put the Penitentiary from his Office, and not
take away the Office it self, is repugnant to the whole advice which Eudaemon
gave, of leaving the People from that time forward to their own Consciences,
repugnant to the Conference between Socrates and Eudamon, wherein complaint is
made of some inconvenience, which the want of the Office would breed; Finally,
repugnant to that which the History declares concerning other Churches which
did as Nectarius had done before them, not in deposing the same man (for that
was impossible) but in removing the same Office out of their Churches, which
Nectarius had banished from his. For which cause, Bellarmin does well reject
the opinion of Hessels, howsoever it please Pamelius to admire it as a
wonderful happy Invention. But in sum, they are all gravelled, no one of them
able to go smoothly away, and to satisfy either others or himself, with his
own conceit concerning Nectarius.

Only in this they are stiff, that Auricular Confession Nectarius did not
abrogate, left if so much should be acknowledged, it might enforce them to
grant, that the Greek Church at that time held not Confession, as the Latin now
does, to be the part of a Sacrament instituted by our Savior Jesus Christ,
which therefore the Church till the Worlds end has no power to alter. Yet
seeing that as long as public voluntary Confession of private Crimes did
continue in either Church (as in the one it remained not much above 200. years,
in the other about 400.) the only acts of such Repentance were; first, the
Offender's intimation of those Crimes to some one Presbyter, for which
imposition of Penance was sought; Secondly, the undertaking of Penance imposed
by the Bishop; Thirdly, after the same performed and ended, open Confession to
God in the hearing of the whole Church; Whereupon, Fourthly, ensued the Prayer
of the Church; Fifthly, then the Bishop's imposition of hands; and so, Sixthly,
the Parties reconciliation or restitution to his former right in the holy
Sacrament. I would gladly know of them which make only private Confession a
part of their Sacrament of Penance, how it could be so in those times: For
where the Sacrament of Penance is ministered, they hold that Confession to be
Sacramental which he receives who must absolve; whereas during the
fore-rehearsed manner of Penance, it can no where be showed, that the Priest to
whom secret information was given, did reconcile, or absolve any: For, how
could he? when Public Confession was to go before Reconciliation, and
Reconciliation likewise in public thereupon to ensue ^ So, that if they did
account any Confession Sacramental, it was surely public, which is now
abolished in the Church of Rome; and as for that which the Church of Rome does
so esteem, the Ancient neither had it in such estimation, nor thought it to be
of so absolute necessity for the taking away of Sin: But, (for any thing that
I could ever observe out of them) although not only in Crimes open and
notorious, which made men unworthy and incapable of holy Mysteries, their
Discipline required, first public Penance, and then granted that which Saint
Hierona mentions, Sa^erdos impo^^ ma^^ ^ subjecto, redi un spiritus Sancti
lav^cit, arque ira cum qui maitus suerat Satane ^inrecima^ carnis, ut spiri us
salvus fierce indicta in p^npu um oratione, ahavi reconcillas. Hier ad^est.
Luci^. Amlr. de poen. l. 2. c. 10.
saying, The Priest lays his hand upon the Penitent, and by invocation
entreats that the holy Ghost may return to him again, and so after having
enjoined solemnly all the People to pray for him, reconcileth to the Altar him
who was delivered to Satan for the destruction of his Flesh, that his Spirit
might be safe in the day of the Lord. Although I say not only in such Offenses
being famously known to the World, but also if the same were committed
secretly, it was the custom of those times, both that private Intimation should
be given, and public Confession made thereof; in which respect whereas all men
did willingly the one, but would as willingly have withdrawn themselves from
the other, had they known how; Is it tolerable, (says Saint Ambrose) that to
sue to God thou should be ashamed, which blushest not to seek and sue unto
Man? should it grieve thee to be a Suppliant to him, from whom thou can not
possibly hide thy self; when to open thy sins to him, from whom, if thou
would, thou might conceal them, it does not any thing at all trouble thee?
This thou art loath to do in the Church, where, all being Sinners, nothing is
more opprobrious indeed than concealment of sin, the most humble the best
thought of, and the lowliest accounted the justest. All this notwithstanding,
we should do them very great wrong, to father any such Opinion upon them, as if
they did teach it a thing impossible for any Sinner to reconcile himself unto
God, without confession unto the Priest.

Would Chrysostom thus persuaded have said, Christ. hom. (...).
Let the enquiry and punishment of thy offenses be made in thine own thoughts,
Let the Tribunal whereat thou arraignest thy self be without witness, Let God,
and only God, see thee and thy Confession.

Would Cassianus so believing have given counsel, Cassian. Col. lat. 20. c. 1.
That if any were withheld with bashfulness from discovering their Faulis to
men, they should be so much the more instant and constant in opening them by
supplication to God himself, whose wont is to help without publication of men's
shame, and not to upbraid them when he pardons?

Finally, would Prosper settled in this Opinion have made it, Pro^per. de de
vira cont. mpl. l 2. c. 7.
as touching Reconciliation to God, a matter indifferent, Whether men of
Ecclesiastical Order did detect their crimes by confession, or leaving the
World ignorant thereof, would separate voluntarily themselves for a time from
the Altar; though not in affection, yet in execution of their Ministry, and so
bewail their corrupt life? Would he have willed them as he does, to make hold
of it, that the favor of God being either way recovered by fruits of forcible
repentance, they should not only receive whatsoever they had lost by sin, but
also after this their new enfranchisement, aspire to the endless joys of that
supernal City? To conclude, We every where find the use of Confession,
especially public, allowed of, and commended by the Fathers; but that extreme
and rigorous necessity of Auricular and private Confession, which is at this
day so mightily upheld by the Church of Rome, we find nor. First, it was not
then the Faith and Doctrine of God's Church, as of the Papacy at this present.
Secondly, That the only remedy for Sin after Baptism, is Sacramental
Penitency. Thirdly, That Confession in secret, is an essential part thereof.
Fourthly, That God himself cannot now forgive Sin without the Priest. That,
because Forgiveness at the hands of the Priest must arise from Confession in
the Offenders; Therefore to confess unto him, is a matter of such necessity,
as being not either in deed, or at the least in desire performed, excludes
utterly from all pardon, and must consequently in Scripture be commanded,
wheresoever any Promise or Forgiveness is made. No, no; these Opinions have
Youth in their countenance, Antiquity knew them not, it never thought nor
dreamed of them.

But to let pass the Papacy. For as much as Repentance does import alteration
within the mind of a sinful man, whereby, through the power of God's most
gracious and blessed Spirit, he sees, and with unfeigned sorrow acknowledges
former Offenses committed against God, has them in utter detestation, seeks
pardon for them in such sort as a Christian should do, and with a resolute
purpose settleth himself to avoid them, leading, as near as God shall assist
him, for ever after an unspotted life; And in the Order (which Christian
Religion has taught for procurement of God's mercy toward Sinners) Confession
is acknowledged a principal duty; Yea, in some cases, Confesion to man, not to
God only; Cal^. Inst l. 3. c. 4. sect. 7.
It is not in Reformed Churches denied by the Learneder sort of Divines, but
that even this Confession, cleared from all Errors, is both lawful and
behoveful for Gods people.

Confession by man being either Private or Public, Private Confession to the
Minister alone touching secret Crimes, or Absolution thereupon ensuing, as the
one, so the other is neither practiced by the French Discipline, nor used in
any of those Churches, which have been cast by the French mould. Open
Confession to be made in the face of the whole Congregation by notorious
Malefactors, they hold necessary; Howbeit not necessary toward the remission
of Sins: Sed^ant^n ut Ecclesiae in aliqua ratione satisfactum. etc omnes
unius poea^ntia confirmentur, qui suerant unius peccath and scandalis
vulnerati. Sadeel, in Psalm. 32. v. 5.
But only in some sort to content the Church, and that one man's repentance may
seem to strengthen many, which before have been weakened by one man's fall.

Saxonians and Bohemians in their Discipline constrain no man to open
Confession: Their Doctrine is, That whose Faults have been Public, and thereby
scandalous unto the World, such, when God gives them the Spirit of Repentance,
ought as solemnly to return, as they have openly gone astray. First, for the
better testimony of their own unfeigned Conversion unto God. Secondly, the more
to notify their Reconcilement unto the Church. And Lastly, that others may
make benefit of their Example.

Harm Con^ess. Sect. 8. ex. 5. cap. confess. Bohem.
But concerning Confession in private, the Churches of Germany, as well the rest
as Lutherans, agree, that all men should at certain times confess their
Offenses to God in the hearing of Gods Ministers, thereby to show how their
Sins displease them, to receive instruction for the warier carriage of
themselves hereafter, to be soundly resolved, if any scruple or snare of
Conscience do entangle their minds, and which is most material, to the end
that men may at Gods hands seek every one his own particular pardon, through
the power of those Keys, which the Minister of God using according to our
blessed Saviors Institution in that case, it is their part to accept the
benefit thereof, as Gods most merciful Ordinance for their good, and, without
any distrust or doubt, to embrace joyfully his Grace so given them, according
to the Word of our Lord, which has said, Whose Sins ye remit they are
remitted. So that grounding upon this assured Belief, they are to rest with
minds encouraged and persuaded concerning the forgiveness of all their Sins,
Cap. 5. Confess. Bohem.
as out of Christ's own Word and Power by the Ministry of the Keys.

It stands with us in the Church of England, as touching Public Confession,
thus:

First, seeing day by day we in our Church begin our Public Prayers to
Almighty God, with Public acknowledgement of our Sins, in which Confession
every man, prostrate as it were before his glorious Majesty, cries against
himself, and the Minister with one Sentence pronounces universally all clear,
whose acknowledgement so made has proceeded from a true penitent mind; What
reason is there, every man should not, under the general terms of Confession,
represent to himself his own Particulars whatsoever, and adjoining thereunto
that affection which a contrite spirit works, embrace to as full effect the
words of Divine Grace, as if the same were severally and particularly uttered
with addition of Prayers, imposition of hands, or all the Ceremonies and
Solemnities that might be used for the strengthening of men's affiance in God's
peculiar mercy toward them? Such Complements are helps to support our
Weakness, and not Causes that serve to procare or produce his Gifts, as David
speaks. The difference of general and particular Forms in Confession and
Absolution, is not so material, that any man's safety or ghostly good should
depend upon it. And for private Confession and Absolution, it stands thus
with us:

As for ^rivate Confession, Abuses and Errors set apart, we condemn it not, but
leave it at liberty. Jewel desen. part. 135.
The Minister's power to absolve is publicly taught and professed, the Church
not denied to have Authority either of abridging, or enlarging the use and
exercise of that Power; upon the People no such necessity imposed of opening
their Trangression unto men, as if Remission of Sins otherwise were
impossible, neither any such opinion had of the thing it self, as though it
were either unlawful or unprofitable, saving only for these inconveniences,
which the World has by experience observed in it heretofore. And in regard
thereof, the Church of England hitherto has thought it the safe way to refer
men's hidden Crimes unto God and themselves only; Howbeit, not without special
caution for the Admonition of such as come to the Holy Sacrament, and for the
comfort of such as are ready to depart the World. First, because there are but
few that consider how much that part of Divine Service, which consists in
partaking the Holy Eucharist, does import their Souls; what they lose by
neglect thereof, and what by devout Practice they might attain unto: therefore,
lest carelessness of general Confession should, as commonly it does, extinguish
all remorse of men's particular enormous Crimes, our Custom (whenever men
present themselves at the Lords Table) is, solemnly to give themselves fearful
Admonition, what woes are perpendicularly hanging over the heads of such as
dare adventure to put forth their unworthy hands to those admirable Mysteries
of Life, which have, by rare Examples, been proved Conduits of irremediable
Death to impenitent Receivers; whom therefore, as we repel being known, so
being not known we cannot but terrify. Yet, with us, the Ministers of God's
most Holy Word and Sacraments, being all put in trust with the custody and
dispensation of those Mysteries, wherein our Communion is, and has been ever,
accounted the highest Grace that men on earth are admitted unto; have therefore
all equally the same power to withold that sacred Mystical Food from
notorious Evil-Livers, from such as have any way wronged their Neighbors, and
from Parties, between whom there does open hatred and malice appear, till the
first sort have reformed their wicked Lives, the second recompensed them unto
whom they were injurious, and the last condescended unto some course of
Christian Reconciliation, whereupon their mutual accord may ensue. In which
cases for the first branch of wicked Life; and the last, which is open Enmity;
there can arise no great difficulty about the exercise of his Power: In the
second, concerning Wrongs, there may, if men shall presume to define or measure
Injuries, according to their own Conceits, depraved oftentimes, as well by
Error, as Partiality, and that no less to the Minister himself, then in
another of the People under him.

The knowledge therefore which he takes of Wrongs must rise, as it does in the
other two, not from his own Opinion, or Conscience, Nos a communione quenqu^m
prohibere non pessumus, quamvis hue prohibido ^o^d^m sic mortalis, sed
medicinalis, nisi aut sponte confessum, aut aliquo sive seculari, sive
Ecclesiastico j^dicio ^ccusatum ^^que convictum. Quis enim sibi utrumque audet
allumere, at cuiqu^m ipse sit ^e ^ccuintor le jude^.
but from the evidence of the Fact which is committed; Yea, from such evidence
as neither does admit Denial nor Defense. For if the Offender, having either
color of Law to uphold, or any other pretense, to excuse his own uncharitable
and wrongful Dealings, shall wilfully stand in defense thereof, it serves as
bar to the power of the Minister in this kind. Because (as it is observed by
men of very good Judgment in these Affairs) although in this sort our
separating of them be not to strike them with the mortal wound of
Excommunication, but to stay them rather from running desperately headlong
into their own harm; yet it is not in us, to sever from the Holy Communion,
but such as are either found culpable by their own Confession, or have been
convicted in some Public, Secular or Ecclesiastical Court. For, who is he,
that dares take upon him to be any man's both Accuser and Judge? Non enim
^emere, and quodanimo^o siber, sed propter judicium, ab Ecclesiae communione
separandi sune mali, ut A propter judicium anserri non possine, tolerantur
potido. velut palcae cum ruitice. Multi corrigantur, ut Petrus; mul^i
tolerantur, ut Judas; multi neseluntur, donce veni^t Dominus, se illuminable
obscondito renebrarun. Rhenan. admonit de dogmat. Tertul.
Evil Persons are not rashly, and (as we lift) to be thrust from Communion with
the Church: insomuch that if we cannot proceed against them by any orderly
course of Judgment, they rather are to be suffered for the time then molested.
Many there are reclaimed, as Peter; Many, as Judas known well enough, and yet
tolerated; Many which must remain un-deseryed till the day of appearance, by
whom the secret corners of Darkness shall be brought into open Light.

Leaving therefore unto his Judgment, them, whom we cannot stay from casting
their own Souls into so great hazard, we have in the other part of Penitential
Jurisdiction, in our Power and Authority to release Sin, joy on all sides,
without trouble or molestation unto any. And, if to give, be a thing more
blessed than to receive, are we not infinitely happyer in being authorized to
bestow the Treasure of God, than when Necessity does constrain to withdraw
the same?

They which, during Life and Health, are never destitute of ways to delude
Repentance, do notwithstanding oftentimes, when their last hour draws on,
both feel that sting, which before lay dead in them, and also thirst after such
helps as have been always, till then, unsavory; Saint Ambrose his
wordstouching late Repentance are somewhat hard, Lib. 3. de Poen.
If a man be penitent, and receive Absolution (which cannot in that case be
denied him) even at the very point of death, and so depart, I dare not affirm
he goes out of the world well; I will counsel no man to trust to this, because
I am loath to deceive any man, seeing I know not what to think of it. Shall I
Judge such a one a Castaway? Neither will I avouch him safe: All I am able to
say, is, Let his Estate be left to the will and pleasure of Almighty God: Will thou be therefore delivered of all doubt? Repent while yet thou art healthy and
strong: If thou defert it till time give no longer possibility of sinning, thou
can not be thought to have left Sin, but rather Sin to have forsaken
thee. Such admonitions may in their time and place be necessary, but in no wise
prejudicial to the generality of God's own high and heavenly promise,
Whenever a Sinner does repent from the bottom of his heart, I will put out
all his iniquity. And of this, although it have pleased God not to leave to the
world any multitude of Examples, lest the careless should too far presume,
yet one he has given, and that most memorable, to withhold from despair in the
mercies of God, at what instant so ever man's unfeigned conversion be wrought.
Yea, because to countervail the fault of delay, there are in the latest
Repentance oftentimes the surest tokens of sincere dealing; Therefore upon
special Confession made to the Minister of God, he presently absolveth in this
case the sick Party from all Sins by that Authority which Jesus Christ has
committed unto him, knowing that God respects not so much what time is spent,
as what truth is showed in Repentance.

In sum, when the Offense does stand only between God and Man's Conscience,
the Counsel is good, Non dico tibi, ut te prodas in publicum, neque ut te apud
abosaccuses, sed obedire se volo Prophetae dicenti, Revela Domino viam tuam.
Any Deum constere peccata rua; Pecca^a rua dicito ut en delean, Si confonderis
alie ^i dicere quae peceasti, dirito ea quetidie in anima: Non d^co ut
confiscaris conservo qui exp^^bici; Deo dicien qui ea curar; Non necesse est
praesenibus, ^^tibus confiteri, solus te Deus consirentem videat. ^ogo and oro
ut crebrius Deo immorrali confiteam^ni, and enumeratis vestrical^ lictis veniem
petatis. Non te in Theatrum conservoram duco, non hominibus pecu^a tue conor
deregers. Repete coram Deo consceuriam tuam, te explica, ostense medico.
praestantisimo vulcera tus, and pere ah co medicamentum, Chrysast, hom. 31. ad
Hebr. and in Psalm. 59. Hom. de poen, ^e confess. and horn. 5. de incara. Dei
natura, ho^mi ^remque de Lazaro.
which Saint Chrysostom gives, I wish thee not to bewray thy self publicly,
nor to accuse thy self before others, I wish thee to obey the Prophet who
says, Disclose thy way unto the Lord, confess thy sins before him; Tell thy
sins to him that he may blot them out. If thou be abashed to tell unto any
other, wherein thou have offended, rehearse them every day between thee and thy
Soul. I wish thee not to confess them to thy fellow servants, who may upbraid
thee with them; Tell them to God, who will cure them; There is no need for thee
in the presence of Witnesses to acknowledge them; Let God alone see thee at thy
Confession; I pray and beseech you, that you would more often than you do,
confess to God eternal, and reckoning up your Trespasses, desire his Pardon. I
carry you not into a Theater or open Court of many your Fellow Servants, I seek
not to detect your crimes before men; Disclose your Conscience before God,
unfold yourselves to him, lay forth your wounds before him the best Physician
that is, and desire of him salve for them. If hereupon it follow, as it did
with David, I thought, I will confess against my self my wickedness unto thee
O Lord, and thou forgavest me the plague of my Sin, we have our desire, and
there remains only thankfulness, accompanied with perpetuity of care to
avoid that, which being not avoided, we know we cannot remedy without new
perplexity and grief. Contrariwise, if peace with God do not follow the pains
we have taken in seeking afterit, if we continue disquieted, and not delivered
from anguish, mistrusting whether that we do be sufficient; it argues that our
Soar does exceed the power of our own skill, and that the wisdom of the Pastor
must bind up those parts, which being bruised, are not able to be recured of
themselves.

Of Satisfaction.
THere rests now Satisfaction only to be considered; A point which the
Fathers do often touch, albeit they never aspire to such Mysteries as the
Papacy has found enwrapped within the folds, and plaits thereof. And it is
happy for the Church of God that we have the Writings of the Fathers, to show
what their meaning was. The name of Satisfaction, as the Ancient Fathers meant
it, contains whatsoever a Penitent should do in the humbling himself unto
God, and testifying by deeds of Contrition, the same which Confession in words
pretends; He which by Repentance for Sins (says Tertullian, Tertul. de
Poenit.
speaking of fickle-minded-men) had a purpose to satisfy the Lord, will now,
by repenting his Repentance, make Satan satisfaction; and be so much more
hateful to God, as he is unto Gods enemy more acceptable. Is it not plain, that
Satisfaction does here include the whole work of Penitency, and that God is
Satisfied, when men are restored through Sin into favor by Repentance?
Chrysostom. in Cor. hom. 8 (...)
How can thou (says Chrysostom) move God to pity thee; when thou will not
seem as much as to know that thou have offended? By appeasing, pacifying, and
moving God to pity, Saint Chrysostom means the very same with the Latin
Fathers, when they speak of satisfying God. Cypr. Est 1. and Ep. 26 (...) dis.
16.
We feel (says Cyprian) the bitter smart of his rod and scourge, because there
is in us neither care to please him with our good deeds, nor to satisfy him
for our evil. Again, Let the eyes which have looked on Idols, sponge out their
unlawful acts with those sorrowful tears, which have power to satisfy God. The
Master of Sentences alleges out of Saint Augustine, that which is plain
enough to this purpose: Three things there are in perfect Penitency,
Compunction, Confession, and Satisfaction; that as we three ways offend God,
namely in Heart, Word, and Deed; so by three Duties we may satisfy God.

Satisfaction, as a part, comprehends only that which the Papists meant by
worthy of Repentance; and if we speak of the whole work of Repentance it self,
we may, in the phrase of Antiquity, term it very well Satisfaction.

Satisfaction is a work which Justice requires to be done for contentment of
Persons injured* Neither is it in the eye of Justice a sufficient satisfaction,
unless it fully equal the Injury for which we satisfy. Seeing then that sin
against God Eternal and Infinite, must needs be an infinite wrong: Justice, in
regard thereof, does necessarily exact an infinite recompense; or else inflict
upon the Offender infinite punishment. Now, because God was thus to be
satisfied; and man not able to make satisfaction, in such sort his unspeakable
love and inclination to save mankind from eternal death ordained in our behalf
a Mediator to do that which had been for any other impossible: Wherefore all
sin is remitted in the only faith of Christ's passion, and no man without
belief thereof justified; Bonavent. in Sentent. 4. did. 15. 9. 9. Faith alone
makes Christ's satisfaction ours, howbeit that Faith alone which after sin
makes us by Conversion his.

For in as much as God will have the benefit of Christ's satisfaction, both
thankfully acknowledged, and duly esteemed, of all such as enjoy the same, he
therefore imparteth so high a treasure unto no man, whose Faith has not made
him willing, by Repentance, to do even that which of it self, how unavailable
soever, yet being required, and accepted with God, we are, in Christ, thereby
made capable, and sit Vessels to receive the fruits of his Satisfaction: Yea,
we so far please and content God, that because when we have offended, he
looks but for Repentance at our hands; our Repentance, and the works thereof,
are therefore termed satisfactory, not for that so much is thereby done as the
Justice of God can exact, but because such actions of grief and humility in man
after sin, are illices divine misericordiae (as Tertullian speaks of them)
they draw that pity of God's toward us, wherein he is for Christ's sake
contented, upon our submission, to pardon our rebellion against him; and when
that little which his Law appoints is faithfully executed, it pleases him in
tender compassion and mercy to require no more.

Repentance is a name which notes the habit and operation of a certain grace,
or virtue in us: Satisfaction, the effect which it has, either with God or
man. And it is not in this respect said amiss, that Satisfaction imports
Acceptance, Reconciliation, and Amity; because that, through Satisfaction on
the one part made, and allowed on the other, they which before did reject are
now content to receive, they to be won again which were lost, and they to love
unto whom just cause of hatred was given. We satisfy therefore in doing that
which is sufficient to this effect; and they toward whom we do it are
satisfied, if they accept it as sufficient, and require no more: Otherwise we
satisfy not, although we do satisfy: For so between man and man it oftentimes
falls out, but between man and God, never; It is therefore true, that our
Lord Jesus Christ by one most precious and propitiatory Sacrifice, which was
his Body, a Gift of infinite worth, offered for the Sins of the whole World,
has thereby once reconciled us to God, purchased his general free pardon, and
turned Divine indignation from mankind. But we are not for that cause to
think, any office of Penitence, either needless or fruitless, on our own
behalf. For then would not God require any such Duties at our hands; Christ
does remain everlastingly a gracious Intercessour, even for every particular
Penitent. Let this assure us, that God, how highly soever displeased and
incensed with our Sins, is notwithstanding, for his sake, by our Tears,
pacified, taking that for Satisfaction, which is due by us, because Christ has
by his Satisfaction made it acceptable. For, as he is the High Priest of our
Salvation, Apoc. 1. 6.
so he has made us Priests likewise under him, to the end we might offer unto
God praise and thankfulness while we continue in the way of life; and when we
sin, the satisfactory or propitiatory sacrifice of a broken and a contrite
Heart. There is not any thing that we do that could pacify God, and clear us
in his sight from sin, if the goodness and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ were
not, whereas now beholding the poor offer of our religions endeavors, Casia.
Col. 20. c. ^.
meekly to submit our selves as often as we have offended, he regards with
infinite mercy those services which are as nothing, and with words of comfort
reviveth our afflicted minds, saying, It ^ I, even I that takes away thine
Iniquities for mine own sake. Thus does Repentance satisfy God, changing his
wrath and indignation unto mercy.

Anger and mercy are in us, Passions; but in him, not so.

Basil hom. in Psalm 37. (...) Cum Deus irascirur non ejus significatur
perturbatio qualis est in animo irascenris hominis sed ex humanis moribus
translato vocabulo, vindictae ejus, quae non nisi justa est, irae nomem ecepit.
Augustine. tom. 3. Ench. cap. 33. Poenitensiae compensacione redimeadam proponit
impunitarem Deus, Tertullian. de Poenitentia.
God (says Saint Basil) is no ways passionate, but because the punishments
which his judgment does inflict, are like effect of indignation severe and
grievous to such as suffer them, therefore we term the revenge which he takes
upon Sinners anger, and the withdrawing of his plagues, mercy. His wrath (says
St. Augustine) is not as ours, the trouble of a mind disturbed and disquieted
with things amiss, but a ralm, unpassionate, and just assignation of dreadful
punishment to be their portion which have disobeyed; his mercy a free
determination of all felicity and happiness unto men, except their sins remain
as a bar between it and them. So that when God does cease to be angry with
sinful men, when he receives them into favor, when he pardons their
offenses, and remembers their iniquities no more, (for all these signify but
one thing) it must needs follow, that all punishments before due is revenge of
sin, whether they be Temporal or Eternal, are remitted.

For how should God's indignation import only man's punishment, and yet some
punishment remain unto them toward whom there is now in God no indignation
remaining? God (says Tertullian) takes Penitency at men's hands; and men at
his, in lieu thereof, receive impunity; which notwithstanding does not
prejudice the chastisements which God, after pardon, has laid upon some
Offenders, as on Numb. 14. 21.
the people of Israel, on Numb. 10. 12.
Moses, on Number. 12 14.
Miriam, on 2 Samuel 1^. 14.
David, either for their own Cui Deus vese propitius est non solum consonat
peccara ne noceant ad suturum feculum, sed etiam caffigat, nesemper peccare
delicter. Aug. in Psalm. 58.
more sound amendment, or for Plectumur quidam que cereri corrigantur; exemple
sunt omalius, tormenta paucorum. Cypr. de lapsis. Ezech. 33 14. Romans 2. 5. Esaias
1. 1^.
example unto others in this present world (for in the World to come,
punishments have unto these intents no use, the dead being not in case to be
better by correction, nor to take warning by executions of God's Justice there
seen) but assuredly to whomsoever he remitteth sin, their very pardon is in
it self a full, absolute, and perfect discharge for revengeful punishment,
which God does now here threaten, but with purpose of revocation if men repent,
no where inflict but on them whom impenitency makes obdurate.

Of the one therefore it is said, Though I tell the wicked, Thou shall dye the
death, yet if he turns from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right,
he shall surely live and not dye. Of the other, Thou according to thine
hardness, and heart that will not repent, treasurest up to thy self wrath
against the day of wrath, and evident appearance of the judgment of God. If
God be satisfied and do pardon sin, our justification restored is as perfect
as it was at the first bestowed: For so the Prophet Isaiah witnesses, Though
your sins were as crimson, they shall be made as white as snow; though they
were as scarlet, they shall be as white as wool. And can we doubt concerning
the punishment of Revenge, which was due to sin, but that if God be satisfied
and have forgotten his wrath, it must be, even as Saint Augustine reasons,
Sitexit Deus peccato, noliutadverter^^ sinoluie alviriere, no^uit
animad-verrere. Aug. de pecomer. and ren^. lib. ^. cap. 34. Mirandum non est.
and mortem corporis non suisse eventurum homini, nui^ praecessiser precatum,
cujus tiam talis poe^e enasequeretur, and pest temissionem peccamrum eam
fidelibus evenire, ur ejua ^^inore vmcendo excerceretur fortitudo justitiae.
Sic de mortem corp. ^^ propter hoc peccarum Deus homini inflixer, and post
pessarorum remissionem propter exerc^ndam justiriam non ademit. An^c r
missicnem ess illa supplicia pecc^^orum pes^ remilsiorem autem certamina
exercitationesque justo^ um. Cypr. Epist. ^^.
What God has covered, he will not observe, and what he observes not, he will
not punish. The truth of which Doctrine is not to be shifted off by restraining
it unto eternal punishment alone: For then would not David have said, They are
blessed to whom God imputes not sin; Blessedness having no part or
fellowship at all with malediction: Whereas to be subject to Revenge for Sin,
although the punishment be but temporal, is to be under the curse of the Law,
wherefore, as one and the same Fire consumes Stubble and refineth Gold, so if
it please God to lay punishment on them whose sins he has forgiven; yet is
not this done for any destructive end of wasting and eating them out, as in
plagues inflicted upon the Impenitent, neither is the punishment of the one as
of the other proportioned by the greatness of sin past, but according to that
future purpose, whereunto the goodness of God refers it, and wherein there
is nothing meant to the Sufferer, but furtherance of all happiness, now in
grace, and hereafter in glory; Saint Augustine, to stop the mouths of Pelagians,
arguing, That if God had imposed death upon Adam, and Adam's posterity, as a
punishment of sin, death should have ceased when God procured Sinners their
pardon; Answers, first, It is no marvel, either that bodily death should not
have happened to the first man, unless he had first sinned, (death as punishment
following his sin) or that after sin is forgiven, death notwithstanding
befalls the Faithful; to the end that the strength of righteousness might be
exercised, by overcoming the fear thereof. So that justly God did inflict
bodily death on man for committing Sin, and yet after Sin forgiven, took it
not away, that his Righteousness might still have whereby to be exercised. He
fortifieth this with David's example, whose sin he forgave, and yet afflicted
him for exercise and trial of his humility. Briefly, a general axiom he has
for all such chastisements, Before forgiveness, they are the punishment of
Sinners; and after forgiveness, they are exercises and trials of Righteous men.
Which kind of proceeding is so agreeable with God's nature and man's comfort,
that it seems even injurious to both, if we should admit those surmised
reservations of temporal wrath, in God appeased toward reconciled Sinners. As
a Father he delights in his Childrens conversion, neither does he threaten the
Penitent with wrath, or them with punishment which already mourn; but by
promise assures such of indulgence and mercy, yea, even of plenary Pardon,
which takes away all, both Faults and Penalties: There being no reason, why we
should think him the less just, because he shows him thus merciful, when
they, which before were obstinate, labor to appease his wrath with the pensive
meditation of Contrition, the meek humility which Confession expresses, and
the deeds wherewith Repentance declares it self to be an amendment as well of
the rotten fruit, as the dried leaves, and withered root of the tree. For with
these duties by us performed, and presented unto God in Heaven by Jesus Christ,
whose blood is a continual sacrifice of propitiation for us, we content,
please, and satisfy God. Repentance therefore, even the sole virtue of
Repentance, without either purpose of shrift or desire of absolution from the
Priest; Repentance the secret Conversion of the heart, in that it consists of
these three, and does by these three pacify God; may be without hyperbolical
terms most truly magnified, as a recovery of the Soul of man from deadly
sickness, a restitution of glorious light to his darkened mind, a comfortable
reconciliation with God, aspiritual nativity, a rising from the dead, a
dayspring from out the depth of obscurity, a redemption from more than the
Egyptian thraldom, a grinding of the old Adam even into dust and powder, a
deliverance out of the prisons hell, a full restoration of the Seat of Grace,
and Throne of Glory, a triumph over Sin, and a saving Victory.

Amongst the works of Satisfaction, the most respected have been always these
three, Prayers, Fasts, and Alms-deeds; by Prayers, we lift up our Souls to him
from whom sin and iniquity has withdrawn them; by Fasting, we reduce the
body from thraldom under vain delights, and make it serviceable for parts of
virtuous conversation; by Alms, we dedicate to Charity those worldly Goods and
Possessions, which unrighteousness does neither get, nor bestow well: The
first, a token of piety intended toward God; the second, a pledge of
moderation and sobriety in the carriage of our own Persons; the last, a
testimony of our meaning to do good to all men. In which three, the Apostle, by
way of abridgement, comprehends whatsoever may appertain to sanctimony,
holiness, and good life: as contrariwise, the very mass of general corruption
throughout the world, what is it but only forgetfulness of God, carnal
pleasure, immoderate desire after worldly things, profaneness, licentiousness,
covetousness? All offices to Repentance have these two Properties; there is in
performance of them painfulnesse, and in their nature a contrariety unto
sin. 2. Cor. 7. 11. (...) Chrysostom. hom. 30. in Ep. ad. Heb. Cypr. de lapsi.
The one Consideration, causes them both in holy Scripture and elsewhere to be
termed Judgment or Revenges, taken voluntarily on our selves, and to be
furthermore also Preservatives from future Evils, in as much as we commonly use
to keep with the greater care that which with pain we have recovered. And they
are in the other respect contrary to sin committed: Contrition, contrary to
the pleasure; Confession, to the error, which is the mother of Sin: and to
the deeds of Sin, the works of Satisfaction contrary, therefore they are the
more effectual to cure the evil habit thereof: Hereunto it was that Saint
Cyprian referred his earnest and vehement Exhortation, That they which had
fallen, should be instant in Prayer, reject bodily Ornaments when once they had
stripped themselves out of Christ's Attire, abhor all Food after Satan's
morsels tasted, follow works of Righteousness, which wash away Sin; and be
plentiful in Alms-deeds, wherewith Souls are delivered from death. Not, as if
God did, according to the manner of corrupt Judges, take some money to abate so
much in the punishment of Malefactors. Salv. ad. Eccl. Coth. lib. 1.
These duties must be offered (says Salvianus) not in confidence to redeem or
buy out Sin, but as tokens of meek submission; neither are they with God
accepted, because of their value, but for the affections sake, which does
thereby show it self. Wherefore, concerning Satisfaction made to God by Christ
only, and of the manner how Repentance generally, particularly also, how
certain special works of Penitency, both are by the Fathers, in their ordinary
phrase of speech, called Satisfactory, and may be by us very well so
acknowledged, enough has been spoken.

Our offenses sometimes are of such nature as requires that particular men be
satisfied, or else Repentance to be utterly void, and of none effect. For, if
either through open repine, or crooked fraud; if through injurious, or
unconscionable dealing a man have wittingly wronged others to enrich himself;
the first thing evermore in his Case required (ability serving) is Restitution.
For let no man deceive himself, from such Offenses we are not discharged,
neither can be, till recompense and restitution to man, accompany the penitent
Confession we have made to Almighty God. Levit. 6. 2.
In which case, the Law of Moses was direct and plain: If any sin and commit
a Trespass against the Lord, and deny unto his Neighbor that which was given
him to keep, or that which was put unto him of trust; or does by robbery, or by
violence oppress his Neighbor; or has found that which was lost, and denies
it, and swears falsely: for any of these things that a man does wherein he
sins, he that does thus offend and trespass, shall restore the robbery that
he has taken, or the thing he has got by violence, or that which was
delivered him to keep, or the lost thing which he found; and for whatsoever he
has sworn falsely, adding perjury to injury, he shall both restore the whole
sum, and shall add thereunto a fifth part more, and deliver it unto him, unto
whom it belongs, the same day wherein he offers for his Trespass. Now,
because men are commonly over-slack to perform this Duty, and do therefore
deferr it sometime, till God have taken the Party wronged out of the World; the
Law providing that Trespassers might not under such pretense gain the
Restitution which they ought to make, appoints the Kindred surviving to
receive what the Dead should, if they had continued. Numb. 5 8.
But (says Moses) if the Party wronged have no Kinsman to whom this damage
may be restored, it shall then be rendered to the Lord himself for the Priest's
use. The whole order of proceeding herein, is in sundry traditional Writings
set down by their great Interpreters and Scribes, which taught them that a
Trespass between a man and his Neighbor, can never be forgiven till the
Offender have by Restitution made recompense for wrongs done; yea, they hold it
necessary that he appease the Party grieved by submitting himself unto him; or,
is that will not serve, by using the help and mediation of others, In this case
(say they) for any man to show himself unappeasable and cruel, were a sin
most grievous, considering that the people of God should be easy to relent, as
Joseph was toward his Brethren; Finally, if so it fall out that the death of
him which was injured, prevent his submission which did offend; let him then
(for so they determine that he ought) go accompanied with ten others unto the
Sepulcher of the Dead, and there make confession of the Fault, saying, Quamdiu
enim res propter quam peccatum est, non redditur. si reddi potest, non agitur
poenitentia sed singitur. Sent. 4. d. 15.
I have sinned against the Lord God of Israel, and against this man, to whom I
have done such or such injury; and if Money be due, let it be restored to his
Heirs, or in case he have none known, leave it with the house of Judgment.
That is to say, with the Senators, Ancients, and Guides of Israel. We hold not
Christian people tied unto Jewish Orders, for the manner of Restitution; but
surely, Restitution we must hold necessary as well in our own Repentance as
theirs, for Sins of wilful oppression and wrong.

Now, although it suffices, that the Offices wherewith we pacify God or
private men, be secretly done; yet in Cases where the Church must be also
satisfied; it was not to this end and purpose unnecessary, that the ancient
Discipline did farther require outward signs of Contrition to be showed,
Confession of Sins to be made openly, and those Works to be apparent which
served as Testimonies for Conversion before men. Wherein, if either Hypocrisy
did at any time delude their Judgment, they knew, Cypr. Ep.l. 50.
that God is he whom Maskes and Mockeryes cannot blind, that he which sees
men's hearts would judge them according unto his own evidence, and, as Lord,
correct the Sentence of his Servants, concerning matters beyond their reach;
Or, if such as ought to have kept the Rules of Canonical Satisfaction, would by
sinister means and practices undermine the same, obtruding presumptuously
themselves to the participation of Christ's most sacred Mysteries, before they
were orderly readmitted thereunto, the Church for contempt of holy things,
held them incapable of that Grace, which God in the Sacrament does impart to
devout Communicants; and no doubt but he himself did retain bound, whom the
Church in those cases refused to loose.

The Fathers, as may appear by sundry Decrees and Canons of the Primitive
Church, were (in matter specially of public Scandal) provident, that too much
facility of pardoning might not be showed. Basil. Ep. ad Amphi. c. 26.
He that casts off his lawful wife (says Saint Basil) and does take another,
it adjudged an Adulterer by the verdict of our Lord himself; and by our Fathers
it is Canonically ordained, that such for the space of a year shall mourn, for
two years space hear, three years be prostrate, the seventh year assemble with
the faithful in Prayer, and after that be admitted to communicate, if with
tears they bewail their fault.

Council. Ny^en. can. 11.
Of them which had fallen from their faith in the time of Emperor Licinius, and
were not thereunto forced by any extreme usage, the Nicene Synod, under
Constantine ordained, that earnestly repenting, they should continue three
years Hearers, seven years be prostrate, and two years communicate with the
people in prayer, before they came to receive the oblation. Which rigor
sometimes they tempered nevertheless with lenity, the self-same Synod having
likewise defined, That whatsoever the cause were, any man desirous at the time
of departure out of this life to receive the Eucharist, might (with examination
and trial) have it granted him by the Bishop. Yea, besides this case of special
commiseration, there is a Canon more large which gives always liberty to
abridge, or extend out the time, as the Parties meek, or sturdy, disposition
should require.

(...). Can. 13. (...), id est manifestis indiciis deprehensa peccatoris seria
conversione ad Deum. Can. 12.
By means of which Discipline, the Church having power to hold them many years
in suspense, there was bred in the minds of the Penitents, through long and
daily practice of submission, a contrary habit unto that which before had been
their ruin, and for ever afterward wariness not to fall into those snares,
out of which they knew they could not easily wind themselves. Notwithstanding,
because there was likewise hope, and possibility of shortning the time, this
made them in all the Parts and Offices of their Repentance the more fervent. In
the first station, while they only beheld others passing toward the Temple of
God, whereunto for themselves to approach it was not lawful, they stood as
miserable forlorn men, the very patterns of perplexity and woe. In the second,
when they had the favor to wait at the doors of God, where the sound of his
comfortable word might be heard, none received it with attention like to
theirs: Thirdly, being taken and admitted to the next degree of Prostrates, at
the feet, yet behind the back of that Angel representing God, whom the rest
saw face to face; their tears, and entreaties both of Pastor and People were
such as no man could resist. After the fourth step, which gave them liberty to
hear and pray with the rest of the People, being so near the haven, no
diligence was then flacked which might hasten admission to the Heavenly Table
of Christ, their last desire. It is not therefore a thing to be marvelled at,
though Saint Cyprian took it in very ill part, when open Back-sliders from the
faith and sacred Religion of Christ, labored by sinister practice to procure
from imprisoned Saints, those requests for present absolution, which the Church
could neither yield unto with safety of Discipline, nor in honor of Martyrdom
easily deny. For, what would thereby ensue, they needed not to conjecture, when
they saw how every man which came so commended to the Church by Letters,
thought that now he needed not to crave, but might challenge of duty his peace,
taking the matter very highly, if but any little forbearance, or small delay
was used. Jacens stantibus, and integris vulneratus, minatur. Ex. 12. 3. Jer.
7. 15. Ezech. 14. 14.
He which is overthrown (says Cyprian) menaceth them that stand, the wounded
them that were never touched; and because presently he has not the body of our
Lord, in his foul imbrued hands, nor the blood within his polluted lips, the
miscreant fumeth at God's Priests; Such is thy madness, O thou furious man,
thou art angry with him, which labors to turn away God's anger from thee;
him thou threatnest, which sueth unto God for grace, and mercy on thy behalf.

Touching Martyrs, he answers, That it ought not in this case to seem
offensive, though they were denied, seeing God himself did refuse to yield to
the piety of his own righteous Saints, making suit for obdurate Jews.

As for the Parties, in whose behalf such shifts were used, to have their
desire, was, in very truth, the way to make them the more guilty: Such peace
granted contrary to the rigor of the Gospel, contrary to the Law of our Lord
and God, does but under color of merciful relaxation deceive Sinners, and by
soft handling destroy them, a grace dangerous for the Giver; and to him which
receives it, nothing at all available. The patient expectation that brings
health, is, by this means, not regarded; recovery of soundness not sought for
by the only medicine available, which is Satisfaction Penitency thrown out of
men's hearts, the remembrance of that heaviest and last Judgment clean
banished; the wounds of dying men, which should be healed, are covered, the
stroke of death, which has gone as deep as any bowels are to receive it, is
over-cast with the slight show of a cloudy look. From the Altar of Satan to
the holy Table of the Lord, men are not afraid to come; even belching in a
manner the sacrificed morsels they have eaten, yea, their jaws yet breathing
out the irksome savor of their former contagious wickedness, they seize upon
the blessed body of our Lord, nothing terrified with that dreadful commination,
which says, 1 Cor. 11. 27.
Whosoever eats and drinks unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of
Christ. They vainly think it to be peace which is gotten before they be purged
of their faults, before their crime be solemnly confessed, before their
Conscience be cleared by the sacrifice and imposition of the Priest's hands,
and before they have pacified the indignation of God. Why term they that a
Favor, which is an Injury? Wherefore cloak they Impiety with the name of
charitable Indulgence? Such facility gives not, but rather takes away peace,
and is it self another fresh Persecution or trial, whereby that fraudulent
Enemy makes a secret havoc of such as before he had overthrown; and now, to
the end that he may clean swallow them, he casts Sorrow into a dead sleep,
puts Grief to silence, wipeth away the memory of Faults newly done,
smothereth the sighs that should rise from a contrite Spirit, dries up Eyes
which ought to send forth rivers of Tears, and permits not God to be
pacified withfull repentance, whom heinous and enormous crimes have displeased.

By this then we see, that, in Saint Cyprian's judgment, all Absolutions are
void, The end of Satisfaction.
frustrate, and of no effect, without sufficient Repentance first showed;
Whereas contrariwise, if true and full Satisfaction have gone before, the
sentence of man here given is ratified of God in Heaven, according to our
Saviors own sacred Testimony, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted.

By what works in the Virtue, and by what in the Discipline of Repentance, we
are said to satisfy either God or men, cannot now be thought obscure. As for
the Inventors of Sacramental Satisfaction, they have both altered the natural
order heretofore kept in the Church, by bringing in a strange preposterous
course, to absolve before Satisfaction be made, and moreover by this their
misordered practice, are grown into sundry errors concerning the end whereunto
it is referred.

They imagine, beyond all conceit of Antiquity, that when God does remit Sin,
and the punishment eternal thereunto belonging, he reserveth the torments of
hellfire to be nevertheless endured for a time, either shorter or longer,
according to the quality of men's Crimes. Yet so, that there is between God and
man, a certain Composition (as it were) or Contract, by virtue whereof works
assigned by the Priest to be done after Absolution shall satisfy God, as
touching the punishment, which he otherwise would inflict for sin, pardoned and
forgiven.

Now, because they cannot assure any man, that, The way of satisfying by others.
if he performs what the Priest appoints, it shall suffice; This (I say)
because they cannot do, in as much as the Priest has no power to determine or
define of equivalency between Sins and Satisfactions; And yet if a Penitent
depart this life, the debt of Satisfaction being either in whole or in part
un-discharged, they steadfastly hold, that the Soul must remain in unspeakable
torment till all be paid: Therefore, for help and mittigation in this Case,
they advise men to set certain Copes-mates on work, whose Prayers and
Sacrifices may satisfy God for such Souls as depart in debt. Hence have arisen
the infinite Pensions of their Priests, the building of so many Altars and
Tombs, the enriching of so many Churches with so many glorious costly Gifts,
the bequeathing of Lands, and ample Possessions to Religious Companies, even
with utter forgetfulness of Friends, Parents, Wife and Children, all natural
affection giving place unto that desire, which men, doubtful of their own
estate, have to deliver their Soals from torment after death.

Yet, behold even this being done, how far forth it shall avail, they are not
sure; And therefore the last upshot unto all their former Inventions, is, that
as every action of Christ, did both meant for himself, and satisfy partly for
the eternal, and partly for the temporal punishment, due unto men for sin; So
his Saints have obtained the like privilege of Grace, making every good work
they do, not only meritorious in their own behalf, but satisfactory too for the
benefit of others: Or if, having at any time grievously sinned, they do more to
satisfy God, then he in justice can exact, of look for at their hands; the
surplusage runs to a common stock, out of which treasury, containing
whatsoever Christ did by way of Satisfaction for temporal punishment, together
with the satisfactory force which resideth in all the virtuous works of Saints;
and in their Satisfactions whatsoever does abound, (I say) From hence they hold
God satisfied for such arrerages as men behind in account discharge not by
other means; and for disposition hereof, as it is their Doctrine, that Christ
remitteth not eternal death without the Priests Absolution, so, without the
grant of the Pope, they cannot but teach it a like unpossible, that Souls in
Hell should receive any temporal release of pain. The Sacrament of Pardon from
him being to this effect no less necessary, than the Priests Absolution to the
other. So that by this Postem-gate comes in the whole mark of Papal
Indulgences, a Gain unestimable to him, to others a Spoil, a scorn both to God
and Man. So many works of satisfaction pretended to be done by Christ, by
Saints, and Martyrs, so many virtuous acts possessed with satisfactory force
and virtue; so many supererogations in satisfying beyond the exigence of their
own necessity; And this that the Pope might make a Monopoly of all, turning all
to his own gain, or at least to the gain of those which are his own. Such
facilitle they have to convert a pretended Sacrament into a Revenue.

Of Absolution of Penitents.
SIn is not helped but by being assecured of Pardon: It rests therefore to be
considered what warrant we have concerning Forgiveness, when the Sentence of
man absolveth us from Sin committed against God. At the words of our Savior,
saying to the sick of the Palsy, Mat. 9 2. Mark. 5.22. Luc. 5. 25.
Son, thy Sins are forgiven-thee, Exception was taken by the Scribes, who
secretly reasoned against him, Is any able to forgive Sins, but only God?
Whereupon they condemned his speech as blasphemy; the rest which believed him
to be a Prophet sent from God, saw no cause wherefore he might not as lawfully
say, and as truly, to whomsoever amongst them, God has taken away thy Sins, as
Nathan (they all knew) had used the very like speech; to whom David did not
therefore impute blasphemy, but embraced, as became him, the words of truth,
with joy and reverence.

Now there is no Controversy, but, as God in that special Case did authorize
Nathan, so Christ more generally his Apostles, and the Ministers of his Word,
in his Name to absolve Sinners. Their power being equal, all the difference
between them can be but only in this, that whereas the one had prophetical
evidence, the other have the certainty, partly of Faith, and partly of Human
experience, whereupon to ground their Sentence; Faith, to assure them of God's
most graous Pardon in Heaven unto all Penitents, and touching the sincerity of
each particular Parties repentance as much, as outward sensible tokens or
signs can warrant.

It is not to be marvelled that so great a difference appears between the
Doctrine of Rome and Ours, when we teach Repentance. They imply in the Name of
Repentance much more than we do; We stand chiefly upon the due inward
Conversion of the Heart, They more upon Works of external show; We teach, above
all things, that Repentance which is one and the same from the beginning to the
World's end; They a Sacramental Penance, of their own devising and shaping: We
labor to instruct men in such sort, that every Soul which is wounded with sin,
may learn the way how to cure it self; They clean contrary would make all Soars
seem incurable, unless the Priests have a hand in them.

Touching the force of whose Absolution they strangely hold, Ipsus poenitentis
actio non est pars Sa. ^amenti, nisi quatenus potestati Sacentorali subjucitur,
and a Sacerdore dirig^ur vel jubetur. Bell, de Poen ^.1. c.16. Christus
instiruit Sacerdotes Judices super cerram cum es potestate, ut sine ipsorum
sententis, nemopest B^prismum lapsus reconciliari pessit. Bell. l.3. ^.1 De
Poenit. Quod si posset ii sine Sacerdutum ^ententia absolvi, non esset vera
Christi promissio. Quaecutque etc. Bellarm. Ibid.
that whatsoever the Penitent does, his Contrition, Confession, and
Satisfaction have no place of right to stand, as material parts in this
Sacrament, nor consequently any such force as to make them available for the
taking away of Sin, in that they proceed from the Penitent himself, without the
privity of the Minister, but only, as they are enjoined by the Minister's
Authority and Power. So that no contrition or grief of heart, till the Priest
exact it; no acknowledgement of Sins, but that which he does demand; no
Praying, no Fasting, no Alms, no Recompense or Restitution for whatsoever we
have done, can help, except by him, it be first imposed. It is the Chain of
their own Doctrine, No remedy for mortal sin committed after Baptism, but the
Sacrament of Penance only; No Sacrament of Penance, if either matter or form be
wanting; No ways to make those Duties a material part of the Sacrament, unless
we consider them, as required and exacted by the Priest. Our Lord and Savior,
they say, has ordained his Priests, Judges in such sort, that no man which
sins after Baptism, can be reconciled unto God, but by their Sentence. For
why? If there were any other way of Reconciliation, the very promise of Christ
should be false in saying, Whatsoever ye bind on Earth, shall be bound in
Heaven, and whose sins soever ye retain, are retained. Except therefore the
Priest be willing, God has by promise hampred himself so, that it is not now
in his own power to pardon any man. Let him which is offended crave as the
Publican did, Lord he thou merciful unto me a sinner; Let him, as David, make a
thousand times his supplication, Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy
loving kindness; according to the multitude of thy compassions, put away mine
iniquities. All this does not help till such time as the pleasure of the Priest
be known, till he have signed us a pardon, and given us, our quietus est. God
himself has no Answer to make but such as that of his Angel unto Lot, I can do
nothing.

It is true, that our Savior by these words, Whose Sins ye remit, they are
remitted, did ordain Judges over our sinful Souls, gave them Authority to
absolve from sin, and promise to ratify in Heaven whatsoever they should do on
Earth, in execution of this their Offices to the end that hereby, as well his
Ministers might take encouragement to do their Duty with all Faithfulness, as
also his People admonition, gladly, with all reverence, to be ordered by them;
both parts knowing that the Functions of the one toward the other have his
perpetual assistance and approbation. Howbeit all this, with two Restraints,
which every Jurisdiction in the World has; the one, that the practice thereof
proceed in due order; the other, that it do not extend it self beyond due
bounds, which bounds or limits have so confined penitential Jurisdiction, that,
although there be given unto it power of remitting sin, yet not such
Sovereignty of Power, that no sin should be pardonable in man without it: Thus
to enforce our Savior's words, is as though we should gather, that because,
Christus ordinarium suam parellarum in Apostolos translusit, ex^ran^linariam
sibi rese ravir.
Whatsoever Joseph did command in the Land of Egypt, Pharaoh's grant is, it
should be done; therefore, he grants that nothing should be done in the Land
of Egypt, but what Joseph did command, and so consequently, by enabling his
Servant Joseph, to command under him, disableth himself to command any thing
without Joseph.

But by this we see how the Papacy makes all Sin unpardonable, which has not
the Priests Absolution; except peradventure in some extraordinary case,
Ordinaria enim remedia in Ecclesia ad remittenda peccara sune ab eo institura,
Sacramenta: sine quibus peceara remittere Christus potest, sed extraordinari^
and musto rarius hoc facit, quam per Sacramenta. Noluit igitur eos
extraordinariis remissionis peccaterum considere, quae, and rara sunt and
incerta, sed ordinaria, ut ira di came, visibilia Sacramentorum quant ere
remedia. Maldon. in Mat. 16.19.
where albeit Absolution be not had, yet it must be desired.

What is then the force of Absolution? What is it which the act of Absolution
works in a sinful man? does it by any operation derived from it self alter
the state of the Soul? Does it really take away sin, or but ascertain us of
God's most gracious and merciful pardon? The latter of which two is our
assertion, the former theirs.

Mat. 9. 2. Mat. 2. 7. Luc. 5. 21.
At the words of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, saying unto the sick of the
Palsy, Son, thy sins are forgiven thee, the Pharisees which knew him not to be
Son of the living God, took secret exception, and fell to reasoning with
themselves against him: Cypr. de saps. c. 4. Clem. Alex. Paedag li. 1 (...).
Is any able to forgive Sin but God only? The Sins (says St. Cyprian) that are
committed against him, he alone has power to forgive, which took upon him our
sins, he which sorrowed and suffered for us, he whom the Father delivered unto
death for our offenses. Whereunto may be added that which Clemens Alexandrinus
has, Our Lord is profitable every way, every way beneficial, whether we
respect him as Man, or as God: as God forgiving, as Man instructing and
learning how to avoid Sin. Esa. 43. 25
For it is I, even I that puts away thine Iniquities for mine own sake, and
will not remember thy sins, says the Lord.

Veniam peccatis quae in ipsum commissa sunt solus potest Ille largiri, qui
peccara nostra potravir, qui pro nobis doluit, qoem Deus tralidir pro peccatis
nostris.
Now, albeit we willingly confess with Saint Cyprian, The Sins which are
committed against him, he only has power to forgive, who has taken upon him
our Sins, he which has sorrowed and suffered for us, he, whom God has given
for our Offenses. Yet neither did Saint Cyprian intend to deny the power of the
Minister, otherwise then if he presume beyond his Commission to remit Sin,
where God's own will is it should be retained; For, against such Ablutions he
speaks, (which being granted to whom they ought to have been denied, are of
no validity;) and, if rightly it be considered, how higher causes in operation
use to concur with inferior means, his Grace with our Ministry, God really
performing the same, which Man is authorized to act as in his Name, there shall
need for decision of this point no great labor.

To Remission of Sins, there are two things necessary; Grace, as the only cause
which takes away Iniquity, and Repentance as a Duty or Condition required in
us. To make Repentance such as it should be, what does God demand but inward
sincerity, joined with fit and convenient Offices for that purpose, the one
referred wholly to our own Consciences, the other best discerned by them whom
God has appointed Judges in this Court. Victor de persecut. Van. dal.
So that having first the promises of God for pardon generally unto all
Offenders penitent; and particularly for our own unfeigned meaning, the
unfallible testimony of a good Conscience, the sentence of God's appointed
Officer and Vicegerent to approve with unpartial Judgment the quality of that
we have done, and, as from his Tribunal in that respect; to assoil us of any
Crime: I see no cause but that by the Rules of our Faith and Religion we may
rest our selves very well assured touching God's most merciful Pardon and
Grace, who, especially for the strengthening of weak, timorous and fearful
minds, has so far endued his Church with Power to absolve Sinners. It
pleases God that men sometimes should, by missing this help, perceive how much
they stand bound to him for so precious a Benefit enjoyed. And surely, so long
as the World lived in any awe or fear of falling away from God, so dear were
his Ministers to the People, chiefly in this respect, that being through
tyranny, and persecution deprived of Pastors, the doleful rehearsal of their
lost felicities has not any one thing more eminent, than that Sinners distressed
should not now know, how or where to unlade their Burdens. Strange it were
unto me, that the Fathers, who so much every where extol the Grace of Jesus
Christ, in leaving unto his Church this Heavenly and Divine power, should as
men, whose simplicity had universally been abused, agree all to admire the
magnify and needless Office.

The Sentence therefore of Ministerial Absolution has two effects: touching
sin, it only declares us freed from the guiltiness thereof, and restored into
God's favor; but concerning right in Sacred and Divine Mysteries, whereof,
through Sin we were made unworthy, as the power of the Church did before
effectually bind and retain us from access unto them, so, upon our apparent
repentance, it truly restores our Liberty, loses and Chains wherewith we
were tied, remitteth all whatsoever is past, and accepts us no less returned
than if we never had gone astray.

For, in as much as the Power which our Savior gave to his Church, is of two
kinds; the one to be exercised over voluntary Penitents only, the other over
such as are to be brought to Amendment by Ecclesiastical Censures, the words
wherein he has given this Authority, must be so understood as the Subject or
Matter whereupon it works, will permit. It does not permit that in the former
kind, (that is to say, in the use of Power over voluntary Converts) to bind
or loose, remit or retain, should signify any other, than only to pronounce of
Sinners according to that which may be gathered by outward signs; because
really to effect the removal or continuance of Sin in the Soul of any
Offender, is no Priestly act, but a Work which far exceeds their Ability.
Contrariwise, in the latter kind of Spiritual Jurisdiction, which, by
Censures, constrains men to amend their Lives; It is is true, that the
Minister of God does then more declare and signify what God has wrought. And
this Power, true it is, that the Church has invested in it.

Howbeit, as other truths, so this has by error been oppugned and depraved,
through abuse. The first of Name, that openly in Writing withstood the Churches
Authority and Power to remit Sin, was Tertullian, after he had combined
himself with Montanists, drawn to the liking of their Heresy, through the very
sowreness of his own nature, which neither his incredible skill and knowledge
otherwise, nor the Doctrine of the Gospel it self, could but so much alter, as
to make him savor any thing, which carried with it the taste of lenity. A
Sponge steeped in Wormwood and Gall, a Man through too much severity
merciless, and neither able to endure, nor to be endured of any. His Book
entitled concerning Chastity, and written professedly against the Discipline
of the Church, has many fretful and angry Sentences, declaring a mind very
much offended with such as would not persuade themselves, that, of Sins, some
be pardonable by the Keys of the Church, some incapable of Forgiveness; That
middle and moderate Offenses having received chastisement, may, by Spiritual
Authority afterward be remitted: but, greater Transgressions must (as touching
Indulgence) be left to the only pleasure of Almighty God in the World to come:
That as Idolatry and Bloodshed, so likewise Fornication and sinful Lust, are of
this nature; that they, which so far have fallen from God, ought to continue
for ever after barred from access unto his Sanctuary, condemned to perpetual
profusion of Tears, deprived of all expectation and hope to receive any thing
at the Churches hands, but publication of their shame. Securitas delicti etiam
libido di cju^.
For, (says he) who will fear to waste out that which he hops he may
recover? Who will be careful for ever to hold that, which be knows cannot for
ever be withheld from him? He which slackneth the Bridle to sin, does thereby
give it even the spurr also. Take away fear, and that which presently
succeeds in stead thereof, is Licencious desire. Greater Offenses therefore
are punishable, but not pardonable by the Church. If any Prophet or Apostle be
found to have remitted such Transgressions, they did it, not by the ordinary
course of Discipline, but by extraordinary power. For they also raised the
Dead, which none but God is able to do; they restored the Impotent and Lame
men, a work peculiar to Jesus Christ; Yea, that which Christ would not do,
because executions of such severity beseemed not him, who came to save and
redeem the World by his sufferings, they, by their power, struck Elymas and
Ananias, the one blind, and the other dead. Approve first your selves to be,
as they were, Apostles or Prophets, and then take upon you to pardon all men.
But, if the Authority you have be only Ministerial, and no way Sovereign,
overreach not the limits which God has set you; know, that to pardon capital
Sin, is beyond your Commission.

Howbeit, as oftentimes the vices of wicked men do cause other their
commendable qualities to be abhorred, so the honor of great men's virtues is
easily a Cloak of their Errors: In which respect, Tertullian has past with
much less obloquy and reprehension than Novatian; who, broaching afterward the
same opinion, had not otherwise wherewith to countervail the Offense he gave,
and to procure it the like toleration. Novatian, at the first, a Stoical
Philosopher (which kind of men has always accounted Stupidity the highest
top of Wisdom, and Commiseration the deadlyest sin) became by Institution and
Study the very same which the other had been before through a secret natural
Distemper upon his Conversion to the Christian Faith, and recovery from
Sickness, which moved him to receive the Sacrament of Baptism in his Bed. The
Bishops, contrary to the Canons of the Church, would needs, Council. Nor caesar.
c. 12.
in special love toward him, ordain him Presbyter, which favor satisfied not
him, who thought himself worthy of greater Place and Dignity. He closed
therefore with a number of well-minded men, and not suspicious what his secret
purposes were, and having made them sure unto him by fraud, procures his own
Consecration to be their Bishop. His Prelacy now was able, as he thought, to
countenance what he intended to publish, and therefore his Letters went
presently abroad to sundry Churches, advising them never to admit to the
Fellowship of Holy Mysteryes, such as had, after Baptism, offered Sacrifice to
Idols.

Secrat. l.4. c. 23.
There was present at the Council of Nice, together with other Bishops, one
Acesius a Novatianist, touching whose diversity in opinion from the Church, the
Emperor desirous to hear some reason, Council. Nuen. c. 30. Secrat. l. 1. c. 7.
asked of him certain Questions: for Answer whereunto, Acesius weaveth out a
long History of things that happened in the Persecution under Decius; And of men,
which to savelife, forsook Faith. But in the end was a certain bitter Canon,
framed in their own School, That men which fall into deadly sin after holy
Baptism, ought never to be again admitted to the Communion of Divine Mysteries:
That they are to be exhorted unto Repentance; howbeit not to be put in hope
that Pardon can be bad at the Priest's hands; but with God, which has
Sovereign Power and Authority in himself to remit sins, it may be in the end
they shall find Mercy: These Followers of Novatian, which gave themselves the
Title of (...), Clean, pure and unspotted men, had one point of Montanism more
than their Master did profess; for amongst Sins unpardonable, they reckoned
second Marriages, of which opinion Tertullian making (as his usual manner was)
a salt Apology, Such is (says he) our stony hardness, that defaming our
Comforter with a kind of enormity in Discipline, we dam up the doors of the
Church, no less against twice-married men, then against Adulterers, and
Fornicators. Of this sort therefore it was ordained by the Nycene Synod, that,
if any such did return to the Catholic and Apostolic unity, they should in
Writing bind themselves to observe the Orders of the Church, and Communicate
as well with them, which had been often married, or had fallen in time of
Persecution, as with other sort of Christian people. But further to relate, or,
at all to refel the error of mis-believing men, concerning this point, is not
now to our present purpose greatly necessary.

The Church may receive no small detriment by corrupt practice, even there
where Doctrine concerning the substance of things practiced is free from any
great or dangerous corruption. If therefore that which the Papacy does in
matter of Confessions and Absolution, be offensive, if it palpably serve in the
use of the Keys, howsoever, that, which it teaches in general concerning the
Churches power to retain and forgive sins be admitted true, have they not on
the one side as much whereat to be abasht, as on the other wherein to rejoice?

They bind all men upon pain of everlasting condemnation and death, to make
Confessions to their Ghostly Fathers of every great offense they know, and can
remember that they have committed against God. Has Christ in his Gospel so
delivered the Doctrine of Repentance unto the World? Did his Apostles so preach
it to Nations? Have the Fathers so believed, or so taught? Surely Novatian was
not so merciless in depriving the Church of power to Absolve some certain
Offenders, as they in imposing upon all a necessity thus to confess. Novatian
would not deny but God might remit that which the Church could not, whereas in
the Papacy it is maintained, that what we conceal from men, God himself shall
never pardon. By which oversight, as they have here surcharged the World with
multitude, but much abated the weight of Confessions, so the careless manner of
their Absolution, has made Discipline, for the most part, amongst them a bare
Formality: Yea, rather a mean of emboldening unto vicious and wicked life, then
either any help to prevent future, or medicine to remedy present evils in the
Soul of man. The Fathers were slow, and always fearful to absolve any before
very manifest tokens given of a true Penitent and Contrite spirit. It was not
their custom to remit sin first, and then to impose works of satisfaction, as
the fashion of Rome is now, in so much that this their preposterous course, and
mis-ordered practices has bred also in them an error concerning the end and
purpose of these works. For against the guiltiness of sin, and the danger of
everlasting condemnation thereby incur^ed, Confession and Absolution succeeding
the same, are, as they take it, a remedy sufficient: and therefore what their
Penitentiaries do think to enjoin farther, whether it be a number of Ave-Maries
daily to be scored up, a Journey of Pilgrimage to be undertaken, some few
Dishes of ordinary Diet to be exchanged, Offerings to be made at the shrines of
Saints, or a little to be scraped off from Men's superfluities for relief of
poor People, all is in lieu or exchange with God, whose Justice,
notwithstanding our Pardon, yet owes us still some Temporal punishment, either
in this or in the life to come, except we quit it our selves here with works of
the former kind, and continued till the balance of God's most strict severity
shall find the pains we have taken equivalent with the plagues which we should
endure, or else the mercy of the Pope relieve us. And at this Postern-gate
comes in the whole Mart of Papal Indulgences so infinitely strewed, that the
pardon of Sin, which heretofore was obtained hardly, and by much suit, is,
with them become now almost impossible to be escaped.

To set down then the force of this Sentence in Absolving Penitents; There are
in Sin these three things: The Act which passes away and vanishes: The
Pollution wherewith it leaves the Soul defiled; In peccaro, cria sunt; actio
mala, interior moculo, and sequela. Bon. seut. l. ^. al. 17. q. 3. 1 John 3.4.
Mat. 15. 19.
And the Punishment whereunto they are made subject that have committed it. The
act of Sin, is every deed, word, and thought against the Law of God. For Sin
is the transgression of the Law, and although the deed it self do not continue,
yet is that bad quality permanent, whereby it makes the Soul unrighteous and
deformed in God's sight. From the Heart, come evil Cogitations, Murders,
Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, false Testimonies, Slanders; These are things
which defile a man. They do not only, as effects of impurity, argue the Nest no
be unclean, out of which they came, but as causes they strengthen that
disposition unto Wickedness, which brought them forth; They are both fruits and
seeds of uncleanness, they nourish the root out of which they grow, they breed
that iniquity, which bred them. The blot therefore of Sin abides, though the
act be transitory. And out of both arises a present debt, to endure what
punishment soever the evil which we have done deserves; an Obligation, in the
Chains whereof Sinners, by the Justice of Almighty God, continue bound till
Repentance loose them. Acts. 8. 23.
Repent this thy Wickedness (says Peter) unto Simon Magus, beseech God, that,
if it be possible, the thought of thine heart may be pardoned; for I see thou
art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of Iniquity. Prove. 5. 22.
In like manner Solomon: The Wicked shall be held fast in the cords of his own
sin.

Sacerdote opus Justifiae exerte^s in peccator^s cum eos just^ poena ligaor,
opus miserie^ediaecum de ea aliquod relaxant, vel Sacramentorum communioni
concilia^r; alia opera in peccatores exercere nequ^unt. ^^^r. l. 4. dis. 18.
Nor does God only bind Sinners hand and foot by the dreadful determination of
his own unsearchable Judgment against them; but sometime also the Church
binds by the Censures of her Discipline: So that when Offenders upon their
Repentance are, by the same Discipline, absolved, the Church loses but her
own Bonds, the Chains wherein she had tied them before.

Acts. 7. 60. Mich. 7. 19. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Tit. 3.^. Luc. 12. 5. Mat. 10. 28.
The act of Sin God alone remitteth in that his purpose is never to call it to
account, or to lay it unto men's charge; The stain he washes out by the
sanctifying Grace of his Spirit; And concerning the punishment of Sin, as
none else has power to cast Body and Soul into Hell fire, so none power to
deliver either besides him.

As for the Ministerial Sentence of private Absolution, it can be no more than
a Declaration what God has done; It has but the force of the Prophet Nathan's
Absolution, God has taken away thy Sin: Than which construction, especially of
words judicial, there is not any thing more vulgar. For example, 2 Samuel 12. 13.
Luc. 7. 17 Malach. 3.15.
the Publicans are said in the Gospel to have justified God, The Jews in
Malachi to have blessed Proud men, which sin and prosper; not that the one
did make God righteous, or the other the wicked happy: But to bless, to
Justify, and to Absolve, are as commonly used for words of Judgment, or
Declaration, as of true and real efficacy; Yea, even by the opinion of the
Master of Sentences; Sent. l. 4. li^. 12.
It may be soundly affirmed and thought that God alone does remit and retain
Sins, although he have given Power to the Church to do both; But he one way,
and the Church another. He only by himself forgiveth Sin, who cleanses the
Soul from inward blemish, and loses the Debt of Eternal death: So great a
Privilege he has not given unto his Priests, who notwithstanding are
authorized to loose and bind, that is to say, declare who are bound, and who
are loosed. For albeit a man be already cleared before God, yet he is not in
the Church of God so taken, but by the virtue of the Priests Sentence; who
likewise may be said to bind by imposing Satisfaction, and to loose by
admitting to the Holy Communion.

Hier. romans 6. comment. in 16. Man.
Saint Hierom also, whom the Master of the Sentences alleges for more
countenance of his own opinion, does no less plainly and directly affirm; That
as the Priests of the Law could only discern, and neither cause nor remove
Leprosies; So the Ministers of the Gospel, when they retain or remit Sin, do
but in the one judge how long we continue guilty, and in the other declare when
we are clear or free. For there is nothing more apparent, than that the
Discipline of Repentance, both Public and Private, was ordained as an outward
mean to bring men to the virtue of inward Conversion: So that when this by
manifest tokens did seem effected, Absolution ensuing (which could not make)
served only to declare men innocent.

But the cause wherefore they are so stiff, and have forsaken their own Master
in this point, is, for that they hold the private Discipline of Penitency to be
a Sacrament: Absolution an external sign in this Sacrament; the signs external
of all Sacraments in the New Testament, to be both causes of that which they
signify, and signs of that which they truly cause.

To this opinion concerning Sacraments, they are now tied by expounding a Canon
in the Florentine Council, according to the former Ecclesiastical invention
received from Thomas. For his device it was, that the mercy of God, which uses
Sacraments as Instruments whereby to work, indueth them at the time of their
Administration with supernatural force and ability to induce Grace into the
Souls of men; Even as the Axe and Saw does seem to bring Timber into that
fashion which the mind of the Artificer intends. His Conceit, Scot. sent.
l. 4. s^lui. ad. 4. quaest. and quintam. Occam in 1. qe q^ant. Alias. quaest.
1. in 4. sent.
Scotus, Occam, Petrus Alliacensis, with sundry others, do most earnestly and
strongly impugn, showing very good reason wherefore no Sacrament of the new Law
can either by virtue which it self has, or by force supernatural given it, be
properly a cause to work Grace; but Sacraments are therefore said to work or
conferr Grace, because the will of Almighty God is, although not to give them
such efficacy, yet himself to be present in the Ministry of the working that
effect, which proceeds wholly from him, without any real operation of theirs
such as can enter into men's Souls.

In which construction, seeing that our Books and Writings have made it known
to the World how we join with them, it seems very hard and injurious Dealing,
that Bellarmine throughout the whole course of his second Book Lutherani de hae
re interdum irascribunt, ut vilcantur a Catholic non dissentire; interdum
aurem aperissime sci ibunt contraris: at semper in eadem sententia maneut.
Sacraments non habere immediate il^am efficientiam respecta gratiae, sed esse
muda signa, ^amen mediore aliquid efficere quatemus excitant and alunt fidem,
quod ipsum non faciunt nisi repraesentando, ut Sacramenta per visum excitent
fidem, quemadmodum praedicatio Verbi per audirum. Bellar^. de Sacr. in genere.
l. 2. c. 2. Quaedam signa sunt Theories, non ad alium sinem instituta, quam ad
significandum; alia ad significandum and efficiendum, quae ali^^ Practica dici
possunt. Controrersia est inter nos and hare^eo^, quod illi faciant Sacramenta
signae prioris generis. Quare si ostendere poterimus esse signa posterioris
generis, obtinuianns ^causam, cap. 8.
De Sacramentis in genere, should so boldly face down his Adversaries, as if
their opinion were, that Sacraments are naked, empty, and ineffectual signs;
whererein there is no other force than only such, as in Pictures to stir up the
mind, that so by theory and speculation of things represented, Faith may grow,
Finally, That all the operations which Sacraments have, is a sensible and
divine Instruction. But had it pleased him, not to hud-wink his own knowledge,
I nothing doubt but he fully saw how to answer himself; it being a matter very
strange and incredible, that one which with so great diligence has winowed
S^mper memoria reperendum est Sacramenta nihil aliud quam instrumentales esse
conserendae nobis grain causas. Calv. in Ant. coa. ^ribl. sc. 7. c. 5. ^iqui
sine qui ^egent Sacramentis con^i^eri gratiam quam figurane, illos inprobu^tur,
ibid. can. ^.
his Adversarys Writings, should be ignorant of their minds. For, even as in
the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ, both God and Man, when his human nature is
by it self considered, we may not attribute that unto him, which we do and must
ascribe as often as respect is had unto both natures combined; so because in
Sacraments there are two things distinctly to be considered, the outward sign,
and the secret concurrence of Gods most blessed Spirit, in which respect our
Savior has taught that Water and the Holy Ghost are combined, to work the
mystery of new birth; Sacraments therefore, as signs, have only those effects
before mentioned: but of Sacraments, in that by God's own Will and Ordinance
they are signs assisted always with the power of the Holy Ghost, we
acknowledge whatsoever either the places of the Scripture, or the Authority of
Councels and Fathers, or the proofs and arguments of reason which he alleges,
can show to be wrought by them. The Elements and words have power of infallible
signification, for which they are called Seals of God's Truth; The Spirit
affixed unto those Elements and Words, power of operation within the Soul, most
admirable, divine, and impossible to be expressed. For so God has instituted and
ordained that, together with due administration and receipt of Sacramental
signs, there shall proceed from himself, Grace effectual, to Sanctify, to
Cure, to Comfort, and whatsoever else is for the good of the Souls of Men.
Howbeit this opinion Isle modus non transcendit ^ationem signi, cum Sacramentum
norae legis non solum sigficent, sed ca^isent gratiam. part. 3. q. 61. act. 1.
Alexan. part ^. q. 8. memb. 3. act. 15. 3. 1. and 1. Th^de vetir. q. 27. act.
3. Alliac. in quant. sent. 9. 1. Capt. in 4. d. 1. q. 1. Palud. ^^n. Perrar.
lib. 4. cont. Gent. c. 57. Necesse est pon^te aliquam virturem supernaturalem
in Sacramentis. Sers. 4. d. 1. q. 1. act. 4. Sacramentum consequirer
spiritualem virtutem cum benedictione Christi, and applicatione Ministri ad
usu^ Sacrament. par. 3. q. 62. art. 4. Council. Vistus Sacramentalis habet es^e
t^arsiens ex uno in aliud and incomple^um, Ibidem. Ex Sacramentis duo
consequntur in anima, unium est character. five aliquid ornarus; aliud, est
gratis. Respectu primo, Sacramenta sunt c^^tr aliquo modo efficientes, respecta
sc^undo, sunt dispan^ntes Sacramenta e^uiam dispositionem al form^m ultimam,
sed ultimam periectionem non inducunt. Sent. ^ ^l. 1. art. ^.
Thomas rejects, under pretense that it makes Sacramental Words and Elements
to be in themselves no more than signs, whereas they ought to be held, as
causes of that they signify. He therefore reformeth it with this addition,
that the very sensible parts of the Sacraments do Instrumentally effect and
produce, not Grace, (for the Schoolmen both of these times, and long after,
did, for the most part, maintain it untrue, and some of them unpossible, that
sanctifying Grace should efficiently proceed but from God alone, and that by
immediate creation, as the substance of the Soul does) but the fantasy which
Thomas had, was, that sensible things, through Christ's and the Priest's
Benediction, receive a certain supernatural transitory force, which leaves
behind it a kind of preparative quality or beauty within the Soul, whereupon
immediately from God does ensue the Grace that justifies.

Now they which pretend to follow Thomas, differ from him in two points: For
first, they make Grace an immediate effect of the outward sign, which he for
the dignity and excellency thereof was afraid to do. Secondly, Whereas he, to
produce but a preparative quality in the Soul, did imagine God to create in the
Instrument, a supernatural Gift, or hability; They confess, that nothing is
created, infused, or any way inherent, either in the Word, or in the Elements;
nothing that gives them Instrumental efficacy, but Gods mere motion, or
application. Are they able to explain unto us, or themselves to conceive, what
they mean when they thus speak? ^^lus Deus effie^t gratiam adeo quod nec
Angelis, qui sum n^^^liores sensibilim^ creaturis, hec emmunies, ^ur. Sent. 4.
d. 1. q. 1. art. 4. Ephesians. 3.
For example, let them teach us, in the Sacrament of Baptism, what it is for
Water to be moved, till it bring forth Grace. The application thereof by the
Minister is plain to sense; The force which it has in the mind, as a moral
instrument of Information, or Instruction, we know by reason: and by Faith, we
understand how God does assist it with his Spirit; Whereupon ensues the Grace
which Saint Cyprian did in himself observe, saying, After the bathe of
Regeneration, having scowred out the stained foulness of former life,
supernatural light had entrance into the Breast which was purified and cleansed
for it: After that a second nativity had made another man, by inward receipt of
the Spirit from Heaven; things doubtful began in mavelous manner to appear
certain, that to be open which lay hid, Darkness to shine like the clear
light, former hardness to be made facility, impossibility casinesse: Insomuch
as it might be discerned how that was earthly, which before had been carnally
bred and lived, given over unto Sins; That now God's own, which the Holy
Ghost did quicken.

Our Opinion is therefore plain unto every man's understanding. We take it for
a very good speech which Bonaventure has uttered in saying: Cir^n^um enim ne
dunt n^^is datu^ corporalibus si^^is ad laudeu^, sub^^a h^mus h^norem Causae
curanti and animae suscipienti.
Heed must be taken that while we assign too much to the bodily signs in way
of their Commendation, we withdraw not the honor which is due to the Cause
which works in them, and the Soul which receives them: Whereunto we
conformably teach, that the outward sign applied, has of it self no natural
efficacy toward Grace, neither does God put into it any supernatural inherent
Virtue: And, as I think, we thus far avouch no more than they themselves
confess to be very true.

If any thing displease them, it is because we add to these Premises another
assertion; That, with the outward sign, God joyneth his Holy Spirit; and so
the whole Instrument of God brings that to pass, whereunto the baser and
meaner part could not extend. As for operations through the motions of signs,
they are dark, intricate and obscure; perhaps possible, howbeit, not proved
either true or likely, by alleging that the touch of our Savior's Garment
restored Health, Clay Sight when he applied it. Although ten thousand such
Examples should be brought, they overthrow not this one Principle; That, where
the Instrument is without inherent, the Effect must necessarily proceed from
the only Agents adherent power. ^^l. 18. Io. 9.


It passes a man's conceit how water should be carried into the Soul with any
force of Divine motion, or Grace proceed but merely from the influence of God's
Spirit: Notwithstanding, if God himself teach his Church in this case to
believe that which he has not given us capacity to comprehend, Bell. de Sacr.
in genesis l. 2. c. 1.
how incredible soever it may seem, yet our Wits should submit themselves, and
Reason give place unto Faith therein. But they yield it, to be no question of
Faith, how Grace does proceed from Sacraments; if in general they be
acknowledged true instrumental Causes, Dicimus grati^m nan ^reari a ^eo, sed
produci c^ api^u ^ine and poten^ia natural animae, sicut ca^er e^atia quae
pen^^ca ^ur in s^^j^ct ^ talibus quae ^uet apra n^ra ad sa cip endium acridem
^^. Allen de Sacr. in genesis c. 37.
by the Ministry whereof men receive Divine Grace: And that they which impute
Grace to the only operation of God himself, concurring with the external sign,
do no less acknowledge the true efficacy of the Sacrament, then they that
ascribe the same to the quality of the sign applied, or to the motion of God
applying, and so far carrying it, till Grace be not created but extracted, out
of the natural possibility of the Soul. Nevertheless this last Philosophical
imagination (if I may call it Philosophical, which uses the terms, but
overthrows the rules of Philosophy, and has no Article of Faith to support
it; but whatsoever it be) they follow it in a manner all, they cast off the
first opinion, wherein is most perspicuity and strongest evidence of certain
truth.

The Council of Florence and Trent defining, that Sacraments contain and
conferr Grace, the sense whereof (if it liked them) might so easily conform it
self with the same opinion which they drew without any just cause quite and
clean the other way, making Grace the issue of bare words, in such Sacraments
as they have framed destitute of any visible Element, and holding it the
offspring as well of Elements as of Words, in those Sacraments where both are;
but in no Sacrament acknowledging Grace to be the fruit of the Holy Ghost
working with the outward sign, and not by it, in such sort, as Thomas himself
teaches; Tho. de Verit. q. 27. art. 3. resp. ad 16. Acts 8. 18.
That the Apostles Imposition of Hands caused not the coming of the Holy
Ghost, which notwithstanding was bestowed together with the exercise of that
Ceremony; Yea, by it, (says the Evangelist) to wit, as by a mean, which came
between the true Agent and the Effect, but not otherwise.

Many of the Ancient Fathers, presupposing that the Faithful before Christ had
not till the time of his coming, that perfect Life and Salvation which they
looked for, and we possess, thought likewise their Sacraments to be but
prefigurations of that which ours, in present, do exhibit: For which cause the
Florentine Council, comparing the one with the other, says, That the old did
only shadow Grace, which was afterward to be given through the passion of
Jesus Christ. Quod ad circumcisionem sequebatur remissio, siebat ratione rei
adjunctae, and ratione pacti divini, eodem plane modo quo non solum haeretici,
sed etiam aliquot verustieres Scholastici voluerunt nova Sacramenta confer
gratiam. Allr de Sacr. in genesis c. 39. Bonaventura, Scotus, Durandes, Richardus,
Occamus, Marcillus, Gabriel, volunt solum ^cum producere gratiam ad praesentiam
Sacramentorum. Bellarm. de Sacr. in genesis lib. 2. cap. 11. Purol nge probatiotem
and tntiorem sententiam quae dat Sacramentis veram efficientiam. Primo, quia
dectores passim docent. Sacramenta nor agere nisi prius a Deo virtutem
seubenedictionem seu sanctificationem accipiant, and reserunt, effectum
Sacramentorum ad omnipotentiam Dei. and conserunt cum veris causis
efficientibus. Secundo, quia non esset. diffe entia inter modum agendi
Sacramentorum, and signorum Magicorum. (...), quia tunc nonesset homo. Dei
Minister, in ipia action Sacramenti, sed ho nu praeberet signum actionesua,
and Deus sua action viso eo signo infunderet grat^^n, ^t e^^^ unus oftendisua
syngrapham Mercatoci, and ille dat pecunias. At Scriturae docent, quod Dews
baptizae per hominem. Bellarm lib. 2. cap. 1^.
But the after-wit of latter days has found out another more exquisite
distinction. That Evangelical Sacraments are causes to effect Grace, through
motions of signs legal, according to the same signification and sense wherein
Evangelical Sacraments are held by us to be God's Instruments for that purpose.
For howsoever Bellarmine has shrunk up the Lutherans sinews, and cut off our
Doctrine by the skirts; Allen, although he terms us Heretics, according to the
usual bitter venom of his first style, does yet ingenuously confess, That the
old. School-mens Doctrine and ours is one concerning Sacramental efficacy,
derived from God himself assisting by promise those outward signs of Elements
and Words, out of which their Schoolmen of the newer mint, are so desirous to
hatch Grace. Where God does work and use these outward means, wherein he
neither finds nor planteth force and aptness toward his intended purpose;
such means are but signs to bring men to the consideration of his Omnipotent
Power, which, without the use of things sensible, would not be marked.

At the time therefore when he gives his Heavenly Grace, he applies, by the
hands of his Ministers, that which betokens the same; nor only betokens,
but, being also accompanied for ever with such Power as does truly work, is in
that respect, termed God's Instrument, a true efficient cause of Grace; a cause
not in it self, but only by connection of that which is in it self a cause,
namely, God's own Strength and Power. Sacraments, that is to say, the outward
signs in Sacraments, work nothing till they be blessed and sanctified by God.

But what is God's Heavenly Benediction and Sanctification, saving only the
association of his Spirit? Shall we say that Sacraments are like Magical
signs, if thus they have their effect? Is it Magic for God to manifest by
things sensible what he does, and to do by his most glorious Spirit really,
what he manifests in his Sacraments? The delivery and administration whereof,
remains in the hands of mortal men, by whom, as by personal Instruments, God
does apply signs, and with signs inseparably join his Spirit, and through the
power of his Spirit work Grace. The first is by way of concomitance and
consequence to deliver the rest also that either accompany, or ensue.

It is not here, as in Cases of mutual Commerce, where diverse Persons have
diverse acts to be performed in their own behalf; a Creditor to show his Bill,
and a Debtor to pay his Money. But God and Man do here meet in one Action upon
a Third, in whom, as it is the work of God to create Grace, so it is his work
by the hand of the Ministry to apply a sign which should betoken, and his work
to annex that Spirit which shall effect it. The Action therefore is but one,
God the Author thereof, and Man a Co-partner, by him assigned to work for,
with, and under him. God the Giver of Grace, by the outward Ministry of man,
so far forth as he authorizeth man to apply the Sacraments of Grace in the
Soul, which he alone works, without either Instrument or Co-agent.

Whereas therefore with us the remission of Sin is ascribed unto God, as a
thing which proceeds from him only, and presently follows upon the virtue
of true Repentance appearing in man; that which we attribute to the virtue,
they do not only impute to the Sacrament of Repentance; but, having made
Repentance a Sacrament, and thinking of Sacraments as they do, they are
enforced to make the Ministry of the Priests, and their Absolution a cause of
that which the sole Omnipotency of God works.

And yet for my own part, I am not able well to conceive how their Doctrine,
That human Absolution is really a cause out of which our Deliverance from Sin
does ensue, Corc. T^id. Sess. 14. c. 4.
can cleave with the Council of Trent, defining, That Contrition perfected with
Charity does at all times it self reconcile offenders to God, before they come
to receive actually the Sacrament of Penance. How it can stand with those
Discourses of the learned Rabbis, which grant, B^llarm de Poenit l. 2. c. 13.
That whosoever turns unto God with his whole heart, has immediately his
Sins taken away; That if a man he truly converted, his Pardon can neither be
denied nor delayed; It does not stay for the Priest's Absolution, but presently
follows: Surely, if every contrite Sinner, in whom there is Charity, and a
sincere conversion of Heart, have Remission of Sins given him, before he seek
it at the Priest's hands; if reconciliation to God be a present and immediate
sequel upon every such Conversion or Change: It must of necessity follow,
seeing no man can be a true Penitent or Contrite, which does not both love God,
and sincerely abhor Sin, that therefore they all before Absolution attain
Forgiveness; whereunto notwithstanding Absolution is pretended a Cause so
necessary, that Sin, without it, except in some rare extraordinary Case,
cannot possibly be remitted. Shall Absolution be a Cause producing and working
that Effect, which is always brought forth without it, and had, before
Absolution be thought of? But when they which are thus beforehand pardoned of
God, shall come to be also assoiled by the Priest, I would know what force his
Absolution has in this case? Are they able to say here that the Priest does
remit any thing? Yet, when any of ours ascribes the Work of Remission to God,
and interprets the Priests Sentence to be but a solemn Declaration of that
which God himself has already performed, they scorn at it; they urge against
it, that, if this were true, our Savior Christ should rather have said, What
is loosed in Heaven, ye shall loose on Earth, then as he does, Whatsoever ye
loose on Earth, shall in Heaven be loosed. As if he were to learn of us how to
place his words, and not we to crave rather of him a sound and right
understanding, lest to his dishonor and our own hurt we mis-expound them. It
suffices, I think, both against their constructions to have proved that they
ground an untruth on his speech; and, in behalf of our own, that his words
without any such transposition, do very well admit the sense we give them;
which is, that he takes to himself the lawful proceedings of Authority in his
Name, and that the Act of Spiritual Authority in this case, Ha^c expositio, ego
re ^lai^^vo, id est. Absolutum ostendo partim quidem vera est, non tamen
perfecta. Sacramenta quippe nova legis non iclum significant, sed. efficient
quod significant. Soto. sent. l. 4. did. 14. q. 1. art. 3.
is by Sentence to acquit or pronounce them free from sin, whom they judge to
be sincerely and truly penitent; which Interpretation they themselves do
acknowledge, though not sufficient, yet very true.

Absolution, they say, declares indeed; but this is not all, for it likewise
makes innocent; which addition, being an untruth proved, our truth granted,
has, I hope, sufficiency without it; and consequently our opinion therein,
neither to be challenged as untrue, nor as unsufficient.

To rid themselves out of these Briars, and to make Remission of Sins an
effect of Absolution, notwithstanding that which hitherto has been said, they
have two shifts: At first, that in many Penitents, there is but Attrition of
heart, which Attrition they define to be Grief proceeding from Fear without
Love; and to these, they say, Atritio solum dicit dolorem propter poenas
inferni; dum quis accedit attritus per gratiam Sacramentalem, sit contritus.
Soto. sent. 4. did. 14. q. 1. art. 1.
Absolution does give that Contrition whereby men are really purged from Sin.
Secondly, that even where Contrition or Inward Repentance does cleanse without
Absolution; the reason why it comes so to pass, is, Dum accedit vere
contri^us propter Deum, illa etiam contritio non est contritio, nisi quarenits
prius natura informetur gratia per Sacramentum in voto. Soto, sent. 4. did.
14. q. 1. art. 1.
Because such Contrites intend and desire Absolution, though they have it not.
Which two things granted: The one, that Absolution given, makes them contrite
that are not; the other, even in them which are contrite, the cause why God
remitteth Sin, is the purpose or desire they have to receive Absolution:
Legitima contritio votum Sacramenti pro suo tempore debet inducere, atque ad^ o
in virtute futuri Sacramenti peccata remittir. Id. art. 3.
we are not to stand against a sequel so clear and manifest as this, that
always remission of Sin proceeds from Absolution either had or desired.

But should a reasonable man give credit to their bare Conceit, and because
their Positions have driven them to imagine Absolving of
unsufficiently-disposed Penitents, to be a real creating of further virtue in
them, must all other men think it due? Let them cancel hence forward and blot
out of all their Books, Tunc sententia Sacerdotis judicio Dei and torius
coeiertis Curiae appro^atur, and confimatur, cum ita ex ^iscretione procedit,
ut reorum m^rita non contradicant. Sent. l. 4. d. 18.
those old Cautions touching Necessity of Wisdom, lest Priests should
inconsiderately absolve any man, in whom there were not apparent tokens of true
Repentance; which to do, was, in Saint Cyprians Judgment, Non est periculosem
sacerdoti dicere. Ego reabsolvo, illis so quibus sign^ contritionis videt, quae
sunt dolor de praeteritis, and proposirum de caetero non peceandi; alike,
absol^^re non debet. Tho. opuse. 22. Cypr. de lapsis.
Pestilent Deceit and Flattery, not only not available, but hurtful to them
that had transgrest; a frivolous, frustrate, and false peace, such as caused
the unrighteous to trust to a lie, and destroyed them unto whom it promised
safety. What needs Observation, whether Penitents have Worthiness, and bring
Contrition, if the words of Absolution do infuse Contrition? Have they born us
all this while in hand, that Contrition is a part of the matter of their
Sacrament; a Condition or Preparation of the Mind toward Grace to be received
by Absolution in the form of their Sacrament? And must we now believe, That the
Form does give the Matter? That Absolution bestows Contrition, and that the
words do make presently of Saul, David; of Judas, Peter? For what was the
Penitency of Saul and Judas, but plain Attrition; horror of Sin through fear
of punishment, without any long sense, or taste of God's Mercy?

Their other Fiction, imputing remission of Sin to desire of Absolution from
the Priest, even in them which are truly contrite, is an evasion somewhat more
witty, but no whit more possible for them to prove. Belief of the World and
Judgment to come, Faith in the Promises, and Sufferings of Christ for
Mankind, Fear of his Majesty, Love of his Mercy, Grief for Sin, Hope for
Pardon, Suit for Grace; These we know to be the Elements of true Contrition:
suppose that, besides all this, God did also command that every Penitent should
seek his Absolution at the Priests hands; where so many Causes are concurring
unto one effect, have they any reason to impute the whole effect unto one; any
reason in the choice of that one to pass by Faith, Fear, Love, Humility, Hope,
Prayer, whatsoever else, and to enthronize above them all, A desire of
Absolution from the Priest, as if in the whole work of Man's Repentance, God
did regard and accept nothing but for and in consideration of this? Why do the
Tridentine Council impute it to Charity, That Contrites are reconciled in Gods
sight, before they receive the Sacrament of Penance, if desired Absolution be
the true Cause?

But let this pass how it will; seeing the Question is not, What virtue God
may accept in penitent Sinners, but what Grace Absolution actually given does
really bestow upon them.

If it were, as they would have it, That God regarding the Humiliation of a
Contrite Spirit, because there is joined therewith a lowly desire of the
Sacrament of Priestly Absolution, pardons immediately, and forgiveth all
Offenses: Does this any thing help to prove, that Absolution received afterward
from the Priest, can more than declare him already pardoned which did desire
it? To desire Absolution, presupposing it commanded, is Obedience: and
Obedience in that Case is a Branch of the virtue of Repentance, which Virtue
being thereby made effectual to the taking away of Sins without the Sacrament
of Repentance, Is it not an Argument, that the Sacrament of Absolution has
here no efficacy, but the virtue of Contrition works all? For how should any
Effect ensue from Causes which actually are not? The Sacrament must be applied
wheresoever any Grace does proceed from it. So that where it is but desired
only, whatsoever may follow upon Gods acceptance of this desire, the
Sacrament, afterward received, can be no cause thereof. A reatu mortis aeterae
absolvitur homo a Deo per contritionem; manet autem reatus ad quandam poenam
temporalem, and Minister Eccles^^ quicunque virtute clavium tollit reatum
cui^^dam partis poenae illius. Abul. in desens. per. 1. ^. 7.
Therefore the further we wade, the better we see it still appears, That the
Priest does never in Absolution, no not so much as by way of Service and
Ministry, really either forgive them, take away the uncleanness, or remove the
punishment of Sin; but if the Party penitent come contrite, he has, by their
own grant. Absolution before Absolution; if not contrite, although the Priest
should seem a thousand times to Absolve him, all were in vain. For which cause,
the Ancients and better sort of their School Divines, Abulensis, Alexander
Hales, and Bonaventurt, Signum hujas Sacramenti est causa effectiva gratiae
five remisstonis peccatorum, non simpliciter sicut ipta prima poenitentia, sed
s^cundum quid; quia est causa efficaciae gratiae qua sit remissio peceati,
quantum ad aliquem effectum in poenitente, ad minus quantum ad remissionem
sequelae ipsius peccati, scillcet poenae. Alex. p. 4. ^. 14. memb 2.
ascribe the real abolition of Sin, and eternal punishment, to the mere
pardon of Almighty God, without dependency upon the Priests. Absolution, as a
cause to effect the same. His Absolution has in their Doctrine certain other
effects specified, but this denied. Wherefore having hitherto spoken of the
virtue of Repentance required; of the Discipline of Repentance which Christ did
establish; and of the Sacrament of Repentance invented sithence, against the
pretended force of Humane Absolution in Sacramental Penitency; Porestas clavium
proprie loquendo non se extendit supra culpam; ad illud quod obj^ct^^s, To. 22.
Quorum remiseritis pecatta: dicendum, quod vel illud de remissione dicitur
quantum ad offensionem, vel solum quantum ad ^^enam. Bon sent. l. ^^^t. ^^ ^.
1. Ab aetema poena nul^o mul^ solvit Sac^^dos, sed a purgatoria^ueque hoc per
se, sed per acciden^. quad cum in poenitente, virtute clarium, minu;tur
^leb^cum poenae temporalis, non i^a acriter punie^ur in purgatorio sicur, si
non esset absolutu^. Sent. l. 4. d. 1^. ^. 2.
Let it suffice thus far to have showed how God alone does truly give, the
virtue of Repentance alone procure, and private Ministerial Absolution but
declare, remission of Sins.

Now the last and sometimes hardest to be satisfied by Repentance, are our
Minds; and our Minds we have then satisfied, when the Conscience is of guilty
become clear. For, as long as we are in our selves privy to our own most
heinous Crimes, but without sense of God's Mercy and Grace toward us, unless
the Heart be either brutish for want of Knowledge, or altogether hardened by
wilful Atheism; the remorse of Sin is in it, as the deadly sting of a
Serpent. Which point since very Infidels and Heathens have observed in the
nature of Sin, (for the disease they felt, though they knew no remedy to help
it) we are not rashly to despise those Sentences, which are the testimonies of
their experience touching this point. They knew that the eye of a Man's own
Conscience is more to be feared by evil doers, than the presence of a thousand
Witnesses, in as much as the mouths of other Accusers are many ways stopped, the
ears of the accused not always subject to glowing with contumely and
exprobation; whereas a guilty Mind being forced to be still both a Martyr and
a Tyrant it self, must of necessity endure perpetual Anguish and Grief; For, as
the Body is rent with stripes, so the Mind with guiltiness of Cruelty, Lust,
and wicked Resolutions. Which Furies brought the Emperor Tyberius sometimes
into such perplexity, that writing to the Senate, his wonted art of
dissimulation failed him utterly in this Case; And whereas it had been ever his
peculiar delight so to speak that no man might be able to sound his meaning, he
had not the power to conceal what he felt through the secret scourge of an evil
Conscience, though no necessity did now enforce him to disclose the same. What
to write, or how to write, at this present, if I know (says Tyberius) let the
Gods and Goddesses, who thus continually eat me, only be worse to me than they
are. It was not his Imperial Dignity and Power, that could provide a way to
protect him against himself; the fears and suspicions which improbity had bred,
being strengthened by every occasion, and those Virtues clean banished, which
are the only foundation of sound tranquillity of mind. For which cause, it has
been truly said, and agreeably with all men's experience, that if the virtuous
did excel in no other privilege, yet far happier they are than the contrary
sort of men, for that their hopes be always better.

Neither are we to marvel, that these things, known unto all, do stay so few
from being Authors of their own woe.

For we see by the ancient example of Ioseph's unkind Brethren, how it comes
to remembrance easily when Crimes are once past, what the difference is of good
from evil, and of right from wrong: But such consideration when they should
have prevented Sin, were over-match'd by inordinate desires. Are we not bound
then with all thankfulness to acknowledge his infinite goodness and mercy,
which has revealed unto us the way how to rid our selves of these mazes; the
way how to shake off that yoke, which no Flesh is able to bear; the way how to
change most grisly horror into a comfortable apprehension of heavenly joy?

Whereunto there are many which labor with so much the greater difficulty,
because imbecility of mind does not suffer them to censure rightly their own
doings: Some, fearful lest the enormity of their Crimes be so unpardonable that
no Repentance can do them good; some, lest the imperfection of their Repentance
make it uneffectual to the taking away of Sin, The one drive all things to
this issue, whether they be not men that have sinned against the Holy Ghost;
the other to this, what Repentance is sufficient to clear Sinners, and to
assure them that they are delivered.

Such as by Error charge themselves of unpardonable Sin, must think, it may
be, they deem that unpardonable, which is not.

Our Savior speaks indeed of Blasphemy which shall never be forgiven: But
have they any sure and infallible knowledge what that Blasphemy is? If not, why
are they unjust and cruel to their own Souls, imagining certainty of Guiltiness
in a Crime, concerning the very nature whereof they are uncertain: For mine own
part, although where this Blasphemy is mentioned, the cause why our Savior
spoke thereof, was, the Pharisees Blasphemy, which was not afraid to say, Mat.
21. 31. Mar. 3. 30.
He had an unclean Spirit, and did cast out Spirits by the Power of Beelzebub;
Nevertheless I dare not precisely deny, but that even the Pharisees themselves
might have repented and been forgiven, and that our Lord Jesus Christ
peradventure might but take occasion at their Blasphemy, which, as yet, was
pardonable, to tell them further of an unpardonable Blasphemy, whereinto he
foresaw that the Jews would fall. For it is plain, that many thousands, at the
first, professing Christian Religion, became afterward wilful Apostates, moved
with no other cause of revolt, but mere indignation that the Gentiles should
enjoy the benefit of the Gospel as much as they, and yet not be burdened with
the yoke of Moses his Law.

The Apostles, by Preaching, had won them to Christ, in whose Name they
embraced, with great alacrity, the full remission of their former sins and
iniquities; they received by the imposition of the Apostles hands, Acts 2. 38.
that Grace and Power of the Holy Ghost whereby they cured Diseases,
Prophesied, spoke with Tongues; and yet in the end, after all this they fell
utterly away, renounced the Mysteries of Christian Faith, Blasphemed in their
formal Abjurations that most glorious and blessed Spirit, the Gifts whereof
themselves had possessed; and by this means sunk their Souls in the Gulf of that
unpardonable Sin; whereof, as our Lord JESUS CHRIST had told them before
hand, so the Apostle at the first appearance of such their revolt, puts them
in mind again, that falling now to their former Blasphemies, their Salvation
was irrecoverably gone: Heb. ^. 6.
It was for them in this Case impossible to be renewed by any Repentance;
because they were now in the state of Satan and his Angels; the Judge of quick
and dead had passed his irrevocable Sentence against them.

So great difference there is between Infidels unconverted, and Backsliders in
this manner fallen away, that always we have hope to reclaim the one, which
only hate whom they never knew; but to the other which know and Blaspheme, to
them that with more than infernal malice accurse both the seen brightness of
Glory which is in him, and in themselves the tasted goodness of Divine Grace,
as those execrable Miscreants did, who first received in extraordinary
miraculous manner, and then, in outrageous sort blasphemed the Holy Ghost,
abusing both it and the whole Religion, which God, by it, did confirm and
magnify; Heb. 10. 2^.
To such as wilfully thus sin, after so great light of the Truth, and Gifts
of the Spirit, there remains justly no fruit or benefit to be expected by
Christ's Sacrifice.

For all other Offenders, without exception or stint, whether they be Strangers
that seek access, or Followers that will make return unto God; upon the tender
of their Repentance, the grant of his Grace stands everlastingly signed with
his blood in the Book of Eternal life. That which, in this Case over-terrifieth
fearful Souls, is, a mis-conceit whereby they imagine every act which they do,
knowing that they do amiss, and every wilful Breach or Transgression of God's
Law, to be mere Sin against the Holy Ghost, forgetting that the Law of Moses
it self ordained Sacrifices of Expiation, as well for Faults presumptuously
committed, as Things wherein men offend by Error.

Now, there are on the contrary side others, who, doubting not of God's mercy
toward all that perfectly repent, remain notwithstanding scrupulous and
troubled with continual fear, lest defects in their own Repentance be a bar
against them.

These cast themselves into very great, Jer. 6. 2^. Mich. 1.c. 8, ^ Lameat.
2.18.
and peradventure needless Agonies through mis-construction of things spoken
about proportioning our griefs to our Sins, for which they never think they
have wept and mourned enough; yea, if they have not always a stream of Tears
at command, Quam magna deliquimus, tam granditer (...)mus. A^to vu^neri
diligens and longa medicina non desit; poenitentia crimine minor non sit. Cypr.
de lapsis. Non levi agendum est contritione, ut debita illa redimantur, quibus
mors aeterna debetur; nec transitoria opus est satisfactione pro malis illis,
propt^r quae paratus est ignis aeternus. Eusebius. Emissenus, vel potius Salv. f.
106.
they take it for a heart congealed and hardened in sin; when to keep the
wound of Contrition bleeding, they unfold the circumstances of their
Transgressions, and endeavor to leave nothing which may be heavy against
themselves.

Yet, do what they can, they are still fearful, lest herein also they do not
that which they ought and might. Come to Prayer, their coldness takes all
heart and courage from them with fasting; albeit their Flesh should be
withered, and their Blood clean dried up, would they ever the less object,
Psalm. 6.6. Mat. 12. 42. Acts. ^^. 31.
What is this to David's humiliation? Wherein notwithstanding there was not any
thing more than necessary. In works of Charity and Alms-deed; It is not all the
World can persuade them they did ever reach the poor bounty of the Widdow's two
Mites, or by many millions of Leagues come near to the mark which Cornelius
touched; so far they are off from the proud surmise of any Penitential
Supererrogation in miserable wretched Worms of the Earth.

Notwithstanding, for as much as they wrong themselves with over-rigorous and
extreme Exactions, by means whereof they fall sometimes into such Perplexities
as can hardly be allayed; It has therefore pleased Almighty God, in tender
commiseration over these imbecillities of men, to ordain for their Spiritual
and Ghostly comfort, consecrated Persons, which by Sentence of Power and
Authority given from above, may, as it were, out of his very mouth ascertain
timorous and doubtful minds in their own particular, ease them of all their
scrupulosities, leave them settled in Peace, and satisfied touching the Mercy
of God toward them. To use the benefit of this help for the better
satisfaction in such cases, is so natural, that it can be forbidden no man; but
yet not so necessary, that all men should be in case to need it.

They me, of the two, the happier therefore that can content and satisfy
themselves, by judging discreetly what they perform, and soundly what God does
require of them. For having that which is most material, the substance of
Penitency rightly bred, touching signs and tokens thereof, we may affirm that
they do boldly, which imagine for every offense a certain proportionable degree
in the Passions and Griefs of Mind, whereunto whosoever aspireth not,
repents in vain.

That, to frustrate men's Confession and Considerations of Sin, except every
Circumstance which may aggravate the same, be unript and laid in the Balance,
is a merciless extremity, although it be true, that, as near as we can, such
Wounds must be searched to the very bottom. Last of all, to set down the like
stint, and to shut up the doors of Mercy against Penitents which come short
thereof in the devotion of their Prayers, in the continuance of their Falls, in
the largeness and bounty of their Alms, or in the course of any other such
like Duties, is more than God himself has thought meet, and consequently more
than mortal men should presume to do.

That which God does chiefly respect in men's penitency is their Hearts: Jer.
^9. 13. Joel 2. 12.
The Heart is it which makes Repentance sincere, Sincerity that which finds
favor in God's sight, and the favor of God that which supplyeth by Gracious
acceptance whatsoever may seem defective in the faithful, hearty, and true
Offices of his Servants.

Chrysostom. de repar. laps. lib. ad Theodor. Deposit. did. 3. c. Talis.
Take it (says Chrysostom) upon my credit, Such is God's merciful inclination
toward men, that repentance offered with a single and sincere mind, he never
refuses, no, not although we be come to the very top of Iniquity. If there be
a will and desire to return, he receives, imbraceth, and omitteth nothing
which may restore us to former happiness; yea, that which is yet above all the
rest, albeit we cannot in the duty of satisfying him, attain what we ought, and
would, but come far behind our mark, he takes nevertheless in good worth
that little which we do; be it never so mean, we lose not our labor therein.

The least and lowest step of Repentance in Saint Chrysostom's Judgment
severeth and sets us above them that perish in their Sin; I therefore will
end with Saint Augustine's Conclusion: Aug. in Ps. l. ^.
Lord, in thy Book and Volume of Life all shall be written, as well the Least
of thy Saints, as the Chiefest. Let not therefore the Unperfect fear; Let them
only proceed and go forward.

OF THE LAWS OF Ecclesiastical Polity.
BOOK VII. Their Sixth Assertion, That there ought not to be in the Church,
Bishops endued with such Authority and Honor as ours are.
The Matter contained in this Seventh Book.
1. THe state of Bishops although sometime oppugned and that by such as therein
would most seems to please God, yet by his providence upheld hitherto, whose
glory it is to maintain that whereof himself is the Author. 2. What a Bishop
is, what his name does import, and what does belong unto his office as he is a
Bishop. 3. In Bishops two things traduced; of which two, the one their
Authority, and in is the first thing condemned, their superiority over other
Ministers: what kind of superiority in Ministers it ^^ which the one part
holds, and the other denies lawful. 4. From whence it has grown that the
Church is governed by Bishops. 5. The time and cause of instituting every where
Bishops with restraint. 6. What manner of power Bishops from the first
beginning have had. 7. After what sort Bishops, together with Presbyters have
used to govern the Churches which were under them. 8. How far the power of
Bishops has reached from the beginning in respect of territory, or local
compass. 9. In what respects Episcopal Regiment has been gainsaid of old by
Aerius. 10. In what respect Episcopal Regiment is gainsaid by the Authors of
pretended Reformation at this day. 11. Their arguments in disgrace of Regiment
by Bishops, as being a mere invention of man, and not found in Scripture,
answered. 12. Their arguments to prove there was no necessity of instituting
Bishops in the Church. 13. The fore-alleadged Arguments, answered. 14. An
answer unto those things which are objected concerning the difference between
that Power which Bishops now have, and that which ancient Bishops had, more
then other Presbyters. 15. Concerning the civil Power and Authority which our
Bishops have. 16. The Arguments answered, whereby they would prove that the Law
of God, and the judgment of the best in all ages condemns the ruling
superiority of our Minister over another. 17. The second malicious thing
wherein the state of Bishops suffers oblaquy, is their Honor. 18. What good
does publicly grow from the Prelacy. 19. What kinds of Honor be due unto
Bishops. 20. Honor in Title, Place, Ornament, Attendance, and Privilege. 21.
Honor by endowment with Lands and Livings. 22. That of Ecclessiastical Goods,
and consequently of the Lands and Livings which Bishops enjoy, the propriety
belongs unto God alone. 23. That Ecclesiastical persons are receivers of Gods
Rents, and that the honor of Prelates, is to be thereof his chief Receivers,
not without liberty from him granted of converting the same unto their own use,
even in large manner. 24. That for their unworthiness to deprive both them and
their Successors of such Goods, and to convey the same unto men of secular
callings, now extreme Sacrilegious Injustice.


The state of Bishops although sometime oppugned, and that by such as therein
would most seen to please God, ye^ by his providence upheld hitherto, whose
glory it is to maintain that whereof himself is the Author.
I. I Have heard that a famous Kingdom in the world being solicited to reform
such disorders as all men saw the Church exceedingly burdened with, when of
each degree great multitudes thereunto inclined, and the number of them did
every day so increase that this intended work was likely to take no other
effect then all good men did wish and labor for: A Principal actor herein (for
zeal and boldness of Spirit) thought it good to show them betimes what it was
which must be effected, or else that there could be no work of perfect
Reformation accomplished. To this purpose, in a solemn Sermon, and in a great
Assembly he described unto them the present quality of their public Estate, by
the parable of a tree, huge and goodly to look upon, but without that fruit
which it should and might bring forth; affirming that the only way of redress
was a full and perfect establishment of Christ's Discipline (for so their manner
is to entitle a thing hammered out upon the forge of their own invention) and
that to make way of entrance for it, there must be three great limbs cut off
from the body of that stately tree of the Kingdom: Those three limbs were three
sorts of men; Nobles, whose high Estate would make them otherwise disdain to
put their necks under that yoke: Lawyers, whose Courts being not pulled down,
the new Church Consistories were not like to flourish: Finally, Prelates, whose
ancient Dignity, and the simplicity of their intended Church Discipline, could
not possibly stand together. The proposition of which device being plausible to
active spirits, restless through desire of innovation, whom commonly nothing
does more offend then a change which goes fearfully on by slow and suspicious
paces; the heavier and more experienced sort began presently thereat to pull
back their feet again, and exceedingly to fear the stratagem of Reformation for
ever after. Whereupon ensued those extreme conflicts of the one part with the
other, which continuing and increasing to this very day, have now made the
state of that flourishing Kingdom even such, as whereunto we may most fitly
apply those words of the Prophet Jeremiah, Thy breach is great like the Sea,
who can heal thee? Whether this were done in truth, according to the constant
affirmation of some avouching the same, I take not upon me to examine; That
which I note therein is, How with us that policy has been corrected. For to
the Authors of pretended Reformation with us, it has not seemed expedient to
offer the edge of the axe unto all three boughs at once, but rather to single
them, and strike at the weakest first, making show that the lop of that one
shall draw the more abundance of sap to the other two, that they may thereby
the better prosper. All prosperity, felicity and peace we wish multiplied on
each Estate, as far as their own hearts desire is: But let men know that there
is a God, whose eye beholds them in all their ways; a God, the usual and
ordinary course of whose justice, is to return upon the head of malice the same
devices which it contriveth against others The foul practices which have been
used for the overthrow of Bishops, may perhaps wax bold in process of time to
give the like assault even there, from whence at this present they are most
seconded. Nor let it over-dismay them who suffer such things at the hands of
this most unkind world, to see that heavenly estate and dignity thus
conculcated, in regard whereof so many their Predecessors were no less esteemed
then if they had not been men but Angels amongst men. With former Bishops it
was as with Job in the days of that prosperity, which at large he describes,
saying, Unto me men gave ea^, they waited and held their tongue at my counsel,
after my words they replied not, I appointed out their way and did sit as
chief, I dwelt as it had been a King in an Army. At this day, the case is
otherwise with them; and yet no otherwise then with the self same Job at what
time the alteration of his estate wrested these contrary speeches from him, But
now they that are younger then I mock at me, the children of fools, and
offspring of slaves, creatures more base then the earth they tread on; such as
if they did show their heads, young and old would shout at them and chase them
through the streets with a cry, their song I am, I am a theme for them to talk
on. An injury less grievous if it were not offered by them whom Satan has
through his fraud and subtilty so far beguiled as to make them imagine herein
they do unto God a part of most faithful service. Whereas the lord in truth,
whom they serve herein, is, as St. Cyprian tells them, like, Cyp. l. 1. ep. 3.
not Christ (for he it is that does appoint and protect bishops) but rather
Christ's adversary and enemy of his Church. A thousand five hundred years and
upward the Church of Christ has now continued under the sacred Regiment of
Bishops. Neither for so long has Christianity been ever planted in any Kingdom
throughout the world but with this kind of government alone; which to have been
ordained of God, I am, for mine own part, even as resolutely persuaded, as that
any other kind of Government in the world whatsoever is of God. In this Realm
of England, before Normans, yea before Saxons, there being Christians, the
chief Pastors of their souls were Bishops. This order from about the first
establishment of Christian Religion which was publicly begun through the
virtuous disposition of King Lucius not fully two hundred years after Christ,
continued till the coming in of the Saxons; By whom Paganism being every where
else replanted, only one part of the Island, whereinto the ancient, natural
inhabitants the Britains were driven, retained constantly the faith of Christ,
together with the same form of spiritual Regiment, which their Fathers had
before received. Sulpit. Severe. lb. 2.
Wherefore in the Histories of the Church we find very ancient mention made of
our own Bishops. Beda Eccl. hist. l. 2. c. 2.
At the Council of Ariminum about the year 359 Britain had three of her Bishops
present. At the arrival of Augustine the Monk, whom Gregory sent hither to
reclaim the Saxons from Gentility about six hundred years after Christ, the
Britains he found observers still of the self same Government by Bishops over
the rest of the Clergy; under this form Christianity took root again, where it
had been exiled. Under the self same form it remained till the days of the An.
1066.
Norman Conqueror. By him and his successors thereunto Alfredus Eborac asis
Archie^ iseopus Galieimum cognome^to Northum spirantem adhue minesua and caelis
in pe^ulum, mitem red^liA^^ and religi^sis in pro conservands repub. tuerd que
ecclesiast. also. sacramento asiiuxit. Nub. i^. l. ^. c. ^.
sworn, it has from that time till now, by the space of above five hundred
years more been upheld. O Nation utterly without knowledge, without sense! We
are not through error of mind deceived, but some wicked thing has undoubtedly
bewitched us, if we forsake that Government, the use whereof universal
experience has for so many years approved, and betake our selves unto a
Regiment, neither appointed of God himself, as they who favor it pretend, nor
till yesterday ever heard of among men. By the Jews Festus was much complained
of, as being a Governor mavelous corrupt, and almost intolerable: Such
notwithstanding were they who came after him, that men which thought the
public condition most afflicted under Festur. began to wish they had him
again, and to esteem him a Ruler commendable. Great things are hoped for at the
hands of these new Presidents, whom Reformation would bring in: Notwithstanding
the time may come, when Bishops, whose Regiment does now seem a yoke so heavy
to bear, will be longed for again even by them that are the readiest to have it
taken from off their necks. But in the hands of Divine Providence we leave the
ordering of all such events; and come now to the Question it self which is
raised concerning Bishops. For the better understanding whereof we must before
hand set down what is meant, when in this Question we name a Bishop.

What a Bishop is, what his name does import, and what does belong to his
Office as he is a Bishop.
II. For whatsoever we bring from Antiquity by way of defense in this cause of
Bishops, it is cast off as impertinent matter, all is wiped away with an odd
kind of shifting Answer, That the Bishops which now are, be not like unto them
which were. We therefore beseech all indifferent Judges to weigh sincerely with
themselves how the case does stand. If it should be at this day a controversy
whether Kingly Regiment were lawful or no, peradventure in defense thereof, the
long continuance which it has had sithence the first beginning might be
alleged, mention perhaps might be made what Kings there were of old even in
Abraham's time, what Sovereign Princes both before and after. Suppose that
herein some man purposely bending his wit against Sovereignty, should think to
elude all such allegations by making ample discovery through a number of
particularities, wherein the Kings that are, do differ from those that have
been, and should therefore in the end conclude, That such ancient examples are
no convenient proofs of that Royalty which is now in use. Surely for decision
of truth in this case there were no remedy, but only to show the nature of
Sovereignty, to sever it from accidental properties, to make it clear that
ancient and present Regality are one and the same in substance, how great odds
soever otherwise may seem to be between them. In like manner, whereas a
Question of late has grown, whether Ecclesiastical Regiment by Bishops be
lawful in the Church of Christ or no: In which Question, they that hold the
Negative, being pressed with that generally received order, according whereunto
the most renowned Lights of the Christian World, have governed the same in
every age as Bishops; seeing their manner is to reply, that such Bishops as
those ancient were, ours are not; There is no remedy but to show, that to be a
Bishop is now the self same thing which it has been; that one definition
agrees fully and truly as well to those elder, as to these latter Bishops.
Sundry dissimilitudes we grant there are, which notwithstanding are not such
that they cause any equivocation in the name, whereby we should think a Bishop
in those times to have had a clean other definition then does rightly agree
unto Bishops as they are now: Many things there are in the state of Bishops,
which the times have changed; Many a Parsonage at this day is larger then some
ancient Bishoprics were; many an ancient Bishop poorer then at this day sundry
under them in degree. The simple hereupon, lacking judgment and knowledge to
discern between the nature of things which changes not, and these outward
variable accidents, are made believe that a Bishop heretofore and now are
things in their very nature so distinct that they cannot be judged the same.
Yet to men that have any part of skill, what more evident and plain in Bishops,
then that augmentation or diminution in their precincts, allowances,
privileges, and such like, do make a difference indeed, but no essential
difference between one Bishop and another? As for those things in regard
whereof we use properly to term them Bishops; those things whereby they
essentially differ from other Pastors, those things which the natural
definition of a Bishop must contain, what one of them is there more or less
appliable unto Bishops now than of old? The name Bishop has been borrowed from
the (...) Dionys. Haltar. de Numa Pompili, Antiq. lib. 2. Vult ^^ Pompeius esse
quem tora ^re Campania and maricima ora habear (...), ad quem delectus and
negotii summa referatur. Cic. ad Attie, lib. 7. Epist. 11.
Grecians, with whom it signifies, One which has principal charge to guide
and Oversee others. The same word in Ecclesiastical writings being applied unto
Church-governors, at the first unto Acts 20. Phil. 1. 1.
all and not unto the chiefest only, grew in short time peculiar and proper to
signify such Episcopal Authority alone, as the chiefest Governors exercised
over the rest; for with all Names this is usual, that, in as much as they are
not given till the things whereunto they are given, have bin sometime first
observed; therefore generally, And God brought them unto Adam, that Adam might
see or consider what name it was meet he should give unto them, Genesis 2. 19.
Things are antienter then the Names whereby they are called.

Again, since the first things that grow into general observation; and do
thereby give men occasion to find Names for them, are those which being in many
Subjects, are thereby the easier, the oftener, and the more universally noted;
it follows, that names imposed to signify common qualities or operations are
ancienter, then is the restraint of those names, to note an excellency of such
qualities or operations in some one or few amongst others. For example, the
name Disciple being invented to signify generally a learner, it cannot choose
but in that signification be more ancient then when it signifies, as it were
by a kind of appropriation, those Learners who being taught of Christ were in
that respect termed Disciples by an excellency. So also the name Deacon, a
Minister, appropriated to a certain order of Ministers.
The like is to be seen in the name Apostle, the use whereof to signify a
messenger, must needs be more ancient then that use which restrains it unto
Messengers sent concerning Evangelical affairs; yea this use more ancient then
that whereby the same word is yet restrained farther to signify only those
whom our Savior himself immediately did send. After the same manner the Title
or Name of a Bishop having been used of old to signify both an Ecclesiastical
Overseer in general, and more particularly also a Principal Ecclesiastical
Overseer; it follows, that this latter restrained signification is not so
ancient as the former, being more common: The name likewise of a Minister was
common to diverse degrees, which now is peculiarly among our selves given only
to Pastors, and not as anciently to Deacons also.
Yet because the things themselves are always ancienter then their names;
therefore that thing which the restrained use of the word does import, is
likewise ancienter then the restraint of the word is; and consequently that
power of chief Ecclesiastical Overseers, which the term of a Bishop imports,
was before the restrained use of the name which does import it. Wherefore a
lame and an impotent kind of reasoning it is, when men go about to prove that
in the Apostles times there was no such thing as the restrained name of a
Bishop does now signify; because in their writings there is found no restraint
of that name, but only a general use whereby it reaches unto all spiritual
Governors and Overseers.

But to let go the name, and to come to the very nature of that thing which is
thereby signified in all kinds of Regiment whether Ecclesiastical or Civil: as
there are sundry operations public, so likewise great inequality there is in
the same operations, some being of principal respect, and therefore not fit to
be dealt in by every one to whom public actions, and those of good
importance, are notwithstanding well and ^itly enough committed. From hence
have grown those different degrees of Magistrates or public persons, even
Ecclesiastical as well as Civil. Amongst Ecclesiastical Persons therefore
Bishops being chief ones, a Bishops function must be defined by that wherein
his Chiefty consists. A Bishop is a Minister of God, unto whom with permanent
continuance, there is given not only power of administering the Word and
Sacraments, which power other Presbyrers have; but also a further power to
ordain Ecclesiastical persons, and a power of Chiefty in Government over
Presbyters as well as Lay men, a power to be by way of jurisdiction a Pastor
even to Pastors themselves. So that this Office, as he is a Presbyter or
Pastor, consists in those things which are common unto him with other
Pastors, as in ministering the Word and Sacraments: But those things incident
unto his Office, which do properly make him a Bishop, cannot be common unto him
with other Pastors. Now even as Pastors, so likewise Bishops being principal
Pastors, are either at large or else with restraint. At large, when the subject
of their Regiment is indefinite, and not tied to any certain place: Bishops
with restraint, are they whose Regiment over the Church is contained within
some definite, local compass, beyond which compass their jurisdiction reaches
not. Such therefore we always mean when we speak of that Regiment by Bishops
which we hold a thing most lawful, divine and holy in the Church of Christ.

In Bishops two things traduced; of which two the one their Authority, and in
it the first thing condemned, the; superiority over other Ministers: what kind
of superiority in ministers is it which the one part holds and the other
denies lawful.
III. In our present regiment by Bishops two things there are complained of, the
one their great Authority, and the other their great Honor. Touching the
Authority of our Bishops, the first thing which therein displeases their
Adversaries, is the Superiority which Bishops have over other Ministers. They
which cannot brook the Superiority which Bishops have, do notwithstanding
themselves admit that some kind of difference and inequality there may be
lawfully amongst Ministers: Inequality as touching gifts and graces they grant,
because this is so plain that no mist in the world can be cast before men's eyes
so thick, but that they needs must discern through it, that one Minister of the
Gospel may be more learneder, holier, and wiser, better able to instruct, more
apt to rule and guide them then another: Unless thus much were confessed, those
men should lose their fame and glory whom they themselves do entitle the Lights
and grand Worthies of this present age. Again, a priority of Order they deny
not, but that there may be; yea such a priority as makes one man amongst many
a principal Actor in those things whereunto sundry of them must necessarily
concur, so that the same be admitted only during the time of such actions and
no longer; that is to say just so much superiority, and neither more nor less
may be liked of, then it has pleased them in their own kind of regiment to set
down. The inequality which they complain of, is, That one Minister of the Word
and Sacraments should have a permanent superiority above another, or in any
sort a superiority of power mandatory, judicial and coercive over other
Ministers. By us, on the contrary side, inequality, even such inequality as
unto Bishops being Ministers of the Word and Sacraments grants a superiority
permanent above Ministers, yea a permanent superiority of power mandatory,
judicial and coercive over them, is maintained a thing allowable, lawful and
good. For, superiority of power may be either above them or upon them, in
regard of whom it is termed superiority. One Pastor has superiority of power
above another, when either some are authorized to do things worthier then are
permitted unto all, some are preferred to be principal Agents, the rest Agents
with dependency and subordination. The former of these two kinds of superiority
is such as the High Priest had above other Priests of the Law, in being
appointed to enter once a year the holy place, which the rest of the Priests
might not do. The latter superiority such as Presidents have in those actions
which are done by others with them, they nevertheless being principal and chief
therein. One Pastor has superiority of power, not only above but upon another,
when some are subject unto others commandment and judicial controlment, by
virtue of public jurisdiction. Superiority in this last kind is utterly
denied, to be allowable; in the rest it is only denied that the lasting
continuance and settled permanency thereof is lawful. So that if we prove at
all the lawfulness of superiority in this last kind, where the same is simply
denied, and of permanent superiority in the rest where some kind of superiority
is granted, but with restraint to the term and continuance of certain actions,
with which the same must, as they say, expire and cease; If we can show these
two things maintainable, we bear up sufficiently that which the adverse party
endeavors to overthrow. Our desire therefore is, that this issue may be
strictly observed, and those things accordingly judged of, which we are to
allege. This we boldly therefore set down, as a most infallible truth, That
the Church of Christ is at this day lawfully, and so has been sit hence the
first beginning, governed by Bishops, having permanent superiority, and ruling
power over other Ministers of the Word and Sacraments.

For the plainer explication whereof, let us briefly declare first, The birth
and original of the same power, whence and by what occasion it grew. Secondly,
What manner of power antiquity does witness Bishops to have had more then
Presbyters which were no Bishops. Thirdly, After what sort Bishops together
with Presbyters have used to govern the Churches under them, according to the
like testimonial evidence of antiquity. Fourthly, How far the same Episcopal
power has usually extended, unto what number of persons it has reached, what
bounds and limits of place it has had. This done, we may afterward descend
unto those by whom the same either has been heretofore, or is at this present
hour gainsaid.

IV. The first Bishops in the Church of Christ were his blessed Apostles, From
whence it has grown that the Church is governed by Bishops, Meminise Diaconi
debent quoniam Apostolos id est Episcopos and praepo^^os Dominus elegic. Cyp.
l. 3 cp. 9.
for the Office whereunto Matthias was chosen the sacred History does term
'E(...) an Episcopal Office. Which being spoken expressly of one, agrees no
less unto them all then unto him. For which cause St. Cyprian speaking
generally of them all does call them Bishops. They which were termed Apostles,
as being sent of Christ to publish his Gospel throughout the world, and were
named likewise Bishops, in that the care of Government was also committed unto
them, did no less perform the offices of their Episcopal Authority by
governing, then of their Apostolical by teaching. The word 'E(...) expressing
that part of their office which did consist in Regiment, proves not (I grant)
their chiefty in regiment over others, because as then that name was common
unto the function of their inferiors, and not peculiar unto theirs. But the
History of their actions shows plainly enough how the thing it self which
that name appropriated imports, that is to say, even such spiritual chiefty
as we have already defined to be properly Episcopal, was in the holy Apostles
of Christ. Bishops therefore they were at large. But was it lawful for any of
them to be a Bishop with restraint? True it is their charge was indefinite, yet
so, that in case they did all, whether severally or jointly discharge the
Office of proclaiming every where the Gospel, and of guiding the Church of
Christ, none of them casting off his part in their burden which was laid upon
them; Romans 2. 14, 15. 1 Cor. 9.16. Joh. 22.15,1^.
there does appear no impediment but that they having received their common
charge indefinitely might in the execution thereof notwithstanding restrain
themselves, or at leastwise be restrained by the after commandment of the
Spirit, without contradiction or repugnancy unto that charge more indefinite
and general before given them; especially if it seemed at any time requisite,
and for the greater good of the Church, that they should in such sort tie
themselves unto some special part of the flock of Jesus Christ, guiding the
same in several as Bishops. For first, notwithstanding our Saviors commandment
unto them all to go and preach unto all Nations. Yet some restraint we see
there was made, when by agreement between Paul and Peter moved with those
effects of their labors which the providence of God brought forth; Gal. 2. 8.
the one betook himself unto the Gentiles, the other unto the Jews, for the
exercise of that Office of every where preaching. A further restraint of their
Apostolical labors as yet there was also made, when they divided themselves
into several parts of the world, Him Eusebius does name the Governor of the
Churches in Asia, Lib 3. Hist. Eccles. cap. 16. Tertujian calls the same
Churches St. lohns Foster, daughters, Lib. 3. advers. Marcion.
John for his charge taking Asia, and so the residue other quarters to labor
in. If nevertheless it seem very hard that we should admit a restraint so
particular, as after that general charge received, to make any Apostle
notwithstanding the Bishop of some one Church, what think we of the Bishop of
Jerusalem, Iacobus qui appe latur frarer Domini cognomento Justus pest pathonem
Domini flatim ab Apostiolis, Hierosolymerum Episeopus ordinatus est. Hierom de
script. Eccles. Eodem tempore Jacobum primumu fedem Episcopaslem Ecclesiae quae
est Hierosolymis obtinuisse memoriae traditur. Eusebius. Hist. Eclces. lib. 2.
cap. 1. The same seems to be intimated Acts 15 13. and Acts 21. 18.
James, whose consecration unto that Mother See of the world, because it was
not meet that it should at any time be left void of some Apostle does seem to
have been the very cause of St. Paul's miraculous vocation to make up the Acts
12. 2.
number of the Twelve again, for the gathering of nations abroad, even as the
Acts 13.2.
martyrdom of the other James the reason why Barnabas in his stead was called.
Finally, Apostles whether they did settle in any one certain place^ as James,
or else did otherwise as the Apostle Paul; Episcopal Authority either at large
or either restraint they had and exercised: Their Episcopal power they
sometimes gave unto others to exercise as agents only in their stead, and as it
were by commission from them. Thus Tit. 1. 5.
Titus, and thus Timothy at the first, though This appears by those
subscriptions which are set after the Epistle to Titus, and the second to
Timothy, and by Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 3. c. 4.
afterward endued with Apostolical power of their own. For in process of time
the Apostles gave Episcopal Authority, and that to continue always with them
which had it. We are able to number up them, Irem lib. 3. c. 3.
says Irenaus, who by the Apostles were made Bishops. In Rome he affirms
that the Apostles themselves made Linus the first Bishop. Again of Polycarp he
says likewise, that the Apostles made him Bishop of the Church of Smyrna. In
Ep. ad Antioch.
Of Antioch they made Evodius Bishop as Ignatius witnesses, exhorting that
Church to tread in his holy steps, and to follow his virtuous example. The
Apostles therefore were the first which had such authority, and all others who
have it after them in orderly sort are their lawful Successors, whether they
succeed in any particular Church, where before them some Apostle has been
seated, as Simon succeeded James in Jerusalem; or else be otherwise endued with
the same kind of Bishoply power, although it be not where any Apostle before
has been. For to succeed them, is after them to have that Episcopal kind of
power which was first given to them. All Bishops are, says Jerome, the
Apostles successors, Hi^ron. ep. 81. Cypr. ep. ad plorent.
In like sort Cyprian does term Bishops, Prepositos qui Apostolis vicaria
ordinatione succedunt. From hence it may happily seem to have grown, that they
whom now we call Bishops Theed. in 1 Timothy 5.
were usually termed at the first Apostles, and so did carry their very names
in whose rooms of spiritual authority they succeeded, Such as deny Apostles to
have Ipsius Apostolates nulla successio Pinitur enim legatio cum legoto nec a^l
successores ipslus transit. Srgpl. doct. prin. con.
any successors at all in the office of their Apostleship, may hold that
opinion without contradiction to this of ours, if they well explain themselves
in declaring what truly and properly Apostleship is: In some things every
Presbyter, in some things lonely Bishops, in some things neither the one nor
the other are the Apostles Successors. The Apostles were sent as special chosen
Act. 1. 21, 22. 1 John 1. 3.
eyewitnesses of Jesus Christ, from whom Gal. 1. 1.
immediately they received their whole Embassage, and their Commission to be
the principal Apoc. 21. 14.
first founders of an House of God consisting as well of Mar. 28. 19.
Gentiles as of Jews: In this there are not after them any other like unto
them, And yet the Apostles have now their Successors upon earth their true
Successors, if not in the largeness, surely in the kind of that Episcopal
function, whereby they had power to sit as spiritual ordinary Judges, both over
Laity and over Clergy where Churches Christian were established.

The time and cause of instituting every where Bishops with restraint.
V. The Apostles of our Lord did, according unto those directions which were
given them from above, erect Churches in all such Cities as received the Word
of Truth, the Gospel of God: All Churches by them erected, received from them
the same Faith, the same Sacraments, the same form of public regiment. The
form of Regiment by them established at first was, That the Laity of people
should be subject unto a College of Ecclesiastical persons, which were in
every such City appointed for that purpose. These in their writings they term
sometime Presbyters, sometime Bishops. To take one Church out of a number for a
pattern what the rest were, Acts 20. 36,37
the Presbyters of Ephesus, as it is in the History of their departure from the
Apostle Paul at Miletum, are said to have wept abundantly all, which speech
does show them to have been many. And by the Apostles exhortation it may
appear, that they had not each his several flock to feed, but were in common
appointed to feed that one flock the Church of Ephesus; for which cause the
phrase of his speech is this, Attendite gregi. Look all to that one flock over
which the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops. Acts 20.29 30.
These persons Ecclesiastical being termed as then, Presbyters and Bishops
both, were all subject unto Paul as to an higher Governor appointed of God to
be over them. But for as much as the Apostles could not themselves be present
in all Churches, As appears both by his sending to call the Presbyters of
Ephesus before him as far as to Milituch. Acts 20. 17, which was almost fifty
miles, and by his leaving Timothy in his place with his Authority and i^sh
uffions for ordaining of Ministers there. 1 Timothy 5. 22. and for proportioning
their maintenance, verse 17.18. and for judicial hearing of accusations brough^
against estem, verse 19. and for holding them in an uniformity of Doctrine,
chap. 1, verse. 3.
and as the Apostles St. Paul foretold the Presbyters of the Ephesians that
there would rise up from amongst their own selves, men speaking perverse things
to draw Disciples after them; there did grow in short time amongst the
Governors of each Church, those emulations, strifes, and contentions, whereof
there could be no sufficient remedy provided, except, according unto the order
of Jerusalem already begun, some one were endued with Episcopal! Authority over
the rest, which one being resident might keep them in order, and have
pre-eminence or principality in those things, wherein the equality of many
agents was the cause of disorder and trouble. This one President or Governor,
amongst the rest had his known Authority established along time before that
settled difference of name, and title took place, whereby such alone were named
Bishops. And therefore in the book of S. John's Revelation we find that they are
entitled Revel. 2
Angels. It will perhaps be answered, That the Angels of those Churches were
only in every Church a Minister Sacraments: But then we ask, Is it probable
that in every of these Churches, even in Ephesus it self, where wany such
Ministers were long before; as has been proved, there was but one such when
John directed his speech to the Angel of that Church? If there were many,
surely St. John in naming but only one of them an Angel, did behold in that one
somewhat above the rest. Nor was this order peculiar unto some few Churches,
but the whole world universally became subject thereunto; insomuch as they did
not account it to be a Church, which was not subject unto a Bishop. It was the
general received persuasion of the ancient Christian world, that Ecclesia est
in Episcopo, Cypr. l. 4. Epist. 9.
the outward being of a Church consists in the having of a Bishop: That where
Colleges of Presbyters were, there was at the first, equality amongst them, S.
Jerome thinks it a matter clear; but when the rest were thus equal, so that
no one of them could command any other as inferior unto him, they all were
controlable by the Apostles, who had that Episcopal authority abiding at the
first in themselves, which they afterward derived unto others. Hi^ren. Ep. ad
E^ag.
The cause wherefore they under themselves appointed such Bishops as were not
every whereat the first, is said to have been those strifes and contentions;
for remedy whereof, whether the Apostles alone did conclude of such a regiment,
or else they together with the whole Church judging it a fit and a needful
policy, did agree to receive it for a custom; no doubt but being established by
them on whom the Holy Ghost was powered in so abundant measure for the ordering
of Christ's Church, it had either Divine appointment beforehand, or Divine
approbation afterward, and is in that respect to be acknowledged the Ordinance
of God, no less then that ancient Jewish regiment, whereof though Iethro were
the Deviser, Exodus 18 19.
yet after that God had allowed it, all men were subject unto it, as to the
Polity of God, and not of Iethro. That so the ancient Fathers did think of
Episcopal regiment, that they held this order as a thing received from the
blessed Apostles themselves, and authorized even from heaven, we may perhaps
more easily prove, then obtain that they all shall grant it w^o see it proved.
St. Augustine sets it down for a principle, Epist. ad Jan.
that whatsoever positive order the whole Church every where does observe, the
same it must needs have received from the very Apostles themselves, unless
perhaps some general Council were the Authors of it. And he saw that the ruling
superiority of Bishops was a thing universally established not by the force of
any Council, (for Councels do all presuppose Bishops, nor can there any Council
be named so ancient, either General, or as much as Provincial, sithence the
Apostles own times, but we can show that Bishops had their Authority before it,
and not from it.) Wherefore St. Augustine knowing this, could not choose but
reverence the Authority of Bishops, as a thing to him apparently and most
clearly apostolical. But it will be perhaps objected that Regiment by Bishops
was not so universal nor ancient as we pretend; and that an Argument hereof may
be Ieroms own Testimony, who living at the very same time with St. Augustine,
notes this kind of Regiment as being no where ancient, saving only in
Alexandria; his words are these, Ep. ad Evag.
It was for a remedy of Schism that one was afterward chosen to be placed
above the rest, lest every man's pulling unto himself, should rend asunder the
Church of Christ. For (that which also may serve for an Argument or taken
hereof) at Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist, unto Heraclas and Dionysius,
the Presbyters always chose one OF THEMSELVES, whom they placed in higher
degree, and gave unto him the Title of Bishop. Now St. Ierom they say would
never have picked out that one Church from amongst so many, T. C. a.p li. It is
to be observed that Ierom says, It was so in Alexandria. sign sung that in
other Churches it was not so.
and have noted that in it there had been Bishops from the time that St. Mark
lived, if so be the self same order were of like antiquity every where; his
words therefore must be thus scholied; In the Church of Alexandria, Presbyters
indeed had even from the time of St. Mark the Evangelist, always a Bishop to
rule over them for a remedy against Divisions, Factions, and Schisms. Not so in
other Churches, neither in that very Church any longer then usque ad Heraclam
and Dionysium, till Heraclas and his Successor Dionysius were Bishops. But this
construction does bereave the words construed, partly of wit, and partly of
truth; it makes them both absurd and false. For if the meaning be that
Episcopal Government in that Church was then expired, it must have expired with
the end of some one, and not of two several Bishops days, unless perhaps it
fell sick under Heraclas, and with Dionysius gave up the Ghost. Besides, it is
clearly untrue that the Presbyters of that Church did then cease to be under a
Bishop. Who does not know that after Dionysius, Maximus was Bishop of
Alexandria, Socrat. l. 1. c. 3.
after him Theonas, after him Peter, after him Achillas, after him Alexander,
of whom Socrates in this sort writes; It fortuned on a certain time that this
Alexander in the presence of the Presbyters which were under him, and of the
rest of the Clergy there, discoursed somewhat curiously and subtly of the
holy Trinity, bringing high Philosophical proofs, that there is in the Trinity
an Unity. Whereupon Arius one of the Presbyters which were placed in that
degree under Alexander, opposed eagerly himself against those things which were
uttered by the Bishop. So that thus long Bishops continued even in the Church
of Alexandria. Nor did their Regiment here cease, but these also had others
their Successors till St. Ieroms own time, who living long after Heraclas and
Dionysius had ended their days, did not yet live himself to see the Presbyters
of Alexandria, othewise then subject unto a Bishop. So that we cannot, with any
truth, so interpret his words as to mean, that in the Church of Alexandria
there had been Bishops endued with Superiority over Presbyters from St. Marks
time, only till the time of Heraclas and of Dionysius; Wherefore that St. Ierom
may receive a more probable interpretation then this, We answer, that
generally, o^ Regiment by Bishops, and what term of continuance it had in the
Church of Alexandria, it was no part of his mind to speak, but to note one
only circumstance belonging to the manner of their election, which
circumstance is, that in Alexandria they used to choose their Bishops altogether
out of the college of their own Presbyters, and neither from abroad nor out of
any other inferior order of the Clergy, whereas oftentimes Unto Ignatius Bishop
of An^^uh, Her^ a Deacon there, was made Successor.
elsewhere the use was to choose as well from abroad as at home, as well
inferior unto Presbyters, as Presbyters when they saw occasion, This custom,
says he, the Church of Alexandria did always keep, till in Heraclas and
Dionysius, they began to do otherwise. These two were the very first not chose
out of their College of Presbyters.

Chrysostom being a Presbyter of Anfi^ch we chosen to succeed Nictarius in the
Bishop rick of Constantinople.
The drift and purpose of S. Ieroms speech does plainly show what his meaning
was; for whereas some did over-extol the Office of the Deacon in the Church of
Rome; where Deacons being grown great, through wealth, challenged place above
Presbyters: S. Jerome, to abate this insolency, writing to Evagrius,
diminishes by all means the Deacons estimation, and lifts up Presbyters as
far as possible the truth might bear. An attendant, says he, upon Tables and
Widows proudly to exalt himself above them, at whose prayers is made the body
and blood of Christ; above them, between whom and Bishops there was at the
first for a time no difference neither in authority nor in title. And whereas
after schisms and contentions made it necessary that some one should be placed
over them, by which occasion the title of Bishop became proper unto that one,
yet was that one chosen out of the Presbyters, as being the chiefest, the
highest, the worthiest degree of the Clergy, and not out of Deacons; in which
consideration also it seems that in Alexandria even from St. Mark to Heraclas
and Dionysius Bishops there, the Presbyters evermore have chosen one of
themselves, and not a Deacon at any time to be their Bishop. Nor let any man
think that Christ has one Church in Rome, and another in the rest of the
world; that in Rome he allows Deacons to be honored above Presbyters, and
otherwhere will have them to be in the next degree to the Bishop. If it be
deemed that abroad where Bishops are poorer, the Presbyters under them may be
the next unto them in honor; but at Rome where the Bishop has amplereven^es,
the Deacons whose estate is nearest for wealth, may be also for estimation the
next unto him: We must know that; a Bishop in the meanest City is no less a
Bishop then he who is seated in the greatest; the countenance of a rich, and
the meanness of a poor estate does make no odds between Bishops; and therefore
if a Presbyter at Engubium be the next in degree to a Bishop, surely, even at
Rome it ought in reason to be so likewise; and not a Deacon for wealths sake
only to be above, who by order should be, and elsewhere is, underneath a
Presbyter. But ye will say that according to the custom of Rome a Deacon
presents unto the Bishop him which stands to be ordained Presbyter; and
upon the Deacons testimony given concerning his fitness, he receives at the
Bishops hands Oraination: So that in Rome the Deacon having this special
pre-eminence, the Presbyter ought there to give place unto him. Wherefore is
the custom of one City brought against the practice of the whole World? The
pancity of Deacons in the Church of Rome has gotten the credit, as unto
Presbyters their multitude has been cause of contempt: Howbeit even in the
Church of Rome, Presbyters sit and Deacons stand: an Argument as strong against
the superiority of Deacons, as the fore-alleadged reason does seem for it.
Besides, whosoever is promoted must needs be raised from a lower degree to an
higher; wherefore either let him which is Presbyter be made a Deacon, that so
the Deacon may appear to be the greater; or if of Deacons Presbyters be made,
let them know themselves to be in regard of Deacons, though below in gain, yet
above in Office. And to the end we may understand that those Apostolical Orders
are taken out of the Old Testament, what Aaron and his Sons and the Levites
were in the Temple, the same in the Church may ^ Bishops and Presbyters and
Deacons challenge unto themselves. This is the very drift and substance, this
the true construction and sense of St. Ieroms whole discourse in that Epistle:
Which I have therefore endeavored the more at large to explain, because no one
thing is less effectual or more usual to be alleged against the ancient
Authority of Bishops; concerning whose Government St. Ieroms own words
otherwhere are sufficient to show his opinion, that this Order was not only in
Alexandria so ancient, but even an ancient in other Churches. We have before
alleged his testimony touching James the Bishop of Jerusalem. As for Bishops
in other Churches, on the first of the Epistle to Titus thus he speaks, Till
through instinct of the devil there grew in the Church factions, and among the
people it began to be professed; I am of Paul, I of Apollos, and I of Cephas,
Churches were governed by the common advice of Presbyters; but when every one
began to reckon those whom himself had baptized, his own and not Christ's, it
was decreed IN THE WHOLE WORLD that one chosen out of the Presbyters should be
placed above the rest, to whom all care of the Church should belong, and so the
seeds of schism be removed. If it be so, that by St. Ieroms own Confession this
order was not then begun when people in the Apostles absence began to be
divided into factions by their Teachers; and to rehearse, I am of Paul, but
that even at the very first appointment thereof was agreed upon and received
throughout the world; how shall a man be persuaded that the same Ierom thought
it so ancient nowhere saving in Alexandria, one only Church of the whole
world; A sentence there is indeed of St. Ieroms which bring not thoroughly
considered and weighed may cause his meaning so to be taken, as if he judged
Episcopal regiment to have been the Churches invention long after, and not the
Apostles own institution; as namely, when he admonishes Bishops in this
manner; As therefore Presbyters do know that the custom of the Church makes
them subject to the Bishop which is set over them; so let Bishops he means by
restraint; for Episcopal power was always in the Church instituted by Christ
himself, the Apostles being in government Bishops at large, as no man will
deny, having received from Christ himself that Episcopal Authority. For which
cause Cyprian has said of them. Meminisse Diaconi debent quoniam Apostolos, id
est, Episcopos and praepos^ros Dominus elegit: Diaconol aurem posla ^censum
Domini in co^los, Apostoli sibi constiruerunt, Episcopatus sui and Ecclesia
ministros. Lib 3. Ep. 9.
Bishops know that, custom rather then the truth of any Ordinance of the Lord,
makes them greater then the rest, and that with common advice they ought to
govern the Church. To clear the sense of these words therefore, as we have done
already the former: Laws which the Church from the beginning universally has
observed were some delivered by Christ himself, with a charge to keep them till
the worlds end, as the Law of Baptizing and administering the holy Eucharist;
some brought in afterward by the Apostles, yet not without the special
direction of the Holy Ghost, as occasions did arise. Of this sort are those
Apostolical orders and laws whereby Deacons, Widows, Virgins were first
appointed in the Church,

This answer to Saint Ierom, seems dangerous, I have qualified it as I may,
by addition of some words of restraint; yet I satisfy not may self, in my
judgment it would be altered. Now whereas Jerome does term the Government of
Bishops by restraint, an Apostolical tradition, acknowledging thereby the same
to have been of the Apostles own institution, it may be demanded, how these two
will stand together; namely, that the Apostles by divine instinct, should be as
Jerome confesses the Authors of that regiment, and yet the custom of the
Church he accounted (for so by Jerome it may seem to be in this place accounted)
the chiefest prop that upholdeth the same? To this we answer, That for as much
as the whole body of the Church, has power to alter with general consent and
upon necessary occasions, even the positive law of the Apostles, if there be no
commandment to the contrary, and it manifestly appears to her, that change of
times have clearly taken away the very reason of Gods first institution, as by
sundry examples may be most clearly proved; what laws the universal Church
might change, and does not; if they have long continued without any alteration;
it seems that St. Jerome ascribes the continuance of such positive laws,
though instituted by God himself, to the judgemement of the Church. For they
which might abrogate a Law and do not, are properly said to uphold, to
establish it, and to give it being. The Regiment therefore whereof Jerome
speaks being positive, and consequently not absolutely necessary, but of a
changeable nature, because there is no Divine voice which in express words
forbids it to be changed; he might imagine both that it came by the Apostles
by very divine appointment at the first, and notwithstanding be after a sort,
said to stand in force, rather by the custom of the Church, choosing to
continue in it, than by the necessary constraint of any Commandment from the
Word, requiring perpetual continuance thereof. So that St. Ieroms admonition is
reasonable, sensible, and plain, being contrived to this effect; The ruling
superiority of one Bishop over many Presbyters, in each Church, is an Order
descended from Christ to the Apostles, who were themselves Bishops at large,
and from the Apostles to those whom they in their steads appointed Bishops over
particular Countries and Cities, and even from those ancient times universally
established, thus many years it has continued throughout the World; for which
cause Presbyters must not grudg to continue subject unto their Bishops, unless
they will proudly oppose themselves against that which God himself ordained by
his Apostles; and the whole Church of Christ approves and judges most
convenient. On the other side Bishops albeit they may avouch, with conformity
of truth, that their Authority had thus descended even from the very Apostles
themselves, yet the absolute and everlasting continuance of it, they cannot say
that any Commandment of the Lord does enjoin; And therefore must acknowledge
that the Church has power by universal consent upon urgent cause to take it
away, if thereunto she be constrained through the proud, tyrannical, and
unreformable dealings of her Bishops, whose Regiment she has thus long
delighted in, because she has found it good and requisite to be so governed.
Wherefore lest Bishops forget themselves, as if none on earth had Authority to
touch their states, let them continually bear in mind, that it is rather the
force of custom, whereby the Church having so long found it good to continue
under the Regiment of her virtuous Bishops, does still uphold, maintain, and
honor them in that respect, than that any such true and heavenly Law can be
showed, by the evidence whereof it may of a truth appear that the Lord himself
has appointed Presbyters for ever to be under the Regiment of Bishops, in what
sort soever they behave themselves; let this consideration be a bridle unto
them, let it teach them not to disdain the advice of their Presbyters, but to
use their authority with so much the greater humility and moderation, as a
Sword which the Church has power to take from them. In all this there is no
le^^ why S. Ierom might not think the Authors of Episcopal Regiment to have
been the very blessed Apostles themselves, directed therein by the special
mution of the Holy Ghost, which the Ancients all before, and besides him and
himself also elsewhere, being known to hold, we are not, without better
evidence then this, to think him in judgment divided both from himself and
from them. Another Argument that the Regiment of Churches by one Bishop over
many Presbyters, has been always held Apostolical, may be this. We find that
throughout all those Cities where the Apostles did plant Christianity, the
History of times has noted succession of pastors in the seat of one, not of
many (there being in every such Church evermore many Pastors) and the first one
in every rank of succession we find to have been, Lib. a. ^o ^. H^^res 4 ^.
if not some Apostle, yet some Apostles Disciple. By Epiphanius the Bishops of
Jerusalem are reckoned down from James to Hilarion then Bishop. Of them which
boasted that they held the same things which they received of such as lived
with the Apostles themselves, De prescr^ p. o^^^ r^. here^.
Tertullian speaks after this sort, Let them therefore show the beginnings of
their Churches, let them recite their Bishops one by one, each in such sort
succeeding other, that the first Bishop of them have had, for his Author and
Predecessor, some Apostle, or at least some Apostolical Person, who persevered
with the Apostles. For so Apostolical Churches are wont to bring forth the
evidence of their estates. So does the Church of Smyrna, having Polycarp whom
John did consecrate. Catalogues of Bishops in a number of other Churches
(Bishops and succeeding one another) from the very Apostles times are by
Eusebius and Socrates collected, whereby it appears so clear, as nothing in
the World more, that under them and by their appointment this Order began,
which makes many Presbyters subject unto the Regiment of some one Bishop. For
as in Rome while the civil ordering of the Commonwealth, was jointly and
equally in the hands of two Consuls, Historical Records concerning them, did
evermore mention them both, and note which two as Colleagues succeeded from time
to time; So, there is no doubt but Ecclesiastical antiquity had done the very
like, had not one Pastors place and calling been always so eminent above the
rest in the same Church. And what need we to seek far for proofs that the
Apostles who began this order of Regiment by Bishops, did it not but by divine
instinct, when without such direction things of far less weight and moment they
attemdted not? Paul and Barnabas did not open their mouths to the Gentiles,
Acts. 13.
till the Spirit had said, Separate me Paul and Barnabas for the work whereunto
I have sent them. Acts. ^.
The Eunuch by Philip was neither baptized nor instructed before the Angel of
God was sent to give him notice that so it pleased the most High. In Asia, Paul
and the rest were silent, because the Spirit forbad them to speak, Acts. 19.
When they intended to have seen Bythinia they stayed their journey, the spirit
not giving them leave to go. Before Timothy was employed in those Episcopal
affairs of the Church, about which the Apostle St. Paul used him, the Holy
Ghost gave special charge for his Ordination, 1 Timothy 1. 1^.
and prophetical intelligence more then once, what success the same would have.
And shall we think that James was made Bishop of Jerusalem, Evodius Bishop of
the Church of Antioch, the Angels in the Churches of Asia Bishops, that Bishops
every where were appointed to take away factions, contentions and Schisms,
without some like divine instigation and direction of the Holy Ghost? Wherefore
let us not fear to be herein bold and peremptory, That, if any thing in the
Churches Government, surely the first institution of Bishops was from Heaven,
was even of God; the Holy Ghost was the Author of it.

VI. A Bishops, says St. Augustine, is a Presbyter's Superior: but the
question is now, What manner of power Bishops from the first beginning have had
wherein that superiority did consist. The Bishops pre-eminence we say
therefore was twofold. First, he excelled in latitude of the power of Order,
secondly in that kind of power which belongs unto Jurisdiction. Priests in
the law had authority and power to do greater things then Levites, Aug. Ep. 19.
^d Hierom. and de haeres. 53.
the high Priest greater then inferior Priests might do, therefore Levites
were beneath Priests, and Priests inferior to the High Priest, by reason of the
very degree of dignity, and of worthiness in the nature of those functions
which they did execute; and not only, for that the one had power to command and
control the other, In like sort, Presbyters having a weightier and a worthier
charge then Deacons had, the Deacon was in this sort the Presbyters inferior,
and where we say that a Bishop was likewise ever accounted a Presbyters
superior, even according unto his very power of Order, we must of necessity
declare what principal duties belonging unto that kind of power a Bishop might
perform, and not a Presbyter. The custom of the primitive Church in
consecrating holy Virgins, 1 Cor. 7 29. 1 Timothy 5. 9.
and Widows, unto the service of God and his Church, is a thing not obscure,
but easy to be known, Tettul. de r^^. vi^g.
both by that which St. Paul himself concerning them has, and by the latter
consonant evidence of other men's writings. Now a part of the pre-eminence which
Bishops had in their power of Order, was, that by them only such were
consecrated. Again, the power of ordaining both Deacons and Presbyters, the
power to give the power of order unto others, this also has been always
peculiar unto Bishops. It has not been heard of, that inferior presbyters
were ever authorized to ordein. And concerning Ordination so great force and
dignity it has, that whereas Presbyters by such power as they have received
for Administration of the Sacraments, are able only to beget Children unto God;
Bishops having power to Ordain, do by virtue thereof create Fathers to the
people of God, as Epiphanius fitly disputes. Epiph. 3. l. 10 ^. haer. 7.
There are which hold that between a Bishop and a Presbyter, touching power of
Order, there is no difference: The reason of which conceit is for that they
see Presbyters no less then Bishops, authorized to offer up the prayers of the
Church, to Preach the Gospel, to Baptize, to Administer the holy Eucharist; but
they considered not with all, as they should, that the Presbyters authority to
do these things is derived from the Bishops which does ordain him thereunto, so
that even in those things which are common unto both, yet the power of the one,
Acts. 1.^. 23.
is as it were a certain light borrowed from the others lamp. The Apostles
being Bishops at large, ^deined every where Presbyters. Tim. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 5. 8.
Titus and Timothy having received Episcopal power, as Apostolic Ambassadors
or Legates, the one in Greece, the other in Ephesus, they both did, by virtue
thereof, likewise ordein throughout all Churches Deacons and Presbyters within
the circuits allotted unto them. A pud AEgyptum Presbyteri consir man's si ^
raesens non fit Eps. copus Comq.vulgo Amb. dic. in 4. Ep. ad Ephesians.
As for Bishops by restraint, their power this way incommunicable unto
Presbyters, which of the ancients do not acknowledge? I make not Confirmation
any part of that power which has always belonged only unto Bishops; because in
some places the custom was, that Presbyters might also confirm in the absence
of a Bishop; albeit for the most part, none but only Bishops were thereof the
allowed Ministers.

Here it will be perhaps Objected that the power of Ordination it self was not
every where peculiar and proper unto Bishops, as may be seen by 2 Council of
Carthage, which shows their Churches Order to have been, That Presbyters
should together with the Bishop lay hands upon the ordained. But the answer
hereunto is easy, For does it hereupon follow that the power of Ordination was
not principally and originally in the Bishop? Our Savior has said unto his
Apostles, With me ye shall sit and judge the Twelve Tribes of Israel; yet we
know that to him alone it belongs to judge the World, and that to him all
judgment is given. With us even at this day Presbyters are licensed to do as
much as that Council speaks of, if any be present. Yet will not any man
thereby conclude that in this Church others than Bishops are allowed to ordain:
The association of Presbyters is no sufficient proof that the power of
Ordination is in them; but rather that it never was in them, we may hereby
understand, for that no man is able to show either Deacon or Presbyter ordained
by Presbyters only, and his Ordination accounted lawful in any ancient part of
the Church; every where examples being found both of Deacons and of Presbyters
ordained by Bishops alone oftentimes, neither ever in that respect thought
unsufficient. Touching that other chiefty, which is of Jurisdiction; amongst
the Jews he which was highest through the worthiness of peculiar duties
incident into his function in the legal service of God, did bear always in
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction the chiefest sway. As long as the glory of the
Temple of God did last, there were in it sundry orders of men consecrated unto
the service thereof; one sort of them inferior unto another in dignity and
degree; the Nathiners subordinate unto the Levites, the Levites unto the
Priests, the rest of the Priests to those twenty four which were chief Priests,
and they all to the High Priest. If any man surmise that the difference between
them was only by distinction in the former kind of power, and not in this
latter of jurisdiction, Numb. 3. 32.
are not the words of the Law manifest which make Eleazer the Son of Aaron the
Priest chief Captain of the Levites, and overseer of them, unto whom the charge
of the Sanctuary was committed? Again at the commandment of Aaron and his Sons,
Numb 4.17. 2 Chronicles. 19. 11.
are not the Gersonites themselves required to do all their service in the
whole charge belonging unto the Gersonites being inferior Priests as Aaron and
his Sons were High Priests? Did not Iehoshaphat appoint Amarias the Priest to
be chief over them who were Judges for the cause of the Lord in Jerusalem?
Priests, says Josephus, Joseph. Atnig. p. 61 ^.
worship God continually, and the eldest of the stock are governors over the
rest. He does sacrifice unto God before others, he has care of the Laws,
judges controversies, corrects offenders, and whosoever obeys him not is
convict of impiety against God. But unto this they answer, That the reason
thereof was because the High Priest did prefigure Christ, and represent to the
people that chiefty of our Savior which was to come; so that Christ being now
come there is no cause why such pre-eminence should be given unto any one.
Which fancy pleases so well the humor of all sorts of rebellions spirits that
they all seek to shroud themselves under it. Tell the Anabaptist, which holds
the use of the sword unlawful for a Christian man, that God himself did allow
his people to make wars; they have their answer round and ready, Those ancient
Wars were figures of the spiritual Wars of Christ. Tell the Barrowist what sway
David, and others the Kings of Israel, did bear in the ordering of spiritual
affairs, the same answer again serves, namely, That David and the rest of the
Kings of Israel prefigured Christ. Tell the Martinist of the Highpriests great
authority and jurisdiction amongst the Jews, what other thing does serve this
Turn but the self-same shift; By the power of the High Priest the universal
supreme Authority of our Lord Jesus Christ was shadowed. The thing is true,
that indeed Highpriests were figures of Christ, yet this was in things
belonging unto their power of Order; they figured Christ by entering into the
holy place, by offering for the sins of all the people once a year, and by
other the like duties: But, that to govern and to maintain order amongst those
that were subject to them, is an office figurative and abrogated by Christ's
coming in the Ministry; that their exercise of jurisdiction was figurative, yea
figurative in such sort, that it had no other cause of being instituted, but
only to serve as a representation of somewhat to come, and that herein the
Church of Christ ought not to follow them; this Article is such as must be
confirmed, if any way by miracle, otherwise it will hardly enter into the heads
of reasonable men, why the High Priest should more figure Christ in being a
Judge then in being whatsoever he might be besides. St. Cyprian deemed it no
wresting of Scripture to challenge as much for Christian Bishops, Cypr. l. 3.
ep. 9. ad Rogatianum.
as was given to the High Priest among the Jews, and to urge the law of Moses
as being most effectual to prove it. St. Ierom likewise thought it an argument
sufficient to ground the Authority of Bishops upon. H^erom. Ep. ^5.
To the end, says he, we may understand Apostolical traditions to have been
taken from the Old Testament, that which Aaron, and his Sons, and the Levites
were in the Temple; Bishops and Presbyters and Deacons in the Church may
lawfully challenge to themselves, In the Office of a Bishop Ignatius observes
these two functions (...), concerning the one such is the prehemince of a
Bishop, Ep. ad Smyr.
that he only has the heavenly mysteries of God committed originally unto him,
so that otherwise than by his Ordination, and by authority received from him,
others besides him are not licensed therein to deal as ordinary Ministers of
Gods Church. And touching the other part of their sacred Function, wherein the
power of their jurisdiction does appear first how the Apostles themselves, 1 Timothy 3. 19. Against a Presbyter receive no accusation under two or three
witnesses.
and secondly how Titus and Timothy had rule and jurisdiction over Presbyters,
no man is ignorant. And had not Christian Bishops afterward the like power?
Ignatius Bishop of Antioch being ready by blessed martyrdom to end his life,
writes unto his Presbyters, the Pastors under him, in this sort. O^ (...)
After the death of Fabian Bishop of Rome, there growing some trouble about the
receiving of such persons into the Church as had fallen away in persecution,
and did now repent their fall; Ignat Epist. ad Antioch Apud Cypr, Ep. 1. Ep. 7.
the Presbyters and Deacons of the same Church advertised St. Cyprian thereof,
signifying That they must of necessity defer to deal in that cause till God did
send them a new Bishop which might moderate all things. Much we read of
extraodinary fasting usually in the Church. And in this appears also somewhat
concerning the chiefty of Bishops. The custom is, says Tertullian that
Bishops do appoint when the people shall all fast. Tertul advers Psychic.
Episcopi universae ple bir mandare jejunia assoleni. Cypr. Ep. 27.
Yea, it is not a matter left to our own free choice whether Bishops shall rule
or no, but the will of our Lord and Savior is, says Cyprian, that every act
of the Church, be governed by her Bishops. An Argument it is of the Bishops
high pre-eminence, rule, and government over all the rest of the Clergy, even
that the Sword of persecution did strike, especially, always at the Bishop as
at the Head, the rest by reason of their lower estate, being more secure, as
the self-same Cyprian notes; the very manner of whose speech unto his own,
both Deacons and Presbyters who remained safe, when himself then Bishop was
driven into exile, argues likewise his eminent authority and rule over them,
By these letters, says he, Cypr. Ep. 39. Vide Ignat. ad Magnes
I both exhort and COMMAND that ye whose presence there is not envied at, nor
so much beset with dangers, supply my room in doing those things which the
exercise of Religion does require. Unto the same purpose serve most directly,
those comparisons, than which nothing is more familiar in the books of the
ancient Fathers, who as often as they speak of the several degrees in Gods
Clergy, if they chance to compare Presbyters with Levitical Priests of the Law;
the Bishop Quod Aaron and tilios ejus, hoc Episcojum and Presbyteros esse
noverimns. Hier. Ep. 2. of Neporia^um.
they compare unto Aaron the High Priest; if they compare the one with the
Apostles, the other they compare (although in a lower proportion) sometime Ita
est ut in Episcopis Hominem, in Presbyteris Apostolos recognoscas Auctor opuse,
de ordinib Eccl. inter opera Hieron.
to Christ, and sometime to God himself, evermore showing that they placed the
Bishop in an eminent degree of ruling authority and power above other
Presbyters. Ignat. Ep. ad Tra.
Ignatius comparing Bishops with Deacons, and with such Ministers of the word
and Sacraments as were but Presbyters, and had no Authority over Presbyters;
What is says he, the Bishop but one which has all principality and power over
all, so far forth as man may have it, being to his power, a follower even of
Gods own Christ; Mr. Inslit. l. 4. cap. 4. Sect. ^^
Calvin himself, though an enemy unto Regiment by Bishops, does notwithstanding
confess, that in old time the Ministers which had charge to teach, chose of
their Company one in every City, to whom they appropriated the Title of Bishop,
lest equality should bread dissension, He adds farther, that look what duty
the Roman Consuls did execute in proposing matters unto the Senate, in asking
their opinions, in directing them by advice, admonition, exhortation, in
guiding actions by their Authority, and in seeing that performed which was with
common consent agreed on, the like charge had the Bishop in the assembly of
other Ministers. Thus much Calvin being forced by the evidence of truth to
grant, does yet deny the Bishops to have been so in Authority at the first as
to bear rule over other Ministers. Wherein what rule he does mean I know not.
But if the Bishops were so far in dignity, above other Ministers, as the
Consuls of Rome, for their year above other Senators, it is as much as we
require. And undoubtedly, if as the Consuls of Rome, so the Bishops in the
Church of Christ had such authority, as both to direct other Ministers, and to
see that every of them should observe that which their common consent had
agreed on, how this could be done by the Bishop not bearing rule over them, for
mine own part I must acknowledge that my poor concept is not able to
comprehend. One objection there is of some force to make against that which we
have hither to endeavored to prove, if they mistake it not who allege it. St.
Ierom comparing other Presbyters with him, Hiere n. Epist. od Eu^gr. 85.
unto whom the name of Bishop was t^en appropriate, asks, What a Bishop by
virtue of his place and calling may do more then a Presbyter, except it be only
to Ordain? In like sort Chrysostom having moved a question, wherefore, St.
Paul should give Timothy precept concerning the quality of Bishops, and descend
from them to Deacons, omiting the Order of Presbyters between, he makes
thereunto this answer, Chrysostom lo in 1 Timothy 3.
What things he spoke concerning Bishops, the same are also meet for
Presbyters, whom Bishops seem not to excel in any thing but only in the power
of Ordination. Wherefore seeing this does import no ruling superiority, it
follows that Bishops were as then no rulers over that part of the Clergy of
God. Whereunto we answer that both S. Ierom and S. Chrysostom had in those
their speeches an eye no farther then only to that function, for which
Presbyters and Bishops were consecrated unto God. Now we know that their
Consecration had reference to nothing but only that which they did by force and
virtue of the power of Order, wherein fithe Bishops received their charge, only
by that one degree to speak of, more ample then Presbyters did theirs, it might
be well enough said that Presbyters were that way authorized to do, in a
manner, even as much as Bishops could do, if we consider what each of them did
by virtue of solemn consecration; for as concerning power of regiment and
jurisdiction, it was a thing withal added unto Bishops for the necessary use of
such certain persons and people, as should be thereunto subject in those
particular Churches whereof they were Bishops, and belonged to them only, as
Bishops of such or such a Church; whereas the other kind of power had relation
indefinitely unto any of the whole society of Christian men, on whom they
should chance to exercise the same, and belonged to them absolutely, as they
were Bishops wheresoever they live. St. Ieroms conclusion thereof is, that
seeing in the one kind of power, there is no greater difference between a
Presbyter and a Bishop, Bishops should not because of their preeminence in the
other, too much lift up themselves, above the Presbyters under them. St.
Chrysostom's collection, that whereas the Apostle does set down the qualities,
whereof regard should be had in the Consecration of Bishops, there was no need
to make a several discourse how Presbyters ought to be qualified when they are
Ordained; because there being so little difference in the functions, whereunto
the one and the other receive Ordination, the same precepts might well serve
for both; at leastwise by the virtues required in the greater, what should
need in the less might be easily understood. As for the difference of
jurisdiction, the truth is the Apostles yet living, and themselves where they
were resident, exercising the jurisdiction in their own persons, it was not
every where established in Bishops. When the Apostles prescribed those laws,
and when Chysostom thus spoke concerning them, it was not by him at all
respected, but his eye was the same way with Ieroms; his cogitation was w^olly
fixed on that power which by Consecration is given to Bishops, more then to
Presbyters, and not on that which they have over Presbyters by force of their
particular accessory jurisdiction. Wherein if any man suppose that Ierom and
Chrysostom knew no difference at all between a Presbyter and a Bishop, let him
weigh but one or two of their sentences. The pride of insolent Bishops, has
not a sharper enemy then Ierom, for which cause he takes often occasions most
severely to inveigh against them, sometimes for Velut in a 1 qua sublimi
specula (...) dignantur videre mo^tales and alloqui con^er^os suos in a. ^.
Epist. ad Gal.
showing disdain and contempt of the Clergy under them; sometimes for not Nemo
peccantibus Episcopis audet contradicere: Nemo audet accusare majorem,
propteres quasi sancti and beati and in praerptis Domini ambulantes augent
peccata peecatis. Dissicilis est accusa^io in Epise^pum. Si ^^ha p^ecaverit,
non creditur, and si convictus suerit ron punirur. in cap. 8. Ecclesiast.
suffering themselves to be told of their faults, and admonished of their duty
by inferiors; sometime for not pessimae consuetudi^^, est in qui^usdam
Eccles^^ tacere Presbyteron and praesentibus Episcopis non loqui; quasi a^^
invideant aut non dignentur audice. Ep. 2. ad Nepotian.
admitting their Presbyters to teach, if so be themselves were in presence;
sometimes for not vouc^^sasing to use any conference with them, or to take any
counsel of them. Howbeit never does he, in such wise, bend himself against
their disorders, as to deny their Rule and Authority over Presbyters: Of
Vigilantius being a Presbyter he thus writes, Ep. 54. ad Rip^r.
Miror sanctum Episcopum in cujus Parochia Presbyter esse dicitur, acquiescere
surori ejus, and non virga Apostolica virgaque ferrea confringere vas inutile.
I marvel that the holy Bishop under whom Vigilantius is said to be a Presbyter,
does yield to his fury, and not break that unprofitable Vessel with his
Apostolic and iron rod. With this agrees most fitly the grave advice he
gives to Hieron. ad. Nepo^. e No Bishop may be a Lord in reference unto the
Presbyters which are under him, if we take that name in the worse part, or
Ierom here does. For a Bishop is no rule his Prebyters, not as Lords do their
Slave^ but as Fathers do their children.
Nepotian, Be thou subject unto thy Bishop, and receive him as the Father of
thy Soul. This also I say, that Bishops should know themselves to be Priests,
and not Lords, that they ought to honor the Clergy as becomes the Clergy to
be honored, to the end their Clergy may yield them the honor which, as
Bishops, they ought to have: That of the Orator Domitius is famous, Wherefore
should I esteem of thee as of a Prince, when thou make not of me that
reckoning which should in reason be made of a Senator? Let us know the Bishop
and his Presbyters to be the same which Aaron sometimes and his Sons were.
Finally, writing against the Heretics which were name Luciferians, The very
safety of the Church, says he, depends on the dignity of the Chief Priest,
to whom, unless men grant an exceeding and an eminent power, there will grow in
Churches even as many Schisms as there are Persons which have authority.

Touching Chrysostom, to show that by him there was also acknowledged a ruling
superiority of Bishops over Presbyters, both then usual, and in no respect
unlawful: what need we allege his Words and Sentences, when the History of his
own Episcopal actions in that very kind, is till this day extant for all men
to read that will? In vira Chrysostom. per Ca^^od. Sen.
For St. Chrysostom of a Presbyter in Antioch, grew to be afterward Bishop of
Constantinople, and in process of time when the Emperors heavy displeasure had,
through the practice of a powerful faction against him, effected his
banishment; Innocent the Bishop of Rome understanding thereof wrote his Letters
unto the Clergy of that Church, That no Successor ought to be chosen in
Chrysostom's room: Nec ejus clerum alii parere Pontisici, Nor his Clergy OBEY
any other Bishop than him. A fond kind of speech if so be there had been, as
then, in Bishops no ruling superiority over Presbyters. When two of
Chrysostom's Presbyters had joined themselves to the faction of his mortal
enemy Theophilus, Pallad in vita Chrysostom.
Patriarch in the Church of Alexandria; the same Theophilus and other Bishops
which were of his Conventicle, having sent those two amongst others to cite
Chrysostom their lawful Bishop, and to bring him into Public judgment, he
takes against this one thing special exception, as being contrary to all
order, That those Presbyters should come as Messengers, and call him to
Judgment who were a part of that Clergy, whereof himself was Ruler and Judge.
So that Bishops to have had in those times a ruling superiority over
Presbyters, neither could Ierom nor Chrysostom be ignorant; and therefore,
hereupon it were superfluous that we should any longer stand.

VII. Touching the next point, How Bishops, together with Presbyters have used
to govern the Churches which were under them: After what sort Bishop^ together
with Presbyters have used to govern the Churches which were under them.
It is by Zonaras somewhat plainly and at large declared, that the Bishop had
his Seat on high in the Church above the residue which were present; that a
number of Presbyters did always there assist him; and that in the oversight of
the Poeple those Presbyters were (...) Zon in Can. Apost.
after a sort the Bishops Coadjutors. The Bishops and Presbyters, who, together
with him, governed the Church, are, for the most part, by Ignatius jointly
mentioned. In the Epistle to them of Trallis, he says of Presbyters, that they
are (...), Counselors and Assistants of the Bishop, and concludes in the end,
He that should disobey these, were a plain Athe^t, and an irreligious Person,
and one that did set Christ himself and his own Ordinances at naught. Which
Orders making Presbyters or Priests the Bishop's Assistants does not import
that they were of equal authority with him, but rather so adjoined that they
also were subject, as has been proved. Cum Episcopa Presbyteri Sace^lat. li
ho^^re conjeusti. Ep. 28 ^ g ^ Compresbyteri p^striq^i nolas a^tide bant, ^p.
27.
In the Writings of Saint Cyprian nothing is more usual, than to make mention
of the College of Presbyters subject unto the Bishop; although in handling the
common affairs of the Church they assisted him. But of all other places which
open the ancient order of Episcopal Presbyters, the most clear is that Epistle
of Cyprian unto Cernelius, concerning certain Novatian Heretics, received
again upon their conversion into the unity of the Church: After that Urbanus
and Sidonius, Confessors, had come and signified unto our Presbyters, that
Maximus, a Consessor and Presbyter, did, together with them, desire to return
into the Church, it seemed meet to hear from their own mouths and confessions
that which by message they had delivered. When they were come, and had been
called to account by the Presbyters touching those things they had committed;
Their answer was; That they had been deceived; and did request that such things
as there they were charged with might be forgotten. It being brought unto me
what was done, I took order that the Presbytery might be assembled. There were
also present five Bishops, that, upon settled advice, it might be, with consent
of all, determined what should be done about their Persons. Thus far St.
Cyprian. Wherein it may be, peradventure, demanded, Whether he, and other
Bishops, did thus proceed with advice of their Presbyters in all such Public
affairs or the Church, as being thereunto bound by Ecclesiastical Canons; or
else that they voluntarily so did, becuase they judged it in discretion as then
most convenient. Surely the words of Cyprian are plain, Cyp. Ep. 93
that of his own accord he chose this way of proceeding. Unto that, says he,
which Donatus, and Fortunatus, and Novatus, and Gordius our Compresbyters have
written, I could, by my self alone, make no answer, forasmuch as at the very
first entrance into my Bishopric I resolutely determined not to do any thing
of mine own private judgment, without your counsel, and the peoples consent.
The reason whereof he renders in the same Epistle, saying, When, by the grace
of God, my self shall come unto you (for St. Cyprian was now in exile) of
things which either have been, or must to done, we will consider, sicut honor
mutous poseit, as the Law of courtesy which one does owe to another of us,
requires. And at this very mark does St. Ierom evermore aim, in telling
Bishops, that Presbyters were at the first their Equals, that, in some
Churches, for a long time no Bishop was made, but only such as the Presbyters
did choose out amongst themselves, and therefore no cause why the Bishop should
disdain to consult with them, and in weighty affairs of the Church to use their
advice, sometime to countenance their own Actions, or to repress the boldness
of proud and insolent Spirits, that which Bishops had in themselves sufficient
authority and power to have done, notwithstanding they would not do alone, but
craved therein the aid and assistance of other Bishops, as in the case of those
Novatian Heretics, before alleged, Cyprian himself did. And in Cyprian we
find of others the like practice. Ragatian, a Bishop, Cyp. E^. ^^
having been used contumelously by a Deacon of his own Church, wrote thereof
his complaint unto Cyprian and other Bishops. In which case their answer was,
That although, in his own cause, he did of humility rather show his grievance,
than himself take revenge, which, by the rigor of his Apostolical Office, and
the authority of his Chair, he might have presently done, without any further
delay: Yet if the Party should do again, as before their Judgments were,
Fungaris circa ^um potestate honoris tui, and cum vel deponas vel abstineas:
Use on him that power which the honor of thy Place gives thee, either to
depose him, or exclude him from access unto holy things. The Bishop, for his
assistance and ease, had under him, to guide and direct Deacons in their
charge, his Archdeacon, so termed in respect of care over Deacons, albeit
himself were not Deacon but Presbyter; For the guidance of Presbyters in their
Function, the Bishop had likewise under him one of the self-same Order with
them, but above them an authority, one whom the Ancients termed usually an ^^^
Such as or was that ^eter wha^^ all Cussiator writes the life of Chrysostom
does call the Accepresbyter of the Church of Alexandriae under Troj ^^^^ that
time ^^^.
Arch-Presbyter, weat this day name him Dean. For, most certain truth it is,
that Churches-Cathedral, and the Bishops of them are as glasses, wherein the
face and very countenance of Apostolical antiquity remains even as yet to be
seen, notwithstanding the alterations which tract of time, and the course of
the world has brought. For defense and maintenance of them we are most
earnestly bound to strive, even as the Jews were for their Temple, and the
High Priest of God therein: The overthrow and ruin of the one, if ever the
sacrilegious avarice of Atheists should prevail so far, which God of his
infinite mercy forbid, ought no otherwise to move us than the people of God
were moved, when having beheld the sack and combustion of his Sanctuary in most
lamentable manner flaming before their eyes, they uttered from the bottom of
their grieved Spirits those voices of doleful supplication, Psalm. 14
Exsurge Domine and miserearis Sion, serve tui diligunt lapides ejus, pulver is
ejus miseret cos.

VIII. How far the power which Bishops had did reach, How sirr the lower of
Bishops has reached from the beginning in respect of Territory or lu^^ compass.
what number of Persons was subject unto them at the first, and how large their
Territories were, it is not for the question we have in hand, a thing very
greatly material to know: For if we prove that Bishops have lawfully of old
ruled over other Ministers, it is enough, how few soever those Ministers have
been, how small soever the circuit of Place which has contained them. Yet
hereof somewhat, to the end we may so far forth illustrate Church-Antiquities;
A Law Imperial there is, which shows that there was great care had to provide
for every Christian City Bi^hop as near as might be, I. 3^. p. de Epise. ad
Cler. (...) Resides. Cypr. Ep. 51. Cum jampridem per omnes provin^as and per
urbes singulas ordinari sunt Episcopi.
and that each City had some Territory belonging unto it, which Territory was
also under the Bishop of the same City; that, because it was not universally
thus, but in some Countries, one Bishop had subject unto him many Cities and
their Territories; the Law which provided for establishment of the other
Orders, should not prejudice those Churches wherein this contrary Custom had
before prevailed. Unto the Bishop of every such City, not only the Presbyters
of the same City, but also of the Territory thereunto belonging, were from the
first beginning subject. For we must note that when as yet there were in Cities
no Parish Churches, but only Colleges of Presbyters under their Bis^ops
Regiment, yet smaller Congregations and Churches there were even then abroad,
U^^ Ecclesiastici ordinis non est c^n^^^s, and osser^ and ^ngit ^Sierailos^ qui
est in solus, Tert. exhor^, ad castir.
in which Churches there was but some one only Presbyter to perform amongst
them Divine duties. Towns and Villages abroad receiving the Faith of Christ
from Cities whereunto they were adjacent, did as Spiritual and Heavenly
Colonies by their subjection, honor those ancient Mother Churches, out of
which they grew. And in the Christian Cities themselves, when the mighty
increase of Believers made it necessary to have them divided into certain
several companies, and over every of those companies one only Pastor to be
appointed for the Ministry of holy things; between the first, and the rest
after it, there could not be but a natural inequality, even as between the
Temple and Synagogues in Jerusalem. The Clergy of Cities were termed Urbici, to
show a difference between them and the Clergies of Towns, Cypr. Ep. 2^.
of Villages, of Castles abroad. And how many soever these Parishes or
Congregations were in number, which did depend on any one principal
City-Church, unto the Bishop of that one Church, they, and their several sole
Presbyters were all subject.

For, if so be, as some imagine, every petty Congregation or Hamlet had had his
own particular Bishop, what sense could there be in those words of Ierom,
Heron, advers. Lucifer.
concerning Castles, Villages, and other places abroad, which having only
Presbyters, to teach them, and to minister unto them the Sacraments, were
resorted unto by Bishops for the Administration of that wherewith their
Presbyters were not licensed to meddle. To note a difference of that one Church
where the Bishop has his seat, and the rest which depend upon it, that one
has usually been termed Cathedral, according to the same sense wherein
Ignatius, speaking of the Church of Antioch, terms it his Throne: and Cyprian
making mention of Euarist^s who had been Bishop and was now depo^ed, Cypr. Ep.
4^.
terms him. Cathedrae ext^rrem, one that was thrust besides his Chair. The
Church where the Bishop is set with his College of Presbyters about him, we
call a See; the Local compass of his Authority we term a Diocese. Unto a Bishop
within the compass of his own, both See and Diocese, it has, by right of his
place, evermore appertained Cou. Antioch cap. 5. ' (...) Cone. Constant. c. 2.
(...) lib. 5. cap. 8.
to ordain Presbyters; to make Deacons, and with judgment, to dispose of all
things of weight. The Apostle St. Paul had Episcopal Authority, but so at
large, that we cannot assign unto him any one certain Diocese. His 1 Cor. 15.
As I have ordained in the Churches of Galatia, the same do ye also.
positive Orders and Constitutions, Churches every where did obey. Yea, a
charge and care, says he, I 2 Cor. 11. 8 Chrysostom. in ^. ad Ti^.
have even of all the Churches. The walks of Titus and Timothy was limited
within the bounds of a narrow Precinct. As for other Bishops, that which
Chrysostom has concerning them, If they be evil, could not po^^ibly agre^ unto
them, unless their Authority had reached farther than to some one only
Congregation. The danger being so great, at it is, to him that scandalizeth one
Soul, What shall he, says Chrisostom, speaking of a Bishop, what shall he
deserve, by whom so many Souls, yea, even whole Cities and Peoples, Men, Women,
and Children, Citizens, Peasants, Inhabitants, both of his own City, and of
other Towns subject unto it, are offended? A thing so unusual it was for a
Bishop not to have ample Jurisdiction, that Theophilus, Patriark of Alexandria,
for making one a Bishop of a small Town, is noted a proud Despiser of the
commendable Orders of the Church with this censure, ^Palial^ in^^ia Chr^^^^^.
Such Novelties Theophilus presumed every where to begin, taking upon him, as
it had been, another Moses. Whereby is discovered also their Error, who think,
that such as in Ecclesi^stical Writings they find termed Chorepiscopos, were
the same in the Country, which the Bishop was in the City: Whereas the old
Chorepiscopi are they, that were appointed of the Bishops to have, as his
Vicegerents, some oversight of those Churches abroad, which were subject unto
his See: in which Churches they had also power to make Subdeacons, Readers,
and such like petty Church Officers. With which power so st^nted, they not
contenting themselves, but adventuring at the length, to Or^^in even Deacons
and Presbyters also, as the Bishop himself did, their presumption herein was
controlled and stayed by the ancient Edict of Councils. For example, that of
Antioch, ^Cane L Antioch ca^. 10.^
It has seemed good to the holy Synod that such in Towns and Countries as are
called Chorepiscopi do know their limits, and govern the Churches under them,
contenting themselves with the charge thereof, and with Authority to make
Readers, Subdeacons, Exorcists, and to be Leaders or Guiders of them, but not
to meddle with the Ordination either of a Presbyter or of a Deacon, without the
Bishop of that City, whereunto the Chorepiscopus, and his Territory also, is
subject. The same Synod appoints likewise that those Chorepiscopi shall be
made by none but the Bishop of that City; under which they are. Much might
hereunto be added, if it were further needful to prove, that the local compass
of a Bishop's authority and power was never so straightly lifted, as some men
would have the World to imagine. But to go forward; degrees of these are, and
have been of old, even amongst Bishops also themselves: One sort of Bishops
being Superiors unto Presbyters only, another sort having pre-eminence also
above Bishops. It comes here to be considered in what respect inequality of
Bishops was thought, at the first, a thing expedient for the Church, and what
odds there has been between them, by how much the power of one has been
larger, higher, and greater then of another. Touching the causes for which it
has been este^med meet, that Bishops themselves should not every way be
Equals; they are the same for which the wisdom both of God and Man, has
evermore approved it as most requisite, that where many Governors must of
necessity concur, for the ordering of the same affairs, of what nature soever
they be, one should have some kind of sway or stroke more than all the
residue. For where number is, there must be order, or else of force there will
be confusion. Let there be diverse Agents, of whom each has his private
inducements, with resolute pu^pose to follow them, (as each may have;) unless
in this case some had pre-eminence above the rest, a Chance it were, if ever
any thing should be either began, proceeded in, or brought unto any Conclusion
by them; Deliberations and Counsels would seldom go forward, their Meetings
would always be in danger to break up with jarrs and contradictions. In an
Army a number of Captains, all of equal power, without some higher to over-sway
them; what good would they do? In all Nations where a number are to draw any
one way, there must be some one principal Mover. Let the practice of our very
Adversaries themselves herein be considere^; Are the Presbyters able to
determine of Church Affairs, unless their Pastors do strike the chiefest stroke
and have power above the rest? Can their Pastoral Synod do any thing, unless
they have some President amongst them? In Synods, they are forced to give one
Pastor pre-eminence and superiority above the rest. But they answer, That he,
who being a Pastor according to the Order of their Discipline, is, for the
time, some little deal mightier than his Brethren, does not continue so longer
than only during the Synod. Which Answer serves not to help them out of the
briars: for, by their practice, they confirm our Principle, touching the
necessity of one man's pre-eminence wheresoever a concurrency of many is
required unto any one solemn action; this Nature teaches, and this they cannot
choose but acknowledge. As for the change of his Person to whom they give this
pre-eminence, if they think it expedient to make for every Synod a new
Superior, there is no Law of God which binds them so to do, neither any that
tells them, that they might suffer one and the same man being made President,
even to continue so during life; and to leave his pre-eminence unto his
Successors after him, as, by the ancient Order of the Church, Archbishops,
Presidents amongst Bishops, have used to do. The ground therefore of their
pre-eminence above Bishops, is the necessity of often concurrency of many
Bishops about the Public affairs of the Church, as consecrations of Bishops,
consultations of remedy of general disorders, audience judicial, when the
actions of any Bishop should be called in question, or Appeals are made from
his Sentence by such as think themselves wronged. These, and the like affairs
usually requiring, that many Bishops should orderly assemble, begin, and
conclude somewhat; it has seemed, in the eyes of Reverend Antiquity, a thing
most requisite, that the Church should not only have Bishops, but, even amongst
Bishops, some to be in Authority chiefest. Unto which purpose, the very state
of the whole World, immediately before Christianity took place, does seem, by
the special providence of God to have been prepared: For we must know, that the
Countries where the Gospel was first planted, were, for the most part, subject
to the Roman Empire. The Romans use was commonly, when, by war they had
subdued Foreign Nations, to make them Provinces, that is, to place over them
Roman Governors, such as might order them according to the Laws and Customs of
Rome. And, to the end that all things might be the more easily and orderly
done, a whole Country being divided into sundry parts, there was in each part
some one City, whereinto they about did resort for Justice. Every such part was
termed a Cic. Fam. Ep. 5. Si quid na (...)um aliquo Helle^^^^^io controversiae
ut in ill^m (...) rejicias. The suit which Tully makes was this, that the
Party in whose behalf he wrote to the Propraetor, might have his Causes put
over to that Court which was held in the Diocese of Hellespont, where the man
did abide, and not to his trouble be forced to fo^low them at Ephesus,which was
the chiefest Court in that Province.
Diocese. Howbeit, the name Diocese is sometime so generally taken, that it
contains not only mo such parts of a Province, but even more Provinces also
than one; as, the Diocese of Asia contained eight; the Diocese of Africa seven.
Touching Diocesses according unto a stricter sense, whereby they are taken for
a part of a Province, the words of Livy do plainly show, what Orders the Romans
did observe in them. For at what time they had brought the Macedonians into
subjection, the Roman Governor, by order from the Senate of Rome, gave charge
that Macedonia should be divided into four Regions or Diocesses. Capita
Regionum ubi concilia fierent primae Sedis Amphipolim, secundae Thessalonicen,
tertiae Pellam, quartae Pelagoniam fecit. Eo, Concilia sua cujusque Regionis
indici, pecuniam conferri, ibi Magistratus creari jussit. This being before the
days of the Emperors, by their appointment Thessalonica was afterward the
chiefest, and in it the highest Governor of Macedonia had his Seat: Whereupon
the other three Dioceses were in that respect inferior unto it, as Daughters
unto a Mother City; for not unto every Town of Justice was that Title given,
but was peculiar unto those Cities wherein principal Courts were kept. Thus in
Macedonia, the Mother City was Thessalonica: In Asia, Cic. ad Attic. lib. 5.
Ep. 12. Item. 1. observe. D. de officio Proconsulis and Legati.
Ephesus; in Africa, Carthage; For so Lib. 1. Tit. 27. l. 1. sect. 1. and 2.
Sancimus ut sicut Oriens atqu^ Illyricum, ita and Africa praetoriana maxima
potestate specialiter a nostra elementia decoretur. Cujus sedem jubemus esse
Carthaginem and ab ea, auxiliante Deo. septem pro^inciae cum suis judicious
disponantur.
Justinian in his time made it. The Governors, Officers, and Inhabitants of
those Mother-Cities were termed for difference-sake Metropolites, that is to
say, Mother-city-men; than which, nothing could possibly have been devised more
fit to suit with the nature of that form of Spiritual Regiment, under which
afterward the Church should live. Wherefore if the Prophet saw cause to
acknowledge unto the Lord, that the light of his gracious providence did shine
no where more apparently to the eye, than in preparing the Land of Canaan to be
a Receptacle for that Church which was of old, Psalm. 30. 8, 9.
Thou have brought a Vine out of Egypt, thou have cast out the Heathen and
planted it, thou made room for it, and when it had taken root it filled the
Land. How much more ought we to wonder at the handiwork of Almighty God, who,
to settle the Kingdom of his dear Son, did not cast out any one People, but
directed in such sort the Politic Councils of them who ruled far and wide
overall, that they throughout all Nations, People, and Countries upon Earth,
should unwittingly prepare the Field wherein the Vine which God did intend,
that is to say, the Church of his dearly beloved Son, was to take root. For
unto nothing else can we attribute it, saving only unto the very
incomprehensible force of Divine providence, that the World was in so
mavelous sit sort divided, levelled, and laid out before hand? whose work
could it be but his alone to make such provision for the direct implantation of
his Church? Wherefore inequality of Bishops being found a thing convenient for
the Church of God, in such consideration as has been showed; when it came
secondly in question, which Bishops should be higher and which lower, it seemed
herein not to the civil Monarch only, but to the most, expedient that the
dignity and celebrity of Mother-Cities should be respected. They which dream,
that, Council. Antiochen, c. ^. (...).
if Civil Authority had not given such pre-eminence unto one City more than
another, there had never grown an inequality among Bishops, are deceived;
Superiority of one Bishop over another would be requisite in the Church,
although that Civil distinction were abolished; other causes having made it
necessary, even amongst Bishops, to have some in degree higher than the rest,
the civil dignity of place was considered only as a reason wherefore this
Bishop should be preferred before that: Which deliberation had been likely
enough to have raised no small trouble, but that such was the circumstance of
place, as being followed in that choice, besides the manifest convenience
thereof, took away all show of Partiality, prevented secret emulations, and
gave no man occasion to think his Person disgraced in that another was
preferred before him.

Thus we see upon what occasion Metropolitan Bishops became Archbishops. Now,
while the whole Christian World, in a manner, still continued under one Civil
Government, there being oftentimes within some one more large Territory, diverse
and sundry Mother-Churches, the Metropolitans whereof were Archbishops, as for
Order's sake, it grew hereupon expedient, there should be a difference also
amongst them; so no way seemed, in those times, more fit, than to give
pre-eminence unto them whose Metropolitan Sees were of special desert or
dignity: for which cause these, as being Bishops in the chiefest
Mother-Churches were termed Primates, and, at the length, by way of excellency,
Patriarks. For, ignorant we are not, how sometimes the Title of Patriark is
generally given to all Metropolitan Bishops. They are mightily therefore to
blame which are so bold and confident, as to affirm, that, Vilierius de fla^u
primitivae Eccl^.
for the space of above four hundred and thirty years after Christ, all
Metropolitan Bishops were in every respect equals, till the second Council of
Constantinople exalted certain Metropolitans above the rest. True it is, they
were equals as touching the exercise of Spiritual power within their Dioceses,
when they dealt with their own flock. For what is it that one of them might do
within the compass of his own precinct, but another within his might do the
same? But that there was no subordination at all, of one of them unto another;
that when they all, or sundry of them, were to deal in the same Causes, there
was no difference of first and second in degree, no distinction of higher and
lower in authority acknowledged amongst them, is most untrue. The Great Council
of Nice, was after our Savior Christ but three hundred twenty four years, and
in that Council, certain Metropolitans are said even then to have had ancient
pre-eminence and dignity above the rest, namely, the Primate of Alexandria, of
Rome, and of Antioch. Threescore years after this, there were Synods under the
Emperor Theodosius, which Synod was the first at Constantinople, Socr. l. 3.
c. ^.
whereat one hundred and fifty Bishops were assembled: at which Council it was
decreed, that the Bishop of Constantinople should not only be added unto the
form: Primates, but also that his Place should be second amongst them, the
next to the Bishop of Rome in dignity. The same Decree again renewed concerning
Constantinople, C^n. 28.
and the reason thereof laid open in the Council of Chalcedon. At the length
came that second of Constantinople, whereat were six hundred and thirty Bishops
for a third confirmation thereof. Can. 3^.
Laws Imperial there are likewise extant to the same effect. Herewith the
Bishop of Constantinople being overmuch puffed up, not only could not endure
that See to be in estimation higher, whereunto his own had preferment to be the
next, but he challenged more than ever any Christian Bishop in the World before
either had, or with reason could have. What he challenged, and was therein as
then refused by the Bishop of Rome; the same, the Bishop of Rome in process of
time obtained for himself, and having gotten it by bad means, has both up-held
and augmented it, and upholdeth it by acts and practices much worse. But
Primates, according to their first Institution, Novel 123. 22.
were all in relation unto Archbishops, the same by Prerogative, which
Archbishops were, being compared unto Bishops. Before the Council of Nice,
albeit there were both Metropolitans and Primates, yet could not this be a
means forcible enough to procure the peace of the Church; but all things were
wonderful tumultuous and troublesome, by reason of one special practice common
unto the Heretics of those times, which was, That when they had been
condemned and cast out of the Church by the Sentence of their own Bishops,
they, contrary to the ancient received Orders of the Church, had a custom to
wander up and down, and to insinuate themselves into favor where they were not
known; imagining themselves to be safe enough, and not to be clean cut off from
the body of the Church, if they could any where find a Bishop which was
content to communicate with them: whereupon ensued, as in that case there needs
must, every day quarrels and jarrs unappeasable amongst Bishops. The Nicene
Council, for redress hereof, considered the bounds of every Archbishop's
Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions, what they had been in former times; and
accordingly appointed unto each grand part of the Christian World some one
Primate, from whose Judgment no man living within his Territory might appeal,
unless it were to a Council General of all Bishops. The drift and purport of
which order was, That neither any man oppressed by his own particular Bishop
might be destitute of a remedy, through appeal unto the more indifferent
Sentence of some other ordinary Judge, not yet every man be lest at such
liberty as before, to shift himself out of their hands; for whom it was most
meet to have the hearing and determining of his cause. The evil, for remedy
whereof this order was taken, annoyed at that present, especially the Church of
Alexandria in Egypt, where Arianism begun. For which cause the state of that
Church is in the Nicene Canons concerning this matter mentioned before the
rest. The words of their sacred Edict are these, Council. Nic. c. 6.
Let those customs remain in force, which have been of old the customs of Egypt
and Libya, and Pentapolis; by which customs the Bishop of Alexandria has
authority over all these; the rather, for that this has also been the use of
the Bishop of Rome, yea, the same has been kept in Antioch, and in other
Provinces. Now, Ejusd. Con. cap. ^.
because the custom likewise had been, that great honor should be done to the
Bishop of Alia or Jerusalem; therefore, lest their Decree concerning the
Primate of Antioch, should any whit prejudice the dignity and honor of that
See, special provision is made, that although it were inferior in degree, not
only unto Antioch the chief of the East, but even unto Cesaria too; yet such
pre-eminence it should retain as belonged to a Mother-City, and enjoy
whatsoever special Prerogative or Privilege it had besides. Let men therefore
hereby judge of what continuance this Order which upholdeth degrees of Bishops
must needs have been, when a General Council of three hundred and eighteen
Bishops, living themselves within three hundred years after Christ, does
reverence the same for Antiquity's sake, T. C. l. t. ^^. What? no mention of
him in Theophibus, Bishop of Antioch? none in Clemens Alexandrinus? none in
Ignatius? no^^^^ in Justin Martyr? in Irenaeus. In Tert^l in O^igen, in
Cyprian? in those old Historiographers, ou^ of which Eusebius gathered his
Story? was it for his baseness and smalness that he could not be seen amongst
the Bishops, Elders and Deacons, being the chief and principal of them all? Can
the Cedar of Lebanon be hidden amongst the Box-trees? T. C. l. ^. ubi supra. A
Metropolitan Bishop was nothing el^e but a Bishop of that place which is
pleased the Emperor or Magistrate to make the chief of the Diocese or Shire,
and as for this name it makes no more difference between a Bishop and a Bishop,
than when I say a Minister of London, and a Minister of Newington.
as a thing which had been even then of old observed in the most renowned parts
of the Christian World. Wherefore needless altogether are those vain and wanton
demands, No mention of an Archbishop in Theophilus Bishop of Antioch? none in
Ignatius? none in Clemens of Alexandria? none in Justin Martyr, Ireneus,
Tertullian, Cyprian? none in all those old Historiographers, out of which
Eusebius gathers his Story? none till the time of the Council of Nice three
hundred and twenty years after Christ? As if the mention, which is thereof made
in that very Council, where so many Bishops acknowledge Archiepiscopal dignity
even then ancient, were not of far more weight and value, than if every of
those Fathers had written large Discourses thereof. But what is it which they
will blush at, who dare so confidently set it down, that in the Council of Nice
some Bishops being termed Metropolitans, no more difference is thereby meant to
have been between one Bishop and another, than is showed between one Minister
and another, when we say such a one is a Minister in the City of London, and
such a one a Minister in the Town of Newington. So that, to be termed a
Metropolitan Bishop did, in their conceit, import no more pre-eminence above
other Bishops, than we mean, that a Girdler has over others of the same trade,
if we term him which does inhabit some Mother-City for difference-sake a
Metropolitan Girdler. But the Truth is too manifest to be eluded; a Bishop at
that time had power in his own Diocese over all other Ministers there, and a
Metropolitan Bishop sundry preheminences above other Bishops, one of which
preheminences was, in the ordination of Bishops, to have (...), the chief power
of ordering all things done. Con. Nicen. c. 6. Illui autem amnino manifestum,
quod siqus absque M^tro politani sententia sactus fl^^ p s^. hune magna ^vno de
lefin vit Epis^. ess. no^n portere. Can. 4.
Which pre-eminence that Council it self does mention, as also a greater
belonging unto the Patriark or Primate of Alexandria, concerning whom, it is
there likewise said, that to him did belong (...), authority and power over all
Egypt, Pentapolis, and Libya: within which compass sundry Metropolitan Sees to
have been, there is no man ignorant, which in those Antiquities have any
knowledge. Certain Prerogatives there are wherein Metropolitans excelled other
Bishops, certain also wherein Primates excelled other Metropolitans.
Archiepiscopal or Metropolitan Prerogatives are those mentioned in the old
Imperial constitutions, to N^vel. 123. can 10.
convocate the holy Bishops under them, within the compass of their own
Provinces, when need required their meeting together for inquisition and
redress of public disorders; Now. 128. c. 9
to grant unto Bishops under them, leave and faculty of absence from their own
Dioceses, when it seemed necessary that they should otherwhere converse for
some reasonable while; Now l. 79. 2.
to give notice unto Bishops under them, of things commanded by Supreme
Authority; Novel. 123. can. 22.
to have the hearing and first determining of such Causes as any man had
against a Bishop; Novel. 1. 3. a. 23.
to receive the appeals of the inferior Clergy, in case they found themselves
overborn by the Bishop, their immediate Judge. And, lest happily it should be
imagined, that Canons Ecclesiastical we want to make the self-same thing
manifest: In the Council of Antioch it was thus decreed, Can. 9.
The Bishop in every Province must know, that he which is Bishop in the
Mother-City, has not only charge of his own Parish or Diocese, but even of the
whole Province also. Again, it has seemed good, that other Bishops, without
him, should do nothing more than only that which concerns each one's Parish,
and the places underneath it. Further, by the self-same Council all Councils
provincial are reckoned void and frustrate, Can. 16.
unless the Bishop of the Mother-City within that Province, where such Councils
should be, were present at them. So that the want of his presence, and, in
Canons for Church Government, want of his approbation also, did disannul them.
Not so the want of any others. Finally, concerning election of Bishops, the
Council of Nice has this general rule, that the chief ordering of all things
here, Can. 4. (...).
is in every Province committed to the Metropolitan. Touching them, who,
amongst Metropolitan, were also Primates, and had of sundry united Provinces,
the chiefest Metropolitan See, of such that Canon, in the Council of Carthage,
was eminent, whereby a Bishop is forbidden to go beyond Seas, without the
license of the highest Chair within the same Bishop's own Country; and of such
which bears the name of Apostolical, Can. 23.
is that ancient Canon likewise, which charge the Bishops of each NATION to
know him which is FIRST amongst them, and to esteem of him as an HEAD, Can. 34.
and to do no extraordinary thing but with his leave. The chief Primates of the
Christian World, were the Bishop of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch. To whom the
Bishop of Constantinople, being afterward added, Saint Chrysostom the Bishop
of that See, Callind. in vita Chrysostom.
is in that respect said, to have had the care and charge^ not only of the City
of Constantinople, sed etiam totius Thracia que sex praefecturis est divisa,
and Asiaetolius quae ab undecim praesidebus regitur. The rest of the East was
under Antioch, the South under Alexandria, and the West under Rome. Whereas
therefore John the Bishop of Jerusalem being noted of Heresy, had written an
Apology for himself unto the Bishop of Alexandria, named Theophilus; Hieron.
Ep. 91.
Saint Ierom reproves his breach of the Order of the Church herein, saying, Tu
qui regular quaris Ecclesiasticas, and Nicend Concilii canonibus uteris,
responde mihi, Ad Alexandrinum Episcopum Palastina quid pertinet? Nifallor, hoc
ibi decernitur at Palaeslinae Metropolie Casarea sit, and totius Orientis
Antiochia. Aut igitur ad Caesariensem Episcopuna refer debueras, aut siprocul
expetendum judiciam erat, Antiochiam potius litera dirigenda. Thus much
concerning that Local Compass which was anciently set out to Bishops; within
the bounds and limits whereof we find, that they did accordingly exercise that
Episcopal Authority and power which they had over the Church of Christ.

IX. The first whom we read to have bent themselves against the Superiority of
Bishops, were Aerius and his Followers. Aerius seeking to be made a Bishop, In
what respects Episcopal Regiment has been gainsaid of old by Aerius.
could not brook that Eustathius was thereunto preferred before him. Whereas
therefore he saw himself unable to rise to that greatness which his ambitious
pride did affect, his way of revenge was, to try what Wit being sharpened with
envy and malice could do, in raising a new seditious opinion, that the
Superiority which Bishops had, Aug. de haen. ad quod vult deu.
was a thing which they should not have; that a Bishop might not ordain; and
that a Bishop ought not any way to be distinguished from a Presbyter: Aeriani
ab Aerio quodam sunt nominari qui qinum e^^er Presbyter, docuisse sen^ur, quad
Episcopus non potest ordioare. Dicibo: Episcopum a Presbytero nulla ratione
debere diseerni. Aug. de haer.
For so does St. Augustine deliver the opinion of Aerius: Epiphanius not so
plainly, nor so directly, but after a more Rhetorical sort. His Speech was
rather furious than convenient for man to use, What is, says he, a Bishop more
than a Presbyter? The one does differ from the other nothing. For their Order
as one, their Honor one, one their Dignity. A Bishop imposes his hands, so
does a Presbyter. A Bishop baptizeth, the like does a Presbyter. The Bishop is
a Minister of Divine Service, a Presbyter is the same. The Bishop sits as a
Judge in a Throne, even the Presbyter fitteth also. A Presbyter therefore doing
thus far the self-same thing which a Bishop did, it was by Aerius enforced,
that they ought not in any thing to differ. Are we to think Aerius had wrong in
being judged an Heretic for holding this opinion? Surely if Heresy be an
error, falsely fathered upon Scriptures, but indeed repugnant to the truth of
the Word of God, and by the consent of the universal Church, in the Councils;
or in her contrary uniform practice throughout the whole world, declared to be
such, and the opinion of Aerius in this point be a plain error of that nature,
there is no remedy; but Aerius so schismatically, and stiffly maintaining it,
must even stand where Epiphanius and Augustine have placed him. An error
repugnant unto the truth of the Word of God is held by them whosoever they be,
that stand in defense of any Conclusion drawn erroneously out of Scripture, and
untruely thereon fathered. The opinion of Aerius therefore being falsely
collected out of Scripture, must needs be acknowledged an error repugnant unto
the truth of the Word of God. His opinion was, that there ought not to be any
difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter. His grounds and reasons for this
Opinion, were Sentences of Scripture. Under pretense of which Sentences,
whereby it seemed that Bishops and Presbyters at the first did not differ, it
was concluded by Aerius, that the Church did ill in permitting any difference
to be made. The Answer which Epiphanius makes unto some part of the proofs by
Aerius alleged, was not greatly studied or labored; for through a contempt of
so base an error, for this himself did perceive and profess, yields he
thereof expressly this reason; Men that have wit do evidently see, that all this
is mere foolishness. (...)
But how vain and ridiculous soever his opinion seemed unto wise men; with it
Aerius deceived many, for which cause somewhat was convenient to be said
against it. And in that very extemporal slightness which Epiphanius there
uses, albeit the answer made to Aerius be As in that he says, the Apostle
does name sometimes Presbyters and not Bishops, ^ Tim. 4. 14. sometime Bishops
and not Presbyters, Phil ^. ^. because all Churches had not both, for want of
able and sufficient men. In such Churches therefore as had but the one, the
Apostle could not mention the other. Which Answer is nothing to the l^t^er
place above mentioned: For that the Church of Philippi should have more Bishops
than one, and want a few able men to be Presbyters under the Regiment of one
Bishop, how shall we think it probable or likely?
in part but raw, yet ought not hereby the Truth to find any less favor than
in other Causes it does, where we do not therefore judge Heresy to have the
better, because now and then it alleges that for it self, which Defenders of
Truth do not always so fully answer. Let it therefore suffice, that Aerius did
bring nothing unanswerable. The weak Solutions which the one does give, are to
us no prejudice against the Cause, as long as the others oppositions are of no
greater strength and validity. Did not Aerius, trow you, deserve to be esteemed
as a new Apollos, mighty and powerful in the Word, which could for maintenance
of his Cause, bring forth so plain Divine Authorities, to prove by the Apostles
own Writings, that Bishops ought not in any thing to differ from other
Presbyters? For example, where it is said that Presbyters made Timothy Bishop,
is it not clear, that a Bishop should not differ from a Presbyter, by having
power of Ordination? Again, if a Bishop might by Order be distinguished from a
Presbyter, would the Apostle have given, 1 Timothy 4. 14. with the Impesition of
the Presbyteries hand. Of which Presbytery S Paul was chief. 1 Timothy 1.6. And I
think no man will deny that S. Paul need more than a simple Presbyters
Authority. Phil. 1. 1. To all the Saints at Philippi, with the Bishops and
Deacons. For as yet in the Church of Philippi, there was no one which had
Authority besides Apostles, but their Presbyters or Bishops were all both in
Title and in Power equal.
as he does unto Presbyters, the Title of Bishops? These were the invincible
demonstrations wherewith Aerius did so fiercely assault Bishops. But the
Sentence of Aerius perhaps was only, that the difference between a Bishop and a
Presbyter, has grown by the order and custom of the Church, the Word of God
not appointing that any such difference should be. Well, let Aerius then find
the favor to have his Sentence so construed; yet his fault in condemning the
order of the Church, his not submitting himself unto that Order, the Schism
which he caused in the Church about it, who can excuse? No, the truth is, that
these things did even necessarily ensue, by force of the very opinion which he
and his followers did hold. His conclusion was, That there ought to be no
difference between a Presbyter and a Bishop. His proofs, those
Scripture-sentences which make mention of Bishops and Presbyters, without any
such distinction or difference. So that if between his Conclusion and the
Proofs whereby he labored to strengthen the same, there be any show of
coherence at all, we must of necessity confess, that when Aerius did plead,
There is by the Word of God no difference between a Presbyter, and a Bishop;
his meaning was, not only that the Word of God it self appoints nor, but that
it enforces on us the duty of not appointing, nor allowing, that any such
difference should be made.

In what respect Episcopal is gain-fall by the Authors of pretended Reformation
at this day.
X. And of the self-same mind are the Enemies of Government by Bishops, even at
this present day. They hold, as Aerius did, that if Christ and his Apostles
were obeyed, a Bishop should not be permitted to ordain: that between a
Presbyter and a Bishop the Word of God allows not any inequality or
difference to be made; that their Order, their Authority, their Power ought to
be one; that it is but by usurpation and corruption, that the one sort are
suffered to have rule of the other, or to be any way superior unto them. Which
opinion having now so many Defenders, shall never be able while the World does
stand, to find in some, believing Antiquity, as much as one which has given
it countenance, or born any friendly affection toward it. Touching these men
therefore, whose desire is to have all equal, three ways there are, whereby
they usually oppugn the received Order of the Church of Christ. First, by
disgracing the inequality of Pastors, as a new and mere Human invention, a
thing which was never drawn our of Scripture, where all Pastors are found (they
say) to have one and the same power, both of Order and Jurisdiction. Secondly,
by gathering together the differences between that power which we give to
Bishops, and that which was given them of old in the Church: So that, albeit
even the ancient took more than was warrantable, yet so far they swerved not
as ours have done. Thirdly, by endeavoring to prove, that the Scripture
directly forbids, and that the judgment of the wisest, the holiest, the
best in all Ages, condemns utterly the inequality which we allow.

XI. That inequality of Pastors is a mere Humane invention, a thing not found
in the Word of God, they prove thus: 1. All the places of Scripture where the
word Bishop is used, or any other derived of that name, signify an Oversight
in respect of some particular Congregation only, Their Auguments in disgrace of
Regiment by^ ^heps, as being a mere invention of Man, and nor sound in
Scripture, Answered. Titus 1. 5. Timothy 3. 5. Philippians ^. 1. 1 Peter 5. 1.
2.
and never in regard of Pastors committed unto his Oversight. For which cause
the names of Bishops, and Presbyters, or Pastoral Elders, are used
indifferently, to signify one and the self-same thing. Which so indifferent
and common use of these words, for one and the self-same office, so constantly
and perpetually in all places, declares, that the word Bishop in the Apostles
Writing, imports not a Pastor of higher Power and Authority over other
Pastors. 2. All Pastors are called to their Office by the same means of
proceeding; the Scripture makes no difference in the manner of their Trial,
Election, Ordination: which proves their Office and Power to be by Scripture
all one. 3. The Apostles were all of equal power, and all Pastors do alike
succeed the Apostles in their Ministry and Power, the Commission and Authority
whereby they succeed, bring in Scripture but one and the same that was
committed to the Apostles, without any difference of committing to one Pastor
more, or to another less. 4. The power of the Censures and Keys of the Church,
and of Ordaining and ordering Ministers (in which two points especially this
Superiority is challenged) is not committed to any one Pastor of the Church,
more than to another, but the same is committed as a thing to be carried
equally in the guidance of the Church. Whereby it appears, that Scripture
makes all Pastors, not only in the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, but
also in all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Authority, equal. 5. The Council of
Nice does attribute this difference, not unto any Ordination of God, but to an
ancient Custom used in former times, which judgment is also followed afterward
by other Councils, Council, Antioch. cap. 9. 6. Upon these Premises, their
summary collection and conclusion is, That the Ministry T. C. l. ^. p. 13. So
that it appears that the Ministry of the Gospel, and the Functurions
thereof, ought to be from Heaven: From Heaven, I say, and Heavenly, because
although it the exce^red by Earthly men, and Ministers are chosen also by men
like unto themselves, yet because it is done by the Word and Institution of
God, It may well be accounted to come from Heaven, and from God.
of the Gospel, and the Functions thereof, ought to be from Heaven and of God,
Joh. I. 23. that if they be of God, and from Heaven, then are they set down in
the Word of God; that if they be not in the Word of God (as by the premises it
does appear (they say) that our kinds of Bishops are not) it follows, they
are invented by the brain of men, and are of the Earth and that consequently
they can do no good in the Church of Christ but harm.


Our Answer hereunto is, first, that their proofs are unavailable to show,
Answer.
that Scripture affords no evidence for the inequality of Pastors. Secondly,
That, albeit the Scripture did no way insinuate the same to be God's Ordinance,
and the Apostles to have brought it in, albeit the Church were acknowledged by
all men to have been the first beginner thereof, a long time after the Apostles
were gone; yet is not the Authority of Bishops hereby disannulled, it is not
hereby proved unfit, or unprofitable for the Church.

1. That the Word of God does acknowledge no inequality of power amongst
Pastors of the Church, neither does it appear by the signification of this word
Bishop, nor by the indifferent use thereof. For, concerning signification,
first it is clearly untrue, that no other thing is thereby signified, but only
an oversight in respect of a particular Church and Congregation. For, I beseech
you, of what Parish, or particular Congregation was Matthias Bishop? His Office
Scripture does term Episcopal: Acts 1. 22.
which being no other than was common unto all the Apostles of Christ;
forasmuch as in that number there is not any to whom the oversight of many
Pastors did not belong, by force and virtue of that Office; it follows, that
the very Word does sometimes, even in Scripture, signify oversight, such as
includes charge over Pastors themselves. And if we look to the use of the
Word, being applied with reference unto some one Church, as Ephesus, Philippi,
and such like, albeit the Guides of those Churches be interchangeably in
Scripture termed sometime Bishops, sometime Presbyters, to signify men having
oversight and charge, without relation at all unto other than the, Christian
Laity alone, yet this does not hinder, but that Scripture may in some place
have other names, whereby certain of those Presbyters or Bishops, are noted to
have the oversight and charge of Pastors, as out of all peradventure they had,
whom St. John does entitle Angels. Revel. 1.


2. As for those things which the Apostle has set down concerning Trial,
Election, and Ordination of Pastors, that he makes no difference in the manner
of their Calling, this also is but a silly Argument to prove their Office and
their Power equal by the Scripture. The form of admitting each sort unto their
Offices, needed no particular Instruction: There was no fear, but that such
matters of course would easily enough be observed. The Apostle therefore
touches those things wherein Judgment, Wisdom, and Conscience is required, he
carefully admonishes of what quality Ecclesiastical Persons should be, that
their dealing might not be scandalous in the Church. And forasmuch as those
things are general, we see that of Deacons there are delivered, in a manner,
the self-same Precepts, which are given concerning Pastors, so far as
concerns their Trial, Election, and Ordination. Yet who does hereby collect,
that Scripture makes Deacons and Pastors equal? If notwithstanding it be yet
demanded, Wherefore he which teatcheth what kind of Persons Deacons and
Presbyters should be, has nothing in particular about the quality of chief
Presbyters, whom we call Bishops? I answer briefly, that there it was no fit
place for any such discourse to be made, inasmuch as the Apostle wrote unto
Timothy and Titus, who having by Commission Episcopal Authority, were to
exercise the same in ordaining, not Bishops (the Apostles themselves yet
living, and retaining that power in their own hands) but Presbyters, such as
the Apostles at the first did create throughout all Churches. Bishops by
restraint (only James at Jerusalem excepted) were not yet in being.

3. About equality amongst the Apostles, there is by us no Controversy moved.
If in the rooms of the Apostles, which were of equal Authority, all Pastors do
by Scripture succeed alike, where shall we find a Commission in Scripture
which they speak of, which appointed all to succeed in the self-same equality
of power, except that Commission which does authorize to Preach and Baptize,
should be alleged, which makes nothing to the purpose; for in such things,
all Pastors are still equal: We must, I fear me, wait very long before any
other will be showed. For howsoever the Apostles were Equals amongst
themselves, all other Pastors were not Equals with the Apostles while they
lived, neither are they any where appointed to be afterward each others Equals.
Apostles had, as we know, authority over all such as were no Apostles; by force
of which their Authority, they might both command and judge. It was for the
singular good and benefit of those Disciples whom Christ left behind him, and
of the Pastors which were afterward chosen; for the great good, I say, of all
sorts, that the Apostles were in power above them. Every day brought forth
somewhat wherein they saw by experience, how much it stood them in stead to be
under controulment of those Superiors and Higher Governors of Gods House. Was
it a thing so behoveful, that Pastors should be subject unto Pastors in the
Apostles own times? and is there any commandment that this Subjection should
cease with them? and that the Pastors of the succeeding Ages should be all
Equals? No, no, this strange and absurd conceit of Equality amongst Pastors
(the Mother of Schism, and of Confusion) is but a dream newly brought forth,
and seen never in the Church before.

4. Power of Censure and Ordination appears even by Scripture mavelous
probable, to have been derived from Christ to his Church, without this surmised
Equality in them to whom he has committed the same. For I would know, Whether
Timothy and Titus were commanded by Saint Paul to do any thing, more than
Christ has authorized Pastors to do; And to the one it is Scripture which
says, 1 Timothy 5. 19.
Against a Presbyter receive THOU no accusation, saving under two or three
Witnesses: Scripture which likewise has said to the other, Tit. 1. 5.
For this very cause left I THEE in Crete, that THOU should redress the
things that remain, and should ORDAIN Presbyters in every City, as I
appointed THEE. In the former place the power of Censure is spoken of, and the
power of Ordination in the latter. Will they say that every Pastor there was
equal to Timothy, and Titus in these things? If they do, the Apostle himself is
against it, who says, that, of their two very Persons, he had made choice, and
appointed in those places them, for performances of those Duties, whereas, if
the same had belonged unto others, no less than to them, and not principally
unto them above others, it had been fit for the Apostle accordingly to have
directed his Letters concerning these things in general unto them all which had
equal interest in them; even as it had been likewise fit to have written those
Epistles in Saint John's Revelation, unto whole Ecclesiastical Senates, rather
than only unto the Angels of each Church, had not some one been above the rest
in Authority, to order the affairs of the Church. Scripture therefore does most
probably make for the inequality of Pastors, even in all Ecclesiastical
affairs, and by very express mention, as well in Censures as Ordinations.

5. In the Nicene Council there are consumed certain Prerogatives and Dignities
belonging unto Primates or Archbishops, and of them it is said, that the
ancient custom of the Church, had been to give them such pre-eminence, but no
syllable whereby any man should conjecture, that those Fathers did not honor
the Superiority which Bishops had over other Pastors, only upon ancient custom,
and not as a true Apostolical heavenly and divine Ordinance.

6. Now, although we should leave the general received persuasion, held from
the first beginning, that the Apostles themselves left Bishops invested with
power above other Pastors; although I say, we should give over this opinion,
and embrace that other conjecture, which so many have thought good to follow,
They of Walden, Acn. Syl. hist. Boem. Norsilius. Defens. pac Nici. Thum. Wakl.
c. 1. l. 2. cap. 0 Calvin, Coment in 1 ad id Lit. Bulhtiger, Decad ^. Ser. 3.
Juel Defens, apol, par. 2. c. ^. ^^t. Folk. Answ. to the Test. Tic. ^. 5. John
1. 25. Mat. 21. 23.
and which my self did sometimes judge a great deal more probable than now I
do, merely that after the Apostles were deceased, Churches did agree amongst
themselves, for preservation of Peace and Order, to make one Presbyter in each
City, Chief over the rest, and to translate into him that power, by force and
virtue whereof the Apostles, while they were alive, did preserve and uphold
order in the Church, exercising Spiritual Jurisdiction, partly by themselves,
and partly by Evangelists, because they could not always every where themselves
be present: This order taken by the Church it self (for so let us suppose, that
the Apostles did neither by word nor deed appoint it) were notwithstanding more
warrantable, than that it should give place and be abrogated, because the
Ministry of the Gospel, and the Functions thereof, ought to be from Heaven.
There came Chief Priests and Elders unto our Savior Christ as he was teaching
in the Temple, and the Question which they moved unto him was this, By what
Authority do thou these things, and who gave thee this Authority? their
Question he repelled with a Counter-demand, The Baptism of John whence was it,
from Heaven, or of Men? Hereat they paused, secretly disputing within
themselves, If we shall say from Heaven, he will ask, Wherefore did ye not then
believe him? And if we say of men, We fear the People, for all hold John a
Prophet. What is it now which hereupon these men would infer? That
all-Functions Ecclesiastical, ought in such sort to be from Heaven, as the
Function of John was I No such matter here contained. Nay, does not the
contrary rather appear most plainly by that which is here set down? For when
our Savior does ask concerning the Baptism, that is to say, the whole
Spiritual Function of John, whether it were from Heaven or of men, he gives
clearly to understand that men give Authority unto some, and some God himself
from Heaven does Authorize. Nor is it said, or in any sort signified, that none
have lawful Authority which have it not in such manner as John, from Heaven.
Again, when the Priests and Elders were loath to say, that John had his calling
from men, the reason was not because they thought that so John should not have
had any good or lawful Calling, but because they saw, that by this means they
should somewhat embase the Calling of John, whom all men knew to have been sent
from God, according to the manner of Prophets, by a mere Celestial vocation. So
that out of the evidence here alleged, these things we may directly conclude,
first, that who so does exercise any kind of Function in the Church, he cannot
lawfully so do, except Authority be given him; Secondly, that if Authority be
not given him from men, as the Authority of Teaching was given unto Scribes and
Pharisees, it must be given him from Heaven, as Authority was given unto
Christ, Elias, John Baptist, and the Prophets. For these two only ways there
are to have Authority. But a strange Conclusion it is, God himself did from
Heaven authorize John to bear Witness of the light, to prepare a way for the
promised Messiah, to publish the nearness of the Kingdom of God, to Preach
Repentance, and to Baptize (for by this part which was in the Function of John
most noted, all the rest are together signified;) Therefore the Church of God
has no power upon new occurences to appoint, to ordain an Ecclesiastical
Function, as Moses did upon Iethroe's advice devise a civil. All things we
grant which are in the Church ought to be of God. But, for as much as they may
be two ways accounted such: one, if they be of his own institution, and not of
ours; another if they be of ours, and yet with his approbation, this latter way
there is no impediment, but that the same thing which is of men, may be also
justly and truly said to be of God, the same thing from Heaven which is from
Earth. Of all good things God himself is Author, and consequently an Approver
of them. The rule to discern when the actions of men are good, when they are
such as they ought to be, is more ample and large than the Law which God has
set particular down in his holy Word, the Scripture is but a part of that rule
as has been heretofore at large declared. If therefore all things be of God
which are well done; Lib. 1.
and if all things be well done, which are according unto the rule of well
doing; and if the rule of welldoing be more ample than the Scripture; what
necessity is there, that every thing which is of God, should be set down in
holy Scripture? true it is in things of some one kind, true it is, that what
we are now of necessity for ever bound to believe or observe in the special
mysteries of Salvation, Scripture must needs give notice of it unto the World;
yet true it cannot be, touching all things that are of God. Sufficient it is
for the proof of lawfulness in any thing done, if we canshew that God approved
it. And of his approbation, the evidence is sufficient, if either himself have
by revelation in his word warranted it, or we by some discourse of reason,
find it good of it self, and unrepugnant unto any of his revealed Laws and
Ordinances. Wherefore injurious we are unto God, the Author and Giver of Human
capacity, Judgment and Wit, when, because of some things wherein he precisely
forbids men to use their own inventions, we take occasion to dis-authorize
and disgrace the works which he does produce by the hand, either of nature or
of grace in them. We offer contumely, even unto him, when we scornfully reject
what we lift without any other exception than this, The brain of man has
devised it. Whether we look into the Church or Commonweal, as well in the one
as in the other, both the Ordination of Officers, and the very institution of
their Offices may be truly derived from God, and approved of him, although they
be not always of him in such sort as those things are which are in Scripture.
Does not the Apostle term the Law of Nature even as the Evangelist does the Law
of Scripture, (...), Romans 1. 32. Luke 1. 6.
God's own righteous Ordinance? the Law of Nature then being his Law, that must
needs be of him which it has directed men unto. Great odds, I grant, there is
between things devised by men, although agreeable with the Law of Nature, and
things is Scripture set down by the finger of the Holy Ghost. Howbeit the
dignity of these is no hinderance, but that those be also reverently accounted
of in their Place. Thus much they very well saw, who although not living
themselves under this kind of Church Polity, yet being, through some
experience, more moderate, grave and circumspect in their Judgment, have given
hereof their sounder and better advised Sentence. That which the holy Fathers
(says Zanchius) have by common consent, Confess. 169.
without contradiction of Scripture, received; for my part, I neither will, nor
dare with good Conscience disallow. And what more certain, than that the
ordering of Ecclesiastical Persons, one in authority above another, was
received into the Church by the common consent of the Christian World. What am
I, that I should take upon me to control the whole Church of Christ in that
which is so well known to have been lawfully, religiously, and to notable
purpose instituted? Calvin makes mention even of Primates that have authority
above Bishops, Epist. 150.
It was, says he, the institution of the ancient Church, to the end that the
Bishops might by this bond of Concord, continue the faster linked amongst
themselves. And, lest any man should think that as well he might allow the
Papacy it self; to prevent this he adds, Aliud est moderatum gerere and
honorem, quamtotum terraram orbem immenso imperio complecti. These things
standing as they do, we may conclude, that, albeit the Offices which Bishops
execute, had been committed unto them only by the Church, and that the
superiority which they have over other Pastors, were not first by Christ
himself given to the Apostles, and from them descended to others, but
afterward in such consideration brought in and agreed upon, as is pretended,
yet could not this be a just or lawful exception against it.

The Arguments to prove there was no necessity of instituting Bishops in the
Church.
XII. But they will say, There was no necessity of instituting Bishops, the
Church might have stood well enough without them, they are as those supersluous
things, which neither while they continue do good, nor do harm when they are
removed, because there is not any profitable use whereunto they should serve.
For first, in the Primitive Church their Pastors were all equal, the Bishops of
those days were the very same which Pastors of Parish Churches at this day
are, with us, no one at commandment or controulment by any others Authority
amongst them. The Church therefore may stand and flourish without Bishops: If
they be necessary, wherefore were they not sooner instituted? 2. Again, if any
such thing were needful for the Church, Christ would have set it down in
Scripture, as he did all kind of Officers needful for Jewish Regiment. He
which prescribed unto the Jews so particularly the least thing pertinent unto
their Temple, would not have left so weighty Offices undetermined of in
Scripture, Ep. 3. lb. 1.
but that he knew the Church could never have any profitable use of them 3.
Furthermore, it is the judgment of Cyprian, that equity requires every man's
cause to be heard, where the fault he is charged with was committed. And the
reason he alleges is, for as much as there they may have both Accusers and
Witnesses in their cause. Since therefore every man's cause is neceiest to be
handled at home by the Judges of his own Parish, to what purpose serves their
device, which have appointed Bishops unto whom such causes may be brought, and
Archbishops to whom they may be also from thence removed?

XIII. What things have necessary use in the Church, The sort-alledged
Argument, answered.
they of all others are the most unfit to judge, who bend themselves purposely
against whatsoever the Church uses, except it pleasie themselves to give it
the grace and countenance of their favorable approbation; which they willingly
do not yield unto any part of Church-Policy, in the forehead whereof there is
not the mark of that new devised stamp. But howsoever men like or dislike,
whether they judge things necessary or needless in the House of God, a
Conscience they should have touching that which they boldly affirm or deny. 1.
In the Primitive Church no Bishops, no Pastor having power over other Pastors,
but all Equals, every man Supreme Commander and Ruler within the Kingdom of his
own Congregation or Parish? The Bishops that are spoken of in the time of the
Primitive Church, all such as Persons or Rectors of Parishes are with in? It
thus it have been in the prime of the Church, the question is, how far they
will have that prime to extend? and where the latter spring of that
ne^-supposed disorder to begin? That Primitive Church wherein they hold that
amongst the Fathers, all which had Pastoral charge were Equal, they must of
necessity so far enlarge, as to contain some hundred of years, because for
proof hereof they allege boldly and confidently Saint Cyprian, who suffered
Martyrdom about two hundred and threescore years after our blessed Lord's
Incarnation. A Bishop, they say, such as Cyprian does T. C. l. 1. p. ^9. and
^on. The Bishop which Cyprian speaks of, is nothing else but such as we call
Pastor, or as the common n^m^: with us is, Pastor; and his Church whereof he is
Bishop is neither Di^ces^ nor Province but a Congregation which met together in
one place, and to he taught of one man.
speak of, had only a Church or Congregation, such as they Ministers and
Pastors with us, which are appointed unto several Towns. Every Bishop in
Cyprian's time was Pastor of one only Congregation, assembled in one place to
be taught of one man. A thing impertiment, although it were true. For the
Question is about Personal inequality amongst Governors of the Church. Now to
show there was no such thing in the Church at such time as Cyprian lived, what
bring they forth? Forsooth, that Bishops had then but a small circuit of place
for the exercise of their Authority. Be it supposed, that no one Bishop had
more than one only Town to govern, one only Congregation to rule: Does it by
Cyprian appear, that in any such Town of Congregation, being under the cure and
charge of someone Bishops, there were not, besides that one Bishop, others also
Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, yet subject to the power of the same
Bishop? If this appear not, how can Cyprian be alleged for a Witness, that in
those times there were no Bishops which did differ from other Ministers, as
being above them in degree of Ecclesiastical power? But a gross and a palpable
untruth it is, That Bishops with Cyprian, were as Ministers are with us in
Parish-Churches; and that each of them did guide some Parish without any other
Pastors under him. St. Cyprian's own Person may serve for a manifest disproof
hereof. Pomius being Deacon under Cyprian notes, that his admirable virtues
caused him to be Bishop with the soonest; which advancement therefore himself
endeavored for a while to avoid. It seemed in his own eyes too soon for him to
take the title of so great Honor, in regard whereof a Bishop is tenned
Pourisex, Sacerdos, Antistes Dei. Yet such was his quality, that whereas others
did hardly perform that duty, whereunto the Discipline of their Order,
togetherwith the Religion of the Oath they took at their entrance into the
Office even constrained them; him the Chair did not make, but receive such a
one, as behoved that a Bishop should be. But soon after followed that
Prescription, whereby being driven into exile, and continuing in that estate
for the space of some two years, he ceased not by Letters to deal with his
Clergy, and to direct them about the Public affairs of the Church. They unto
whom those Etsi Frarres pro dilectione iua cupoli sunt ad conven endum and
visiandum Censissires boars quos illustravit ja^^ gloriosis initiis divina
degnati; ramen caur-hoc and non glomeratim nee pre multitudinem simull iunctain
pure ^^^saciendum ne ex hor ipsu invidi^ conciten ur, and in evened ^alive
denegenar, and ilum inferiabiles multum volumus, ^^m perdamus is; Consulite
ergo and providere ut cum temperamento be egi ruids poth: Ira ur Presbyteri
queque qui ille apud Consessores offer ant sinu^h cum singulls, Diaconis
pervices acc^rum, qua and metatio personarum, and vecitiirudo converient um
minuis invidiam Ep. 5.
Epistles were written, he commonly entituleth the Presbyters and Deacons of
that Church. If any man doubt, whether those Presbyters of Carthage were
Ministers of the Word and Sacraments or no, let him, consider but that one only
place of Cyprian, where he gives them this careful advice, how to deal with
circumspection in the perilous times of the Church, that neither they which
were for the truths sake imprisoned, might want those Ghostly comforts which
they ought to have, nor the Church by ministering the same unto them, incurr
unnecessary danger and peril. In which Epistle it does expressly appear, that
the Presbyters of whom he speaks, did offer, that is to say, administer the
Eucharist; and that many there were of them in the Church of Carthage, so as
they might have every day change for performance of that duty. Nor will any man
of sound Judgment I think deny, that Cyprian was in Authority and Power above
the Clergy of that Church, above those Presbyters unto whom he gave direction.
It is apparently therefore untrue, that in Cyprian's time, Ministers of the
Word and Sacraments were all equal, and that no one of them had either Title
more excellent than the rest, or Authority and Government over the rest,
Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, was clearly Superior unto all other Ministers
there: Yea, Cyprian was, by reason of the Dignity of his See an Archbishop, and
so consequently Superior unto Bishops. Bishops, we say, there have been
always, even as long as the Church of Christ it self has been. The Apostles
who planted it, did themselves rule as Bishops over it, neither could they so
well have kept things in order during their own times, but that Episcopal
Authority was given them from above, to exercise far and wice over all other
Guides and Pastors of God's Church. The Church indeed for a time continued
without Bishops by restraint, every where established in Christian Cities. But
shall we thereby conclude, that the Church has no use of them, that without
them it may stand and flourish? No, the cause wherefore they were so soon
universally appointed was, for that it plainly appeared, that, without them,
the Church could not have continued long. It was by the special Providence of
God no doubt so disposed, that the evil whereof this did serve for remedy,
might first be felt, and so the reverend Authority of Bishops be made by so
much the more effectual, when our general experience had taught men what it was
for Churches to want them. Good Laws are never esteemed so good, not
acknowledged so necessary, as when precedent crimes are as seeds out of which
they grow. Episcopal Authority was even in a manner sanctified unto the Church
of Christ, by that little bitter experience which it first had of the pestilent
evil of Schisms. Again, when this very thing was proposed as a remedy, yet a
more suspicions and fearful acceptance it must needs have found, if the
self-same provident Wisdom of Almighty God, had not also given beforehand
sufficient trial thereof in the Regiment of Jerusalem, a Mother Church, which
having received the same order even at the first, was by it most peaceably
governed, when other Churches without it had trouble. So that by all means, the
necessary use of Episcopal Government is confirmed, yea strengthened it is and
ratified, even by the not establishment thereof in all Churches every where at
the first. 2. When they further dispute, That if any such thing were usedful,
Christ would in Scripture have set down particular Statutes and Laws,
appointing that Bishops should be made, and prescribing in what order, even as
the Law does for all kind of Officers which were needful in the Jewish
Regiment; might not a man that would bend his wit to maintain the fury of the
Petrobrusian Heretics, in pulling down Oratories, use the self-same argument,
with as much countenance of reason? If it were needful that we should assemble
our selves in Churches, would that God which taught the Jews so exactly the
frame of their sumptuous Temple, leave us no particular instructions in
writing, no not so much at which way to lay any one stone? Surely such kind of
Argumentation does not so strengthen the sinews of their cause, as weaken the
credit of their Judgment which are led therewith. 3. And whereas Thirdly, in
disproof of that use which Episcopal Authority has in Judgment of Spiritual
Causes, they bring forth the verdict of Cyprian, who says, Cypr. lib. 1. Ep. 3.
That equity requires every man's Cause to be heard, where the fault he was
charged with was committed, forasmuch as there they may have both Accusers and
Witnesses in the Cause: This Argument grounding it self on Principles no less
true in Civil, than in Ecclesiastical Causes, unless it be qualified with some
exceptions or limitations, over-turneth the highest Tribunal Seats both in
Church and Commonwealth, it takes utterly away all appeals, it secretly
condemns even the blessed Apostle himself, as having transgressed the law of
Equity, by his appeal from the Court of Judea, unto those higher which were in
Rome. Acts. 25.
The generality of such kind of axioms deceives, unless it be construed with
such cautions as the matter whereunto they are applyable does require. An usual
and ordinary transportation of causes out of Africa into Italy, out of one
Kingdom into another, as discontented Persons list, which was the thing which
Cyprian disalloweth, may be unequal and unmeet; and yet not therefore a thing
unnecessary to have the Courts erectted in higher places, and judgment
committed unto greater Persons, to whom the meaner may bring their causes
either by way of appeal ot otherwise, to be determined according to the order
of Justice; which has been always observed every where in Civil States, and is
no less requisite also for the State of the Church of God. The Reasons which
teach it to be expedient for the one, will show it to be for the other, at
leastwise, not unnecessary. Inequality of Pastors is an Ordinance both Divine
and profitable: Their exceptions against it in these two respects we have
showed to be altogether causless, unreasonable, and unjust.

XIV. The next thing which they upbraid us with, An Answer unto those things
which are objected, concerning the difference between that power which Bishops
now have, and that which ancient Bishops had more than other Presbyters.
is the difference between that inequality of Pastors which has been of old,
and which now is: For at length they grant, That the superiority of Bishops and
of Archbishops is somewhat ancient, but no such kind of Superiority as ours
have. By the Laws of our Discipline a Bishop may ordain without asking the
Peoples consent, a Bishop may excommunicate and release alone, a Bishop may
imprison, a Bishop may bear Civil Office in the Realm, a Bishop may be a
Counselor of State; these thing ancient Bishops neither did nor might do. Be
it granted, that ordinarily neither in elections nor deprivations, neither in
excommunicating, nor in releasing the excommunicate; in none of the weighty
affairs of Government, Bishops of old were wont to do any thing without
consultation with their Clergy, and consent of the People under them. Be it
granted, that the same Bishops did neither touch any man with corporal
punishment, nor meddle with secular affairs and Offices, the whole Clergy of
God being then tied by the strict and severe Canons of the Church, to use no
other than ghostly power, to attend no other business than heavenly. Live. lib.
1.
Tarquinius was in the Roman Commonwealth deservedly hated, of whose unorderly
proceedings the History speaks thus, Hic Regum primus traditum a Prioribus
morem de omnibus Senatum consulendi solvit; domesticis Consillis Rempub.
administravit, bellum, pacem, foedera, societates, perse ipsum cum quibus
voluit injussu Populi ac Senatus, fecit diremitque. Against Bishops the like is
objected, That they are Invaders of other men's right, and by intolerable
usurpation take upon them to do that alone, wherein ancient Laws have
appointed, that others, not they only, should bear sway. Let the Case of
Bishops he put, not in such sort as it is, but even as their very heavyest
Adversaries would devise it: Suppose that Bishops at the first had encroached
upon the Church, that by sleights and cunning practices they had appropriated
Ecclesiastical, as Augustus did Imperial, power; that they had taken the
advantage of men's inclinable affections, which did not suffer them for
Revenue-sake to be suspected of Ambition; that in the mean while their
usurpation had gone forward by certain easy and unsensible degrees, that being
not discerned in the growth, when it was thus far grown, as we now see it has
proceeded, the world at length perceiving there was just cause of complaint,
but no place of remedy left, had assented unto it by a general secret agreement
to bear it now as an helpless evil: all this supposed for certain and true, yet
surely a thing of this nature, as for the Superior to do that alone, unto
which of right the consent of some other Inferiors should have been required
by them; though it had an indirect entrance at the first, must needs through
continuance of so many ages as this has stood be made now a thing more natural
to the Church, than that it should be oppressed with the mention of contrary
Orders worn so many ages since quite and clean out of ure. But with Bishops the
case is otherwise; For in doing that by themselves, which others together with
them have been accustomed to do, they do not any thing, but that whereunto they
have been, upon just occasion authorized by orderly means. All things natural,
have in them naturally, more or less, the power of providing for their own
safety: And, as each particular man has this power, so every Politic Society
of men must needs have the same, that thereby the whole may provide for the
good of all parts therein. For other benefit we have not any, by sorting our
selves into Politic Societies, saving only that by this mean each part has
that relief, which the virtue of the whole is able to yield it. The Church
therefore being a Politic Society or Body, cannot possibly want the power of
providing for it self: And the chiefest part of that power consists in the
Authority of making Laws. Now, forasmuch as Corporations are perpetual, the
Laws of the antienter Church cannot choose but bind the latter, while they are
in force. But we must note withal, that, because the body of the Church
continues the same, it has the same Authority still, and may abrogate old
Laws, or make new, as need shall require. Wherefore vainly are the ancient
Canons and Constitutions objected as Laws, when once they are either let
secretly to dye by dis-usage, or are openly abrogated by contrary Laws. The
Ancient had cause to do no otherwise than they did; and yet so strictly they
judged not themselves in Conscience bound to observe those Orders, but that in
sundry cases they easily dispensed therewith, which I suppose they would never
have done, had they esteemed them as things whereunto everlasting, immutable,
and undispensible observation did belong. The Bishop usually promoted none,
which were not first allowed as fit, by conference had with the rest of his
Clergy, and with the People: Notwithstanding, in the case of Aurelius, Saint
Cyprian did otherwise. In matters of Deliberation and Counsel, for disposing of
that which belongs generally to the whole body of the Church, or which being
more particular, is nevertheless of so great consequence, that it needs the
force of many Judgments conferred; in such things the common saying must
necessarily take place, An Eye cannot see that which Eyes can. As for Clerical
Ordinations, there are no such reasons alleged against the Order which is, but
that it may be esteemed as good in every respect, as that which has been; and,
in some considerations, better, at leastwise (which is sufficient to our
purpose) it may be held in the Church of Christ, without transgressing any Law,
either Ancient or Late, Divine or Human. which we ought to observe and keep.
The form of making Ecclesiastical Officers, has sundry parts, neither are they
all of equal moment. When Deacons having not been before in the Church of
Christ, the Apostles saw it needful to have such ordained: They, first,
assemble the multitude, and show them how needful it is that Deacons be made.
Secondly, they name unto them what number they judge convenient, what quality
the men must be of, and to the People they commit the care of finding such out.
Thirdly, the People hereunto assenting, make their choice of Stephen and the
rest; those chosen men they bring and present before the Apostles: Howbeit, all
this does not endue them with any Ecclesiastical Power. But when so much was
done, the Apostles finding no cause to take exception, did with Prayer and
imposition of hands, make them Deacons. This was it which gave them their very
being, all other things besides were only preparations unto this. Touching the
form of making Presbyters, although it be not wholly of purpose anywhere set
down in the Apostles Writings, yet sundry speeches there are, which insinuate
the chiefest things that belong unto that Action: As when Paul and Barnabas are
said to have fasted, prayed, and made Presbyters: When Timothy is willed to lay
hands suddenly on no man, for fear of participating with other men's sins. For
this cause the Order of the Primitive Church was, between Choice and Ordination
to have some space for such Probation and Trial as the Apostle does mention in
Deacons, saying, Let them first be proved, and then minister, if so be they be
found blameless.

Alexander Severus beholding in his time how careful the Church of Christ was,
especially for this point; how, after the choice of their Pastors, they used to
publish the names of the Parties chosen, and not to give them the final act of
Approbation, till they saw whether any let or impediment would be alleged; he
gave Commandment, That the like should also be done in his own Imperial
Elections, adding this as a Reason wherefore he so required, namely, For that
both Christians and Jews being so wary about the Ordination of their Priests,
it seemed very unequal for him not to be in like sort circumspect, to whom he
committed the Government of Provinces, containing power over men's both Estates
and Lives. This the Canon Law it self does provide for, requiring before
Ordination scrutiny: Let them diligently be examined three days together
before the Sabbath, D^c^ quando Epis. sect Igitur.
and on the Sabbath let them be presented unto the Bishop. And even this in
effect also is the very use of the Church of England, at all Solemn Ordaining
of Ministers; and if all Ordaining were Solemn, I must confess it were much
the better.

The pretended disorder of the Church of England is, that Bishops Ordain them,
to whose Election the People give no voices, and so the Bishops make them
alone, that is to say, they give Ordination without Popular Election going
before, which ancient Bishops neither did nor might do. Now in very truth, if
the multitude have hereunto a right, which right can never be translated from
them for any cause, then is there no remedy but we must yield, that unto the
lawful making of Ministers, the voice of the People is required; and that,
according to the Adverse Parties Assertion, such as make Ministers without
asking the Peoples consent, Eccl dis p 14
do but exercise a certain Tyranny.

At the first Erection of the Common-weals of Rome, the People (for so it was
then fittest) determined of all affairs: Afterward, this growing troublesome,
their Senators did that for them, which themselves before had done: In the end
all came to one man's hands, and the Emperor alone was instead of many
Senators.

In these things, the experience of time may breed both Civil and
Ecclesiastical change from that which has been before received, neither do
latter things always violently exclude former, but the one grawing less
convenient then it has been, gives place to that which is now become more.
That which was fit for the People themselves to do at the first, might
afterward be more convenient for them to do by some other: Which other is not
thereby proved a Tyrant, because he alone does that which a multitude were wont
to do, unless by violence he take that Authority upon him, against the Order of
Law, and without any public appointment; as with us, if any did, it should (I
suppose) not long be safe for him so to do.

This Answer (I hope) will seem to be so much the more reasonable, in that
themselves, who stand against us, have furnished us, therewith, For, whereas
against the making of Ministers by Bishops alone, their use has been to
object, What sway the People did bear when Stephen and rest were ordained
Deacons: They begin to espy how their own Platform swerveth not a little from
that example wherewith they control the practices of others. For, touching the
form of the Peoples concurrence in that Action, they observe it not; no, they
plainly profess, that they are not in this point bound to be followers of the
Apostles. The Apostles Ordained whom the People had first chosen. They hold,
that their Ecclesiastical Senate ought both to choose, and also to Ordain. Do
not themselves then take away that which the Apostles gave the People, namely,
the privilege of choosing Ecclesiastical Officers? They do. But behold in what
sort they answer it.

By the sixth and the fourteenth of the Acts (say they) it does appear, Eccl.
Discipl. fol. 41.
that the people had the chiefest power of choosing. Howbeit that, as unto me it
seems, was dine upon special cause, which does not so much concern us,
neither ought it to be drawn unto the ordinary and perpetual form of governing
the Church: For, as in establishing Common-weals, not only if they be popular,
but even being such as are ordered by the power of a few the chiefest, or as by
the sole Authority of one till the same he established, the whole sway is in
the Peoples hands, who voluntarily appoint those Magistrates by whose Authority
they may be governed; so that afterward not the multitude it self, but those
Magistrates which were chosen by the multitude, have the ordering of Public
Affairs: After the self-same manner is fared in establishing also the Church:
When there was not as yet any placed over the People, all Authority was in them
all; but when they all had chosen certain to whom the Regiment of the Church
was committed, this power is not now any longer in the hands of the whole
multitude, but wholly in theirs who are appointed Guides of the Church.
Besides, in the choice of Deacons, there was also another special cause
wherefore the whole Church as that time should choose them. For inasmuch as the
Grecians murmured against the Hebrews, and complained, that in the duly
distribution which was made for relief of the poor, they were not indifferently
respected, nor such regard had of their Widows as was meet; this made it
necessary that they all should have to deal in the choice of those unto whom
that care was afterward to be committed, to the end that all occasion of
jealousies and complaints might be removed. Wherefore that which was done by
the People for certain Causes, before the Church was sully settled, may not be
drawn out, and applied unto a constant and perpetual form of ordering the
Church.

Let them cast the Discipline of the Church of England into the same scales
where they weigh their own, let them give us the same measure which here they
take, and our strifes shall soon be brought to a quiet end. When they urge the
Apostles as Precedents; when they condemn us of Tyranny, because we do not, in
making Ministers, the same which the Apostles did; when they plead, That with
us one alone does ordain, and that our Ordinations are without the Peoples
knowledge, contrary to that example which the blessed Apostles gave: We do not
request at their hands allowance as much as of one word we speak in our own
defense, if that which we speak be of our own: but that which themselves speak,
they must be content to listen unto. To exempt themselves from being over-farr
pressed with the Apostles example, they can answer, That which was done by the
People once upon special Causes, when the Church was not yet established, is
not to be made a rule for the constant and continual ordering of the Church. In
defense of their own Election, although they do not therein depend on the
People so much as the Apostles in the choice of Deacons, they think it a very
sufficient Apology, that there were special considerations why Deacons at that
time should be chosen by the whole Church, but not so now. In excuse of
dissimilitudes between their own and the Apostles Discipline, they are
contented to use this Answer, That many things were done in the Apostles times,
before the settling of the Church, which afterward the Church was not tied to
observe. For countenance of their own proceedings, wherein their Governors do
more than the Apostles, and their People less than under the Apostles the first
Churches are found to have done, at the making of Ecclesiastical Officers, they
deem it a mavelous reasonable kind of Pleading to say, That even as in
Common-wealt, when the multitude have once chosen many, or one to rule over
them, the right which was at the first in the whole body of the People, is now
derived into those many, or that one which it so chosen; and that this being
done, it is not the whole multitude, to whom the administration of such Public
affairs any longer appertains, but that which they did, their Rulers may now
do lawfully without them: After the self-same manner it slandeth with the
Church also.

How easy and plain might we make our defense? how clear and allowable even
unto them, it we could but obtain of them to admit the same things consonant
unto equity in our mouths, which they require to be so taken from their own? If
that which is truth, being uttered in maintenance of Scotland and Geneva, do
not cease to be truth when the Church of England once alleges it; this great
crime of Tyranny wherewith we are charged, has a plain and an easy defense?
Yea, But we do not at all ask the Peoples approbation, which they do, whereby
they show themselves more indifferent and more free from taking away the
Peoples right. Indeed, when their Lay Elders have chosen whom they think good,
the Peoples consent thereunto is asked, and, if they give their approbation,
the thing stands warranted for sound and good. But if not, is the former
choice overthrown? No, but the People is to yield to reason; and, if they which
have made the choice, do so like the Poeples reason, as to reverse their own
deed at the hearing of it, then a new election to be made; otherwise the former
to stand, notwithstanding the Peoples negative and dislike. What is this else
but to deal with the People, as those Nurses do with Infants, Eccles. Discip.
p. 41.
whose mouths they besmear with the backside of the spoon, as though they had
fed them, when they themselves devour the food. They cry in the ears of the
People, that all men's consent should be had unto that which concerns all; they
make the People believe we wrong them, and deprive them of their right in
making Ministers, whereas, with us, the People have commonly far more sway and
force then with them. For inasmuch as there are but two main things observed in
every Ecclesiastical function, Power to exercise the duty it self, and some
charge of People whereon to exercise the same; the former of these is received
at the hands of the whole visible Catholic Church: For it is not any one
particular multitude that can give power, the force whereof may reach far and
wide indefinitely, as the power of Order does, which whosoever has once received,
there is no action which belongs thereunto, but he may exercise effectually
the same in any part of the World, without iterated Ordination. They whom the
whole Church has from the beginning used as her Agents, in conferring this
power, are not either one or mo^ of the Laity, and therefore it has not been
heard of, that ever any such were allowed to ordain Ministers: Only Persons
Ecclesiastical, and they, in place of Calling, Superiors both unto Deacons,
and unto Presbyters; only such Persons Ecclesiastical have been authorized to
ordain both, and to give them the power of Order, in the name of the whole
Church. Such were the Apostles, such was Timothy, such was Titus, such are
Bishops. Neque enim sas crae aut licebat ut interior ordinater major in:
Coment, q. Ambros. til. hutio^ur, in 1 Timothy 3.
Not that there is between these no difference, but that they all agree in
pre-eminence of Place above both Presbyters and Deacons, whom they otherwise
might not ordain. Now whereas hereupon some do infer, that no Ordination can
stand, but only such as is made by Bishops, which have had their Ordination
likewise by other Bishops before them, till we come to the very Apostles of
Christ themselves. In which respect it was demanded of Beza at Poissie, By what
Authority he could administer the holy Sacraments, being not thereunto ordained
by any other than Calvin, or by such as to whom the power of Ordination did not
belong, according to the ancient Orders and Customs of the Church, since Calvin,
and they who joined with him in that action, were no Bishops: And Athanasius
maintains the fact of Macarius a Presbyter, which overthrew the holy Table,
whereat one Ischyras would have ministered the blessed Sacrament, having not
been consecrated thereunto by laying on of some Bishops hands, according to the
Ecclesiastical Canons, as also Epiphanius inveigheth sharply against diverse for
doing the like, when they had not Episcopal Ordination. (...).
To this we answer. That there may be sometimes very just and sufficient reason
to allow Ordination made without a Bishop. The whole Church visible being the
true original subject of all power, it has not ordinarily allowed any other
than Bishops alone to ordain: Howbeit, as the ordinary course is ordinarily in
all things to be observed, so it may be in some cases not unnecessary that we
decline from the ordinary ways. Men may be extraordinarily, yet allowably, two
ways admitted unto Spiritual Functions in the Church. One is, when God himself
does of himself raise up any, whose labor be uses without requiring that men
should Authorize them. But then he does ratify their Calling by manifest
signs and tokens himself from Heaven. And thus even such as believed not our
Saviors teaching, did yet acknowledge him a lawful Teacher sent from God: Thou
art a Teacher sent from God, otherwise none could do those things which thou
do. Luther did but reasonably therefore, in declaring that the Senate of
Mulheuse should do well to ask of Muncer, From whence he received power to
teach? who it was that had called him? And if his answer were, that God had
given him his Charge, then to require at his hands some evident sign thereof
for men's satisfaction; because so God is wont, when he himself is the Author
of any extraordinary Calling. Another extraordinary kind of Vocation is, when
the exigence of necessity does constrain to leave the usual ways of the
Church, which otherwise we would willingly keep: Where the Church must needs
have some ordained, and neither has, nor can have possibly a Bishop to ordain;
in case of such necessity, the ordinary Institution of God has given
oftentimes, and may give, place. And therefore we are not, simply without
exception, to urge a lineal descent of power from the Apostles by continued
succession of Bishops in every effectual Ordination. These cases of inevitable
necessity excepted, none may ordain but only Bishops: By the imposition of
their hands it is, that the Church gives power of Order, both unto Presbyters
and Deacons. Now, when that power so received is once to have any certain
Subject whereon it may work, and whereunto it is to be tied, here comes in the
Peoples consent, and not before. The power of Order I may lawfully receive,
without asking leave of any multitude; but that power I cannot exercise upon
any one certain People utterly against their wills; Neither is there in the
Church of England any man, by order of Law, possessed with Pastoral charge over
any Parish, but the People in effect do choose him thereunto. For, albeit they
choose not by giving every man personally his particular voice, yet can they not
say, that they have their Pastors violently obtruded upon them, in as much as
their ancient and original interest therein, has been by orderly means derived
into the Patron who chooses for them. And if any man be desirous to know how
Petrons came to have such interest, we are to consider, that at the first
erection of Churches, it seemed but reasonable in the eyes of the whole
Christian World, to pass that right to them and their Successors, on whose
soil, and at whose charge the same were founded. This all men gladly and
willingly did, both in honor of so great Piety, and for encouragement of many
others unto the like, who peradventure else, would have been as slow to erect
Churches, or to endow them, as we are forward both to spoil them, and to pull
them down.

Its no true assertion therefore, in such sort as the pretended Reformers mean
it, That all Ministers of God's Word ought to be made by consent of many, that
is to say, by the Peoples saffrages; that ancient Bishops neither did nor might
or dain otherwise; and that ours do herein usurp a far greater power than was,
or then lawfully could have been granted unto Bishops which were of old.
Furthermore, as touching Spiritual Jurisdiction, our Bishops, they say, do that
which of all things is most intolerable, and which the Ancient never did, Our
Bishops excommunicate and release alone, whereas the Censures of the Church
neither ought, nor were want to be administered otherwise, then by consent of
many. Their meaning here when they speak of Many, is not as before it was: When
they hold that Ministers should be made with consent of many, they understand
by Many, the Multitude, or Common People; but in requiring that many should
evermore join with the Bishop in the administration of Church Censures, they
mean by Many, a few Lay Elders, chosen out of the rest of the People to that
purpose, This, they say, Cencil. Carth^e. 4. c. 23. Cypr ^ Ep 10. and 14. l.^.
Ep. 8.
is ratified by ancient Councils, by ancient Bishops this was practiced. And
the reason hereof, as Beza supposes, was, Because if the power of
Ecclesiastical Censures did belong unto any one, there would this great
inconvenience follow; Ecclesiastical Regiment should be changed into mere
Tyranny, or else into a Civil Royalty: Therefore no one, either Bishop or
Presbyter, should or can alone exercise that Power, but with his Ecclesiastical
Consist^ry he ought to do it, as may appear by the old Discipline.

And is it possible, that one so grave and judicious should think it in earnest
Tyranny for a Bishop to excommunicate, whom Law and Order has authorized so to
do? or be persuaded, that Ecclesiast^cal Regiment degenerateth into Civil
Regality, when one is allowed to do that which has been at any time the deed
of more? Surely, far meaner-witted men than the World accounts Mr. Reza, do
easily perceive, that Tyranny is Power violently exercised against Order,
against Law; and that the difference of these two Regiments, Ecclesiastical and
Civil, consists in the matter about which the actions of each are conversant;
and not in this, that Civil Royalty admits but one, Ecclesiastical
Government requires many Supreme Correctors. Which Allegation, were it true,
would prove no more than only, that some certain number is necessary for the
assistance of the Bishop: But that a number of such as they do require is
necessary, how does it prove? Wherefore albeit Bishops should now do the very
same which the Ancients did, using the College of Presbyters under them as
their Assistants, when they administer Church Censures, yet should they still
swerve utterly from that which these men so busily labor for, because the
Agents whom they require to assist in those Cases, are a sort of Lay Elders,
such as no ancient Bishop ever was assisted with.

Shall these fruitless jarrs and janglings never cease? shall we never see end
of them? How much happier were the World if those eager Taskmasters, whose
eyes are so curious and sharp in discerning what should be done by many, and
what by few, were all changed into painful doers of that which every good
Christian man ought either only or chiefly to do, and to be found therein doing
when that great and glorious Judge of all men's both deeds and words shall
appear? In the mean while, be it One that has this charge, or be they Many
that be his Assistants, let there be careful provision that Justice may be
administered, and in this shall our God be glorified more than by such
contentious Disputes.

Concerning the Civil power and authority which our Bishops have.
XV. Of which nature that also is, wherein Bishops are, over and besides all
this, accused to have much more excessive power than the ancient, in as much as
unto their Ecclesiastical authority, the Civil Magistrate for the better
repressing of such as contemn Ecclesiastical censures, has for diverse ages
annexed Civil. The crime of Bishops herein is divided into these two several
branches, the one that in Causes Ecclesiastical, they strike with the sword of
Secular punishments; the other, that Offices are granted them, by virtue
whereof they meddle with Civil Affairs. Touching the one, it reaches no
farther than only unto restraint of liberty by imprisonment (which yet is not
done but by the Laws of the Land, and by virtue of authority derived from the
Prince.) A thing which being allowable in Priests amongst the Jews, must needs
have received some strange alteration in nature since, if it be now so
pernicious and venomous to be coupled with a Spiritual Vocation in any man
which bears Office in the Church of Christ. Shemaia writing to the College
of Priests which were in Jerusalem, Jer. 29. 2^.
and to Z^phania the principal of them, told them they were appointed of God,
that they might be Officers in the House of the Lord, for every man which
raved, and did make himself a Prophet, to the end that they might by the force
of this their authority put such in Prison, and in the Stocks. His malice is
reproved, for that he provokes them to show their power against the innocent.
But surely, when any man justly punishable had been brought before them, it
could be no unjust thing for them even in such sort then to have punished. As
for Offices, by virtue whereof Bishops have to deal in Civil Affairs, we must
consider that Civil Affairs are of diverse kindes^ and as they be not all fit
for Ecclesiastical Persons to meddle with, so neither is it necessary, nor at
this day happily convenient, that from meddling with any such thing at all they
all should without exception be secluded. I will therefore set down some few
causes, wherein it cannot but clearly appear unto reasonable men, that Civil
and Ecclesiastical Functions may be lawfully united in one and the same Person.

First therefore, in case a Christian Society be planted amongst their
professed enemies, or by toleration do live under some certain State whereinto
they are not incorporated, whom shall we judge the meetest men to have the
hearing and determining of such mere civil Controversies as are every day wont
to grow between man and man? Such being the state of the Church of Corinth, the
Apostle gives them this direction, 1 Cor. 6.
Dare any of you, having business against another be judged by the unjust, and
not under Saints? Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the World? If the
World then shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest
matters? Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels? How much more things that
appertain to this life? If then ye have judgment of things pertaining to this
life, set up them which are least esteemed in the Church. I speak it to your
shame; Is it so, that there is not a wise man amongst you? us not one that can
judge between his Brethren, but a Brother goes to law with a Brother, and that
under the Infidels? Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you, because
ye go to Law one with another; Why rather suffer ye not wrong, why rather
sustain ye not harm? In which Speech there are these degrees; Better to suffer
and to put up Injuries, than to contend; better to end contention by
Arbitrament, then by Judgment; better by Judgment before the wisest of their
own, than before the simpler; better before the simplest of their own, than the
wisest of them without: V^l. Birnah, E^sson, ane^^. Jer, lib. 40. c. 16.
So that if judgment of Secular affairs should be committed unto wise men,
unto men of chiefest Credit and Account amongst them, when the Pastors of their
Souls are such, Who more fit to be also their Judges for the ending of strikes?
The wisest in things divine, may be also in things humane the most skilful. At
leastwise they are by likelihood commonly more able to know right from wrong
than the common un-lettered sort. And what St. Augustine did hereby gather, Aug.
de oper. Monarch. c. 29
his own words do sufficiently show. I call God to witness upon my Soul, says
he, that according to the Order which is kept in well-ordered Monasteries, I
could wish to have every day my hours of laboring with my hands, my hours of
reading and of praying, rather than to endure these most tumultuous
perplexities of other men's causes, which I am forced to bear while I travel in
Secular businesses, either by judging to discuss them, or to cut them off by
entreaty: Unto which toils that Apostle, who himself sustained them not, for
any thing we read, has notwithstanding ^yed us not of his own accord, but
being thereunto directed by that Spirit which speaks in him. His own
Apostleship, which drew him to travel up and down, suffered him not to be any
where settled for this purpose; wherefore the wise, faithful and holy men which
were seated here and there, and not them which traveled up and down to preach,
he made Examiners of such Businesses. Whereupon of him it is no where written,
that he had leisure to attend these things, from which we cannot excuse our
selves although we be simple, because even such he requires, if wise men
cannot be had, rather than that the affairs of Christians should be brought
into public judgment. Howbeit, not without comfort in our Lord are these
travels undertaken by us, for the hopes sake of eternal life, to the end that
with patience we may reap fruit. So far is Saint Augustine from thinking it
unlawful for Pastors in such sort to judge Civil Causes, that he plainly
collecteth out of the Apostles words, a necessity to undertake that duty; yea
himself he comfort with the hope of a blessed reward, in lieu of travel that
way sustained.

Again, even where whole Christian Kingdoms are, how troublesome were it for
Universities, and other greater Collegiate Societies, erected to serve as
Nurseries unto the Church of Christ, if every thing which civilly does concern
them were to be carried from their own peculiar Governors, because for the most
part they are (as fittest it is they should be) Persons Ecclesiastical Calling?
It was by the wisdom of our famous Predecessors foreseen how unfit this would
be, and hereupon provided by grant of special Charters, that it might be, as
now it is in the Universities, where their Vice-Chancellors, being for the most
part Professors of Divinity, are nevertheless Civil Judges over them in the
most of their ordinary Causes.

And to go yet some degrees further, A thing impossible it is not, neither
altogether unusual, for some who are of royal blood to be consecrated unto the
Ministry of Jesus Christ, and so to be Nurses of God's Church, not only as the
Prophet did foretell, but also as the Apostle Saint Paul was. Now in case the
Crown should by this mean descend unto such Persons, perhaps when they are the
very last, or perhaps the very best of their Race, so that a greater benefit
they are not able to bestow upon a Kingdom, than by accepting their right
therein; shall the sanctity of their Order deprive them of that honor
whereunto they have right by blood? or shall it be a bar to shut out the
public good that may grow by their virtuous Regiment? If not, then must they
cast off the Office which they received by Divine Imposition of hands; or, if
they carry a more religious opinion concerning that heavenly Function, it
follows, that being invested as well with the one as the other, they remain
God's lawfully anointed both ways. With men of skill and mature judgment there
is of this so little doubt, that concerning such as at this day are under the
Archbishops of Ments, Colen, and Travers, being both Archbishops and Princes of
the Empire; yea such as live within the Popes own Civil Territories, there is
no cause why any should deny to yield them civil obedience in any thing which
they command, not repugnant to Christian Piety; yea even that civilly, for such
as are under them, not to obey them, were the part of seditious Persons:
Howbeit for Persons Ecclesiastical, thus to exercise Civil Dominion of their
own, is more than when they only sustain some Public Office, or deal in some
business Civil, being thereunto even by Supreme Authority required. As Nature
does not any thing in vain, so neither Grace: Wherefore, if it please God to
bless some Principal Attendants on his own Sanctuary, and to endue them with
extraordinary parts of excellency, some in one kind, some in another, surely a
great derogation it were to the very honor of him who bestowed so precious
Graces, except they on whom he has bestowed them should accordingly be
employed, that the fruit of those Heavenly Gifts might extend it self unto the
Body of the Commonwealth wherein they live; which being of purpose instituted
(for so all Commonwealths are) to the end, that all might enjoy whatsoever
good it pleases the Almighty to endue each one with, must needs suffer loss,
when it has not the gain which eminent civil hability in Ecclesiastical
Persons is now and then found apt to afford. Shall we then discommend the
People of Milan for using Ambrose their Bishop as an Ambassador about their
Public and Politic Affairs; the Jews for electing their Priests sometimes to
be Leaders in War; David for making the High Priest his Chiefest Counselor
of State, Finally, all Christian Kings and Princes which have appointed unto
like services, Bishops, or other of the Clergy under them? No! they have done
in this respect that which most sincere and religious wisdom allows. Neither
is it allowable only, when either a kind of necessity does cast Civil Offices
upon them, or when they are thereunto preferred in regard of some extraordinary
fitness, but further also, when there are even of right annexed unto some of
their places, or of course imposed upon certain of their Persons, Functions of
Dignity and Account in the Commonwealth; albeit no other consideration be had
therein save this, that their credit and countenance may by such means be
augmented. A thing, if ever to be respected, surely most of all now, when God
himself is for his own sake generally no where honored, Religion almost no
where, no where religiously adored, the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments of
Christ a very cause of disgrace in the eyes both of high and low, where it has
not somewhat besides it self to be countenanced with. For unto this very pass
things are come, that the glory of God is constrained even to stand upon
borrowed credit, which yet were somewhat the more tolerable, if there were not
that dissuade to lead i^ him. No practice so vile, but pretended Holiness is
made sometimes a Cloak to hide it.

The French King Philip Valois in his time made an Ordinance, that all Prelates
and Bishops shu^^ld be clean excluded from Parliaments, where the Affairs of
the Kingdom were handled; pretending that a King, with good Conscience; cannot
draw Pastors, having Cure of Souls, from so weighty a business; to trouble
their Heads with Consultations of State. But irreligious intents are not able
to hide themselves, no not when Holiness is made their Cloak. This is plain and
simple truth, That the counsels of wicked men hate always the presence of them,
whose virtue, though it should not be able to prevail against their purposes,
would notwithstanding be unto their minds a secret corrosive; and therefore,
till either by one shift or another they can bring all things to their own
hands alone, they are not secure. Ordinances holler and better there stand as
yet in force by the grace of Almighty God, and the works of his Providence,
amongst us. Let not Envy so far prevail, as to make us account that a Blemish,
which, if there be in us any spark of sound Judgment, or of religious
Conscience, we must of necessity acknowledge to be one of the chiefest
Ornaments unto this Land: By the ancient Laws whereof, the Clergy being held
for the chief of those Three Estates, which together make up the entire Body of
this Commonwealth, under one Supreme Head and Governor; it has all this time
ever born a sway proportionable in the Weighty Affairs of the Land, wise and
virtuous Kings condescending most willingly thereunto, even of reverence to the
Most High; with the Flower of whose sanctified Inheritance, as it were with a
kind of Divine presence, unless their Chiefest Civil Assemblies were so far
forth beautified as might be without any notable impediment unto their Heavenly
F^nctions, they could not satisfy themselves as having showed toward God an
Affection most du^iful.

Thus, first, in defect of other Civil Magistrates; Secondly for the ease and
quietness of Scholastical Societies; Thirdly, by way of Political necessity;
Fourthly, in regard of quality, care, and extraordinancy; Fifthly, For
countenance into the Ministry; And lastly, even of Devotion and Reverence
toward God himself, there may be admitted at leastwise in some Particulars
well and lawfully enough a conjunction of Civil and Ecclesiastical Power;
except there be some such Law or Reason to the contrary, as may prove it to be
a thing simply in it self naught.

Against it many things are objected, as first, That the matters which are
noted in the holy Scripture to have belonged unto the ordinary Office of any
Minister of God's holy Word and Sacraments, are these which follow, with such
like, and no other; namely, The watch of the Sanctuary, the business of God,
the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, Oversight of the House of God,
Watching over his Flock, Prophecy, Prayer, Dispensations of the Mysteries of
God, Charge and care of men's Souls. If a man would show what the Offices and
Duties of a Surgeon or Physician are; I suppose it were not his part, so
much as to mention any thing belonging to the one or the other, in case either
should be also a Soldier or a Merchant, or an Housekeeper, or a Magistrate;
Because the Functions of these are different from those of the former, albeit
one and the same man may happily be both. The Case is like, when the Scripture
teaches what Duties are required in an Ecclesiastical Minister, in describing
of whose Office, to touch any other thing than such as properly and directly
touches his Office that way, were impertinent.

Yea, But in the Old Testament the two Powers Civil and Ecclesiastical were
distinguished, not only in Nature, but also in Person: the one committed unto
Moses, and the Magistrates joined with him; the other to Aaron, and his Sons.
Jehosophat in his Reformation does not only distinguish Causes Ecclesiastical
from Civil, and erecteth diverse Courts for them, but appoints also diverse
Judges. With the Jews these two Powers were not so distinguished, but that
sometimes they might and did conc^^ in one and the same Person. Was not Ely
both Priest and Judge? After their return from captivity, Es^^as a Priest, and
the same their Chief Governor even in Civil Affairs also? These men which urge
the necessity of making always a Personal distinction of these two Powers, as
if by Iehosaphat's example the same Person ought not to deal in both Causes,
yet are not scrupulous to make men of Civil Place and Calling, Presbyters and
Ministers of Spiritual Jurisdiction in their own Spiritual Consistories.

If it be against the Jewish Precedents for us to give Civil Power unto such as
have Ecclesiastical; is it not as much against the same for them to give
Ecclesiastical Power unto such as have Civil? They will answer perhaps, That
their Position is only against conjunction of Ecclesiastical Power of Order,
and the Power of Civil Jurisdiction in one Person. But this Answer will not
stand with their Proofs, which make no less against the Power of Civil and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in one Person; for of these two Powers Iehosaphat's
example is: Besides, the contrary example of Heli and of Ezra, by us alleged,
do plainly show, that, amongst the Jews, even the power of Order
Ecclesiastical, and Civil Jurisdiction, were sometimes lawfully united in one
and the same Person, Pressed further we are with our Lord and Savior's
example, who denies his Kingdom to be of this Would, and therefore as not
standing with his Calling refused to be made a King, to give sentence in a
criminal Cause of Adultery, and in a Civil of dividing an Inheritance.

The Jews, imagining that their Messiah should be a Potent Monarch upon Earth,
no marvail, though when they did otherwise wonder at Christ's greatness, they
sought forthwith to have him invested with that kind of Dignity, to the end he
might presently begin to reign. Others of the Jews, which likewise had the
same imagination of the Messiah, and did somehat incline to think that
peradventure this might be He, thought good to try whether he would take upon
him that which he might do, being a King, such as they supposed their true
Messiah should be. But Christ refused to be a King over them, because it was no
part of the Office of their Messiah, as they did, falsely conceive; and to
intermeddle in those Acts of Civil Judgment be refused also, because he had no
such Jurisdiction in that Commonwealth, being, in regard of his Civil Person,
a man of mean and low Calling. As for repugnancy between Ecclesiastical and
Civil Power, or any inconvenience that these two Powers should be united, it
does not appear, that this was the cause of his resistance either to reign or
else to judge.

^ Tim. 8. 4.
What say we then to the blessed Apostles, who teach, That Soldiers entangle
not themselves with the businesses of this life, but leave them, to the end
they may please him who has chosen them to serve; and that so the good
Soldiers of Christ ^ught to do.

The Apostles which taught this, did never take upon them any Place or Office
of Civil Power. No: they gave over the Ecclesiastical care of the Poor, that
they might wholly attend upon the Word and Prayer. St. Paul indeed does exhort
Timothy after this manner, Suffer thou evil as a noble Soldier of Jesus
Christ: No man warring is entangled with the affairs of Life, because he must
serve such as have pressed him unto Warfare. The sense and meaning whereof is
plain, that Soldiers may not be nice and tender, that they must be able to
endure hardness, that no man betaking himself unto Wars, continues entangled
with such kind of Businesses, as tend only unto the ease and quiet felicity of
this Life; but if the service of him who has taken them under his Banner,
require the hazard, yea, the loss of their Lives, to please him^ they must be
content and willing with any difficulty, any peril, be it never so much against
the natural desire which they have to live in safety. And at this point the
Clergy of God must always stand; thus it behooves them to be affected as often as
their Lord and Captain leads them into the field, whatsoever conflicts,
perils or evils they are to endure. Which duty being not such, but that
therewith the Civil Dignities, which Ecclesiastical Persons amongst us do
enjoy, may enough stand; the Exhortation of Paul to Timothy, is but a slender
Allegation against them. As well might we gather out of this place, that Men
having Children or Wives, Convenit huju^modi eligi and ordinari sacerdotes,
quibus nec liberi sunt nec nepotes, Etenim fieri vix potest ut vacans hujus
vitae quoti^^ae curis quae liberi creant parentibus maxim* omne studium
omnemque cogitationem circa divinam litugiam and res Ecclesiasticas consumat.
l. 42 sect.1 C de Episc. and Cles.
are not fit to be Ministers (which also has been collected, and that by
sundry of the Ancient) and that it is requisite the Clergy be utterly forbidden
Marriage: For, as the burden of Civil Regiment does make them who bear it, the
less able to attend their Ecclesiastical Charge; even so Saint Paul does say,
that the Married are careful for the World, the unmarried freer to give
themselves wholly to the service of God, Howbeit, both experience has found it
safer, that the Clergy should bear the cares of honest Marriage, than be
subject to the inconveniences which single life, imposed upon them, would draw
after it; And as many as are of sound judgment know it to be far better for
this present age, that the detriment be born, which happily may grow through the
lessening of some few men's Spiritual labors, than that the Clergy and
Commonwealth should lack the benefit which both the one and the other may reap
through their dealing in Civil Affairs. In which consideration, that men
consecrated unto the Spiritual service of God be licensed so far forth to
meddle with the Secular affairs of the World, as does seem for some special
good cause requisite, and may be without any grievous prejudice unto the
Church; surely, there is not in the Apostles words, being rightly understood,
any let. That no Apostle did ever bear Office, may it not be a wonder,
considering the great devotion of the age wherein they lived, and the zeal of
Herod, of Nero the great Commander of the known World, and of other Kings of
the Earth, at that time to advance by all means Christian Religion? Their
deriving unto others that smaller charge of distributing of the Goods which
were laid at their feet, and of making provision for the poor, which charge,
being in part Civil, themselves had before (as I suppose, lawfully) undertaken,
and their following of that which was weightier, may serve as a mavelous good
example, for the dividing of one man's Office into diverse slips, and the
subordinating of Inferiors to discharge some part of the same, when, by reason
of multitude increasing, that labor waxes great and troublesome, which before
was easy and light: but very small force it has to infer a perpetual divorce
between Ecclesiastical and Civil power in the same Persons. The most that can
be said in this Case is, That sundry eminent Canons, bearing the name of
Apostolical, and diverse Conncils likewise there are, which have forbidden the
Clergy to bear any Secular Office; and have enjoined them to attend altogether
upon Reading, Preaching, and Prayer: Whereupon the most of the ancient Fathers,
have showed great dislikes that these two Powers should be united in one Person.

For a full and final Answer whereunto, I would first demand, Whether
commension and separation of these two Powers, be a matter of mere positive
Law, or else a thing simply with or against the Law immutable of God and
Nature? That which is simply against this latter Law, can at no time be
allowable in any Person, more than Adultery, Blasphemy. Sacrilege, and the
like. But conjunction of Power Ecclesiastical and Civil, what Law is there
which has not at some time or other allowed as a thing convenient and meet? In
the Law of God we have examples sundry, whereby it does most manifestly appear,
how of him the same has oftentime been approved. No Kingdom or Nation in the
World, but has been thereunto accustomed without inconvenience and hurt. In
the prime of the World, Kings and Civil Rulers were Priests for the most part
all. The Cum multa divinitus, Pontifices, a majoribus nostris invenia atque
instituta sunt, tum nihil praeclarius quam quod vos eo^dem and Religionibus,
Deorum immortalum and summae Reipub. praesse voluerunt. Cic. pro domo sua ad
Pontif.
Romans note it as a thing beneficial in their own Commonwealth, and even to
Honor Sacerdotii firmamentum porentiae assumebatur, Tacit. hist. lib. 5. He
shows the reason wherefore their Rulers were also Priests. The joining of
these two Powers, as now, so then likewise profitable for the Public State but
in respect clean opposite and contrary. For, whereas then Divine things being
more esteemed, were used as helps for the countenance of Secular Power, the
Case to these latter ages is turned upside down, Earth has now brought Heaven
under foot, and in the course of the World, has of the two the greater credit*
Priesthood was then a strengthening to Kings, which now is forced to take
strength and credit from far meaner degrees of Civil Authority, Hic mos apud
Judaeos fuit, ut eosdem Reges and Sacerdotes haberent, quorum justitia
religioni permixta incredibile quantum evaluere. Just. hist l. 39. Lib. 41.
sect. 22. C. de Episc.
them apparently forcible for the strengthening of the Jews Regiment, under
Moses and Samuel. I deny not, but sometime there may be, and has been perhaps
just cause to ordain otherwise. Wherefore we are not to urge those things,
which heretofore have been either ordered or done as thereby to prejudice those
Orders, which, upon contrary occasion, and the exigence of the present time, by
like authority have been established. For, what is there which does let, but
that from contrary occasions, contrary Laws may grow, and each he reasoned and
disputed for by such as are subject thereunto, during the time they are in
force; and yet neither so opposite to other, but that both may laudably
continue, as long as the ages which keep them, do see no necessary cause which
may draw them unto alteration? Wherefore in these things, Canons,
Constitutions, and Laws which have been at one time meet, do not prove that the
Church should always be bound to follow them. Ecclesiastical Persons were by
ancient Order forbidden to be Executors of any man's Testament, or to undertake
the Wardship of Children. Bishops, by the Imperial Law, are forbidden to
bequeath by Testament, or otherwise to alienate, any thing grown unto them
after they were made Bishops. Is there no remedy but that these, or the like
Orders, must therefore every where still be observed? The reason is not always
evident, why former Orders have been repealed, and other established in their
room: Herein therefore we must remember the axiom used in the Civil Laws, That
the Prince is always presumed to do that with reason, which is not against
reason being done, although no reason of his deed be expressed. Which being in
every respect as true of the Church, and her Divine Authority in making Laws,
it should be some bridle unto those malepert and proud spirits, whose wits not
conceiving the reason of Laws that are established, they adore their own
private fancy, as the supreme Law of all, and accordingly take upon them to
judge that whereby they should be judged. But why labor we thus in vain? For
even to change that which now is, and to establish instead thereof, that which
themselves would acknowledge the very self-same which has been, to what
purpose were it, fith they protest, T. C. l. 1. p. 126.
That they utterly condemn as well that which has been, as that which is; as
well the ancient, as the present Superiority, Authority, and Power of
Ecclesiastical Persons?

The Arguments answered, whereby they would prove, that the law of God, and the
Judgment of the best in all ages, condemns the ruling Superiority of one
Minister over another. T. C. l. 1. p. 12.
XVI. Now where they lastly allege, That the Law of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
the judgment of the best in all ages, condemn all ruling Superiority of
Ministers over Ministers; they are in this, as in the rest, more bold to
affirm, than able to prove the things which they bring for support of their
weak and feeble Cause. The bearing of Dominion, or the exercising of Authority
(they say) is this wherein the Civil Magistrate is severed from the
Ecclesiastical officer, according to the words of our Lord and Savior, Kings
of Nations bear rule over them, but it shall not be so with you: Therefore
bearing of Dominion does not agree to one Minister over another. This place
has been, and still is, although most falsely, yet with far greater show and
likelihood of truth, brought forth by the Anabaptists, to prove that the Church
of Christ ought to have no Civil Magistrates, but be ordered only by Christ.
Wherefore they urge the opposition between Heathens, and them unto whom our
Savior speaks. For, fith the Apostles were opposite to Heathens, not in that
they were Apostles, but in that they were Christians; the Anabaptists
inference, is, That Christ doth-here give a Law, to be for ever observed by all
true Christian men, between whom and Heathens there must be always this
difference, that whereas Heathens have their Kings and Princes to rule,
Christians ought not in this thing to be like unto them. Wherein their
construction has the more show, because that which Christ does speak to his
Apostles, is not found always agreeable unto them as Apostles, or as Pastors
of men's Souls, but oftentimes it touches them in generality, as they are
Christians; so that Christianity being common unto them with all Believers,
such specches must be so taken, that they may be applied unto all, and not
only unto them, They which consent with us, in rejecting such Collections as
the Anabaptist makes with more probability, must give us leave to reject such
as themselves have made with less: For a great deal less likely it is, that our
Lord should here establish an everlasting difference, not between his Church
and Pagans, but between the Pastors of his Church and Civil Governors. For if
herein they must always differ, that the one may not bear rule, the other may;
How did the Apostles themselves observe this difference, the exercise of whose
Authority, both in commanding and in controuling others, the Scripture has
made so manifest, that no gloss can over-shadow it? Again, it being, as they
would have it, our Savior's purpose to withhold his Apostles, and in them all
other Pastors from bearing rule, why should Kingly Dominion be mentioned, which
occasions men to gather, that not all Dominion and Rule, but this one only form
was prohibited, and that Authority was permitted them, so it were not Regal?
Furthermore, in case it had been his purpose to withhold Pastors altogether
from bearing Rule, why should Kings of Nations be mentioned, as if they were
not forbidden to exercise, no not Regal Dominion it self, but only such Regal
Dominion as Heathen Kings do exercise? The very truth is, our Lord and Savior
did aim at a far other mark than these men seem to observe. The end of his
speech was to reform their particular mis-perswasion to whom he spoke: And
their mis-perswasion was, that which was also the common fancy of the Jews at
that time, that their Lord being the Messiah of the World, should restore unto
Israel that Kingdom, whereof the Romans had as then bereaved them; they
imagined that he should not only deliver the State of Israel, but himself
reign as King in the Throne of David, with all Secular Pomp and Dignity; that
he should subdue the rest of the World, and make Jerusalem the Seat of an
Universal Monarchy. Seeing therefore they had forsaken all to follow him, being
now in so mean condition, they did not think, but that together with him, they
also should rise in state; that they should be the first, and the most advanced
by him.

Of this conceit it came, that the Mother of the Sons of Zebedee sued for her
Childrens preferment; and of this conceit it grew, that the Apostles began to
question amongst themselves which of them should be greatest: And, in
controulment of this conceit, it was, that our Lord so plainly told them, that
the thoughts of their hearts were vain. The Kings of Nations have indeed their
large and ample Dominions, they reign far and wide, and their Servants they
advance unto honor in the World, they bestow upon them large and ample Secular
preferments, in which respect they are also termed many of them Benefactors,
because of the liberal hand which they use in rewarding such as have done them
service: But, was it the meaning of the ancient Prophets of God, that the
Messiah the King of Israel should be like unto these Kings, and his retinue
grow in such sort as theirs? Wherefore ye are not to look for at my hands such
preferment as Kings of Nations are wont to bestow upon their Attendants, With
you not so. Your Reward in Heaven shall be most ample, on Earth your Chiefest
Honor must be to suffer Persecution for Righteousness sake; Submission,
Humility and Meekness are things fitter for you to inure your Minds withal,
than these aspiring Cogitations; if any amongst you be greater than other, let
him show himself greatest in being lowlyest; let him be above them in being
under them, even as a Servant for their good. These are Affections which you
must put on; as for degrees of Preferment and Honor in this World, if ye
expect any such thing at my hands, ye deceive your selves, for in the World
your Portion is rather the clear contrary. Wherefore they who allege this
Place against Episcopal Authority abuse it, they many ways deprave and wrest
it, clear from the true understanding wherein our Savior himself did utter it.

For First, whereas he by way of mere Negation had said, With you it shall not
be so, foretelling them only that it should not so come to pass, as they
vainly surmised; these men take his words in a plain nature of a Prohibition,
as if Christ had thereby forbidden all inequality of Ecclesiastical Power.
Secondly, Whereas he did but cut off their idle hope of Secular Advancements,
all Standing-Superiority amongst Persons Ecclesiastical these men would raze
off with the edge of his speech. Thirdly, whereas he in abating their hope even
of Secular Advancements spoke but only with relation unto himself, informing
them that he would be no such munificent Lord unto them in their Temporal
Dignity and Honor, as they did erroneously suppose; so that any Apostle might
afterward have grown by means of others to be even Emperors of Rome, for any
thing in those words to the contrary; these men removing quite and clean the
hedge of all such restraints, enlarge so far the bounds of his meaning, as if
his very precise intent and purpose had been not to reform the error of his
Apostles, conceived as touching him, and to teach what himself would not be
toward them; but to prescribe a special Law both to them and their Successor
for ever; a Law determining what they should not be in relation of one to
another; a Law forbidding that any such Title should be given to any Minister
as might import or argue in him a Superiority over other Ministers. Being thus
defeated of that succor which they thought their cause might have had out of
the words of our Savior Christ, T.C. l. 1. p. 10. Page 95.
they try their adventure in seeking, what aid man's testimony will yield them:
Cyptian objecteth it to Florentinus as a proud thing, that by believing evil
reports, and mis-judging of Cyprian, he made himself Bishop of a Bishop, and
Judge over him, whom God had for the time appointed to be Judge, lib. 4. Ep. 9.
The endeavor of godly men to strike at these insolent names, may appear in the
Council of Carthage: where it was decreed, That the Bishop of the Chief See
should not be entitled the Exarch of Priests, or the highest Priest, or any
other thing of like sense, but only the Bishop of the chiefest See; whereby
are shut out the name of Archbishop, and all other such haughty titles. (...).
Can. 39.
In these Allegations it fares, as in broken reports snatched out of the
Author's mouth, and broached before they be half either told on the one part,
or on the other understood. The matter which Cyprian complains of in
Florentinus was thus: Novatus misliking the easiness of Cyprian to admit men
into the fellowship of Believers, after they had fallen away from the bold and
constant Confession of Christian Faith, took thereby occasion to separate
himself from the Church; and being united with certain excommunicate Persons,
they joined their wits together, and drew out against Cyprian their lawful
Bishop sundry grievous accusations, the crimes such, as being true, had made
him incapable of that Office whereof he was six years as then possessed; they
went to Rome, and to other places, accusing him every where as guilty of those
faults, of which themselves had lewdly condemned him, pretending that twenty
five African Bishops (a thing most false) had heard and examined his Cause in a
Solemn Assembly, and that they all had given their Sentence against him,
holding his Election by the Canons of the Church void. The same factious and
seditious Persons coming also unto Florentinus, who was at that time a man
imprisoned for the testimony of Jesus Christ, but yet a favourer of the error
of Novatus, their malicious accusations he over-willingly hearkened unto, gave
them credit, concurred with them, and unto Cyprian in fine wrote his Letters
against Cyprian: Which Letters he justly takes in mavelous evil part, and
therefore severely controuleth his so great presumption in making himself a
Judge of a Judge, and, as it were, a Bishop's Bishop, to receive accusations
against him, as one that had been his Ordinary. What height of pride is this,
says Cyprian, what arrogance of spirit, what a puffing up of mind, to call
Guides and Priests to be examined and sifted before him? So that unless we
shall be cleared in your Courts, and absolved by your sentence, behold for
these six years space, neither shall the Brotherhood have had a Bishop, nor the
People a Guide, nor the Flock a Shepherd, nor the Church a Governor, nor Christ
a Prelate, nor God a Priest. This is the pride which Cyprian condemns in
Florentinus, and not the title or name of Archbishop; about which matter there
was not at that time so much as the dream of any controversy at all between
them. A silly collection it is, that because Cyprian reproves Florentinus for
lightness of belief, and presumptuous rashness of judgment, therefore he held
the title of Archbishop to be a vain and a proud name. Archbishops were chief
amongst Bishops, yet Archbishops had not over Bishops that full Authority which
every Bishop had over his own particular Clergy: Bishops were not subject unto
their Archbishop as an Ordinary, by whom at all times they were to be judged,
according to the manner of inferior Pastors, within the compass of each
Diocese. A Bishop might suspend, excommunicate, depose such as were of his own
Clergy, without any other Bishops Assistants; not so an Archbishop the Bishops
that were in his own Province, above whom diverse Prerogatives were given him,
howbeit no such Authority and Power, as alone to be Judge over them: For as a
Bishop could not be ordained, so neither might he be judged by any one only
Bishop, albeit that Bishop were his Metropolitan: Wherefore Cyprian, concerning
the liberty and freedom which every Bishop had, spoke in the Council of
Carthage, Council. Carthag. de haer. baptizandis.
whereat fourscore and seven Bishops were present, saying, It rests that
every of us declare, what we think of this matter, neither judging nor severing
from the right of Communion, any that shall think otherwise: For of us there is
not any which makes himself a Bishop of Bishops, or with Tyrannical fear
constrains his Colleagues unto the necessity of obedience, inasmuch as every
Bishop, according to the reach of his liberty and power, has his own free
judgment, and can have no more another his Judge, than himself be Judge to
another. Whereby it appears, that, amongst the African Bishops, none did use
such Authority over any as the Bishop of Rome did afterward claim over all;
forcing upon them opinions by main and absolute power. Lib. 2. Ep. 1.
Wherefore unto the Bishop of Rome, the same Cyprian also writes concerning
his Opinion about Baptism, These things we present unto your Conscience, most
dear Brother, as well for common honors sake, as of single and sincere love,
trusting that as you are truly your self Religious and Faithful, so those
things which agree with Religions and Faith, will be acceptable unto you:
Howbeit we know, that what some have over-drunk in, they will not let go,
neither easily change their mind, but with care of preserving whole amongst
their Brethren the bond of Peace and concord, retaining still to themselves
certain their own Opinions wherewith they have been inuired: Wherein we neither
use force, nor prescribe a Law unto any, knowing, that in the Government of the
Church, every Ruler has his own voluntary free judgment, and of that which he
does shall render unto the Lord himself an account. As for the Council of
Carthage; Does not the very first Canon thereof establish with most effectual
terms, all things which were before agreed on in the Council of Nice? (...).
And, that the Council of Nice did ratify the pre-eminence of Metropolitan
Bishops, who is ignorant? The name of an Archbishop imports only, a Bishop
having chiefty of certain Prerogatives above his Brethren of the same Order.
Which thing, since the Council of Nice does allow, it cannot be that the other
of Carthage should condemn it, inasmuch as this does yield unto that a
Christian unrestrained approbation.

The thing provided for by the Synod of Carthage, can be no other therefore,
than only that the chiefest Metropolitan, where many Archbishops were within
any greater Province, should not be termed by those names, as to import the
power of an ordinary Jurisdiction, belonging in such degree and manner unto
him, over the rest of the Bishops and Archbishops, as did belong unto every
Bishop over other Pastors under him. But much more absurd it is to affirm, that
both Cyprian and the Council of Carthage condemn even such Superiority also of
Bishops themselves, T. C. l. 1. p. 113.
over Pastors their Inferiors, as the words of Ignatius imply, in terming the
Bishop, A Prince of Priests, Bishops to be termed Arch-Priests, in regard of
their Superiority over Priests, is in the Writings of the Ancient Fathers a
thing so usual and familiar, as almost no one thing more. Theod. Hist. Eccles.
l. 1. c. ^. (...).
At the Council of Nice, says Theodores, three hundred and eighteen
Arch-Priests were present. Were it the meaning of the Council of Carthage, that
the Title of Chief-Priest, and such like, ought not in any sort at all to be
given unto any Christian Bishop, what excuse should we make for so many
Ancient, both Fathers, and Synods of Fathers, Heronymus contra Lucifer.
Saluccin Ecclesiae pemdere d^cira summi Sacer^uris digmiate id est. Episcop^
Idem est is Hieronymo summos Sacerdo^ quod (...) in Carthaginensi Concilio.
Vide C. o^nes 38. did. I^em C. De conseq. did. 5.
as have generally applied the Title of Archpriest unto every Bishop's Office?
High time I think it is, to give over the obstinate defense of this most
miserable, forsaken Cause; in the favor whereof, neither God, nor, amongst so
many wise and virtuous men as Antiquity has brought forth, any one can be
found to have hitherto directly spoken. Irksome confusion must of necessity be
the end whereunto all such vain an ungrounded confidence does bring, as has
nothing to bear it out, but only an excessive measure of bold and peremptory
words, helped by the start of a little time, before they came to be examined.
In the Writings of the ancient Fathers, there is not any thing with more
serious asseveration inculcated, than that it is God which makes Bishops, that
their Authority has Divine allowance, that the Bishop is the Priest of God,
that he is Judge in Christ's stead, that, according to God's own Law, the whole
Christian Fraternity stands bound to obey him. Of this there was not in the
Christian World of old any doubt or controversy made; it was a thing
universally every where agreed upon. What should move men to judge that now so
unlawful and naught, which then was so reverently esteemed? Surely no other
cause but this, men were in those times times meek, lowly, tractable, willing
to live in dutiful aw and subjection unto the Pastors of their Souls: Now, we
imagine our selves so able every man to teach and direct all others, that none
of us can brook it to have Superiors; and, for a mask to hide our Pride, we
pretend falsely the Law of Christ, The second main thing wherein the state of
Bishops suffers (...) their Honor.
as if we did seek the execution of his will, when in truth we labor for the
mere satisfaction of our own against his.

XVII. The chiefest cause of disdain and murmr against Bishops in the Church
of England, is, that evil-affected eye wherewith the World looked upon them,
since the time that irreligious Profaneness, beholding the due and just
advancements of Gods Clergy has under pretense of enmity unto Ambition and
Pride, proceeded so far, that the contumely of old offered unto Aaron in the
like quarrel, may seem very moderate and quiet dealing, if we compare it with
the fury of our own times. The ground and original of both their proceedings,
one and the same; in Declaration of their Grievances they differ not; the
Complaints as well of the one as the other are, Numb. 16. 3.
Wherefore lift ye up your selves thus far above the Congregation of the Lord?
It is too much which you take upon you, too much Power, and too much Honor.
Wherefore, as we have showed, that there is not in their Power any thing unjust
or unlawful, so it rests that in their Honor also the like be done. The
labor we take unto this purpose is by so much the harder, in that we are
forced to wraftle with the stream of obstinate Affection, mightily carried by a
wilful prejudice, the Dominion whereof is so powerful over them in whom it
reigns, that it gives them no leave, no not so much as patiently to hearken
unto any speech which does not profess to feed them in this their bitter
humor. Notwithstanding, for as much as I am persuaded, that against God they
will not strive, if they perceive once that in truth it is he against whom they
open their mouths, my hope is their own Confession will be at the length,
Behold we have done exceeding foolishly, It was the Lord, and we know it not,
Him in his Ministers we have despised, we have in their honor impugned his.
But the alteration of men's hearts must be His good and gracious work, whose
most omnipotent power framed them. Wherefore to come to our present purpose,
Honor is no where due, saving only unto such as have in them that whereby they
are sound, or at the least presumed, voluntarily beneficial unto them of whom
they are honored. Wheresoever nature sees the countenance of a Man, it still
presumes, that there is in him a mind willing to do good, if need require,
inasmuch as by nature so it should be; for which cause Men unto Men do honor,
even for very Humanity sake. And unto whom we deny all honor, we seem plainly
to take from them all opinion of Human Dignity, to make no account or reckoning
of them, to think them so utterly without virtue, as if no good thing in the
World could be looked for at their hands. Seeing therefore it seems hard,
that we should so hardly think of any man, the Precept of St. Peter is, 1 Pet.
2. 17.
Honor all men. Which duty of every men toward all, does vary according to the
several degrees whereby they are more and less beneficial, whom we do honor.
Ecclus. 38. 1.
Honor the Physician, says the Wiseman. The reason why, because for
necessities sake, God created him. Again, Levit. 19. 32.
Thou shall rise up before the beary head, and honor the person of the Aged.
The reason why, because the younger sort have great benefit by their gravity,
Ecclus. 25.6.
experience and wisdom, for which cause, these things the Wiseman terms the
Crown or Diadem of the Aged. Honor is due to Parents: The reason why, Prove. 23.
22.
because we have our beginning from them; Obey the Father that has begotten
thee, the Mother that bare thee despise thou nor. Honor due unto Kings and
Governors: The reason why, 1 Pet. 2. 14.
because God has set them for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise
of them that do well, Thus we see by every of these particulars, that there is
always some kind of virtue beneficial, wherein they excel, who receive honor;
and that degrees of Honor are distinguished, according to the value of those
effects which the same beneficial Virtue does produce.

Nor is Honor only an inward estimation, whereby they are reverenced, and well
thought of in the minds of men; Psalm. 72. 15.
but Honor, whereof we now speak, is defined to be an External sign, by which
we give a sensible testification, that we acknowledge the beneficial Virtue of
others. Sarah honored her Husband Abraham; this appears by the Title she gave
him. The Brethren of Joseph did him honor in the Land of Egypt; their lowly and
humble gesture shows it. Parents will hardly persuade themselves that this
intentional Honor, which reaches no farther than to the Inward conception
only, is the Honor which their Children owe them.

Touching that Honor which, mystically agreeing unto Christ, was yielded
literally and really unto Solomon; the words of the Psalmist concerning it are,
Unto him they shall give of the Gold of Sheba, they shall pray for him
continually, and daily bless him. Weigh these things in themselves, Titles,
Gestures, Presents, other the like external signs wherein Honor does consist,
and they are matters of no great moment. Howbeit, take them away, let them
cease to be required, and they are not things of small importance, which that
surcease were likely to draw after it. Let the Lord Mayor of London, or any
other unto whose Office Honor belongs, be deprived but of that Title which in
itself is a matter of nothing; and suppose we that it would be a small maim
unto the credit, force, and countenance of his Office? It has not without the
singular wisdom of God been provided, that the ordinary outward tokens of Honor
should for the most part be in themselves things of mean account; for to the
end they might easily follow as faithful testimonies of that beneficial virtue
whereunto they are due, it behoved them to be of such nature, that to himself
no man might over-eagerly challenge them, without blushing; not any man where
they are due withhold them, but with manifest appearance of too great malice or
pride. Now, forasmuch as, according to the Ancient Orders and Customs of this
Land, as of the Kingdom of Israel, and of all Christian Kingdoms through the
World, the next in degree of Honor unto the Chief Sovereign, are, the Chief
Prelates of God's Church; what the reason hereof may be; it rests next to be
enquired.

XVIII. Other reason there is not any, wherefore such Honor has been judged
due, saving only that public good which the Prelates of God's Clergy are
Authors of: What good does publicly grow from the Prelacy.
For I would know, which of these things it is whereof we make any question,
either that the favor of God is the chiefest Pillar to bear up Kingdoms and
States; or, that true Religion publicly exercised, is the principal mean to
retain the favor of God; or, that the Prelates of the Church are they, without
whom the exercise of true Religion cannot well and long continue? If these
three be grented, then cannot the public benefit of Prelacy be dissembled. And
of the first or second of these, I look not for any professed denial: The World
at this will blush, not to grant at the leastwise in word as much as Quis est
ea^^ vecors. qui ^u^^um suspect cri^ in coelum Deos e^e non sen^a^, and en qu^^
^anca mea^^ siunt ut vix quis quam art ulla ondinem rerum ac vicissicudinem
perse qui possi^. ca^^ sieri poter^ our. cum Deos esse intell exerit. non
intelli^a^ eorem nural^ne hoc tantum Imperium esse narum and a^ctum and
rerentum ^ Cie. Orat. de haru^ respon^.
Heathens themselves have of old with most earnest asseveration acknowledged,
concerning the force of Divine Grace in upholding Kingdoms. Again, though his
mercy does so far strive with men's ingratitude, that all kind of Public
iniquities deserving his indignation, their safety is, through his gracious
Providence, many times nevertheless continued, to the end that amendment
might, if it were possible, avert their Envy: so that as well Common-weals, as
particular Persons, both may and do endure much longer, when they are careful,
as they should be, to use the most effectual means of procuring His favor, on
whom their continuance principally depends: Yet this point no man will stand
to argue, no man will openly arm himself to enter into set Disputation against
the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian, for making unto their Laws concerning
Religion, this Preface, Tit. 1. l. 3. C. de summatri ^ nit.
Decere arbitramur nostrum Imperium, subditos nostros de Religione
commonefacere. Ita enim and plenicrem adquiri Dei ac Salvatoris nostri Jesus
Christi benignitatem possibile esse existimamus, si quando and nos pro viribus
ipsi placere studuerimus, and nostros subditos ad eam rem instituerimus: Or
against the Emperor Justinian, for that he also makes the like Profession, L.
3. C. de Episc. ^^ Cler.
Per sanctissimas Ecclessias and nostrum Imperium sustineri, and communes res
elementissimi Dei gratia muniri, credimus. And in another place, L. 34. C. de
Episc. audiend.
Certissime credemus, quia Sacerdotum puritas and de^^^^ and ad Dominum Deum
Salvatorem nostrum Iesuis Christum fervor, and ab ipsis missa perpetua preces,
maltum favorem nostra Reipublica and incrementum praebent.

Wherefore only the last point is that which men will boldly require us to
prove; for no man fears now to make it a question, Whether the Prelacy of the
Church be any thing available or no, to effect the good and long continuance of
true Religion? Amongst the principal Blessings wherewith God enriched Israel,
the Prophet in the Psalm acknowledges especially this for one, Thou did lead
thy People like Sheep by the hands of Moses and Aaron. Psalm. 7^. ^0^
That which Sheep are, if Pastors be wanting; the same are the people of God,
if so be they want Governors: And that which the principal Civil Governors are,
in comparison of Regents under them; the same are the Prelates of the Church,
being compared with the rest of God's Clergy.

Wherefore inasmuch as amongst the Jews, the benefit of Civil Government grew
principally from Moses, he being their Principal Civil Governor; even so the
benefit of Spiritual Regiment grew from Aaron principally, he being in the
other kind of their principal Rector, although even herein subject to the
Sovereign Dominion of Moses. For which cause, these two alone are named as the
Heads and Well-springs of all. As for the good which others did in service
either of the Commonwealth, or of the Sanctuary, the chiefest glory thereof
did belong to the chiefest Governors of the one sort, and of the other, whose
vigilant care and oversight kept them in their cue Order. Qui Sacerdotes in
veteri restamento vocabantur, hi sont qui nunc l'resbyteri appell antur: and
qui tune Princep^ Sacerdocum, nunc Episco^m vocatur. Roba. Maur. de. ^ss.t.
Cler. 1.3.c.^.
Bishops are now, is Highpriests were then, inregard of power over other
Priests, and in respect of subjection unto Highpriests: What Priests were
then, the same now Presbyters are, by way of their place under Bishops: The
ones Authority therefore being so profitable, how should the others be thought
unnecessary. Is there any man professing, Christian Religion, which holds it
not as a Maxim, That the Church of Jesus Christ did reap a singular benefit by
Apostolical Regiment, not only for other respects, but even in regard of that
Prelacy, whereby they had and exercised Power of Jurisdiction over lower Guides
of the Church? Preciates are herein the Apostles Successors, as has been
proved.

Thus we see, that Prelacy must needs be acknowledged exceedingly beneficial in
the Church: and yet for more perspicuities sake, it shall not be pains
superstuously taken, if the manner how be also declared at large. For this one
thing, not understood by the vulgar sort, causes all contempt to be offered
unto higher Powers, not only Ecclesiastical, but Civil: whom when proud men
have disgraced, and are therefore reproved by such as carry some dutiful
affection of mind, the usual Apologies which they make for themselves, are
these: What more virtue in these Great ones, than in others? we see no such
eminent good which they do above other mon. We grant indeed, that the good
which Higher Governors do, is not so immediate and near unto every of us, as
many times the mean: labors of others under them, and this does make it to be
less esteemed.

But we must note, that it is in this Case, as in a Ship; he that fitteth at
the Stern is quiet, he moves not, he seems in a manner to do little or
Nothing, in comparison of them that sweat about other toil, yet that which he
does is in value and force more than all the labors of the residue laid
together. The influence of the Heavens above, works infinitely more to our
good, and yet appears not half so sensible as the force does of things below.
We consider not what it is which we reap by the Authority of our Chiefest
Spiritual Governors, not are likely to enter into any consideration thereof,
till we want them, and that is the cause why they are at our hands so
unthankfully rewarded. Authority is a constraining Power; which Power were
needless, if we were all such as we should be, willing to do the things we
ought to do without constraint. But, because generally we are otherwise,
therefore we all reap singular benefit by that Authority which permits no
men, though they would, to slack their duty. It does not suffice, that the Lord
of an Household appoint Laborers what they should do, unless he set over them
some chief Workman to see they do it. Constitutions and Canons made for the
ordering of Church Affairs, are dead Taskmasters. The due execution of Laws
Spiritual depends most upon the vigilant care of the Chiefest Spiritual
Governors, whose charge is to see that such Laws be kept by the Clergy and
People under them: With those Duties which the Law of God, and the
Ecclesiastical Canons require in the Clergy, Lay-Governors, are neither for the
most part so well acquainted, nor so deeply and nearly touched. Requisite
therefore it is, that Ecclesiastical Persons have authority in such things.
Which kind of Authority, makes them that have it Prelates. If then it be a
thing confessed, as by all good men it needs must be, to have Prayers read in all
Churches, to have the Sacraments of God administered, to have the Mysteries of
Salvation painfully taught, to have God every where devoutly worshipped, and
all this perpetually, and with quietness, brings unto the whole Church, and
unto every Member thereof, inestimoble good; how can that Authority, which has
been proved the Ordinance of God for preservation of these duties in the
Church, how can it choose but deserve to be held a thing publicly most
beneficial? It were to be wished, and is to be labored for, as much as can be,
that they who are set in such Rooms, may be furnished with honorable Qualities
and Graces, every way fit for their Galling: But, be they otherwise, howsoever
so long as they are in Authority, all men reap some good by them, albeit not so
much good, as if they were abler men. There is not any amongst us all, but is a
great deal more apt to exact another man's duty, than the best of us is to
discharge exactly his own, and therefore Prelates, although neglecting many
ways their duty unto God and men, do notwithstanding by their Authority great
good, in that they keep others at the leastwise in some awe under them.

It is our duty therefore in this consideraton, to honor them that rule as
Prelates; which Office if they discharge well, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
the Apostles own verdict is, that the honor they have, they be worthy of, yea,
though it were double: And if their Government be otherwise, the judgment of
sage men has ever been this, that albeit the dealings of Governors be
culpable, yet honorable they must be, in respect of that Authority by which
they govern. Great caution must be used, that we neither be emboldned to follow
them in evil, whom for Authorities sake we honor; nor induced in Authority to
dishonor them, whom as examples we may not follow. In a word, not to dislike
sin, though it should be in the highest, were unrighteous meekness; and proud
righteousness it is to contemn or dishonor Highness, though it should be in the
sinfullest men that live. But so hard it is to obtain at our hands, especially
as now things stand, the yielding of Honor to whom Honor in this case
belongs, Romans 13.7.
that by a brief Declaration only, what the Duties of men are toward the
principal Guides and Pastors of their Souls, we cannot greatly hope to prevail,
partly for the malice of their open Adversaries, and partly for the cunning of
such as in a sacrilegious intent work their dishonor under covert, by more
mystical and secret means. Wherefore requisite, and in a manner necessary it
is, that by particular instances we make it even palpably manifest, what
singular benefit and use public, the nature of Prelates is apt to yield.

First, no man doubts, but that unto the happy condition of Common-weals, it
is a principal help and furtherance, when in the eye of Foreign States; their
estimation and credit is great. In which respect, the Lord himself commending
his own Laws unto his people, mentions this as a thing not meanly to be
accounted of, that their careful obedience yielded thereunto, should purchase
them a great good opinion abroad, Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
and make them every where famous for wisdom. Fame and reputation grows
especially by the virtue, not of common ordinary persons, but of them which are
in each estate most eminent, by occasion of their higher Place and Calling. The
mean man's actions, be they good or evil, they reach not far, they are not
greatly enquired into, except perhaps by such as dwell at the next door;
whereas men of more ample dignity, Mat. 5. 13.
are as Cities on the tops of Hills, their lives are viewed a far off; so that
the more there are which observe aloof what they do, the greater glory by their
well-doing they purchase, both unto God whom they serve, and to the State
wherein they live. Wherefore if the Clergy be a beautifying unto the body of
this Commonweal in the eyes of Foreign beholders; and if in the Clergy, the
Prelacy be most exposed unto the World's eye, what public benefit does grow
from that Order, in regard of reputation thereby gotten to the Land from
abroad, we may soon conjecture. Amongst the Jews (their Kings excepted,) who so
renowned throughout the World, as their High Priest? who so much, or so often
spoken of, as their Prelates?

2. Which Order is not for the present only the most in sight, but for that
very cause also the most commended unto Posterity: For if we search those
Records wherein there has descended from age to age, whatsoever notice and
intelligence we have of those things which were before us, is there any thing
almost else, surely not any thing so much kept in memory, as the successions,
doings, sufferings, and affairs of Prelates. So that either there is not any
public use of that light which the Church does receive from Antiquity; or if
this be absurd to think, then must we necessarily acknowledge our selves
beholden more unto Prelates, than unto others their Inferiors, for that good
of direction which Ecclesiastical actions recorded do always bring.

3. But to call home our cogitations, and more inwardly to weigh with our
selves, what principal commodity that Order yields, or at leastwise is of its
own disposition and nature apt to yield; Kings and Princes, partly for
information of their own consciences, partly for instruction what they have to
do in a number of most weighty affairs, entangled with the cause of Religion,
having, as all men know, so usual occasion of often consultations and
conferences with their Clergy; suppose we, that no public detriment would
follow, upon the want of honorable Personages Ecclesiastical to be used in
those Cases? It will be happily said, That the highest might learn to stoop, and
not to disdain the advice of some circumspect, wise, and vertu^us Minister of
God; albeit the Ministry were nor by such degrees distinguished. What Princes
in that case might or should do, it is not material. Such difference being
presupposed therefore, as we have proved already to have been the Ordinance of
God, there is no judicious man will ever make any question or doubt, but that
fit and direct it is, for the highest and chiefest Order in God's Clergy, to be
employed before others, about so near and necessary Offices as the sacred
estate of the greatest on earth does require. For this cause Joshua had
Eliazer; David, Abiathar; Constantine, Hosius Bishop of Cor^nba; other Emperors
and Kings their Prelates, by whom in private (for with Princes this is the most
effectual way of doing good) to be adminished, counseled, comforted, and, if
need were, reproved.

Whenever Sovereign Rulers are willing to admit these so necessary private
conferences for their Spiritual and ghostly good, inasmuch as they do for the
time while they take advice, grant a kind of Superiority unto them of whom
they receive it, albeit happily they can be contented, even so far to bend to
the gravest and chiefest Persons in the Order of God's Clergy, yet this of the
very best being rarely and hardly obtained, now that there are whose greater
and higher Callings do somewhat more proportion them unto that ample conceit
and spirit, wherewith the mind of so powerable Persons we possessed; what
should we look for in case God himself not authorizing any by miraculous means,
as of old he did his Prophets, the equal meaness of all did leave, in respect
of Calling, no more place of decency for one, then for another to be admitted?
Let unexperienced wits imagine what pleases them, in having to deal with so
great Personages, these Personal differences are so necessary, that there must
be regard had of them.

4. Kingdoms being principally (next unto God's Almightiness, and the
Sovereignty of the highest under God) upheld by wisdom; and by valor, as by
the chiefest human means to cause continuance in safety with honor (for the
labors of them who attend the service of God, we reckon as means Divine, to
procure our protection from Heavens,) from hence it rises, that men excelling
in either of these, or descending from such, as for excellency either way have
been enobled, or possesing howsoever the rooms of such as should be in Politic
wisdom, or in Martial prowess eminent, are had in singular recommendation.
Notwithstanding, because they are by the state of Nobility great, but not
thereby made inclinable to good things; such they oftentimes prove even under
the best Princes; as under David certain of the Jewish Nobility were. In Polity
and Council the World had not Achitophels equal, nor Hell his equal in deadly
malice. Ioab the General of the Host of Israel, valiant, industrious, fortunate
in War; but withal headstrong, cruel, treacherous, void of Piety toward God;
in a word, so conditioned, that easy it is not to define, whether it were for
David harder to miss the benefit of his Warlike hability or to bear the
enormity of his other Crimes. As well for the cherishing of those virtues
therefore, wherein if Nobility do chance to flourish, they are both an ornament
and a stay to the Commonwealth wherein they live; as also for the bridling of
those disorders, which if they loosly run into, they are by reason of their
greatness dangerous; what help could thereever have been invented more Divine,
than the sorting of the Clergy into such Degrees, that the chiefest of the
Prelacy being matched in a kind of equal yoke, as it were, with the higher,
the next with the lower degree of Nobility, the reverend Authority of the one,
might be to the other as a courteous bridle, a mean to keep them lovingly in aw
that are exorbitant, and to correct such excesses in them, as whereunto their
Courage, State, and Dignity makes them over-prone? O that there were for
encouragement of Prelates herein, that lactimation of all Christian Kings and
Princes toward them, which sometime a famous King of this Land either had, or
pretended to have, for the countenancing of a principal Prelate under him, in
the actions of Spiritual Authority.

Petr. D'efens. Ep. 5.
Let my Lord Archbishop know, (says he) that if a Bishop, or Earl, or any
other great Person, yea, if my own chosen Son, shall presume to withstand, or
to hinder his will and disposition, whereby he may be withheld from performing
the work of the Embass age committed unto him; such a one shall find, that of
his contempt I will show my self no less a Persecutor and Revenger, than if
Treason were committed against mine own very Crown and Dignity, Since therefore
by the Fathers and first Founders of this Commonweal, it has, upon great
experience and forecast, been judged most for the good of all sorts, that as
the whole Body Politic wherein we live, should be for strengths sake a
threefold Cable, consisting of the King as a Supreme Head over all, of Peers
and Nobles under him, and of the People under them; so likewise, that in this
conjunction of States, the second wreath of that Cable should, for important
respects, consist, as well of Lords Spiritual as Temporal: Nobility and Prelacy
being by this mean twined together, how can it possibly be avoided, but that
the tearing away of the one, must needs exceedingly weaken the other, and by
consequent impair greatly the good of all?

5. The force of which detriment there is no doubt, but that the common sort of
men would feel to their helpless woe, how goodly a thing soever they now surmise
it to be, that themselves and their godly Teachers did all alone, without
controulment of their Prelate: For if the manifold jeopardies whereto a people
destitute of Pastors is subject, be unavoidable without Government, and if the
benefit of Government, whether it be Ecclesiastical or Civil, do grow
principally from them who are principal therein, as has been proved out of the
Prophet, who albeit the people of Israel had sundry inferior Governors,
ascribes not unto them the public benefit of Government, but makes mention
of Moses and Aaron only, the Chief Prince, and Chief Prelate, because they were
the wellspring of all the good which others under then did; may we not boldly
conclude, that to take from the people their Prelate, is to leave them in
effect without Guides, at leastwise, without those Guides which are the
strongest hands that God does direct them by? Psalm. 77. 20.
Then did lead thy People like Sheep, says the Prophet, by the hands of
Moses and Aaron.

If now there arise any matter of Grievances between the Pastor and the People
that are under him, they have their Ordinary, a Judge indifferent to determine
their Causes, and to end their strife. But in case there were no such appointed
to sit, and to hear both, what would then he end of their quarrels? They will
answer perhaps, That for purposes, their Synids shall serve. Which is, as if in
the Commonwealth, the higher Magistrates being removed, every Township should
be a State, altogether free and independent; and the Controversies which they
cannot end speedily within themselves, to the contentment of both parties,
should be all determined by Solemn Parliaments. Mercipul God! where is the
light of Wit and Judgment, which this age does so much vaunt of, and glory in,
when unto these such odd imaginations, so great, not only assent, but also
applause, is yielded?

6. As for those in the Clergy, whose Place and Calling is lower; were i^ not
that their eyes are blinded, lest they should see the thing, that, of all
others, is for their good most effectal, somewhat they might consider the
benefit which they enjoy by having such in Authority over them, as are of the
self-same Profession, Society, and Body with them; such as have trodden the
same steps before; such as know by their own experience, the manifold
intolerable contempts and indignities which faithful Pastors, intermingled with
the multitude, are constrained every day to suffer in the exercise of their
Spiritual Charge and Function, unless their Superiors, taking their Causes
even to heart, be, by a kind of sympathy, drawn to relieve and aid them in
their virtuous proceedings, no less effectually, than loving Parents their dear
Children.

Thus therefore Prelacy being unto all sorts so beneficial, ought accordingly
to receive honor at the hands of all: But we have just cause exceedingly to
fear, that those miserable times of confusion are drawing on, wherein the
people shall be oppressed one of another, Isa. 3.5.
inasmuch as already that which prepares the way thereunto is come to pass,
Children presume against the Ancient, and the Vile against the Honorable:
Prelacy, the temperature of excesses in all Estates, the glue and soder of the
Public weal, the ligament which tieth and connecteth the limbs of this Body
Politic each to other, has instead of deserved Honor, all extremity of
Disgrace; the Foolish every where plead, that unto the wise in heart they owe
neither service, subjection, not honor.

XIX. Now that we have laid open the causes for which Honor is due unto
Prelates, What kinds of Honor be due unto Bishops
the next thing we are to consider is, What kinds of Honor be due. The good
Government either of the Church, or the Commonwealth, depends scarcely on
any one external thing, so much as on the Public Marks and Tokens, whereby the
estimation on that Governors are in, is made manifest to the eyes of men. True
it is, that Governors are to be esteemed according to the excellency of their
virtues; the more vertous they are, the more they ought to be honored, if
respect be had unto that which every man should voluntarily perform unto his
Superiors. But the question is now, of that Honor which Public Order does
appoint unto Church-Governors, in that they are Governors; the end whereof is,
to give open sensible testimony, that the Place which they hold is judged
publicly in such degree beneficial, as the marks of their excellency, the
Honors appointed to be done unto them, do import. Wherefore this honor we are
to do them, without presuming our selves to examine how worthy they are; and
withdrawing it, if by us they be thought unworthy. It is a note of that public
judgment which is given of them; and therefore not tolerable that men in
private, should, by refusal to do them such honor, reverse as much as in them
lies, the Public judgment. If it deserve so grievous punishment, when any
particular Person adventureth to deface those marks whereby is signified what
value some small piece of Coin is publicly esteemed at; is it sufferable that
Honors, the Character of that estimation which publicly is had of Public
Estates and Callings in the Church, or Commonwealth, should at every man's
pleasure be cancelled? Let us not think that without most necessary cause, the
same have been thought expedient. The first Authors thereof were wise and
judicious men; they knew it a thing altogether impossible, for each particular
in the multitude to judge what benefit does grow unto them from their Prelates,
and thereunto uniformly to yield them convenient honor. Wherefore that all
sorts might be kept in obedience and awe, doing that unto their Superiors of
every degree, not which every man's special fancy should think meet, but which
being beforehand agreed upon as meet, by public Sentence and Decision, might
afterward stand as a rule for each in particular to follow; they found that
nothing was more necessary, than to allet unto all degrees their certain honor,
as marks of public judgment, concerning the dignity of their Places; which
mark, when the multitude should behold, they might be thereby given to know,
that of such or such restimation their Governors are, and in token thereof, do
carry those notes of excellency. Hence it grows, that the different notes and
signs of Honor, do leave a correspondent impression in the minds of common
Beholders. Let the people be asked; Who are the chiefest in any kind of
Calling? who whost to be listened unto? who of greatest account and reputation?
and see if the very discourse of their minds, lead them not unto those
sensible marks, according to the difference whereof they give their suitable
judgment, esteeming them the worthiest persons who carry the principal note,
and public mark of Worthiness. If therefore they see in other estates a number
of tokens sensible, whereby testimony is given what account there is publicly
made of them, but no such thing in the Clergy; what will they hereby, or what
can they else conclude, but that where they behold this, surely in that
Commonwealth, Religion, and they that are conversant about it, are not
esteemed greatly beneficial? Whereupon in time, the open contempt of God and
Godliness must needs ensue: Psalm.l 5.^.2.
Qui bona fide Dcos colit, amat and Sacerdotes, says Papenius. In vain does
that Kingdom or Commonwealth pretend zeal to the honor of God, which does not
provide that his Clergy also may have honor. Now if all that are employed in
the service of God, should have one kind of honor, what more confused, absurd,
and unseemly? Wherefore in the honor which has been allotted unto God's
Clergy, we are to observe, how not only the kinds thereof, but also in every
particular kind, the degrees do differ. The honor which the Clergy of God has
hitherto enjoyed, consists especially in prcheminence of Title, Place,
Ornament, Attendance, Privilege, Endowment. In every of which it has been
evermore judge meet, that there should be no small odds between Prelates, and
the inferior Clergy.

^^^^e in title. Place, Ornaments, Acren^ancy and Privilledge.
XX. Concerning Title, albeit even as under the Law, all they whom God had
sesevered to offer him Sacrifice, were generally termed Priests; so likewise
the name of Pastor or Presbyter, be now common unto all that serve him in the
Ministry of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: Yet both then and now, the higher
Orders as well of the one sort as of the other, have by one and the same
congruity of reason, their different titles of honor, wherewith we since them
in the phrase of ordinary speech exalted above others. Thus the Heads of the
twenty four Companies of Priests, are in Scripture termed Arch-Priests; (...)
Aaron and the Successors of Aaron being above those Arch-Priests; themselves
are in that respect further entitled, High ang Great. After what sort
Antiquity has used to style Christian Bishops, and to yield them in that kind
Honor more than were meet for inferior Pastors; I may the better omit to
declare, both because others have sufficiently done it already, and, in so
slight a thing, it were but a loss of time to bestow further travel. The
allegation of Christ's Prerogative to be named an Arch-Pastor simply, in regard
of his absolute Excellency over all ^ is no impediment, but that the like Title
in an unlike signification, may be granted unto others besides him, to note a
more limited Superiority, whereof men are capable enough, without derogation
from his Glory, than which nothing is more Sovereign. To quarrel at syllables,
and to take so poor exceptions at the first four letters in the name of an
Archbishop, as if they were manifestly stolen goods, whereof restitutions
ought to be made to the Civil Magistrate, touches no more the Prelates that
now are, than it does the very blessed Apostle, who gives unto himself the
Title of an Arch-builder.

As for our Saviors words, alleged against the style of Lordship and Grace,
we have before sufficiently opened how far they are drawn from their natural
meaning, to houlster up a Cause which they nothing at all concern. Bishop
Theodoret entituleth most honoarable. Emperors writing unto Bishops, have not
disdained to give them their appellations of Honor, Lib. 5. c. ^. H^stor.
Eccles. L. 7. C. ^ls summa Trinit L. 33. C de Epist. and Cler. L. 16. C. de
Sacrol. Eccles. Mor. 23. 6.9. They love to have the chief Scars in the
Assemblies, and to be called of men, Rabbi. Ecclus. 45.7.
Your Holiness, your Blessedness, your Amplitude, your Highness, and the like:
Such as purposely have done otherwise, are noted of insolent singularity and
pride.

Honor done by giving pre-eminence of Place unto one sort before another, is
for decency, order, and quietness-sake so needful, that both Imperial Laws and
Canons Ecclesiastical, have made their special provisions for it. Our Savior's
invective against the vain affectation of Superiority, whether in Title, or in
Place, may not hinder these seemly differences usual in giving and taking
honor, either according to the one, or the other.

Some thing there is even in the Ornaments of Honor also: Otherwise idle it had
been for the Wiseman speaking of Aaron, to stand so much upon the circumstance
of his Priestly attire, and to urge it as an argument of such dignity and
greatness in him: An everlasting Covenant God made with Aaron, and gave him the
Priesthood among the people, and made him blessed through his comely Ornament,
and clothed him with the garment of Honor. The Robes of a Judge do not add to
his virtue; the chiefest Ornaments of Kings is Justice; holiness and purity of
Conversation does much more adorn a Bishop, than his peculiar form of
Clothing. Notwithstanding, both Judges, through the garments of Judicial
Authority; and through the Ornaments of Sovereignty, Princes; yea, Bishops
through the very attire of Bishops, are made blessed, that is to say, marked
and manifested they are to be such, as God has poured his blessing upon, by
advancing them above others, and placing them where they may do him principal
good service. Thus to be called is to be blessed, and therefore to be honored
with the signs of such a Calling, must needs be in part a blessing also; for of
good things, even the signs are good.

Of Honor; another part is Attendancy; and therefore in the visions of the
glory of God, Angels are spoken of as his Attendants. In setting out the honor
of that mystical Queen, the Prophet mentions the Virgin-Ladies which waited
on her. Amongst the tokens of Solomon's honorable condition, his Servants and
Waiters, the sacred History omitteth not. This does prove Attendants a part of
Honor: But this as yet does not show with what Attendancy Prelates are to be
honored. Of the Highpriests retinue amongst the Jews, somewhat the Gospel it
self does intimate: And, albeit our Savior came to minister, and not, as the
Jews did imagine their Messiah should, to be ministered unto in this World, yet
attended on he was by his blessed Apostles, who followed him not only as
Scholars, but even as Servants about him. After that he had sent them, as
himself was sent of God, in the midst of that hatred and extreme contempt which
they sustained at the World's hands; by Saints and Believers this part of honor
was most plentifully done unto them. Attendants they had provided in all places
where they went; which Custom of the Church was still continued in Bishops,
their Successors, as by Ignatius it is plain to be seen. And from hence no
doubt, those Acolyths took their beginning, of whom so frequent mention is
made; the Bishops Attendants; his Followers they were: in regard of which
service, the name of Acolythes seems plainly to have been given. The custom
for Bishops to be attended upon by many, is, as Justinian does show, Novel. 6.
ancient: The affairs of Regiment, wherein Prelates are employed, make it
necessary that they always have many about them, whom they may command,
although no such thing did by way of honor belong unto them.

Some men's judgment is, that if Clerks, Students, and Religious Persons were
more, common Serving-men and Lay-Retainers fewer than they are in Bishops
Palaces, the use, and the honor thereof would be much more suitable than now:
But these things, concerning the number and quality of Persons fit to attend on
Prelates, either for necessity, or for honors sake, are rather in particular
discretion to be ordered, than to be argued of by disputes. As for the vain
imagination of some, T. C. l. 3. p. 126. out of Jos. l.8. c. 15.
who teach the original hereof to have been a preposterous imagination of
Maximinus the Emperor, who being addicted unto Idolatry, chose of the choicest
Magistrates to be Priests; and, to the end they might be in great estimation,
gave unto each of them a train of Followers: And that Christian Emperors
thinking the same would promote Christianity, which promoted Superstition,
endeavored to make their Bishops encounter and match with those Idolatrous
Priests; such frivolous conceits having no other ground than conceit, we weigh
not so much as to frame any answer unto them; our declaration of the true
original of ancient attendancy on Bishops being sufficient. Now, if that which
the light of sound reason does teach to be sit, have, upon like inducements
reasonable, allowable and good, approved it self in such wise as to be
accepted, not only of us, but of Pagans and Infidels also; does conformity with
them that are evil in that which is good, make that thing which is good, evil?
We have not herein followed the Heathens, nor the Heathens us, but both we end
they one and the self-same Divine rule, the light of a true and sound
understanding, which shows what honor is fit for Prelates, and what attendancy
convenient to be a part of their honor.

l. 1^. C. de sacr. Eccles. l. 9. C. de sacr. Eccles. l. a. C. de Epise. and
Cler. l. 10 C. de Epise and Cler.
Touching Privileges granted for Honor's-sake, partly in general unto the
Clergy, and partly unto Prelates the Chiefest Persons Ecclesiastical in
particular: of such quality and number they are, that to make but rehearsal of
them, we scarce think it safe, left the very entrails of some of our godly
Brethren, as they term themselves, should thereat happily burst in sunder.

Honor by endowncer with Lords and Livings.
XXI. And yet, of all these things rehearsed, it may be there never would have
grown any question, had Bishops been honored only thus far forth. But the
honoring of the Clergy with wealth, this is in the eyes of them which pretend
to seek nothing but mere Reformation of Abuses, a sin that can never be
remitted.

How soon, O how soon, might the Church be perfect, even without any spot or
wrinckle, if Public Authority would at the length say Amen, unto the holy and
devout requests of those godly Brethren, who as yet with outstretched necks,
groan in the pangs of their zeal to see the Houses of Bishops risted, and their
so long desired Livings gloriously divided amongst the Righteous. But there is
an impediment, a let, which somewhat hinders those good men's Prayers from
taking effect: They, in whose hands the Sovereignty of Power and Dominion over
the Church does rest, are persuaded there is a God; for undoubtedly either the
name of Godhead is but a feigned thing; or, if in Heaven there be a God, the
Saerilegious intention of Church-Robbers, which lurketh under this plausible
name of Reformation, is in his sight a thousand times more hateful than the
plain professed malice of those very Miscreants, who threw their Vomit in the
open face of our blessed Savior.

They are not words of persuasion by which true men can hold their own, when
they are over-beset with Thieves: And therefore to speak in this Cause at all
were but labor lost, saving only in respect of them, who being as yet un-joyned
unto this Conspiracy, may be happily somewhat stayed, when they shall know
betimes, what it is to see Thieves, and to run on with them, Psalm. 50. 1^.
as the Prophet in the Psalm speaks, When thou saw a Thief, then thou
consentedst with him, and have been Partaker with Adulterers.

For the better information therefore of men which carry true, honest, and
indifferent minds, these things we will endeavor to make most clearly
manifest:

First, That in Goods and Livings of the Church, none has propriety but God
himself.

Secondly, That the honor which the Clergy therein has, is to be, as it were
God's Receivers, the honor of Prelates, to be his chief and principal Receivers.

Thirdly, That from him they have right, not only to receive, but also to use
such Goods, the lower sort in smaller, and the higher in larger measure.

Fourthly, That in case they be thought, yea, or found to abuse the same, yet
may not such honor be therefore lawfully taken from them, and be given away
unto Persons of other Calling.

XXII. Possessions, Lands, and Livings Spiritual, the wealth of the Clergy,
That of Ecclesiastical Goods, and consiquently of the Lands and Livings which
Bishops enjoy, ^^^ propt (...) longs a ^ God done.
the Goods of the Church are in such sort the Lords own, that man can challenge
no propriety in them. His they are, and not ours; all things are his, in that
from him they have their being, Hos 2. 5.
My Corn, and my Wine, and mine Oil, says the Lord. All things his, in that he
has absolute power to dispose of them at his pleasure. Psalm. 50.1 ^.
Mine, says he, are the Sheep and Oxen of a thousand hills? All things his, in
that when we have them, we may say with Job, God has given, and when we are
deprived of them, The Lord, whose they are, has likewise taken them away
again. But these sacred Possessions are his by another tenure: His, because
those men who first received them from him, have unto him returned them again,
by way of Religious gift, or Oblation: Job ^. 1.
And in this respect it is, that the Lord does term those Houses wherein such
Gifts and Oblations were laid, His Treasuries. Mat. 3. 10.


The ground whereupon men have resigned their own interest in things Temporal,
and given over the same unto God, is that Precept which Solomon borrows from
the Law of Nature, Prove. 3. 9.
Honor the Lord out of thy Substance, and of the chiefest of all thy Revenue:
so shall thy Barns be filled with Plenty, and with new Wine, the fat of thy
Press shall overflow: For although it be by one most fitly spoken against those
superstitious Persons, who only are scrupulous in external Rites; Seneca.
Will thou win the favor of God? He virtuous. They best worship him, that are
his Followers. It is not the bowing of your Knees, but of your Hearts; it is
not the number of your Oblations, but the integrity of your Lives; not your
Incense, but your Obedience, which God is delighted to be honored by:
Nevertheless, we must beware, lest simply understanding this, which
comparatively is meant; that is to say, whereas the meaning is, that God does
chiefly respect the inward disposition of the Heart, we must take heed we do
not hereupon so worship him in Spirit, that outwardly we take all Worship,
Reverence, and Honor from him.

Our God will be glorified both of us himself, and for us by others: To others,
because our Hearts are known, and yet our example is required for their good;
therefore it is not sufficient to carry Religion in our Hearts, as Fire is
carried in Flint-stones, but we are outwardly, visibly, apparently, to serve
and honor the living God; yea, to employ that way, as not only for our Souls,
but our Bodies; so not only our Bodies, but our Goods, yea, the choice, the
flower, the chiefest of all thy Revenue, says Solomon: If thou have any thing
in all thy Possessions of more value and price than other, to what use
should thou convert it, rather than to this? Samuel was dear unto Hannah his
Mother: The Child that Hannah did so much esteem, she could not but greatly
wish to advance; and her Religious conceit was, that the honoring of God with
it, was the advancing of it unto honor. The chiefest of the Offspring of men
are, the Males which be firstborn, and, for this cause, in the ancient World,
they all were by right of their birth Priests of the Most High. By these and
the like Precedents, it plainly enough appears, that in what Heart soever
does dwell unseigned Religion, in the same there rests also a willingness to
bestow upon God that soonest, which is most dear. Amongst us the Law is, that
since Gold is the chiefest of Metals, if it be any where found in the bowels of
the Earth, it belongs in right of honor, as all men know, to the King: Whence
has this Custom grown, but only from a natural persuasion, whereby men judge
it decent, for the highest Persons always to be honored with the choicest
things? Mat. 1. 8. ^
If ye offer unto God the blind, says the Prophet Malachi, it is not evil; if
the lame and sick, it is good enough. Present it unto thy Prince, and see if he
will content himself, or accept thy Person, says the Lord of Hosts. When Abel
presented God with an Offering, it was the fattest of all the Lambs in his
whole Flock; he honored God not only out of his substance, but out of the very
Chiefest therein, whereby we may somewhat judge, how religiously they stand
affected toward God, who grudge that any thing worth the having should be his.
Long it were to reckon up particularly, what God was Owner of under the Law:
For of this sort was all which they spent in Legal Sacrifices; of this sort,
their usual Oblations and Offerings; of this sort, Tithes and Fust-fruits; of
this sort, that which by extraordinary occasions they vowed unto God; of this
sort, all that they gave to the building of the Tabernacle; of this sort, all
that which was gathered amongst them for the erecting of the Temple, and the
Because (says David) I have a delight in the House of my God, therefore I have
given the eunio of my own both Gold and Silver to adorn it with.
adorning of it erected; of this sort, whatsoever their Corban contained,
wherein that blessed Widow's Deodate was laid up. Now either this kind of
Honor was prefiguratively altogether Ceremonial, and then our Savior accepts
it not; or, if we find that to him also it has been done, and that with
divine approbation given for encouragement of the World, to show, by such kind
of service, their dutiful hearts toward Christ, there will be no place left
for men to make any question at all, whether herein they do well or no.

Wherefore to descend from the Synagogue unto the Church of Christ, albeit
Sacrifices, wherewith sometimes God was highly honored, be not accepted as
heretofore at the hands of men: Chron. 2. 5.
Yet, forasmuch as Ps. 50. 13, 14.
Honor God with thy Riches is an Edict of the inseparable Law of Nature, so far
forth as men are therein required by such kind of homage to testify their
thankful minds, this Sacrifice God does accept still. Wherefore, as it was
said of Christ, Phil. 4. 18. Psalm. ^2. ^1
That all Kings should worship him, and all Nations do him service; so this
very^ kind of worship or service was likewise mentioned, lest we should think
that our Lord and Savior would allow of no such thing. The Kings of Tarshish,
and of the Isles shall bring Presents, the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall bring
Gifts. And, Math. 2. 11.
as it makes not a little to the praise of those Sages mentioned in the
Gospel, that the first amongst men which did solemnly honor our Savior on
Earth were they; so it sounds no less to the dignity of this particular
kind, that the rest by it were prevented; They fell down and worshipped, and
opened their Treasures, and presented onto him Gifts, Gold, Incense, and Mirr^.

Of all those things which were done to the honor of Christ in his lifetime,
there is not one whereof he spoke in such sort, as when Mary, to testify the
largeness of her affection, Matthew. 26. 13.
seemed to waste away a Gift upon him, the price of which Gift might, as they
thought who saw it, much better have been spent in works of Mercy toward the
Poor, Verily, I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached
throughout all the World, there shall also this that she has don't be spoken
of, for memorial of her. Of service to God, Joh. 15. 16.
the best works are they which continue longest: And, for permanency, what like
Donation, whereby things are unto him for ever dedicated? That the ancient
Lands and Livings of the Church were all in such sort given into the hands of
God by the just Lords and Owners of them, that unto him they passed over their
whole interest and right therein, the form of sundry the said Donations as yet
extant, most plainly shows. And where time has left no such evidence as now
remaining to be seen, yet the same intention is presumed in all Donors; unless
the contrary be apparent. But to the end it may yet more plainly appear unto
all men under what Title the several kinds of Ecclesiastical Possessions are
held, Ans. cap. 15. de ^^nca.
Our Lord himself (says Saint Augustine) had Coffers to keep those things
which the Faithful OFFERED unto him. Then was the form of the Church-treasury
first instituted, to the end, that withal we might understand that in
forbidding to be careful for to morrow, his purpose was not to bar his Saints
from keeping money, but to withdraw them from doing God service for Wealth's
sake, and from for saking Righteousness through fear of losing their Wealth.

The first Gifts consecrated unto Christ after his departure out of the World
were sums of money, in process of time other Movables were added, and at
length Goods unmovable, Churches and Oratories hallowed to the honor of his
glorious Name, Houses and Lands for perpetuity conveyed unto him, Inheritance
given to remain his as long as the World should endure. C. 12. c. 8 cap. 15 and
16.
The Apostles (says Melchiades) they foresaw that God would have his Church
amongst the Gentiles, and for that cause in Judea they took no Lands, but price
of Lands sold. This he conjectureth to have been the cause why the Apostles did
that which the History reports of them.

The truth is, that so the state of those times did require, as well other
where, as in Judea: Wherefore when afterward it did appear much more
commodious for the Church, to dedicate such Inheritances; then, the value and
price of them being sold, the former Custom was changed for this, as for the
better. The Devotion of Constantine herein all the World, even till this very
day, admireth: They that lived in the prime of the Christian World, thought no
Testament Christianly made, nor any thing therein well bequeathed, unless
something were thereby added unto Christ's Patrimony: Touching which men, what
judgment the World does now give, I know not; perhaps we deem them to have
been herein but blind and superstitious Persons. Nay, we in these cogitations
are blind; they contrariwise did with Solomon plainly know and persuade
themselves, that thus to diminish their wealth, Prove. 10. 3.
was not to diminish, but to augment it; according to that which God does
promise to his own People, by the Prophet Malachi, M^l 3. 10. 2 Chro. 31.
and which they by their own particular experience sound true: If Wickliff
therefore were of that opinion which his Adversaries ascribe unto him (whether
truly, or of purpose to make him odious, I cannot tell, for in his Writings I
do not find it) namely, T^. Wald. tum. 1. lib^ 4. c. 39.
That Constantine, and others following his steps did evil, as having no
sufficient ground whereby they might gather, that such Donations are acceptable
to Jesus Christ, it was in Wickless a palpable error. I will use but one only
Argument to stand in the stead of many: Jacob taking his Journey unto Haran,
made in this sort his solemn vow, Genesis 28.20.
If God will be with me, and will keep me in this Journey which I go, and will
give me Bread to eat, and Clothes to put on, so that I come again to my
Fathers house in safety; then shall the Lord be my God, and this Stone which I
have set up a Pillar shall be the House of God, and of all that thou shall give
me, will I give the Tenth unto thee. May a Christian man desire as great things
as Jacob did at the hands of God? may he desire them in as earliest manner? may
he promise as great thankfulness in acknowledging the goodness of God? may he
vow any certain kind of public acknowledgment before hand; or, though he vow
it not, perform it after, in such sort that men may see he is persuaded how the
Lord has been his God? Are these particular kinds of testifying thankfulness
to God, the erecting of Oratories, the dedicating of Lands and Goods to
maintain them, forbidden any where? Let any mortal man living show but one
reason, wherefore in this point to follow Jacob's example, should not be a
thing both acceptable unto God, and in the eyes of the World for ever most
highly commendable? Concerning Goods of this nature, Goods whereof when we
speak, we term them (...), The Goods that are consecrated unto God; and, as
Tertullian speaks, Deposit a pietatis, things which Piety and Devotion has
laid up, as it were in the bosom of God: Touching such Goods, the Law Civil
following mere light of Nature, defines them to be no man's, because no mortal
man, or community of men, has right of propriety in them.

XXIII. Persons Ecclesiastical are God's Stewards, That Ecclesiastical Persons
are Receivers of God's ^^enr^^ and that the honor of Prelates is, to be thereof
his chief Receivers; not without liberty from him granted, of converting the
same unto their own use, even in large manner.
not only for that he has set them over his Family, as the Ministers of
ghostly food; but even for this very cause also, that they are to receive and
dispose his Temporal Revenues, the gifts, and oblations which men bring him. Of
the Jews it is plain, that their Tyths they offered unto the Lord, and those
Number. 18.23
offerings the Lord bestowed upon the Levites. When the Levites gave the Tenth
of their Tithes, this their Gift the Law does term the Lord's Heave Offering,
and Number. 19.23
appoint that the High Priest should receive the same. Num^. 21.
Of spoils taken in War, that part which they were accustomed to separate unto
God, they brought it before the Priest of the Lord, by whom it was laid up in
the Tabernacle of the Congregation, for a memorial of their thankfulness
toward God, and his goodness toward them, in fighting for them against their
enemies. As therefore the Apostle magnifieth the honor of Melchisedec, in that
he being an High Priest, did receive at the hands of Abraham the Tyths which
Abraham did honor God with: so it argues in the Apostles themselves great
honor, that at their feet the price of those Possessions was laid, which men
thought good to bestow on Christ. Heb. 7. 3.
St. Paul commending the Churches which were in Macedonia, for their exceeding
liberality this way, says of them, Acts ^. 34.
That he himself would bear record, they had declared their forward minds,
according to their power, yea, beyond their power, and had so much exceeded his
expectation of them; 2 Cor. 8. 5.
that they seemed as it were even to give away themselves first to the Lord,
says the Apostle, and then by the will of God unto us: To him, as the owner of
such gifts; to us, as his appointed receivers and dispensers. The gift of the
Church of Antioch, Acts 11.30. Acts 21. 18. and 12. 17.
bestowed unto the use of distressed Brethren which were in Judea, Paul and
Baruabar did deliver unto the Presbyters of Jerusalem; and the head of those
Presbyters was James, he therefore the Chiefest disposer thereof.

Amongst those Canons which are entitled Apostolical, one is this, Cap. 41. Et
Council. Antioch c. 25.
We appoint, that the Bishop have care of these things which belong to the
Church; the meaning is, of Church-Goods, as the Reason following shows: (...)
For if the precious Souls of men must be committed unto him of trust, much
more it beloveth the charge of money to be given him, that by his Authority the
Presbyters and Deacons may administer all things to them that stand in need. So
that he which has done them the honor to be, as it were, his Treasurers, has
left them also authority and power to use these his Treasures, both otherwise,
and for the maintenance even of their own Estate; the lower sort of the Clergy,
according unto a meaner; the higher, after a larger proportion. The use of
Spiritual goods and possessions, has been a matte^ much disputed of, grievous
complaints there are usually made against the evil and unlawful usage of them,
but with no certain determination hitherto, on what things and Persons; with
what proportion and measure they being bestowed, do retain their lawful use.
Some men condemn it as idle, superfluous, and altogether vain, that any part of
the Treasure of God should be spent upon costly Ornaments, appertaining unto
his Service: who being best worshipped, when he is served in Spirit and truth,
John 4. 14.
has not for want of pomp and magnificence, rejected at any time those who
with faithful hearts have adored him. Whereupon the Heretics, termed
Henriciani and Petrobusiani, threw down Temples and Houses of Prayer, erected
with mavelous great charge, as being in that respect not fit for Christ by us
to be honored in. We deny not, but that they who sometime wandered as Pilgrims
on earth, Heb. 11. 3^.
and had no Temples, but made Caves and Dens to pray in, did God such honor as
was most acceptable in his sight; God did not reject them for their poverty and
nakedness sake: Their Sacraments were not abhorred for want of Vessels of Gold.

Howbeit, let them who thus delight to plead, answer me, When Moses first, and
afterward David, exhorted the people of Israel unto matter of charge about the
service of God; suppose we it had been allowable in them to have thus pleaded,
Our Fathers in Egypt served God devoutly, God war with them in all their
afflictions, he heard their Prayers, pitied their Case, and delivered them from
the tyranny of their oppressors; what House, Tabernacle, or Temple had they?
Such Argumentations are childish and fond; God does not refuse to be honored at
all, where there lacks wealth; but where abundance and store is, he there
requires the Flower thereof, being bestowed on him, to be employed even unto
the Ornament of his Service: In Egypt the state of his People was servitude,
and therefore his Service was accordingly. In the Defart they had no sooner
ought of their own, but a Tabernacle is required; and in the Land of Canaan, a
Temple. In the eyes of David it seemed a thing not fit, a thing not decent,
that himself should be more richly seated than God.

But concerning the use of Ecclesiastical Goods bestowed this way, there is not
so much contention amongst us, as what measure of allowance is fit for
Ecclesiastical Persons to be maintained with. A better rule in this case to
judge things by, we cannot possibly have, than the^ Wisdom of God himself; by
considering what he thought meet for each degree of the Clergy to enjoy in time
of the Law; what for Levites, what for Priests, and what for Highpriests,
somewhat we shall be the more able to discern rightly, what may be fit,
convenient, and right for the Christian Clergy likewise. Priests for their
maintenance had those first fruits of Number. 18.15.
Cattle, Number. 12.
Coin, Wine, Oil, and Number. 13.
other Commodities of the Earth, which the Jews were accustomed yearly to
present God with. They had Verse 1^.
the price which was appointed for men to pay in lieu of the firstborn of
their Children, and the price of the first born also amongst Cattle, which were
unclean: They had the vowed Verse 8.
Gifts of the People, or Le^. 9.11. Verse 14 Num^ 1^. 5.
the prices, if they were redeemable by the Donors after vow, as some things
were: They had the free, and un-vowed Oblations of men: Verse. 8. 5, ^1. 18.
They had the remainder of things sacrificed: With Tithes, the Levites were
maintained; and with the tithe of their Tithes, the High Priest.

In a word, if the quality of that which God did assign to his Clergy be
considered, and their manner of receiving it, without labor, expense, or
charge, it will appear, that the Tribe of Levi being but the twelfth part of
Israel, had in effect as good as four twelfth parts of all such Goods as the
holy Land did yield: So that their Worldly Estate was four times as good as any
other Tribes in Israel besides: But the High-Priest's condition, how ample? to
whom belonged the Tenth of all the Tithe of this Land, especially the Law
provicing also, that as the people did bring the best of all things unto the
Priests and Levites, so the Levite should deliver the choice and flower of all
their Commodities to the High Priest, and so his Tenthpart by that mean be made
the very best part amongst ten: by which proportion, if the Levites were
ordinarily in all not above thirty thousand men (whereas when David numbered
them, 1 Chronicles. 2.3^
he found almost thirty eight thousand above the age of thirty years) the
High Priest after this very reckoning, Genesis 47.^2.
had as much as three or four thousand others of the Clergy to live upon. Over
and besides all this, lest the Priests of Egypt holding Lands, should seem in
that respect better provided for, than the Priests of the true God, it pleased
him further to appoint unto them forty and eight whole Cities, with Territories
of Land adjoining, Numb 35.9. Josh. 14.4.
to hold as their own free Inheritance for ever. For to the end they might have
all kind of encouragement, not only to do what they ought, but to take
pleasure in that they did: albeit they were expressly forbidden to have any part
of the Land of Canaan laid out whole to themselves, by themselves, in such sort
as the rest of the Tribes had, forasmuch as the will of God was, rather that
they should throughout all Tribes be dispersed, for the easier access of the
People unto knowledge: Deuteronomy. 12. 8. Lev. 25.33.34.
Yet were they not barred altogether to hold Land, nor yet otherwise the worse
provided for, in respect of that former restraint; for God by way of special
pre-eminence, undertook to feed them at his own Table, and out of his own
proper Treasury to maintain them, that want and penury they might never feel,
except God himself did first receive injury. A thing most worthy our
consideration, is the wisdom of God herein; for the Common sort being prone
unto envy and murmur, little considers of what necessity, use and importance,
the sacred duties of the Clergy are, and for that Cause hardly yields them
any such honor, without repining and grudging thereat; they cannot brook it,
that when they have labored, and come to reap, there should so great a portion
go out of the fruit of their Labors, and he yielded up unto such as sweat nor
for it. But when the Lord does challenge this as his own due, and require it to
be done by way of homage unto him, whose mere liberality and goodness had
raised them from a poor and servile estate, to place them where they had all
those ample and rich possessions, they must be worse than Brute beasts, if they
would storm at any thing which He did receive at their hands. And for him to
bestow his own on his own Servants (which liberty is not denied unto the
meanest of men) what man lives that can think it other than most reasonable?
Wherefore no cause there was, why that which the Clergy had, should in any
man's eye seem too much, unless God himself were thought to be of an
over-having disposition.

This is the mark whereat all those speeches drive, ^^^. 10. 9. I^th. 13. 14.
Numb. 18.24.
Levi has no part nor inheritance with his Brethren, the Lord is his
inheritance, again, To the Tribe of Levi, he gave no inheritance, the
Sacrifices of the Lord God of Israel an inheritance of Levi; again, The tyths
of the which they shall offer as an offering unto the Lord, I have given the
Levites for an inheritance; and again, Verse 19.
All the heave-offerings of the holy things which the children of Israel shall
offer unto the Lord, I have given thee, and thy sons, and thy daughters with
thee, to be a duty for ever; it is a perpetual Covenant of salt before the
Lord. Now that, if such provision be possible to be made, the Christian Clergy
ought not herein to be inferior unto the Jewish, What sounder proof than the
Apostles own kind of Argument? 1 Cor. 9. 13.
Do ye not know, that they which minister about the holy things, eat of the
things of the Temple? and they which partake of the Altar are partakers with
the Altar? So, (even So,) has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel. Upon which words I thus conclude, that if the
People of God do abound, and abounding can so far forth find in their hearts
to show themselves toward Christ their Savior, thankful as to honor him with
their riches (which no Law of God or Nature forbids) no less than the
ancient Jewish people did honor God; the plain Ordinance of Christ appoints
as large, and as ample proportion out of his own treasure unto them that serve
him in the Gospel, as ever the Priests of the Law did enjoy? What further proof
can we desire? It is the blessed Apostles testimony, That even so the Lord has
ordained. Yea, I know not whether it be sound to interpret the Apostle
otherwise than that, 1 Timothy 5. 17. 2 Cor. 3. 8. Vide ^2^. 79. art. 1.
whereas he judges the Presbyters which rule well in the Church of Christ to
be worthy of double honor, he means double unto that which the Priests of the
Law received; For if that Ministry which was of the Letter were so glorious,
how shall not the Ministry of the Spirit be more glorious? If the Teachers of
the Law of Moses, which God delivered written with Letters in Tables of Stone,
were thought worthy of so great honor, how shall not the Teachers of the Gospel
of Christ be in his sight most worthy, the Holy Ghost being sent from Heaven to
ingrave the Gospel on their Hearts who first taught it, and whose Successors
they that teach it at this day are? So that according to the Ordinance of God
himself, their Estate for worldly maintenance ought to be no worse than is
granted unto other sorts of men, each according to that degree they were placed
in. Neither are we so to judge of their worldly condition, as if they were
Servants of men, and at men's hands did receive those earthly benefits by way of
stipend in lieu of pains whereunto they are hired: nay that which is paid unto
them is homage and tribute due unto the Lord Christ. His Servants they are, and
from him they receive such goods by way of stipend. Not so from men: For at the
hands of men, he himself being honored with such things, has appointed his
Servants therewith according to their several degrees and places to be
maintained. And for their greater encouragement who are his Laborers he has
to their comfort assured them for ever, 1 Timothy 5. 18.
that they are, in his estimation, worthy the hire which he allows them; and
therefore if men should withdraw from him the store, which those his Servants
that labor in his Work are maintained with, yet be in his Word shall be found
everlastingly true, their labor in the Lord shall not be forgotten; the hire
he accounts them worthy of, they shall surely have either one way or other
answered.

Acts 4. 31.
In the prime of the Christian world, that which was brought and laid down at
the Apostles feet, they disposed of by distribution, according to the exigence
of each man's need. Neither can we think, that they, who, out of Christ's
treasury made provision for all others, were careless to furnish the Clergy
with all things fit and convenient for their Estate: And as themselves were
chiefest in place of Authority, and Calling, so no man doubts, but that
proportionably they had power to use the same for their own decent maintenance*
The Apostles, with the rest of the Clergy in Jerusalem lived at that time
according to the manner of a Fellowship, or Collegiate Society maintaining
themselves and the poor of the Church with a common purse, the rest of the
Faithful keeping that Purse continually stored. And in that sense it is, that
the Sacred History says, All which believed were in one place, and had all
things common. Acts 2. 44.
In the Histories of the Church, and in the Writings of the Ancient Fathers for
some hundreds of years after, we find no other way for the maintenance of the
Clergy but only this, the Treasury of Jesus Christ furnished through men's
Devotion, bestowing sometimes Goods, sometimes Lands that way, and out of his
Treasury the charge of the service of God was de^rayed, the Bishop and the
Clergy under him maintained, the poor in their necessity ministered unto. For
which purpose, every Bishop had some one of the Presbyters under him to be
Ditp^^ns. Prosp. de vita contemp. l. 2. c. 12. Oc^^n. l. 14. C de Sa^r. ^erl^s.
and Novel. 7. In Princip.
Treasurer of the Church, to receive, keep, and deliver all; which Office in
Churches Cathedral remains even till this day, albeit the use thereof be not
altogether so large now as heretofore. The disposition of these goods was by
the appointment of the Bishop. Wherefore Prosp. de vi^^ Cortempl. lib. cap. 1^.
Prosper speaking of the Bishops care herein, says, It was necessary for one
to be troubled therewith, to the end that the rest under him might be freer to
attend quietly their Spiritual businesses. And left any man should imagine,
that Bishops by this means were hindered themselves from attending the service
of God, Even herein, says he, they d^ God service; for if these things which
are bestowed on the Church be God's; he does the work of God, who, not of a
covetous mind, but with purpose of most faithful administration, takes care
of things consecrated unto God. And forasmuch as the Presbyters of every Church
could not all live with the Bishop, partly for that their number was great, and
partly because the People being once divided into Parishes, such Presbyters as
had severally charge of them were by that mean more conveniently to live in the
midst each of his own particular flock, therefore a competent number being fed
at the same Cypr. lib. 4. Ep. 5. Presbyterii honorem defiguasse nos ill^s jam
seiatis de ^^ sportulis eisdem cum Presbyteris honorentur, etc divisioner
menfurnai aequaris quantitatibus parti^ntur, sensuri nobiscum provectis and
corr^horatis anuis suis. Which words of Cyprian do show, that every Presbyter
had his standing allowance out of the Church treasury; that besides the same
allowance called Sportula, some also had their portion in that dividend which
was the remainder of every months expense; thirdly that out of the Presbyters
under^ him, the Bishop as them had a certain number of the gravest, who lived
and commoned always with him.
Table with the Bishop, the rest had their whole allowance apart, which several
allowances were called Sportulae, and they who received them, Sportulantes
fratres. Touching the Bishop, as his Place and Estate was higher, so likewise
the proportion of his Charges about himself, being for that cause in all equity
and reason greater; yet, forasmuch as his stiat herein was no other than it
pleased himself to set, the rest (as the manner of Inferiors is to think that
they which are over them always have too much) grudged many times at the
measure of the Bishops private expense, perhaps not without cause: Howsoever,
by this occasion, there grew amongst them great heart-burning, quarrel and
strife: where the Bishops were found culpable, as eating too much beyond their
tether, and drawing more to their own private maintenance than the proportion
of Christ's Patrimony being not greatly abundant could bear, sundry
Constitutions hereupon were made to moderate the same, according to the
Churches condition in those times. Some before they were made Bishops, having
been Owners of ample Possessions, sold them, and gave them away to the Poor:
Prosp. de vita contempl. l. 2. c ^. Pont. Diacon. in vita Cypr.
Thus did Paulinus, Hilary, Cyprian, and sundry others. Hereupon, they, who
entering into the same Spiritual and high Function, held their Secular
Possessions still, were hardly thought of: And even when the Case was fully
resolved, that so to do was not unlawful, yet it grew a question, Whether they
lawfully might then take any thing out of the Public Treasury of Christ? a
question, Whether Bishops, holding by Civil Title sufficient to live of their
own, were bound in Conscience to leave the Goods of the Church altogether to
the use of others. Of contentions about these matters there was no end, neither
appeared there any possible way for quietness, otherwise than by making
partition of Church-Revenues, according to the several ends and users for which
they did serve, that so the Bishops part might be certain. Such partition being
made, the Bishop enjoyed his portion several to himself; the rest of the Clergy
likewise theirs; a third part was severed to the furnishing and upholding of
the Church; a fourth to the erection and maintenance of Houses wherein the Poor
might have relief. After which separation made, Lands and Livings began every
day to be dedicated unto each use severally, by means whereof every of them
became in short time much greater than they had been for worldly maintenance,
the fervent devotion of men being glad that this new opportunity was given, of
showing zeal to the House of God in more certain order.

By these things it plainly appears, what proportion of maintenance has been
ever thought reasonable for a Bishop; since in that very partition agreed on, to
bring him unto his certain stint, as much as allowed unto him alone, as unto
all the Clergy under him, namely, a fourtli part of the whole yearly Rents and
Revenues of the Church. Nor is it likely, that, before those Temporalities,
which now are such eye-sores, were added unto the honor of Bishops, their
state was so mean, as some imagine: For if we had no other evidence than the
covetous and ambitious humor of Heretics, whose impotent desires of aspiring
thereunto, and extreme coffeehouse as often as they were defeated, even this
does show, that the state of Bishops was not a few degrees advanced above the
rest. Wherefore of grand Apostates which were in the very prime of the
Primitive Church, thus Lactantius above thirteen hundred years sithence,
testified, Lact. de vera. sap. l. 5. c. 30.
Men of a slippery says they were, who feigning that they knew and worshipped
God, but seeking only that they might grow in WEALTH and Honor, affected the
Place of the HIGHEST PRIESTHOOD; whereunto, when their Betters were chosen
before them, they thought it better to leave the Church, and to draw their
Favorers with them, than to endure those men their Governors, whom themselves
desired to govern. Now, whereas against the present estate of Bishops, and the
greatness of their port, and the largeness of their expenses at this day, there
is not any thing more commonly objected than those ancient Canons, whereby they
are restrained unto a far more sparing life, their Houses, their Retinue, their
Diet limited within a far more narrow compass than is now kept; we must know,
that those Laws and Orders were made, when Bishops lived of the same Purse,
which served a well for a number of others, as them, and yet all at their
disposing: So that convenient it was to provide, that there might be a moderate
stint appointed to measure their expenses by, lest others should be injured by
their wastefulness. Contrariwise, there is now no cause wherefore any such Law
should be urged, when Bishops live only of that which has been peculiarly
alloted unto them: They having therefore Temporalities and other Revenues to
bestow for their own private use, according to that which their state
requires, and no other having with them any such common interest therein,
their own discretion is to be their Law for this matter; neither are they to be
pressed with the rigor of such ancient Canons as were framed for other times,
much less so odiously to be upbraided with uncomformity unto the Pattern of our
Lord and Savior's estate, in such circumstances as himself did never mind to
require, that the rest of the World should of necessity be like him. Thus
against the wealth of the Clergy, they allege how meanly Christ himself was
provided for; against Bishops Palaces, his want of a hole to hide his Head in;
against the service done unto them, that he came to minister, not to be
ministered unto in the World. Which things, as they are not unfit to control
covetous, proud, or ambitious desires of the Ministers of Christ, and even of
all Christians, whatsoever they be; and to teach men contentment of mind, how
mean soever their estate is, considering that they are but Servants to him,
whose condition was farrmore abused than theirs is, or can be; so to prove such
difference in State between us and him unlawful, they are of no force or
strength at all. If one convented before their Consistories, when he stands
to make this Answer, should break out into Invectives against their Authority,
and tell them, that Christ, when he was on Earth, did not sit to judge, but
stand to be judged; would they hereupon think it requisite to dissolve their
Eldership, and to permit no Tribunals, no Judges at all, for fear of swerving
from our Savior's example? If those men, who have nothing in their mouths more
usual, than the poverty of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, allege not this as
Julian sometime did, Beati panperes, unto Christians, when his meaning was to
spoil them of that they had; our hope is then, that as they seriously and
sincerely wish, that our Savior Christ in this point may be followed, and to
that end only propose his blessed example; so, at our hands again, they will
be content to hear with like willingness, the holy Apostle's Exhortation, made
unto them of the Laity also, 1 Cor. 11. 1. Phil. 3. 1^.
Be ye Followers of us, even as we are of Christ; let us be your example, even
as the Lord Jesus Christ is ours, that we may all proceed by one and the same
rule.

XXIV. But beware we of following Christ, as Thieves follow True-men, to take
their Goods by violence from them. That for their unworthiness, to deprive both
them and their Encres^ors of such Go^ds, and to ^^nves the same unto men of
Secular Calling, were extreme Sacral^gious injus^e.
Be it, that Bishops were all unworthy, not only of Livings, but even of Life,
yet what has our Lord Jesus Christ deserved, for which men should judge him
worthy to have the things that are his given away from him, unto others that
have no right unto them? For at this mark it is, that the head Lay-Reformers do
all aim. Must these unworthy Prelates give place; What then? Shall Better
succeed in their rooms? Is this desired, to the end that others may enjoy their
Honors, which shall do Christ more faithful service than they have done?
Bishops are the worst men living upon Earth; therefore let their sanctified
Possessions be divided: Amongst whom? O blessed Reformation! O happy men, that
put to their helpinghands for the furtherance of so good and glorious a Work!
Wherefore, albeit the whole World at this day do already perceive, and
Posterity be like hereafter a great deal more plainly to discern; not that the
Clergy of God is thus heaved at, because they are wicked, but that means are
used to put it into the heads of the simple multitude, that they are such
indeed: to the end that those who thirst for the spoil or Spiritual
Possessions, may, till such time as they have their purpose, be thought to
covet nothing but only the just extinguishment of un-reformable Persons; so
that in regard of such men's intentions, practices, and machinations against
them, the part that suffers these things, Psalm. 7. 8.
may most fitly pray with David, Judge thou me, O Lord, according to my
Righteousness, and according unto mine innocence: O let the malice of the
wicked come to an end, and be thou the guide of the just. Notwithstanding,
forasmuch as it does not stand with Christian humility otherwise to think, then
that this violent outrage of men, is a rod in the ireful hands of the Lord our
God, the smart whereof we deserve to feel: Let it not seem grievous in the eyes
of my reverend L. L. the Bishops, if to their good consideration I offer a view
of those sores which are in the kind of their heavenly function, most apt to
breed, and which being not in time cured, may procure at the length that which
God of his infinite mercy avert. Of Bishops in his time St. Jerome complains,
that they took it in great disdain to have any fault, great or small found with
them: Epiph. contra hares. l. 3.10 1. baer. 70.
Epiphanius likewise before Jerome, notes their impatiency this way, to have
been the very choose of a Schism in the Church of Christ; at what time one
Audius, a Man of great Integrity of life, full of faith and zeal toward God,
beholding those things which were corruptly done in the Church, told the B B.
and Presbyters their faults in such sort as those men are wont, who love the
truth from their hearts, and walk in the paths of a most exact life. Whether it
were covetousness, or sensuality in their lives; absurdity or error in their
teaching; any breach of the laws and Canons of the Church wherein he espied
them faulty, certain and sure they were to be thereof most plainly told. Which
thing, they whose dealings were justly culpable, could not bear; but, instead
of amending their faults, bent their hatred against him who sought their
amendment, till at length they drove him by extremity of infestation, through
weariness of striving against their injuries, to leave both them, and with them
the Church. Amongst the manifold accusations, either generally intended against
the Bishops of this our Church, or laid particularly to the charge of any of
them, I cannot find that hitherto their spitefullest adversaries have been able
to say justly, that any man for telling them their personal faults in good and
Christian sort, has sustained in that respect much persecution. Wherefore,
notwithstanding mine own inferior estate and calling in Gods Church, the
consideration whereof assures me, that in this kind the sweetest Sacrifice
which I can offer unto Christ, is meek Obedience, reverence and aw unto the
Prelates which he has placed in seats of higher Authority over me, emboldned I
am, so far as may conveniently stand with that duty of humble subjection,
meekly to crave, my good L L. your favorable pardon, if it shall seem a fault
thus far to presume; or* if otherwise, your wonted courteous acceptance.

AEneid. l. 12. -- Sinite hat haud mollia fatu
Sublatis aperite dolis
In government, be it of what kind soever, but especially if it be such kind of
Government as Prelates have over the Church, there is not one thing publicly
more hurtful then that an hard opinion should be conceived of Governors at the
first: and a good opinion how should the World ever conceive of them for their
after-proceedings in Regiment, whose first access and entrance thereunto,
gives just occasion to think them corrupt men, which fear not that God, in
whose name they are to rule? Wherefore a scandalous thing it is to the Church
of God, and to the Actors themselves dangerous, to have aspired unto rooms of
Prelacy by wicked means. We are not at this day troubled much with that
tumultuous kind of ambition wherewith the elections of Ammian. Marcel. lib. 37
Damasus in S. Ieromes age, and of Vide in vita Greg. Naz.
Maximus in Gregory's time, and of others, were long sithence stained. Our
greatest fear is rather the evil which Nemo gradum sacerdoti precii venalitate
mercetur quantum quisque mercatur non quantum dare sufficiat, aestimetur.
Profecto enim, quis locus tutus and quae causa esse poterit excusata, si
veneranda Dei templa pecuniis expugnentur? Quem murum integritaris aut vallum
providebimus, si auri sacra fames in penetralia veneranda proserpat ^quid
denique cantum esse poterit aut securum, si sanctitas incorrupta corrumpatur?
Cesser altaribus imminere profanus ardor avaritiae, and a sacris a^ytis
repellatur pi^culare flagitium. Iraque castus and humilis nostris temporibus
eligatur Episcopus, ut quocunque loc^rum pervenitit, omnia vita propriae
integritate purificet. Nec pretio sed precibus ordinetur Antistes. l. 31. C. de
Epis. and Cler.
Leo and Anthemius did by Imperial constitution, endeavor as much as in them
by to prevent. He which grants, or he which receives the office and dignity
of a Bishop, otherwise then beseems a thing Divine and most holy; he which
bestows and he which obteineth it after any other sort then were honest and
lawful to use, if our Lord Jesus Christ were present himself on earth to bestow
it even with his own hands, sins a sin by so much more grievous then the sin
of Balshazar, by how much Offices and Functions heavenly are more precious then
the meanest ornaments or implements which thereunto appertain. If it be, as the
Apostle says, that the Holy Ghost does make Bishops, and that the whole action
of making them is Gods own deed, men being therein but his Agents; what spark
of the fear of God can there possibly remain in their hearts, who representing
the person of God in naming worthy men to Ecclesiastial charge, do sell that
which in his name they are to bestow, or who standing as it were at the Throne
of the Living God do bargain for that which at his hands they are to receive?
Woe worth such impious and irreligious prophanations. The Church of Christ has
been hereby made, not a den of thieves, but in a manner the very dwelling place
of soul spirits; for undoubtedly, such a number of them have been in all ages
who thus have climbed into the seat of Episcopal Regiment.

2. Men may by orderly means be invested with spiritual Authority, and yet do
harm by reason of ignorance how to use it to the good of the Church. It is
says Chrysostom, (...); a thing highly to be accounted of, but a hard thing to
be that which a Bishop should be. Yea a hard and a toilsom thing it is, for a
Bishop to know the things that belong unto a Bishop. A right good man may be a
very unfit Magistrate. And for discharge of a Bishops Office, to be well minded
is not enough, no not to be well learned also. Skill to instruct is a thing
necessary, skill to govern much more necessary in a Bishop. It is not safe for
the Church of Christ, when Pishops learn what belongs unto Government, as
Empericks learn physic by killing of the sick. Bishops were wont to be men of
great learning in the Laws both Civil and of the Church; and while they were
so, the wisest men in the land for Counsel and Government were Bishops.

3. Know we never so well what belongs unto a charge of so great moment, yet
can we not therein proceed but with hazard of public detriment, if we rely
on our selves alone, and use not the benefit of conference with others. A
singular mean to unity and concord amongst themselves, a mavelous help unto
uniformity in their dealings, no small addition of weight and credit unto that
which they do, a strong bridle unto such as watch for occasions to stir against
them; finally, a very great stay unto all that are under their Government, it
could not choose but be soon found, if Bishops did often and seriously use the
help of mutual consultation, These three rehearsed are things only preparatory
unto the course of Episcopal proceedings. But the hurt is more manifestly seen
which does grow to the Church of God by faults inherent in their several
actions, as when they carelessly Ordein, when they Institute negligently, when
corruptly they bestow Church Livings, Benefices, Prebends, and rooms especially
of Jurisdiction, when they visit for gain-sake, rather then with serious intent
to do good, when their Courts erected for the maintenance of good Order are
disordered; when they regard not the Clergy under them; when neither Clergy nor
Laity are kept in that aw for which this authority should serve; when any thing
appears in them rather then a fatherly affection toward the flock of Christ
when they have no respect to posterity; and finally, when they neglect the true
and requisite means whereby their authority should be upheld. Surely the hurt
which grows out of these defects must needs be exceeding great. In a
Minister, ignorance and disability to teach is a maim, nor is it held a thing
allowable to ordain such, were it not for the avoiding of a greater evil which
the Church must needs sustain, if in so great scarcity of able men, and
unsufficiency of most Parishes throughout the Land to maintain them, both
public Prayer and the Administration of Sacraments should rather want, then
any man thereunto be admitted lacking dexterity and skill to perform that which
otherwise was most requisite. Wherefore the necessity of ordaining such, is no
excuse for the rash and careless ordaining of every one that has but a friend
to bestow some two or three words of ordinary commendation in his behalf. By
reason whereof the Church grows burdened with silly creatures more then need,
whose noted baseness and insufficiency brings their very Order it self into
contempt.

It may be that the fear of a Quare impedit does cause Institutions to pass
more easily then otherwise they would. And to speak plainly the very truth, it
may be that Writs of Quare non impedit, were for these times most necessary in
the others place: Yet where Law will not suffer men to follow their own
judgment, to show their judgment they are not hindered. And I doubt not but that
even conscienceless and wicked Patrons, of which sort the swarms are too great
in the Church of England, are the more imboldened to present unto Bishops any
reffuse, by finding so easy acceptance thereof. Somewhat they might redress
this sore, notwithstanding so strong impediments. if it did plainly appear that
they took it indeed to heart, and were not in a manner contented with it.

Shall we look for care in admitting whom others present, if that which some of
your selves confer, be at any time corruptly bestowed? A foul and an ugly kind
of deformity it has, if a man do but think what it is for a Bishop to draw
commodity and gain from those things whereof he is left a free bestower, and
that in trust, without any other obligation then his sacred Order only, and
that religious Integrity which has been presumed on in him. Simoniacal
corruption I may not for honors sake suspect to be amongst men of so great
place. So often they do not, I trust, offend by sale; as by unadvised gift of
such preferments, wherein that ancient Canon should specially be remembered,
which forbids a Bishop to be led by humane affection, Can. Apost. ^5
in bestowing the things of God. A fault no where so hurtful, as in bestowing
places of jurisdiction, and in furnishing Cathedral Churches, the Prebendaries
and other Dignities whereof are the very true successors of those ancient
Presbyters which were at the first as Counselors unto Bishops. A foul abuse it
is, that any one man should be loaded as some are with Livings in this kind,
yea some even of them who condemn utterly the granting of any two Benefices
unto the same man, whereas the other is in truth a matter of far greater
sequel, as experience would soon show, if Churches Cathedral being furnished
with the residence of a competent number of virtuous, grave, wise and learned
Divines, the rest of the Prebends of every such Church were given within the
Diocese unto men of worthiest desert, for their better encouragement unto
industry and travel; unless it seem also convenient to extend the benefit of
them unto the learned in Universities, and men of special employment otherwise
in the affairs of the Church of God. But howsoever, surely with the public
good of the Church it will hardly stand, that in any one person such favors be
more multiplied, then law permits, in those Livings which are with Cure.

Touching Bishops Visitations, the first institution of them was profitable, to
the end that the state and condition of Churches being known, there might be
for evils growing convenient remedies provided in due time. The observation of
Church Laws, the correction of faults in the service of God and manners of men,
these are things that visitors should seek. When these things are inquired of
formally, and but for custom sake, fees and pensions being the only thing which
is sought, and little else done by Visitations; we are not to marvel if the
baseness of the end does make the action it self loathsome. The good which
Bishops may do not only by these Visitations belonging ordinarily to their
Office, but also in respect of that power which the Founders of Colleges have
given them of special trust, charging even fearfully their consciences
therewith: the good I say which they might do by this their authority, both
within their own Diocese, and in the well-springs themselves, the Universities,
is plainly such as cannot choose but add weight to their heavy accounts in that
dreadful Day, if they do it not.

In their Courts where nothing but singular integrity and Justice should
prevail, if palpable and gross corruptions be found, by reason of Offices so
often granted unto men who seek nothing but their own gain; and make no account
what disgrace does grow by their unjust dealings unto them under whom they deal
the evil hereof shall work more then they which procure it do perhaps imagine.

At the hands of a Bishop the first thing looked for, is a care of the Clergy
under him, a care that in doing good they may have whatsoever comforts and
encouragements his countenance, authority, and place may yield. Otherwise what
heard shall they have to proceed in their painful course, all sorts of men
besides being so ready to malign, despise, and every way oppress them? Let them
find nothing but disdain in Bishops; in the enemies of present Government, if
that way lift to betake themselves, all kind of favorable and friendly help;
unto which part think we it likely that men having wit, courage, and stomach
will incline?

As great a fault is the want of severity when need requires, as of kindness
and courtesy in Bishops. But touching this, what with ill usage of their powe
amongst the meaner and what with disuage amongst the higher sort, they are in
the eyes of both sorts as Bees have lost their sting. It is a long time
sithence any great one has felt, or almost any one much feared the edge of
that Ecclesiastical severity, which sometime held Lords and Dukes in a more
religious aw then now the meanest are able to be kept.

A Bishop, in whom there did plainly appear the marks and tokens of a fatherly
affection toward them are under his charge, what good might he do ten thousand
ways more then any man knows how to set down? But the souls of men are not
loved; that which Christ shed his blood for, is not esteemed precious. This is
the very root, the fountain of all negligence in Church Government.

Most wretched are the terms of men's estate when once they are at a point of
wrechlesness so extreme, that thy bend not their wits any further than only to
shift out the present time, never regarding what shall become of their
Successors after them. Had our Predecessors so loosely cast off from them all
care and respect to posterity, a Church Christian there had no^ been, about the
regiment whereof we should need at this day to strive. It was the barbarous
affection of Nero, that the ruin of his own Imperial Seat he could have been
well enough contented to see, in case he might also have seen it accompanied
with the fall of the whole World: An affection not more intolerable then
theirs, who care not to overthrow all posterity, so they may purchase a few
days of Ignominious safety unto themselves, and their present estates, if it
may be termed a safety which tends so fast unto their very overthrow, that
are the Purchasers of it in so vile and base manner.

Men whom it stands upon to uphold a reverend estimation of themselves in the
minds of others, without which the very best things they do are hardly able to
escape disgrace, must before it be over-late remember how much easier it is to
retain credit once gotten, then to recover it being lost. The Executors of
Bishops are sued if their Mansion House be suffered to go to decay: But whom
shall their Successors sue for the dilapidations which they make of that
Credit, the unrepaired diminutions whereof will in time bring to pass, that
they which would most do good in that calling, shall not be able; by reason of
prejudice generally settled in the minds of all sorts against them. By what
means their estimation has hitherto decayed, Egisip. l. ^. c. 1.
it is no hard thing to discern. Herod and Archelaus are noted to have sought
out purposely the dullest and most ignoble that could be found amongst the
people, preferring such to the Highpriests Office, thereby to abate the great
opinion which the multitude had of that Order, and to procure a more expedite
course for their own wicked Counsels, whereunto they saw the Highpriests were
no small impediment, as long as the common sort did much depend upon them. It
may be, there has been partly some show and just suspicion of like practice in
some, in procuring the undeserved preferments of some unworthy persons, the
very cause of whose advancement has been principally their unworthiness to be
advanced. But neither could this be done altogether without the inexcusable
fault of some preferred before, and so often we cannot imagine it to have been
done, that either only or chiefly from thence this decay of their estimation
may be thought to grow. Somewhat it is that the malice of their cunning
Adversaries, but much more which themselves have effected against themselves. A
Bishops estimation does grow from the excellency of virtues suitable unto his
place. Unto the place of a Bishop those high Divine Virtues are judged
suitable, which virtues being not easily found in other sorts of greatmen, do
make him appear so much the greater in whom they are found.

Devotion, and the feeling sense of Religion are not usual in the noblest,
wisest, and chiefest Personages of State, by reason their wits are so much
employed another way, and their minds so seldom conversant in heavenly things.
If therefore wherein themselves are defective, they see that Bishops do
blessedly excel, it frames secretly their-hearts to a stooping kind of
disposition, clean opposite to contempt: The very countenance of Moses was
glorious after that God had conferred with him. And where Bishops are the
powers and faculties of whose souls God has possessed, those very actions, the
kind whereof is common unto them with other men, have notwithstanding in them a
more high and heavenly form, which draws correspondentestimation unto it, by
virtue of that celestial impression, which deep meditation of holy things, and
as it were conversation with God does leave in their minds. So that Bishops
which will be esteemed of as they ought, must frame themselves to that very
pattern from whence those Asian Bishops unto whom St. John writes were
denominated, even so far forth as this our frailty will permit; shine they must
as Angels of God in the midst of perverse men. They are not to look that the
world should always carry the affection of Constantine, to bury that which
might derogate from them, and to cover their imbecillities. More then high time
it is, that they bethink themselves of the Apostles admonition; Attend tibi,
Have a vigilant eye to thy self. They err if they do not persuade themselves
that wheresoever they walk or sit, be it in their Churches or in their
Consistories, abmad or at home, at their Tables or in their Closets, they are
in the midst of snares laid for them: Wherefore as they are with the Prophet
every one of them to make it their hourly prayer unto God, Lead me, O Lord, in
thy righteousness, because of enemies; so it is not safe for them, no not for a
moment to slacken their industry in seeking every way that estimation which may
further their labors unto the Churches good. Absurdity, though but in words,
must needs he this way a maim, where nothing but wisdom, gravity, and,
judgment is looked for. That which the son of Syrach has concerning the
Writings of the old Sages, Wise sentences are found in them; should be the
proper mark and character of Bishops speeches; whose lips, as doors, are not to
be opened, but for egress of instruction and sound knowledge. If base servility
and dejection of mind be ever espied in them, how should men esteem them as
worthy the rooms of the great Ambassadors of God? A wretched desire to gain by
bad and unseemly means, stands not with a mean man's credit, much less with
that reputation which Fathers of the Church should be in. But if besides all
this, there be also coldness in works of Piety and Charity, utter contempt even
of Learning it self, no care to further it by any such helps as they easily
might and ought to afford, no not as much as that due respect unto their very
Families about them, which all men that are of account do order as near as they
can in such sort, that no grievous offensive deformity be therein noted; if
there still continue in that most Reverend Order, such as by so many Engines,
work day and night to pull down the whole frame of their own estimation amongst
men; some of the rest secretly also permitting others their industrious
opposites, every day more and more to seduce the multitude, how should the
Church of God hope for great good at their hands?

What we have spoken concerning these things, let not malicious accusers think
themselves therewith justified? no more then Shimei was by his Sovereigns most
humble and meek acknowledgment even of that very crime which so impudent a
Caitiffs tongue upbraided him withal, the one in the virulent rancour of a
canckred affection, took that delight for the present, which in the end did
turn to his own more tormenting woe; the other in the contrite patience even of
deserved malediction, had yet this comfort, It may be the Lord will look on
mine affliction, and do we good for his cursing this day. As for us over whom
Christ has placed them to be chiefest Guides and Pastors of our souls, our
common fault is, 2. Sam. 15 11.
that we look for much more in our Governors then a tolerable sufficiency can
yield, and bear much less, then Humanity and Reason do require we should. Too
much perfection over rigo^ously exacted in them, cannot but breed in us
perpetual coffeehouse, and on both parts cause all things to be unpleasant.
It is exceedingly worth the noting, which Plato has about the means whereby
men fall into an utter dislike of all men with whom they converse: Plat in
Phaed^^
This sowreness of mind which makes every man's dealings unsavory in our
taste, enters by an unskilful overweening, which at the first we have of
one, and so of another, in whom we afterward find our selves to have been
deceived, they declaring themselves in the end to be frail men, whom we judged
demigods: When we have oftentimes been thus begailed, and that far besides
expectation, we grow at the length to this plain conclusion, That there is
nothing at all sound in any man. Which bitter conceit is unseemly, and plain to
have risen from lack of mature judgment in humane affairs; which i^ so be we
did handle with art, we would not enter into dealings with men, otherwise then
being beforehand grounded in this persuasion, that the number of persons
notably good or bad, is but very small; that the most part of good have some
evil, and of evil men, some good in them. So true our experience does find
those Aphorisms of Mercurius Trismegistas; (...), To purge gooddness quite and
clean from all mixture of evil here, is a thing impossible. Again, To (...),
When in this World we term a thing good, M. (...) in pimandro. ^^al. ^.
we cannot by exact construction have any other true meaning, then that the
said thing so termed, is not noted to be a thing exceeding evil. And again,
Moros (...), Amongst men, OEsclapius, The name of that which is good we find,
but no where the very true thing it self. When we censure the deeds and
dealings of our Superiors, to bring with us a fore-conceit thus qualified,
shall be as well on our part as theirs, a thing availeable unto quietness: But
howsoever the case does stand with men's either good or bad quality, the verdict
which our Lord and Savior has given, should continue for ever sure, Qua Dei
sunt, Deo, let men bear the burden of their own iniquity, as for those things
which are Gods, let not God be deprived of them. Mal. 3. 8. Acts. 5. 2.
For if only to withold that which should be given, be no better then to rob
God? if to withdraw any mite of that which is but in purpose only bequeathed,
though as yet undelivered into the sacred treasure of God, be a Sin for which
Ananias and Sapphyra felt so heavily the dreadful hand of Divine revenge; quite
and clean to take that away which we never gave, and that after God has for so
many ages therewith been possessed, and that without any other show of cause,
saving only that it seems in their eyes who seek it, to be too much for them
which have it in their hands, can we term it, or think it, less then most
impious injustice, most heinous sacrilege? Such was the Religious affection of
Joseph, Gen 47. 12.
that it suffered him not to take that advantage, no not against the very
Idolatrous Priests of Egypt, which he took for the purchasing of other men's
lands to the King; but he considered, that albeit their Idolatry deserved
hatred, yet for the honors sake due unto Priesthood, better it was the King
himself should yield them relief in public extremity, then permit that the
same necessity should constrain also them to do as the rest of the people did.
But, it may be, men have now found out, that God has proposed, the Christian
Clergy, as a prey for all men freely to seize upon; that God has left them as
the fishes of the Sea, which every man that lifts to gather into his net may;
or that there is no God in Heaven to pity them, and to regard the injuries
which man does lay upon them: Yet the public good of this Church and
Commonwealth does, I hope, weigh somewhat in the hearts of all honestly
disposed men. Unto the public good, no one thing is more directly availeable,
then that such as are in place, whether it be of Civil, or of Ecclesiastical
Authority, be so much the more largely furnished even with external helps and
ornaments of this life, how much the more highly they are in power and calling
advanced above others. For nature is not contented with bare sufficiency unto
the sustenance of man, but does evermore cover a decency proportionable unto
the place which man has in the body or society of others: For according unto
the greatness of men's calling, the measure of all their actions does grow in
every man's secret expectation, so that great men do always know, that great
things are at their hands expected. In a Bishop great liberality, great
hospitality, actions in every kind great are looked for: And for actions which
must be great, mean instruments will no^serve. Men are but men, what room
soever amongst men they hold: If therefore the measure of their Worldly
habilities be beneath that proportion which their calling does make to be
looked for at their hands, a stronger inducement it is then perhaps men are
aware of, unto evil and corrupt dealings, for supply of that defect. For which
cause, we must needs think it a thing necessary unto the common good of the
Church, that great Jurisdiction being granted unto Bishops over others, a state
of wealth proportionable should likewise be provided for them: where wealth is
had in so great admiration, as generally in this golden age it is, that without
it Angelical perfections are not able to deliver from extreme contempt, surely
to make Bishops poorer then they are, were to make them of less account and
estimation then they should be. Wherefore if detriment and dishonor do grow to
Religion, to God, to his Church, when the public account which is made of the
chief of the Clergy decays, how should it be, but in this respect, for the
good of Religion, of God, of his Church, that the wealth of Bishops be
carefully preserved from further dimination? The travels and crosses wherewith
Prelacy is never unaccompanied, they which feel them know how heavy, and how
great they are. Unless such difficulties therefore, annexed unto that estate,
be tempered by co-annexing thereunto things esteemed of in this World, how
should we hope that the minds of men, shunning naturally the burdens of each
function, will be drawn to undertake the burden of Episcopal care and labor
in the Church of Christ? Wherefore if long we desire to enjoy the peace,
quietness, order and stability of Religion, which Predacy (as has been
declared) causes, then must we necessarily, even in favor of the public
good, uphold those things, the hope whereof being taken away, it is not the
mere goodness of the charge, and the Divine acceptance thereof, that will be
able to invite many thereunto. What shall become of that Commonwealth or Church
in the end, which has not the eye of Learning to beautify, guide, and direct
it? At the length, what shall become of that Learning, which has not wherewith
any more to encourage her industrious followers? And finally, what shall become
of that courage to follow learning, which has already so much failed through
the only diminution of her chiefest rewards, Bishoprics? Surely, wheresoever
this wicked intendment of overthrowing Cathedral Churches, or of taking away
those Livings, Lands, and Possessions, which Bishops hitherto have enjoyed,
shall once prevail, the hand maids attending thereupon will be Paganism, and
extreme Barbarity. In the Law of Moses, how careful provision is made that
goods of this kind might remain to the Church for ever: Ye shall not make
common the holy things of the children of Israel, lest ye dye, says the Lord.
Numb. 1^. 32.
Touching the fields annexed unto Levitical Cities, the Law was plain, they
might not be sold; and the reason of the Law, Levit. 25.
this, for it was their possession for ever. He which was Lord and owner of it,
his will and pleasure was, that from the Levites it should never pass, to be
enjoined by any other. The Lords own portion, without his own Commission and
Grant, how should any man justly hold? They which hold it by his appointment,
had it plainly with this condition, They shall not sell of it, neither change
it, nor alienate the first fruits of the Land; for it is holy unto the Lord.
Ezekiel. 4^. 8. Habak. 2. 17.
It falls sometimes out, as the Prophet Habbakkuk notes, that the very prey
of Savage Beasts becomes dreadful unto themselves. It did so in Judas, Achan,
Nebuchadnezzar; their evil-purchased goods were their snare, and their prey
their own terror: A thing no where so likely to follow, as in those goods and
possessions, which being laid where they should not rest, have by the Lords own
testimony, his most bitter curse; Mal. 3. 9.
their undividable companion. These persuasions we use for other men's cause,
not for theirs with whom God and Religion are parts of the abrogated Law of
Ceremonies. Wherefore not to continue longer in the cure of a Sore desperate,
there was a time when the Clergy had almost as little as these good people
wish. But the Kings of this Realm and others, whom God had blessed, considered
devoutly with themselves, as David in like case sometimes had done, Is it meet
that we at the hands of God should enjoy all kinds of abundance, and Gods
Clergy suffer want? They considered that of Solomon, Honor God with thy
substance, and the chiefest of all thy revenue, so shall thy barns be filled
with corn, and thy vessels shall run over with new wine. Prove. 3. 9.
They considered how the care which Iehoshaphat had, 2. Chron. 9. chap. 19.
in providing that the Levites might have encouragement to do the work of the
Lord cheerfully, was left of God as a fit pattern to be followed in the Church
for ever. They considered what promise our Lord and Savior has made unto
them, at whose hands his Prophets should receive but the least part of the
meanest kind of friendliness, though it were but a draught of water: Which
promise seems not to be taken, as if Christ had made them of any higher
courtesy incapable, and had promised reward not unto such as give them but
that, but unto such as leave them but that. They considered how earnest the
Apostle is, that if the Ministers of the Law were so amply provided for, less
care then ought not to be had of them, who under the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
possess correspondent rooms in the Church. they considered how needful it is,
that they who provoke all others unto works of Mercy and Charity, should
especially have wherewith to be examples of such things, and by such meons to
win them, with whom other means, without those, do commonly take very small
effect.

In these and the like considerations, the Church-Revenues were in ancient
times augmented, our Lord thereby performing manifestly the promise made to his
servants, that they which did leave either Father, or Mother, or Lands, or
goods for his sake, should receive even in this World an hundred fold. For some
hundreds of years together, they which joined themselves to the Church, were
fain to relinquish all worldly emoluments, and to endure the hardness of an
afflicted estate. Afterward the Lord gave rest to his Church, Kings and Princes
became as Fathers thereunto, the hearts of all men inclined toward it, and by
his providence there grew unto it every day earthly possessions in more and
more abundance, till the greatness thereof bred envy, which no diminutions are
able to satisfy: For, as those ancient Nursing Fathers thought they did never
bestow enough; even so in the eye of this present age as long as any thing
remains, it seems to be too much. Our Fathers we imitate inperversum, as
Tertullian speaks; like them we are, by being in equal degree the contrary
unto that which they were. Unto those earthly blessings which God as then did
with so great abundance pour down upon the Ecclesiastical state, we may in
regard of most near resemblance, apply the self same words which the Prophet
has, Psa. 109^ 4, 25
God blessed them exceedingly; and, by this very mean, turned the hearts of
their own Brethren to hate them, and to deal politiquely with his servants.
Computations are made, and there are huge sums set down for Princes, to see how
much they may amplify and enlarge their own treasure; how many public
burdens they may ease; what present means they have to reward their servants
about them, if they please but to grant their assent, and to accept of the
spoil of Bishops, by whom Church-goods are but abused unto pomp and vanity.
Thus albeit they deal with one, whose princely virtue gives them small hope to
prevail in impious and sacrilegious motions; yet shame they not to move her
Royal Majesty even with a suit not much unlike unto that wherewith the Jewish
High Priest tried Judas, whom they solicited unto Treason against his Master
and proposed unto him a number of silver-pence in lien of so virtuous and
honest a service. But her sacred Majesty disposed to be always like her self,
her heart so far estranged from willingness to gain by pillage of that estate,
the only awe whereof under God she has been unto this present hour as of all
other parts of this noble Commonwealth whereof she has vowed her self a
Protector till the end of her days on earth, which, if nature could permit, we
wish, as good cause we have, endless: this her gracious inclination is more
then a seven times sealed warrant; upon the same assurance whereof touching
time and action, so dishonorable as this, we are on her part most secure, not
doubting but that unto all posterity, it shall for ever appear, that from the
first to the very last of her Sovereign proceedings, there has not been one
authorized deed, other then consonant with that Symmachus says, Fiscus bonitum
Principum, non sacer dotum damnis sed hastium spoliis angeatur; consonant with
that imperial law, Lib. 10. Ep. 54. DDD. Valent Theodof. ^e Archad.
Ea qua ad be atissima ecclesia jur a p^rtinent, tanquam ipsam^ sacro sanctam
and religiosam Ecclesiam intactu convenit vener abiliter a^stodiri; ut ^ic^^
ips^religionis and ^idei matter perpetua est, it a ej^^ patrimonium jugiter
servetur illas^^. As for the case of public burdens, let any politirian
living, make it appear, that by confiscation of Bishops livings, L. 14 C. de
sicros eccles.
and their utter dissolution at once, the Commonwealth shall ever have half
that relief and ease which it receives by their continuance as now they are,
and it shall give us some cause to think, that albeit we sew they are implously
and irreligiously minded, yet we may^ esteem them at least to be tolerable
Common-wealths-men. But the case is too clear and manifest, the World does but
too plainly see it, that no one Order of subjects whatsoever within this Land
does bear the seventh part of that proportion which the Clergy bears in the
burdens of the Commonwealth; No revenue of the Crownlike unto it, either for
certainty or for greatness. Let the good which this way has grown to the
Commonwealth by the dissolution of religious houses, teach men what ease unto
public burdens there is like to grow, by the overthrow of the Clergy. My
meaning is not hereby to make the state of Bishoprics, and of those dissolved
Companies alike, the one no less unlawful to be removed then the other. For
those religious persons were men which followed only a special kind of
Contemplative life in the Commonwealth, they were properly no portion of Gods
Clergy (only such amongst them excepted, as were also Priests) their goods
(that excepted, which they unjustly held through the Popes usurped power of
appropriating Ecclesiastical livings unto them) may in part seem to be of the
nature of Civil possessions, held by other kinds of Corporations such as the
City of London has diverse. Wherefore, as their institution was human, and
their end for the most part superstitious, they had not therein merely that
holy and divine interest which belongs unto Bishops, who being employed by
Christ in the principal service of his Church, are receivers and disposers of
his patrimony, as has been showed, which whosoever shall withold or
withdraw at any time from them, he undoubtedly robs God himself. If they
abuse the goods of the Church unto pomp and vanity, such faults we do not
excuse in them. Only we wish it to be considered whether such faults be verily
in them, or else but objected against them by such as gape after spoil, and
therefore are no competent judges what is moderate and what excessive in them,
whom under this pretense they would spoil. But the accusation may be just. In
plenty and fullness it may be we are of God more forgetful then were requisite.
Notwithstanding men should remember how not to the Clergy alone it was said by
Moses in Deuteronomy, Necum manducaveris and biberis and domos optimas
adisicaveris: If the remedy prescribed for this disease be good, let it
unpartially be applied. Interest Reip, utre sua QUIS QUE been utatur. Let all
states be put to their moderate pensions, let their livings and lands be taken
away from them whosoever they be, in whom such ample possessions are found to
have been matters of grievous abuse: Were this just ^ would Noble Families
think this reasonable? The Title which Bishops have to their livings is as good
as the title of any sort of men unto whatsoever we account to be most justly
held by them; yea, in this one thing, the claim of ^. B. has pre-eminence
above all secular Titles of right, in that Gods own interest in the tenure
whereby they hold, even as also it was to the Priests of the Law an assurance
of their spiritual goods and possessions, whereupon though they many times
abused greatly the goods of the Church, yet was not Gods patrimony therefore
taken away from them, and made saleable unto other Tribes. To rob God, to
ransack the Church, to overthrow the whole Order of Christian Bishops, and to
turn them out of Land and Living, out of House and Home, what man of common
honesty can think it for any manner of abuse to be a remedy lawful or just? We
must confess that God is righteous in taking away that which men abuse: But
does that excuse the violence of Thieves and Robbers? Complain we will not,
with S. Ierom, that the hands of men are so straightly tied, and their liberal
minds so much bridled and held back from doing good by augmentation of the
Church-Patrimony. For we confess that herein mediocrity may be and has been
sometime exceeded. There did want heretofore Podet dicere, sacerdotes idolorum.
a^. rigae; mimi Ecscorte haereditates capient, Toris clericis and ^^^achis ^^
lege prohibetur and prohibetur non ^ persecu^ori^us sed Principibus Cheisti^
^is. Nec de lege conquero^ sed doleo quod meruerimus hane legem. Ad Nepot. 7.
Moses to temper men's liberality, to say unto them who enriched the Church,
Sufficit, Stay your hands lest favor of zeal do cause you to empty your selves
too far. It may be the largeness of men's hearts being then more moderate, had
been after more dureable; and one state by too much over-growing the rest, had
not given occasion unto the rest to undermine it. That evil is now sufficiently
cured: the Church treasury, if then it were over-ful, has since been
reasonable well emptyed. That which Moses spoke unto givers, we must now
inculcate unto takers away from the Church, Let there be some stay, some stint
in spoiling. Obad. verse. 3
If Grape-gatherers came unto them, says the Prophet, would they not leave
some remnant behind? But it has fared with the wealth of the Church as with a
Tower which being built at the first with the highest, overthrows if self
after by its own greatness; neither does the ruin thereof cease, with the only
fall of that, which has exceeded mediocrity, but one part bears down
another, till the whole be laid prostrate. For although the state
Ecclesiastical, both others and even Bishops themselves, be now fallen to so
low an ebb, as all the World at this day does see; yet because there remains
still somewhat which unsatiable minds can thirst for, therefore we seem not to
have been hitherto sufficiently wronged. Touching that which has been taken
from the Church in Appropriations known to amount to the value of one hundred
twenty six thousand pounds yearly, we rest contentedly, and quietly without it,
till it shall please God to touch the hearts of men, of their own voluntary
accord to restore it to Him again; judging thereof no otherwise then some
others did of those goods which were by Sylla taken away from the Citizens of
Rome, that albeit they were in truth male capta, unconscionably taken away from
the right owners at the first, nevertheless seeing that such as were after
possessed of them held them not without some title, ^lor. lib. 3. c. 13.
which Law did after a sort make good, repetitio little proculdubio labefaltabat
compositam civitatem; what has been taken away as dedicated unto uses
superstitious, and consequently not given unto God, or at the leastwise not so
rightly given, we repine not thereat. That which has gone by means secret and
indirect, through corrupt compositions or compacts we cannot help. What the
hardness of men's hearts does make them loath to have exacted, though being due
by Law eventhereof the want we do also bear. Out of that which after all these
Deductions comes clearly unto our hands, I hope it will not be said that
toward the public charge, we disburse nothing. And, does the residue seem
yet excessive? The ways whereby temporal men provide for themselves and their
Families, are fore-closed unto us. All that we have to sustain our miserable
life with, is but a remnant of God's own treasure, so far already diminished
and clipped, that if there were any sense of common humanity left in this
hard-hearted World, the improverished estate of the Clergy of God, would at the
length even of very commiseration be spared. The mean Gentleman that has but
an hundred pound Land to live on, would not be hasty to change his Worldly
estate and condition with many of these so over-abounding Prelates; a common
Artisan or Tradesman of the City, with ordinary Pastors of the Church. It is
our hard and heavy lot that, no other sort of men being grudged at how little
benefit soever the Public Weal reap by them, no state complained of for
holding that which has grown unto, them by lawful means, only the Governors of
our Souls, they that study day and night so to guide us, that both in this
World we may have comfort and in the World to come endless felicity and joy,
(for even such is the very scope of all their endeavors, this they wish, for
this they labor, how hardly soever we use to construe of their incents,) hard,
that only they should be thus continually lifted at for possessing but that
whereunto they have by Law both of God and man most just Title. If there should
be no other remedy but that the violence of men, in the end must needs bereave
them of all succor, further than the inclinations of others shall vouchsafe to
cast upon them, as it were by way of Alms for their relief but from to hour;
better they are not than their Fathers, who have been contented with as hard a
portion at the World's hands: let the light of the Sun and Moon, the common
benefit of Heaven and Earth be taken away from ^^. if the Question were,
Whether God should lose his glory, and the safety of his Church be hazarded, or
they relinquish the right and interest which they have in the things of this
World. But fith the Question in truth is, Whether Levi shall be deprived of the
portion of God or no, to the end that Simeon or Reuben may devour it as their
spoil, the comfort of the one in sustaining the injuries which the other would
offer, must be that Prayer powered out by Moses the Prince of Prophets, in most
tender affection to Levi, Bless O Lord his substance, accept than the work of
his hands; Deuteronomy. 33. 10,11.
s^ite through the loins of them that rise up against him, and of them which
hate him, that they rise no more.

OF THE LAWS OF Ecclesiastical Polity.
Book VIII.
Containing their Seventh Assertion, That to no Civil Prince or Governor, there
may be given such power of Ecclesiastical Dominion, as by the Laws of this Land
belongs unto the Supreme Regent thereof.

WE come now to the last thing whereof there is Controversy moved namely, The
Power of Supreme Jurisdiction, which for distinction sake we call, The Power of
Ecclesiastical dominion. It was not thought fit in the Jews Commonwealth, that
the exercise of Supremacy Ecclesiastical should be denied unto him, to whom the
exercise of Chiefy Civil did appertain; Maccab. 1^.
and therefore their Kings were invested with both. This power they gave into
Simon, when they consented that he should be their Prince, not only to set men
over their Works, and Country, and Weapons, but also to provide for the Holy
things, and that he should be obeyed of every man, and that the Writings of the
Country should be made in his name, and that it should not be lawful for any of
the people, or Priests, to withstand his words, or to call any Congregation in
the Country without him. And if happily it be surmised, that thus much was given
to Simon, as being both Prince and High Priest, which otherwise (being their
Civil Governor) he could not lawfully have enjoyed; We must note, that all this
is no more then the ancient Kings of that People had, being Kings, and not
Priests. By this power, David, Asa, Iehoshaphat, Iosiaes, and the rest, made
those Laws and Orders which sacred History speaks of, concerning matters of
mere Religion, the affairs of the Temple, and service of God, Finally, had it
not been by the virtue of this power, how should it possibly have come to pass,
that the piety or impiety of the Kings did always accordingly change the
public face of Religion, which things the Prophets by themselves never did,
nor at any time could hind from being done: Had the Priests alone been possessed
of all power in spiritual affairs, how should any thing concerning matter of
Religion have been made but only by them; in had it head been, and not in the
King, to change the face of religion at any time, the altering of religion, the
making of Ecclesiastical Laws, with other the like actions belonging unto the
power of Dominion, are still termed the deeds of the King; to show, that in him
was placed the supremacy of power in this kind over all, and that unto their
Priests the same was never committed, saving only at such times as the Priests
were also Kings and Princess over them. According to the pattern of which
example, the like power in causes Ecclesiastical is by the Laws of this Realm
annexed unto the Crown; and there are which do imagine, that Kings being mere
Lay-persons, do by this means exceed the lawful bounds of their callings; which
thing to the end that they may persuade, they first make a necessary separation
perpetual and personal between the Church and the Commonwealth. Secondly, they
so tie all kind of power Ecclesiastical unto the Church, as if it were in every
degree their only right, who are by proper spiritual functions termed
Church Governors, and might not unto Christian Princes in any wise appertain.
To lurk under shifting ambignities, and equivocations of words in matter of
principal weight, is childish. A Church and a Commonwealth, we grant, are
things in nature one distinguished from the other: a Commonwealth is one way,
and a Church an other way defined. In their opinions the Church and
Commonwealth are corporations, not distinguished only in nature and
definition, but in substance perpetually severed: so that they which are of the
one, can neither appoint, nor execute, in whole nor in part, the duties which
belong to them which are of the other, without open breach of the Law of God
which has divided them; and does require, that so being divided, they should
distinctly or severally work, as depending both upon God, and not hanging one
upon the others approbation. For that which either has to do, we say that the
care of Religion being common to all societies Politic, such societies as do
embrace the true Religion have the name of the Church given unto every one of
them for distinction from the rest; so that every body Politic has some
Religion, but the Church that Religion which is only true. Truth of Religion is
the proper difference whereby a Church is distinguished from other Politic
societies of men; we here mean true Religion in gross, and not according to
every particular: for they which in some particular points of Religion do sever
from the truth, may nevertheless truly (if we compare them to men of an
heathenish Religion) be said to hold and profess that Religion which is true,
For which cause there being of old so many Politic societies stablished
through the world, only the Commonwealth of Israel, which had the truth of
Religion, was is that respect the Church of God: and the Church of Jesus Christ
is every such Politic society of men, as does in Religion hold that truth
which is proper to Christianity. As a Politic society it does maintain
Religion, as a Church, that Religion which God has revealed by Jesus Christ;
with us, therefore, the name of a Church imports only a society of men,
first united into some public form of Regiment, and secondly distinguished
from other societies by the exercise of Religion, With them on the other side
the name of the Church in this present question, imports not only a maltitude
of men so united, and so distinguihed, but also further, the same divided
necessarily and perpetually from the body of the Commonwealth: so that even in
such a Politic society as consists of none but Christians, yet the Church
and Commonwealth are too Corporations, independently subsisting by it self.

We hold that seeing there is not any man of the Church of England but the same
man is also a member of the Commonwealth; nor any, member of the Commonwealth,
which is not also of the Church of England. Therefore as in a figure Triangle,
the base does differ from the sides thereof, and yet one and the self same line
is both a base and also a side; aside simply, a base if it chance to be the
bottom and under-lye the rest. So albeit, properties and actions of one do
cause the name of a Commonwealth; qualities and functions of another sort, the
name of the Church to be given to a multitude; yet one and the self-same
multitude may in such sort be both. Nay, it is so with us, that no person
appertaining to the one, can be denied also to be of the other: contrariwise,
unless they against us should hold that the Church and the Commonwealth are
two, both distinct and separate societies; of which two, one comprehends
always persons not belonging to the other, (that which they do) they could not
conclude out of the difference between the Church and the Commonwealth, namely
that the Bishops may not meddle with the affairs of the Common wealth, because
they are Governors of an other Corporation, which is the Church, nor Kings,
with making Laws for the Church, because they have government not of this
Corporation, but of another divided from it, the Commonwealth and the walls of
separation between these two, must for ever be upheld: they hold the necessity
of personal separation which clean excludes the power of one man's dealing with
both; we of natural, but that one and the same person may in both bear
principal sway.

The causes of common received Errors in this Point seem to have been
especially two: One, That they who embrace true Religion, living in such
Commonwealths as are opposite thereunto; and in other public affairs,
retaining civil Communion with such as are constrained for the exercise of
their Religion, to have a several Communion with those who are of the same
Religion with them. This was the state of the Jewish Church both in Egypt and
Babylon, the state of Christian Churches a long time after Christ. And in this
case, because the proper affairs and actions of the Church, as it is the
Church, has no dependence on the Laws, or upon the Government of the civil
State; and opinion has thereby grown, that even so it should be always; This
was it which deceived Allen in the writing of his Apology: The Apostles (says
he) did govern the Church in Rome, when Nero bare rule, even as at this day in
all the Churches dominions: The Church has a spiritual Regiments without
dependence and so ought she to have amongst Heathens, or with Christians.
Another occasion of which mis-conceit is, That things appertaining to Religion
are both distinguished from other affairs: and have always had in the Church
spiritual persons chosen to be exercised about them. By which distinction of
Spiritual affairs, Arist. pol. l. 3. cap. 16.
and persons therein employed from Temporal, the Error of personal separation
always necessary between the Church and Commonwealth has strengthened it
self. For of every Politic Society, that being true which Aristotle says,
namely, That the scope thereof is not simply to live, nor the duty so much to
provide for the life, as for means of living well: Maccab. 7
And that even as the soul is the worthier part of man, so humane Societies are
much more to care for that which tends properly to the souls estate, then for
such temporal things which the life has need of. Other proof there needs
none to show, that as by all men the Kingdom of God is to be sought first, for
so in all Commonwealths things spiritual ought above temporal be sought for;
and of things spiritual, the chiefest is Religion. For this cause, persons and
things employed peculiarly about the affairs of Religion, are by an excellency
termed Spiritual. The Heathens themselves had their spiritual Laws, and Causes,
and Affairs, always severed from their Arist. pol. lib. ^ cap. 30. Live. lib. 1.
temporal; neither did this make two Independent estates among them, God by
revealing true Religion sioth make them that receive it his Church. Unto the
Jews he so revealed the truth of Religion, that he gave them in special
Considerations, Laws, not only for the administration of things spiritual, but
also temporal. The Lord himself appointing both the one and the other in that
Commonwealth, did not thereby distract it into several independent
Communities, but institute several Functions of one and the self-same
Community: Some Reasons therefore must there be alleged why it should be
otherwise in the Church of Christ.

I shall not need to spend any great store of words in answering that which is
brought out of the Holy Scripture to show that Secular and Ecclesiastical
affairs and offices are distinguished: Three kinds of their proofs are stakes
from the difference of affairs and offices.
neither that which has been borrowed from antiquity, using by phrase of
speech to oppose the Commonweal to the Church of Christ; neither yet their
Reasons which are wont to be brought forth as witnesses, that the Church and
Commonweal were always distinct: for whether a Church or Commonweal do
differ, in not the question we strive for; but our controversy is, concerning
the kind of distinction, whereby they are severed the one from the other;
whether as under heathen Kings of the Church did deal with her own affairs
within her self, without depending at all upon any in Civil authority; and the
Commonweal in hers, altogether without the privity of the Church: so it ought
to continue still even in such Common-weals as have now publicly embraced the
truth of Christian Religion; whether they ought evermore to be two societies in
such sort, several and distinct: I ask therefore what society was that in Rome,
whereunto the Apostle did give the name of the Church of Rome in his time? If
they answer (as needs they must) that the Church of Rome in those days was
that whole society of men, which in Rome professed the Name of Christ, and not
that Religion which the Laws of the Commonweal did then authorize; we say as
much, and therefore grant, that the Commonweal of Rome was one society, and
the Church of Rome another, in such sort that there was between them no mutual
dependence. But when whole Rome became Christian, when they all embraced the
Gospel, and made Laws in defense thereof, if it be heid that the Church and
Commonweal of Rome did then remain as before; there is no way how this could
be possible, save only one, and that is, They must restrain the name of a
Church in a Christian Commonweal to the Clergy, excluding all the rest of
believers both Prince and People; For if all that believe be contained in the
name of the Church, how should the Church remain by personal subsistence
divided from the Commonweal, when the whole Commonweal does believe? The
Church and the Commonweal are in this case therefore personally one Society,
which Society being termed a Commonweal as it lives under whatsoever Form of
Secular Law and Regiment, a Church as it lives under the spiritual Law of
Christ, for so much as these two Laws contain so many and different Offices,
there must of necessity be appointed in it some to one charge, and some to
another, yet without dividing the whole, and making it two several impaled
Societies.

The difference therefore either of Affairs or Offices Ecclesiastical from
Secular, 1 Chronicles. 14.3,11. Hebr. 9.1. Alum. lib. 31 p.158.
is no Argument that the Church and Commonweal are always separate and
independent, the one on the other; which thing even Allain himself considering
somewhat better, does in this Point a little correct his former judgment
before mentioned, and confesses in his defense of English Catholics, that the
power Political has her Princes, ^. Taken from the speeches of the Fathers
opposing the one to the other.
Laws, Tribunals, the Spiritual, her Prelates, Canons, Councels, Judgments, and
those (when the Temporal Princes were Pagans) wholly separate; but in Christian
Common-weals, joined though not confounded: Howbeit afterward his former sting
appears again; for in a Commonwealth he holds, that the Church ought not
to depend at all upon the authority of any civil person whatsoever, as in
England he says it does.

Eusebius. de vita Constan. lib. 3. Aug. Epist. 167.
It will be objected, that the Fathers do oftentimes mention the Commonweal and
the Church of God, by way of opposition. Can the same thing be opposed to it
self? If one and the same society be both Church and Commonwealth, what sense
can there be in that Speech; That they suffer and flourish together? What sense
is that which makes one thing to be adjudged to the Church, and another to the
Commonweal? Finally, in that which puts a difference between the causes of
the Province and the Church, does it not hereby appear, that the Church and the
Commonweal, are things evermore personally separate? No, it does not hereby
appear that there is not perpetually any such separation; we speak of them as
two, we may sever the rights and the causes of the one well enough from the
other, in regard of that difference which we grant is between them, albeit we
make no personal difference. For the truth is, that the Church and the
Commonwealth, are names which import things really different: but those things
are accidents, and such accidents as may and always should lovingly dwell
together in one subject. Wherefore the real difference between the accidents
signified by these names, does not prove different subjects for them always to
reside in. For albeit the subjects wherein they be resident be sometimes
different, as when the people of God have their residence among Infidels. yet
the nature of them is not such, but that their subject may be one, and
therefore it is but a changeable accident, in those accidents they are to
diverse: There can be no Error in our conceit concerning this Point, if we
remember still what accident that is, for which a society has the name of a
Commonwealth, and what accident that which does cause it to be termed a
Church: A Commonwealth we name it simply in regard of some regiment or policy
under which men live; a Church for the truth of that Religion which they
pofess. Now Names betokening accidents inabstracted, betoken no^ only the
Accidents themselves, but also together with them Subjects whereunto they
cleave. As when we name a Schoolmaster and a Physician, those names do not
only betoken two accidents, Teaching and Curing, but also some person or
persons in whom those accidents are. For there is no impediment but both may be
in one man, as well as they are for the most part in diverse. The Commonweal
and the Church therefore being such names, they do not only betoken these
Accidents of civil Government and Christian Religion, which we have mentioned,
but also together with them such multitudes as are the subjects of those
accidents; Again, their nature being such as they may well enough dwell
together in one subject, it follows that their names though always implying
that difference of accidents that has been set down, yet do not always imply
different subjects also. When we oppose therefore the Church and the
Commonwealth in Christian Society, we mean by the Commonwealth that Society
with relation to all the public affairs thereof, only the matter of true
Religion excepted; by the Church, the same Society with only reference unto the
matter of true Religion, without any affairs^ Besides, when that Society, which
is both a Church and a Commonwealth, does flourish in those things which
belong unto it as a Commonwealth, we then say, The Commonwealth does
flourish; when in both them, we then say, The Church and Commonwealth do
flourish together.

The Prophet Esaias to note corruptions in the Commonwealth complains, Isai.
1. 21.
That where justice and judgment had lodged, now were murderers; Princes were
become companions of Thieves, every one loved gifts, and rewards; but the
fatherless was not judged, neither did the widows cause come before them. To
show abuses in the Church, Malachy does make his complaint, Ye offer unclean
bread upon mine Altar. Mal 1. ^.
If ye offer the blind for sacrifice, it is not evil as ye think, if the lame
and the sick, nothing is amiss. The treasure which David bestowed upon the
Temple, did argue the love which he bore unto the Church: The pains which
Nehemiah took for building the walls of the City, are tokens of his care for
the Commonwealth. 1 Chronicles 29.3^ Nehem. 2. ^7.
Causes of the Commonwealth, or Province, are such as Gallio was content to be
judge of. If it were a matter of wrong, or an evil deed (O ye Jews) I would
according to reason maintain you. Causes of the Church, are such as Gallio
there receiteth; Acts 18.14.
if it be a question of your Law, look ye to it, I will be no judge thereof: In
respect of this difference therefore the Church and the Commonwealth may in
speech be compared or opposed aptly enough the one to the other; yet this is no
Argument, that they are two Independent Societies.

Some other Reasons there are which seem a little more nearly to make for the
3. Taken from the effect of punishment inflicted by the one or the other.
purpose, as long as they are but heard, and not sifted: For what though a man
being severed by Excommunication from the Church be not thereby deprived of
freedom in the City, or being there discommoned, is not therefore forthwith
excommunicated and excluded the Church? What though the Church be bound to
receive them upon Repentance, whom the Commonweal may refuse again to admit?
If it chance the same man to be shut out of both, division of the Church and
Commonweal which they contend for, will very hardly hereupon follow: For we
must note, that members of a Christian Commonweal have a triple state; a
natural, a civil, and a spiritual: No man's natural estate is cut off otherwise
then by that capital execution. After which, he that is none of the body of the
Commonwealth, does not I think remain fit in the body of that visible Church.
And concerning man's civil estate, the same is subject partly to inferior
abatement of liberty, and partly to diminution in the highest degree, such as
banishment is; since it casts out quite and clean from the body of the
Commonweal, it must needs also consequently cast the banished party even out
of the very Church he was of before; because that Church and the Commonweal he
was of, were both one and the same Society; So that whatsoever does utterly
separate a man's person from the one, it separateth from the other also. As for
such abatements of civil estate as take away only some privilege, dignity or
other benefit, which a man enjoys in the Commonweal they reach only to our
dealing with public affairs, from which what may let, but that men may be
excluded, and thereunto restored again, without diminishing or augmenting the
number of persons, in whom either Church or Commonwealth consists. He that
by way of punishment loses his voice in a public election of Magistrates,
cease not thereby to be a Citizen; A man dis-franchised may notwithstanding
enjoy as a Subject the common benefit of Protection under Laws and Magistrates;
so that these inferior diminutions which touch men civilly, but neither do
clean extinguish their estates, as they belong to the Commonwealth, nor impair
a whit their condition as they are of the Church of God; These, I say, do
clearly prove a difference of the one from the other, but such a difference as
makes nothing for their surmise of distracted Societies.

And concerning Excommunication, it curreth off indeed from the Church, and yet
not from the Commonwealth; howbeit so, that the party Excommunicate is not
thereby severed from one body which subsisteth in it self, and retained by
another in like sort subsisting; but he which before had fellowship with that
society whereof he was a member, as well touching things spiritual as civil, is
now by force of Excommunication, although not severed from the body in Civil
affairs, nevertheless for the time cut off from it as touching Communion in
those things which belong to the same body as it is the Church: A man which
having been both Excommunicated by the Church, and deprived of Civil dignity in
the Commonwealth; is upon his repentance necessarily reunited into the one,
but not of necessity into the other. What then? That which he is admitted unto,
is a Communion in things Divine, whereof both parts are partakers; that from
which he is withheld, is the benefit of some humane previledge, or right, which
other Citizens happily enjoy. But are not these Saints and Citizens, one and
the same people? are they not one and the same Society? Does it hereby appear
that the Church which received an Excommunicate, can have no dependency on any
pers o which has chief Authority and Power of these things in the Commonwealth
whereunto the same party is not admitted. Wherefore to end this point, I
conclude; First, that under the dominions of Infidels, the Church of Christ,
and their Commonwealth, were two Societies independent. Secondly, that in
those Commonwealths, where the Bishop of Rome bears sway, one Society is
both the Church and the Commonwealth: But the Bishop of Rome does divide the
body into two diverse bodies, and does not suffer the Church to depend upon the
power of any civil Prince and Potenrate. Thirdly, that within this Realm of
England, the case is neither as in the one, nor as in the other of the former
two: but from the state of Pagans we differ, in that with us one Society is
both the Church and Commonwealth, which with them it was not; as also from the
state of those Nations which subjected themselves to the Bishop of Rome, in
that our Church has dependence from the Chief in our Commonwealth, which it
has not when he is suffered to rule. In a word, our state is according to the
pattern of Gods own ancient elect people, which people was not part of them the
Commonwealth, and part of them the Church of God; but the self-same people
whole and entire were both under one Chief Governor, on whose Supreme
Authority they did all depend. Now the drift of all that has been alleged to
prove perpetual separation and independency between the Church and the
Commonwealth, is, that this being held necessary, it might consequently be
thought fit, that in a Christian Kingdom, he whose power is greatest over the
Commonwealth, may not lawfully have supremacy of power also over the Church,
that is to say, so far as to order thereby and to dispose of spiritual affairs,
so far as the highest uncommanded Commander in them. Whereupon it is grown a
Question, whether Government Ecclesiastical, and power of Dominion in such
degrees as the Laws of this Land do grant unto the Sovereign Governor thereof,
may by the said supreme Governor lawfully be enjoyed and held: For resolution
wherein, we are, First, to define what the power of dominion is. Secondly, then
to show by what right. Thirdly, after what sort. Fourthly, in what measure.
Fifthly in what inconveniency. According to whose example Christian Kings may
have it. And when these generals are opened, to examine afterward how lawful
that is which we in regard of Dominion do attribute unto our own: namely the
title of headship over the Church, so far as the bounds of this Kingdom do
reach. Secondly, the Prerogative of calling and dissolving great assemblies,
about spiritual affairs public. Thirdly, the right of assenting unto all those
orders concerning Religion, which must after be in force as Law. Fourthly, the
advancement of Principal Church Governors to their rooms of Prelacy. Fifthly,
judicial authority higher then others are capable of. And sixthly, exemption
from being punishable with such kind of Censures as the platform of Reformation
does teach, that they ought to be subject unto.

What the Power of Dominion is.
Without order there is no living in public Society, Luke ^^. 1 Cor 1^.
because the want thereof is the mother of confusion, whereupon division of
necessity follows; and out of division, destruction. The Apostle therefore
giving instruction to public Societies, requires that all things be orderly
done: Order can have no place in things, except it be settled amongst the
persons that shall by office be conversant about them. And if things and
persons be ordered, this does imply that they are distinguished by degrees. For
order is a gradual disposition: The whole world consisting of parts so many, so
different, is by this only thing upheld; he which framed them, has set them in
order: The very Deity it self both keeps and requires for ever this to be
kept as a Law, that wheresoever there is a coagmentation of many, the lowest be
knit unto the highest, by that which being interjacent, may cause each to
cleave to the other, and so all to continue one. This order of things and
persons in public Societies, is the work of Policy, and the proper instrument
thereof in every degree is power, power being that hability which we have of
our selves, or receive from others for performance of any action. If the action
which we have to perform be conversant about matters of mere Religion, the
power of performing it is then spiritual; And if that power be such as has not
any other to overrule it, we term it Dominion, or Power Supreme; so far as the
bounds thereof extend. When therefore Christian Kings are said to have
Spiritual Dominion or Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical affairs and causes, the
meaning is, that within their own Precincts and Territories, they have an
authority and power to command even in matters of Christian Religion, and that
there is no higher nor greater that can in those cases overcommand them, where
they are placed to reign as Kings. But withal we must likewise note that their
power is termed supremacy, as being the highest, not simply without exception
of any thing. For what man is so brainsick, as not to except in such speeches
God himself the King of all Dominion? Who doubts, but that the King who
receives it, must hold it of, and order the Law according to that old axiom,
Altribuat Rex legi, quod lex attribuit es potestatem: And again, Rex non debet
esse sub homine, sed sub Deo and lege. Thirdly, whereas it is altogether
without reason, That Kings are judged to have by virtue of their Dominion,
although greater power then any, yet not than all the state of those Societies
conjoined, wherein such Sovereign rule is given them; there is not any thing
hereunto to the contrary by us affirmed, no not when we grant supreme Authority
unto Kings; because Supremacy is not otherwise intended or meant to exclude
partly sorraign powers, and partly the power which belongs in several unto
others, contained as parts in that politic body over which those Kings have
Supremacy; Where the King has power of Dominion, or Supreme power, there no
foreign State, or Potentate, no State or Potentate Domestical, whether it
consists of one or many, can possibly have in the same affairs and causes
Authority higher than the King. Power of Spiritual Dominion, therefore, is in
causes Ecclesiastical, that ruling Authority, which neither any foreign State,
not yet any part of that politic body at home, wherein the same is
established, can lawfully overruled. It has been declared already in general,
how the best established dominion is, where the Law does most rule the King;
the true effect whereof particularly is found as well in Ecclesiastical as
Civil affairs: In these the King, through his Supreme Power, may do sundry
great things himself, both appertaining to Peace and War, both at home, and by
command and by commerce with States abroad, because the Law does so much
permit. Sometimes on the other side, The King alone has no right to do without
consent of his Lords and Commons in Parliament: The King himself cannot change
the nature of Pleas, nor Courts, no not so much as restore blood; because the
Law is a has unto him: the positive Laws of the Realm have a privilege
therein, and restrain the Kings power; which positive Laws, whether by custom
or otherwise established without repugnancy to the Laws of God, and nature,
ought not less to be in force even in supernatural affairs of the Church,
whether in regard of Ecclesiastical Laws, we willingly embrace that of Ambrose,
Imperator bonus intrae Ecclesiam, non supra Ecclesiam, est. Kings have Dominion
to exercise in Ecclesiastical causes, but according to the Laws of the Church;
whether it be therefore the nature of Courts, or the form of Pleas, or the kind
of Governors, or the order of proceeding in whatsoever business, for the
received Laws an Lib(...)o the Church, the King has Supreme Authority and
power, but against them never, What such positive Laws has appointed to be
done by others than the King, or by others with the King, and in what form they
have appointed the doing of it; the same of necessity must be kept; neither is
the Kings sole Authority to alter it: yet, as it were a thing unreasonable, if
in civil affairs the King, albeit the whole universal body did join with him,
should do any thing by their absolute power for the ordering of their state at
home, in prejudice of those ancient. Laws of Nations, which are of force
throughout all the World, because the necessary commerce of Kingdoms depends
on them: So in principal matters belonging to Christian Religion, a thing very
scandalous and offensive it must needs be thought, if either Kings or Laws
should dispose of the Law of God, without any respect had unto that which of
old has been reverently thought of throughout the World, and wherein there is
no Law of God which forces us to swerve from the ways wherein so many and holy
Ages have gone: Wherefore not without good consideration, the very Law it self
has provided, That Judges Ecclesiastical appointed under the Kings Commission,
shall not adjudg for heresy anything but that which heretofore hathbeen
adjudged by the Authority of the Cononical Scriptures, or by the first four
general Counbels, or lysome other general Council, wherein the same has been
declared heresy, by the express words of the said Canonical Scriptures, or
such at hereafter shall be determined to be heresy by the high Court of
Parliament of this Realm, with the assent of the Clergy in the Convocation, An.
1. Reg. Eliz. By which words of the Law, Who does not plainly see, how that in
one branch of proceeding by virtue of the Kings supreme authority, the credit
which those four first general Councels have throughout all Churches, and
evermore had, was judged by the making of the aforesaid Act a just cause
wherefore they should be mentioned in that case, as a requisite part of that
rule wherewith Dominion was to be limited? But of this we shall further
consider, when we come unto that which Sovereign Power may do in making
Ecclesiastical Laws.

Unto which Supreme Power in Kings, two kinds of adversaries there are which
have opposed themselves one sort defending That Supreme power in causes
Ecclesiastical throughout the world, appertains of Divine Right to the Bishop
of Rome: Another sort, That the said power belongs in every national Church
unto the Clergy thereof assembled. We which defend as well against the one, as
against the other, That Kings within their own Precincts may have it, The Right
which men give. God ratifies.
must show by what right it must come unto them. First unto me, it seems
almost out of doubt and controversy, that every independent multitude before
any certain form of Regiment established, has under God Supreme Authority,
full Dominion over it self, even as a man not tied with the band of subjection
as yet unto any other, has over himself the like power. God, creating mankind,
did endue it naturally with power to guide it self, in what kind of Society
soever he should choose to live. A man which is born Lord of himself, may be
made an others servant. And that power which naturally whole societies have,
may be derived unto many, few, or one; under whom the rest shall then live in
subjection: Some multitudes are brought into subjection by force, as they who
being subdued, are fain to submit their necks unto what yoke it pleases their
Conquerors to lay upon them; which Conquerors by just and lawful Wars do hold
their power over such multitudes as a thing descending unto them; Divine
Providence it self so disposing. For it is God who gives victory in the day of
War, and unto whom Dominion in this sort is derived, the same they enjoy
according to the Law of Nations; which Law authorizeth Conquerours to reign as
absolute Lords over them whom they vanquish. Sometimes it pleases God himself
by special appointment to choose out and nominate such, as to whom Dominion
shall be given; Conrora est poresiat dele^a^a De^^raction.
which thing he did often in the Commonwealth of Israel: They which in this
sort receive power immediately from God, have it by mere Divine Right; they by
humane, on whom the same is bestowed, according to men's discretion, when they
are left freely by God to make choice of their own Governors. By which of
these means soever it happen, that Kings or Governors be advanced unto their
Estates, we must acknowledge both their lawful choice to be approved of God, and
themselves to be Gods Lievtenants; and cofess their Power which they have to be
his. As for Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical affairs, the Word of God does no
where appoint that all Kings should have it, neither that any should not have
it; for which cause, it seems to stand altogether by humane Right, that unto
Christian Kings there is such Dominion given.

Again, on whom the same is bestowed at men's discretions, they likewise do hold
it by Divine Right: If God in his revealed Word, has appointed such Power to
be, although himself extraordinarily bestow it not, but leave the appointment
of persons to men; yea, albeit God do neither appoint nor assign the person:
nevertheless, when men have assigned and established both. Who does doubt but
that sundry duties and affairs depending thereupon are prescribed by the Word
of God, and consequently by that very right to be exacted? For example sake,
the power which Roman Emperors had over foreign Provinces, was not a thing
which the Law of God did ever Institute: Neither was Tiberius Caesar by
especial Commission from Heaven therewith invested, and yet payment of Tribute
unto Caesar being now made Emperor, is the plain Law of Jesus Christ: unto
Kings by humane Right, Honor by very Divine Right, is due; man's Ordinances, are
many times proposed as grounds in the Statutes of God: And therefore of what
kind soever the means be, whereby Governors are lawfully advanced to their
States, as we by the Laws of God stand bound meekly to acknowledge them for Gods
Lieutenants; and to confess their Power his: So by the same Law they are both
authorized, and required to use that Power as far as it may be in any State
available to his Honor. The Law appoints no man to be a husband: but if a man
has betaken himself unto that condition, it gives him power and Authority
over his own Wife. That the Christian world should be ordered by the Kingly
Regiment, the Law of God does not any where command: and yet the Law of God
does give them, which once are exalted unto that place of Estate, right to
exact at the hands of their Subjects general obedience in whatsoever affairs
their power may serve to command, and God does ratify works of that Sovereign
Authority, which Kings have received by men. This is therefore the right
whereby Kings do hold their power; but yet in what sort the same does rest and
abide in them, it somewhat behooves further to search, where that we be not
enforced to make overlarge discourses about the different conditions of
Sovereign or Supreme Power; that which we speak of Kings, shall be in respect
of the State, and according to the nature of this Kingdom, where the people are
in no subjection, but such as willingly themselves have condescended unto for
their own most behoo^ and security. In Kingdoms therefore of this quality, the
highest Governor has indeed universal Dominion, but with dependency upon that
whole entire body, over the several parts whereof he has Dominion: so that it
stands for an Axiom in this case; The King is Major singulis, universis
minor. The Kings dependency, we do not construe as some have done, who are of
opinion that no man's birth can make him a King; but every particular person,
advanced to such Authority, has at his entrance into his Reign, the same
bestowed on him as an estate in condition by the voluntary deed of the people,
in whom it does lie to put by any one, and to prefer some other before him,
better liked of or judged fitter for the place, and that the party so rejected
has no injury done unto him; no although the same be done in a place where the
Crown does go (...). by succession, and to a person which is capital and has
apparently if blood be respected the nearest right. They plainly affirm in all
well appointed Kingdoms, the custom evermore has been, and is, that children
succeed not their Parents, till the people after a sort have created them anew,
neither that that they grow to their Fathers as natural and proper Heirs, but
are then to be reckoned for Kings when at the hands of such as represent the
Kings Majesty, Iunies Bru^iel vindie, page 8^.
they have by a Scepter and a Diadem received, as it were, the investure of
Kingly power: Their very words are, That where such power is sealed into a
family or kindred, the Stock it self is thereby chosen, but not the twig that
springs of it. The next of the Stock unto him that reigns, page 8^.
are not through nearness of blood made Kings, but rather set forth to stand
for the Kingdom, where Regal Dominion is hereditary, it is notwithstanding (if
we look to the persons which have it) altogether elective: To this purpose are
selected heaps of Scriptures concerning the Solemn Coronation or Inauguration
of Saul, of David, of Solomon, and others, by the Nobles, Ancients, and people
of the Commonweal of Israel; as if these solemnities were a kind of deed,
whereby the right of Dominion is given. Which strange, untrue, and unnatural
conceits, set abroad by seeds-men of Rebellion, only to animate unquiet
spirits, and to feed them with possibility of aspiring to Thrones, if they can
win the hearts of the people, what hereditary title soever any other before
them may have. I say unjust and insolent positions, I would not mention, were
it not thereby to make the countenance of truth more orient; for unless we will
openly proclaim defiance unto all law, equity, and reason we must (there is no
remedy) acknowledge, that in kingdoms hereditary birth gives right unto
Sovereign Dominion; and the death of the predecessor puts the successor by
blood in seisin. Those public solemnities before specified, do but serve for
an open testification of the Inheritors right, or belong unto the form of
inducting him into possession of that thing he has right unto: therefore in
case it does happen, that without right of blood a man in such wise be
possessed, all these new elections and investings are utterly void; they make
him no indefeasable estate; the inheritor by blood may disposses him as an
usurper. The case thus standing, albeit we judge it a thing most true, that
Kings, even inheritors, do hold their right in the Power of Dominion, with
dependency upon the whole Body politic, over which they have Rule as Kings;
yet so it may not be understood as if such dependency did grow, for that every
supreme Governor does personally take from thence his power by way of gift,
bestowed of their own free accord upon him at the time of his entrance into the
said place of his sovereign Government. But the cause of dependency is that
first Original conveyance, when power was derived from the whole into One; to
pass from him unto them, whom out of him nature by lawful births should
produce, and no natural or legal inability make incapable: Tully de Office.
Neither cab any man with reason think, but that the first institution of
Kings, a sufficient consideration wherefore their power should always depend on
that from which it did always flow by Original influence of power, from the
body into the King, is the cause of Kings dependency in Power upon the body. By
dependency we mean subordination and subjection: A manifest token of which
dependency may be this; as there is no more certain Argument, that Lands are
held under any as Lords, then if we see that such lands is defect of heirs fall
unto them by escheat: In like manner, it does follow rightly, that seeing
Dominion when there is none to inherit it, returns unto the body; therefore,
they which before were inheritors thereof, did hold it with dependency upon the
body, so that by comparing the body with the head, as touching power, it
seems always to reside in both; fundamentally and radicially in the one, in
the other derivatively; in the one the Habit, in the other the Act of Power.
May a body politic then at all times, withdraw in whole or in part the
influence of Dominion which passes from it, if inconveniences do grow
thereby? It must be presumed, that supreme Governors will not in such case
oppose themselves, and be stiff in detaining that, the use whereof is with
public detriment: but surely without their consent I see not how the body by
any just means should be able to help it self, saving when Dominion does
escheat; such things therefore must be thought upon before hand, that Power may
be limited ere it be granted, which is the next thing we are to consider.

In what Measure.
IN power of Dominion, all Kings have not an equal latitude: Kings by conquest
make their own Charter; so, that how large their power, either Civil or
Spiritual is, we cannot with any certainty define further, then only to set
them in the line of the Law of God and Nature for bounds. Kings by Gods own
special appointment, have also that largeness of power which he does assign or
permit with approbation touching Kings which were first instituted by agreement
and composition made with them over whom they reign, how far their power may
extend; the Articles of Compact between them is to show not only the Articles
of Compact at the first beginning, which for the most part are either clean
worm out of knowledge, or else known to very few; but whatsoever has been after
in free and voluhtary manner condiscended unto, whether by express consent,
(whereof positive laws are witnesses,) or else by silent allowance, Arist. Fol.
lib. ^. Cap. ^.
famously notified through custom, reaching beyond the memory of man. By which
means of after. Agreement, it comes many times to pass in Kingdoms, that they
whose ancient predecessors were by violence and force made subject, do by
little and little grow into that sweet form of Kingly Government, which
Philosophers define, Regency willingly sustained, and endued with Chiefly of
power in the greatest things. Many of the ancients in their writings do speak
of Kings with such high and ample terms, as if universality of Power, even in
regard of things and not of persons, did appertain to the very being of a King:
The reason is, because their speech concerning Kings, they frame according to
the state of those Monarchs, to whom unlimited authority was given; which some
not observing, imagine, that all Kings, even in that they are Kings, ought to
have whatsoever power they judge any Sovereign Ruler lawfully to have enjoyed.
But the most judicious Philosopher, Pythag^rae ^. pad Eccless. de Reg^o.
whose eye scarce any things did escape which was to be found in the bosom of
nature, he considering how far the power of one Sovereign Rule^ may be
different from another Regal Authority, notes in Spartan Kings, That of all
others they were most tied to Law, and so the most restrained power. A King
which has not supreme power in the greatest things, is rather entitled a
King, then invested with real Sovereignty. We cannot properly term him a King,
of whom it may not be said, at the least wise, as touching certain the chiefest
affairs of the State, (...), his right in them is to have rule, not subject to
any other predominancy. I am not of opinion that simply in Kings the most, but
the best limited power is best, both for them and the people: the most limited
is that which may deal in fewest things, the ^e^t, that which in dealing is
tied unto the soundest, perfectest, and most indifferent Rule, which Rule is
the Law: I mean not only the Law of Nature, and of God; but the National Law
consonant thereunto. Happier that people whose Law is their King in the
greatest things, then that whose King is himself their Law: where the King does
guide the State, and the Law the King, that Commonwealth is like an Harp or
Melodious Instrument, the strings whereof are turned and handled all by one
hand, following as Laws, the Rules and Canons of Musical Science. Most divinely
therefore Archytas makes unto public felicity these four steps and degrees,
every of which does spring from the former, as from another cause, (...) The
King ruling by Law, the Magistrate following, the Subject free, and the whole
Society happy. Adding on the contrary side, that where this order is not, it
comes by transgression thereof to pass that a King grows a Tyrant; he that
rules under him abhors to be guided by him or commanded; the people subject
unto both, have freedom under neither, and the whole Community is wretched. In
which respect, I cannot choose but commend highly their wisdom, by whom the
Foundations of the Commonwealth has been laid; wherein though no manner of
Person, or cause be unsubject unto the Kings Power, yet so is the Power of the
King over all, and in all limited, that unto all his proceedings the Law it
self is a rule. The Axioms of our Regal Government are these, Lex facit regem:
The Kings Grant of any favor made contrary to the Law is void; Rex nibil
potest nisi quod jure potest: Our Kings therefore, when they are to take
possession of the Crown they are called unto, have it pointed our before their
eyes, even by the very Solemnities and Rites of their Inauguration, to what
affairs by the same Law their Supreme Power and Authority reaches; crowned we
see they are, enthronized and anointed; the Crown a Sign of a Military
Dominion: the Throne of Sedentary or Judicial; the Oil of Religious and Sacred
Power. It is not on any side denied, that Kings may have Authority in Secular
affairs. The Question then is, Stipl. de ^^^ Princip. I^s. ^. 6, 17.
What power they may lawfully have, and exercise in causes of God. A Prince, or
Magistrate, or a Community (says Doctor Stapleton) may have power to lay
corporal punishment on them which are teachers of perverse things; power to
make Laws for the Peace of the Church; Power to proclaim, to defend, and even
by revenge to preserve dogmata the very Articles of Religion themselves from
violation. Others, in affection no less devoted unto the Papacy, do likewise
yield, that the Civil Magistrate may by his Edicts and Laws keep all
Ecclesiastical Persons within the bounds of their duties, and constrain them to
observe the Canons of the Church, to follow the rule of ancient Discipline.
That, if Ioash was commended for his care and provision, concerning so small a
part of Religion, as the Church-treasure; it must needs be both unto Christian
Kings themselves greater honor, and to Christianity a larger benefit, when the
custody of Religion, and the worship of God in general is their charge. It
therefore all these things mentioned be most properly the affairs of Gods
Ecclesiastical causes; if the actions specified be works of power; and if that
power be such as Kings may use of themselves, without the fear of any other
power superior in the same thing; it follows necessarily, that Kings may have
supreme power, not only in Civil, but also in Ecclesiastical affairs, and
consequently, that they may withstand what Bishop or Pope soever shall, under
the pretended claim of higher Spiritual Authority, oppose themselves against
their proceedings. But they which have made us the former grant, will never
hereunto condescend; what they yield that Princes may do, it is with secret
exception always understood, If the Bishop of Rome give leave, if he enterpose
no prohibition; wherefore, somewhat it is in show, in truth nothing which they
grant. Our own Reformes do the very like, when they make their discourse in
general, concerning the Authority which Magistrates may have, a man would think
them to be far from withdrawing any jot of that, which with reason may be
thought due. The Prince and Civil Magistrate (says one of them) T. C. l. 1. p.
192.
has to see the Laws of God, touching his Worship, and touching all Matters,
and all Orders of the Church to be executed, and duly observed; and to see
every Ecclesiastical Person do that office, whereunto he is appointed; and to
punish those which fail in their office accordingly. Another acknowledges,
Farmen^ ^ef^of the Godly Magistrate.
That the Magistrate may lawfully uphold all truth by his Sword, punish all
persons, enforce all to their duties toward God and men; maintain by his Laws
every point of Gods Word, punish all vice in all men; see into all causes,
visit the Ecclesiastical Estate, and correct the abuses thereof: Finally to
look to his Subjects, that under him they may lead their lives in all godliness
and honesty^ A third more frankly prosesseth, That in case their Church
Discipline were established, so little it shortneth the Arms of Sovereign
Dominion in causes Ecclesiastical, that Her Gracious Majesty, for any thing
they teach or hold to the contrary, may no less then now remain still over all
persons, in all things Supreme Governess even with that full and Royal
Authority, Superiority, and Pre-eminence, Supremacy, and Prerogative, which the
Laws already established do give her; and her Majesty's Injunctions, and the
Articles of the Convocation house, and other writings Apologetical of her Royal
Authority, and Supreme Dignity, do declare and explain. Possidonius was wont to
say of the Epicure, Cicero lib. 1. de man Decr.
That he thought there were no Gods, but that those things which he spoke
concerning the Gods, were only given out for fear of growing adious amongst
men: and therefore that in words he left gods remaining, but in very deed
overthrew them, in so much as he gave them no kind of Action. After the very
self same manner, when we come unto those particular effects, Prerogatives of
Dominion which the Laws of this Land do grant unto the Kings thereof, it will
appear how these men, notwithstanding their large and liberal Speeches abate
such parcels out of the before alleged grant and flourishing show, that a man
comparing the one with the other, may half stand in doubt, lest their Opinion
in very truth be against that Authority, which by their Speeches they seem
mightily to uphold, partly for the avoiding of public obloquie, envy, and
hatred, partly to the intent they may both in the cad by the establishment of
their Discipline, extinguish the force of Supreme Power, which Princes have,
and yet, in the mean while, by giving forth these smooth Discourses, obtain
that their savourers may have somewhat to allege for them by way of Apology,
and that such words only sound toward all kind of fullness of Power. But for my
self, I had rather construe such their contradictions in the better part, and
impute their general acknowledgment of the lawfullness of Kingly Power, unto
the force of truth, presenting it self before them sometimes above their
particular contrarieties, oppositions, denyals, unto that error which having
so fully possessed their minds, casts things inconvenient upon them; of which
things in their due place. Touching that which is now in hand, wear on all
sides fully agreed, First, that there is not any restraint or limitation of
matter for regal Authority and Power to be conversant in, but of Religion
only; and of whatsoever cause thereunto appertains Kings may lawfully have
change, they lawfully may therein exercise Dominion, and use the temporal
Sword. Secondly, Kinds.
that some kind of actions conversant about such affairs are denied unto Kings:
As namely, Actions of Power and Order, and of Spiritual Jurisdiction, which
has with it inseparably joined Power to Administer the Word and Sacraments,
power to Ordain, to Judge as an Ordinary, to bind and loose, to Excommunicate,
and such like. Thirdly, By what^e^^^.
that even in those very actions, which are proper unto Dominion, there must be
some certain rule whereunto Kings in all their proceedings ought to be strictly
tied; which rule for proceeding in Ecclesiastical affairs and causes by Regal
Power, has not hitherto been agreed upon with such uniform consent, and
certainty, as might be wished. The different sentences of men herein I will now
go about to examine, but it shall be enough to propose what Rule does seem in
this case most reasonable.

The case of deriving Supreme Power from a whole entire multitude into some
special part thereof; as partly the necessity of expedition in public affairs,
partly the inconvenience of confusion and trouble, where a multitude of Equals
deals; and partly the dissipation which must needs ensue, in companies where
every man wholly seeks his own particular (as we all would do, even with
other men's hurts) and happily the very overthrow of themselves, in the end also;
if for the procurement of the common good of all men, by keeping every several
man is order, some were not invested with Authority over all, and encouraged
with Prerogative-Honour to sustain the weighty burden of that charge. The good
which is proper unto each man belongs to the common good of all, as part to
the whole perfection; but these two are things different; for men by that which
is proper, are severed; united they are by that which is common. Wherefore,
besides that which moves each man in particular to seek his own private good,
there must be of necessity in all public Societies also a general mover,
directing unto common good, and framing every man's particular unto it. The end
whereunto all Government was instituted, was Bonum publicum, the Universal or
Common good. Ob (...) publica per (...) consu(...) L.C. 11. ^ de origin. i^ris
Civilis.
Our question is of Dominion, for that end and purpose derived into one; such
as all in one public State have agreed, that the Supreme charge of all things
should be committed unto one: They, I say, considering what inconveniency may
grow, where States are subject unto sundry Supreme Authorities, have for fear
of these inconveniences withdrawn from liking to establish many; (...), the
multitude of Supreme Commanders is troublesome, No Nan (says our Savior) can
serve two Masters; surely two supreme Masters would make any ones service
somewhat uneasy in such cases as might fall out, Suppose that to morrow the
Power which has Dominion in Justice, require thee at the Court; that which in
War, at the Field; that which in Religion, at the Temple; all have equal
Authority over thee, and impossible it is, that then in such case thou should
be obedient unto all: By choosing any one whom thou will obey, certain thou art
for thy disobedience to incur the displeasure of the other two.

But there is nothing for which some comparable reason or other may not be
found; According to what example.
are we able to show any commendable State of Government, which by experience
and practice has felt the benefit of being in all causes subject unto the
Supreme Authority of one? Against the policy of the Israelites, I hope there
will no man except, where Moses deriving so great a part of his burden in
Government unto others, did notwithstanding retain to himself Universal
Supremacy; Iehosaphat appointing one to be chosen in the affairs of God, and
another in the Kings affair's, did this as having Dominion over them in both.
If therefore from approbation of Heaven, the Kings of Gods own chosen people
had in the affairs of Jewish Religion Supreme Power, why not Christian Kings
the like also in Christian Religion? First, unless men will answer, as some
have done, Stapl. de prin. Doct. page 19. Stapl. 10.
That the Jews Religion was of far less perfection and dignity then ours, our
being that truth whereof theirs was but a shadowish prefigurative resemblance.
Secondly, That all parts of their Religion, their Laws, their Sacrifices, and
their Rights and Ceremonies, being fully set down to their hands, and needing
no more, but only to be put in execution; the Kings might well have highest
Authority to see that done; whereas with us there are a number of Mysteries
even in Belief, which were not so generally for them, as for us necessary to be
with sound express acknowledgement understood: A number of things belonging to
external Government, and our manner of serving God, not set down by particular
Ordinances, and delivered to us in writing, for which cause the State of the
Church does now require, that the Spiritual Authority of Ecclesiastical persons
be large, absolute, and not subordinate to Regal power. Thirdly, Idem ib.
That whereas God armeth Religion Jewish as Christian with the Temporal sword.
But of Spiritual punishment, the one with power to imprison, to scourge, to put
to death: The other with bare authority to Censure and excommunicate: There is
no reason that the Church which has no visible sword, should in Regiment be
subject unto any other power, then only unto theirs which have authority to
bind and loose. Fourthly, That albeit whilst the Church was restrained unto one
people, it seemed not incommodious to grant their King the general Chiefty of
Power; yet now the Church having spread it self over all Nations, great
inconveniences must thereby grow, if every Christian King in his several
Territory shall have the like power. Of all these differences, there is not one
which does prove it a thing repugnant to the Law, either of God, or of Nature,
that all Supremacy of external Power be in Christian Kingdoms granted unto
Kings thereof, for preservation of quietness, unity, order, and peace, in such
manner as has been showed.

Of the Title of Headship.
FOr the Title or State it self, although the Laws of this Land have annexed it
to the Crown, yet so far^ we should not strive, if so be men were nice and
scrupulous in this behalf only; because they do wish that, for reverence to
Christ Jesus, the Civil Magistrate did rather use some other form of speech
wherewith to express that Sovereign Authority which he lawfully has overall,
both Persons and Causes of the Church. But I see that hitherto they which
condemn utterly the name so applied, do it because they mislike that such Power
should be given to Civil Governors. The great exception that Sir Thomas Moor
took against that Title, Rasiensis, Epist. p. 5. 17. Pres. cont. 7. Calvin. in
com. 7. Amos 7. 13.
who suffered death for denial of it, was, for that it makes a Lay, a Secular
Person, the head of the State Spiritual or Ecclesiastical; as though God
himself did not name Said; the Head of all the Tribes of Israel; and
consequently of that Tribe also among the rest, whereunto the State Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical belonged; when the Authors of the Centuries reprove it in
Kings and Civil Governors, the reason is, Is It is non competit iste Primatus;
such kind of Power is too high for them, they fit it not: In excuse of Mr.
Calvin, by whom this Realm is condemned of Blasphemy, for intitu^ing, H. 8.
Supreme Head of this Church under Christ, a charitable conjecture is made, that
he spoke by misinformation; howbeit as he professes utter dislike of that
name, so whether the name be used or no, the very Power it self which we give
unto Civil Magistrates, he much complains of, and protests, That their
Power over all things was it which had ever wounded him deeply: That un-advised
Persons had made them too Spiritual; that throughout Germany this fault did
reign; that in these very parts where Calvin himself was, it prevailed more
than was to be wished; that Rulers by imagining themselves so Spiritual, have
taken away Ecclesiastical Government; that they think they cannot reign unless
they abolish all the Authority of the Cuurch, and be themselves the chief
Judges, as well in Doctrine, as in the whole Spiritual Regency. So that, in
truth, the Question is, Whether the Magistrate by being Head in such sense as
we term him, do use or exercise any part of that Authority, not which belongs
unto Christ, but which other men ought to have.

These things being first considered thus, it will be easier to judge
concerning our own estate, whether by force of Ecclesiastical Government, Kings
have any other kind of Prerogative that they may lawfully hold and enjoy. It
is, as some do imagine, too much, that Kings of England should be termed Heads
in relation of the Church. That which we do understand by Headship, is, their
only Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical Affairs and Causes; That which lawful
Princes are, what should make it unlawful for men in Spiritual Styles or Titles
to signify? If the having of Supreme Power be allowed, why is the expressing
thereof, by the Title of Head, condemned? They seem in words, (at leastwise
some of them) now at the length to acknowledge, that Kings may have Dominion or
Supreme Government even over all, both Persons and Causes. We in terming our
Princes, Heads of the Church, do but testify that we acknowledge them such
Governors. Again, to this it will peradventure be replied, T. C. l. 2. p. 4 11.
That howsoever we interpret our selves, it is not fit for a mortal man, and
therefore not fit for a Civil Magistrate to be entitled the Head of the
Church, which was given to our Savior Christ, to lift him above all Powers,
Rules, Dominions, Titles, in Heaven or in Earth. Where, if this Title belong
also to Civil Magistrates, then it is manifest, that there is a Power in Earth
whereunto our Savior Christ is not in this point superior. Again, if the
Civil Magistrate may have this Title, he may be termed also the first-begotten
of all Creatures. The first begotten of all the Dead, yea the Redeemer of his
People. Ephesians. 1. 2^. Col. 1. 1^.
For these are alike given him as Dignities whereby he is lifted up above all
Creatures. Besides this, the whole Argument of the Apostle in both places does
lead to show that this Title, Head of the Church, cannot be said of any
Creature. And further, the very domonstrative Articles amongst the Hebrews,
especially whom St. Paul does follow, serves to tie that which is verified of
one, unto himself alone: so that when the Apostle does say that Christ it
(...), the Head, it is as if he should say; Christ, and none other, is the Head
of the Church. Thus have we against the entituling of the Highest Magistrate,
head, with relation unto the Church, four several Arguments gathered by strong
surmise out of words mavelous unlikely to have been written to any such
purpose, as that whereunto they are now used and urged. To the Ephesians, the
Apostle writes, Ephesians. 1. 20. 21. 22. 23.
That Christ, God had set on his right hand in the Heavenly places above all
Regency and Authority, and Power, and Dominion, and whatsoever name is named,
not in this World only, but in that which shall be also: and has under his
feet set all things, and has given him head above all things unto the Church,
which is his Body, even the fullness of him which accomplisheth all in all. To
the Colossians in like manner, Col. 1. 1^. Col. 15.
That he is the head of the body of the Church, who is a first born Regency out
of the dead, to the end he might be made amongst them all such an one as both
the Chiefty: He means, amongst all them whom he mentioned before, saying. By
him all things that are, were made; the things in the Heavens, and the things
in the Earth, the things that are visible, and the things that are invisible,
whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Regencies, etc. Unto the
fore-alledged Arguments therefore we answer: First, that it is not simply the
title of Head, in such sort understood, as the Apostle himself meant it; so
that the same being imparted in another sense unto others, does not any ways
make those others his Equals; in as much as diversity of things is usually to
be understood, even when of words there is no diversity; and it is only the
adding of one and the same thing unto diverse Persons, which does argue equality
in them. If I term Christ and Caesar Lords, yet this is no equalizing Caesar with
Christ, because it is not thereby intended: To term the Emperor Lord, (says
Tertullian) I, for my part, will not refuse, so that I be not required to call
him Lord in the same sense that God is so termed. Neither does it follow, which
is objected in the second place, that if the Civil Magistrate may be entitled
a Head, he may as well be termed the first begotten of all Creatures, the first
begotten of the Dead, and the Redeemer of his People. For albeit the former
dignity does lift him up to less than these, yet these terms are not applyable
and apt to signify any other inferior dignity, as the former term of Head was.
The Argument of matter which the Apostle follows has small evidence or
proof, that his meaning was to appropriate unto Christ, that the aforesaid
title; otherwise than only in such sense as does make it, being so understood,
too high to be given to any Creature.

As for the force of the Article where our Lord and Savior is called the Head,
it serves to tie that unto him by way of excellency, which in meaner degrees
is common to others; it does not exclude any other utterly from being termed
Head, but from being entitled as Christ is the Head, by way of the very
highest degree of excellency: Not in the communication of Names, but in the
confusion of things, there is error. Howbeit, if Head were a Name that could
not well be, nor never had been used to signify that which a Magistrate may be
in relation to some Church; but were by continual use of speech appropriated
unto the only thing it signifies, being applied unto Jesus Christ; then,
although we must carry in our selves a right understanding, yet ought we
otherwise rather to speak, unless we interpret our own meaning by some clause
of plain speech, because we are else in manifest danger to be understood
according to that construction and sense, wherein such words are personally
spoken. But here the rarest construction, and most removed from common sense,
is that which the Word does import being applied unto Christ; that which we
signify by it in giving it to the Magistrate, it is a great deal more familiar
in the common conceit of men.

The word is so fit to signify all kinds of Superiority, Pre-eminence, and
Chiefty, that nothing is more ordinary than to use it in vulgar speech, Esaias 7.
9. Teka^ is termed the head of Samaria.
and in common understanding so to take it: If therefore Christian Kings may
have any pre-eminence or chiefty above all others, although it be less than
that which Theodore Beza gives, who places Kings amongst the principal
Members, whereunto public Function to the Church belongs; and denies not,
but that of them which have public Fonction, the Civil Magistrates power has
all the rest at command, in regard of that part of his Office, which is to
procure that Peace and good (...) especially kept in things concerning the
first Table; if even hereupon they term him the Head of the Church, which is
his Kingdom, it should not seem so unfit a thing; Which Title surely we could
not communicate to any other, no not although it should at our hands be exacted
with torments: but that our meaning herein is made known to the World, so that
no man which will understand can easily be ignorant, that we do not impart unto
Kings, when we term them Heads, the honor which is properly given to our Lord
and Savior Christ, when the blessed Apostle in Scripture does term him the
Head of the Church.

The power which we signify in that name, differs in three things plainly
from that which Christ does challenge.

First, it differs in order, because God has given to his Church for the
Head, Ephesians. 1.21.
(...) Far above all Principalities, and Powers, and Might, and Dominion, and
every Name that is named, not in this World only, but also in that which is to
come: Whereas the Power which others have, is subordinate unto his.

Secondly, again, as he differs in order, so in measure of Power also;
because God has given unto him the ends of the Earth for his Possesion; unto
him, Psalm. 2. ^.
Dominion from Sea to Sea, unto him all power both in Heaven and Earth, unto
him such Sovereignty, as does not only reach over all places, persons, and
things, but does rest in his own only Person, and is not by any succession
continued; he reigns as Head and King, nor is there any kind of law which
tyeth him, but his own proper will and wisdom, his power is absolute, the same
jointly over all which it is severally over each: not so the Power of any other
Headship. How Kings are restrained, and how their Power is limited, we have
showed before; so that unto him is given by the title of Headship ever the
Church that largeness of Power, wherein neither Man, nor Angel, can be matched
not compared with him.

Thirdly, the last and greatest difference between him and them, is in the very
kind of their Power. The Head being, of all other parts of the Body, most
divine, has dominion over all the rest; it is the fountain of sense, of
motion, the throne where the guide of the Soul does reign; the Court from
whence direction of all things human proceeds. Why Christ is called the Head
of the Church, these Causes themselves do yield. As the Head is the chiefest
part of a man, above which there is none, always joined with the Body; so
Christ the highest in his Church, is always knit to it. Again, as the Head
gives sense and motion unto all the Body, so he quickneth us, and, together
with understanding of heavenly things, gives strength to walk therein. Seeing
therefore that they cannot affirm Christ sensibly present, or always visibly
joined unto his Body the Church which is on Earth, in as much as his Corporal
residence is in Heaven; again, seeing they do not affirm (it were intolerable
if they should) that Christ does personally administer the external Regiment of
outward Actions in the Church, but, by the secret inward influence of his
Grace, gives Spiritual life, and the strength of ghostly motions thereunto:
Impossible it is, that they should so close up their eyes, as not to discern
what odds there is between that kind of operation, which we imply in the
Headship of Princes, and that which agrees to our Saviors dominion over the
Church. The Headship which we give unto Kings, is altogether visibly exercised,
and orders only the external frame of the Church Affairs here amongst us; so
that it plainly differs from Christ's, even in very nature and kind. To be
in such sort united unto the Church as he is; to work as he works, either on
the whole Church or upon any particular Assembly, or in any one man; does
neither agree; nor has any possibility of agreeing unto any one besides him.

T. C. l. 2. p. ^1^.
Against the first distinction or difference, it is to be objected, That to
entitle a Magistrate head of the Church, although it be under Christ, is not
absurd. For Christ has a twofold Superiority; ever his, and even Kingdoms:
according to the one, he has a Superior; which is his Father; according to the
other, none had immediate Authority with his Father; that is to say, of the
Church he is Head and Governor only as the Son of Man; Head and Governor of
Kingdoms only as the Son of God. In the Church, as Man, he has Officers under
Him, which Officers are Ecclesiastical Persons: As for the Civil Magistrate,
his Office belongs unto Kingdoms, T. C. l. 2. p. ^13.
and to Commonwealths, neither is he there an under or subordinate Head,
considering that his Authority comes from God, simply and immediately, even as
our Savior Christ's does. Whereunto the sum of our Answer is, First, that as
Christ being Lord or Head over all, does, by virtue of that Sovereignty, rule
all; so he has no more a Superior in governing his Church, than in exercising
Sovereign Dominion upon the rest of the World besides. Secondly, That all
Authority, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical, is subordinate unto him. And
Thirdly, the Civil Magistrate being termed Head, by reason of that Authority in
Ecclesiastical Affairs which has been already declared that themselves do
acknowledge to be lawful: It follows, that he is a Head even subordinated of
Christ, and to Christ. For more plain explication whereof, unto God we
acknowledge daily, that Kingdom, Power, and Glory, are his; that he is the
immortal and invisible King of Ages, as well the future which shall be, as the
present which now is. That which the Father does work as Lord and King over
all, he works not without, but by the Son, who, through coeternal generation,
receives of the Father that Power, which the Father has of himself. And for
that cause our Saviors words concerning his own Dominion, are, To me all Power
both in Heaven and in Earth is given: The Father by the Son did create, and
does guide all, wherefore Christ has Supreme dominion over the whole universal
World, Christ is God, Christ is (...), the consubstantial Word of God, Christ
is also that consubstantial Word which made man. As God, he says of himself, I
am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end: he which was, and which is, and
which is to come, even the very Omnipotent. As the consubstantial Word of God,
he has with God, before the beginning of the World, ^poc. ^. ^.
that glory, which, as he was Man, he requires to have: Father, glorify thy
Son with that glory which with thee be enjoyed before the World wa^. Further,
it is not necessary, that all things spoken of Christ should agree to him,
either as God, or else as Man; John. 17. 5.
but some things as he is the consubstantial Word of God, some things as he is
that Word incarnate. The Works of Supreme Dominion which have been since the
first beginning wrought by the power of the Son of God, are now most properly
and truly the Works of the Son of Man: the Word made Flesh does sit for ever,
and reign, as Sovereign Lord over all. Dominion belongs unto the Kingly
Office of Christ, as Propitration and Mediation unto his Priestly; Instruction,
unto his Pastoral and Prophetical Office. His Works of Dominion are, in sundry
degrees and kinds, according to the different conditions of them that are
subject unto it: he presently does govern, and hereafter shall judge the World,
entire and wholly; and therefore his Regal power cannot be with truth
restrained unto a proportion of the World only. Notwithstanding, forasmuch as
all do not show and acknowledge, with dutiful submission, that Obedience which
they owe unto him; therefore such as do, their Lord he is termed by way of
excellency, no otherwise than the Apostle does term God the Savior generally
of all, but especially of the Faithful; these being brought to the obedience of
Faith, are every where spoken of, as men translated into that Kingdom, wherein
whosoever is comprehended, Christ is the Author of eternal Salvation unto them;
they have a high and ghostly fellowship with God and Christ, and Saints, as the
Apostle in more ample manner speaks, Heb. 12. 23.
Aggregated they are unto Mount Sion, and to the City of the living God; the
Celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the
Congregation of the first born, which are written in Heaven, and to God the
Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just and perfect men, and to Jesus the
Mediator of the new Testament. In a word, they are of that Mystical body, which
we term the Church of Christ. As for the rest we account them Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and that live in the Kingdom of Darkness, and that are
in this present World without God. Our Saviors Dominion is therefore over
these, as over Rebels; over them, as over dutiful and loving Subjects; which
things being in holy Scriptures so plain, I somewhat muse at that strange
position, That Christ in the Government of his Church, and Superiority over the
Officers of it, has himself a Superior which is the Father; but in governing
of Kingdoms and Common wealths, and in the Superiority which he has over
Kingdoms, no Superior.

Again, T.C. l. 4. p. 41^
That the Civil Magistrates Authority comes from God immediately, as Christ's
does, and it subordinate unto Christ. In what Evangelist, Apostle, or Prophet,
is it found, that Christ (Supreme Governor of the Church) should be so unequal
to himself, as he is Supreme Governor of Kingdoms? The works of his Providence
for the preservation of Mankind, by upholding Kingdoms, not only obedient
unto, but also obstinate and rebellious against him, are such as proceed from
Divine Power; and are not the works of his Providence for safety of God's
Elect, by gathering, inspiring, comforting, and every way preserving his
Church, such as proceed from the same Power likewise? Surely, if Christ, as God
and Man, has ordained certain means for the gathering and keeping of his
Church, seeing this does belong to the Government of that Church: it must in
reason follow, I think, that, as God and Man, he works in Church Regiment;
and consequently has no more there any Superiors, than in the Government of
the Commonwealth. Again, to be in the midst of his, wheresoever they are
assembled in his Name, and to be with them to the World's end, are comforts
which Christ does perform to his Church as Lord and Governor; yea, such as he
cannot perform but by that very Power wherein he has no Superior. Wherefore,
unless it can be proved, that all the works of our Saviors Government in the
Church, are done by the mere and only force of his Human nature, there is no
remedy but to acknowledge it a manifest error, that Christ, in the Government
of the World, is equal to the Father, but not in the Government of the Church.
Indeed, to the honor of this Dominion, it cannot be said, that God did exalt
him otherwise than only according to that Human nature, wherein he was made
low. For, as the Son of God, there could no advancement or exaltation grow unto
him: And yet the Dominion, whereunto he was in his Human nature lifted up, is
not without Divine Power exercised. It is by Divine Power, that the Son of man,
who sits in Heaven, does work as King and Lord upon us which are on Earth.
The exercise of his Dominion over the Church Militant cannot choose but cease,
when there is no longer any Militant Church in the World. And therefore, as
Generals of Armies when they have finished their Work, are wont to yield up
such Commissions as were given for that purpose, and to remain in the state of
Subjects, and not as Lords, as concerning their former authority; even so, when
the end of all things is come, the Son of man (who till then reigns) shall do
the like, as touching Regiment over the Militant Church on the Earth. So that
between the Son of man and his Brethren, over whom he reigns now in this
their War fare, there shall be then, as touching the exercise of that Regiment,
no such difference, they not warfaring any longer under him; but he, together
with them, under God, receiving the joys of everlasting triumph, that so God
may be in all; all misery in all the Wicked, through his Justice; in all the
Righteous, through his love, all felicity and bliss. In the mean while he
reigns over the World as King, and does those things wherein none is
Superior unto him, whether we respect the works of his Providence and Kingdom,
or of his Regiment over the Church. The cause of Error in this point, does
seem to have been a misconceit, that Christ, as Mediator, being inferior to
his Father, does, as Mediator, all Works of Regiment over the Church, when, in
truth, Regiment does belong to his Kingly Office, Mediatourship to his
Priestly. For, T.C. l. 4. p. 15.
as the High Priest both offered Sacrifices, for expiation of the Peoples sins,
and entered into the holy Place, there to make intercession for them: So, Christ
having finished upon the Cross that part of his Priestly Office, Heb. 5. 25.
which wrought the propitiation for our Sins, did afterward enter into very
Heaven, and does there, as Mediator of the New Testament, appear in the sight
of God for us. A like sleight of Judgment it is, when they hold, that Civil
Authority is from God, but not immediately through Christ, nor with any
subordination to God, nor does any thing from God, but by the hands of our Lord
Jesus Christ. They deny it not, Esaias 7. 25. Romans 13 1. Prove. 2. 15. Humble
motion. p. 63. Rev. 1. 5.
to be said of Christ in the Old Testament, By me Princes rule, and the Nobles,
and all the Judges of the Earth. In the New as much is taught, That Christ is
the Prince of the Kings of the Earth. Wherefore, to the end it may more plainly
appear, how all Authority of Man is derived from God through Christ, and must
by Christian men be acknowledged to be no otherwise held then of, and under
him; we are to note, that, because whatsoever has necessary being, the Son of
God does cause it to be, and those things without which the World cannot well
continue, have necessary being in the World: a thing of so great use as
Government, cannot choose but be originally from Him. Touching that Authority
which Civil Magistrates have in Ecclesiastical Affairs, it being from God by
Christ, as all other good things are, cannot choose but be held as a thing
received at his hands; and, because such power is of necessity for the ordering
of Religion, wherein the essence and very being of the Church consists, can
no otherwise slow from him, than according to that special care which he has
to govern and guide his own People: it follows, that the said Authority is of
and under him after a more special manner, in that he is Head of the Church,
and not in respect of his general Regency over the World. All things (says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 12.
speaking unto the Church) are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's.
Kings are Christ's as Saints, because they are of the Church, if not
collectively, yet divisively understood. It is over each particular Person
within that Church where they are Kings: Surely, Authority reaches both unto
all men's persons, and to all kinds of causes also: It is not denied, but that
they may have and lawfully exercise it; such Authority it is, for which, and
for no other in the World, we term them Heads; such Authority they have under
Christ, because he in all things is Lord overall; and even of Christ it is that
they have received such Authority, in as much as of him all lawful Powers are;
therefore the Civil Magistrate is, in regard of this Power, an under and
subordinate Head of Christ's People.

It is but idle where they speak, T. C. l. p. 413.
That although, for several Companies of Men, there may be several Heads or
Governors, differing in the measure of their Authority from the Chiefest, who
is Head over all; yet it cannot be in the Church, for that the reason why
Head-Magistrates appoint others for such several places, it, Because they
cannot be present every where to perform the Office of an Head. But Christ is
never from his Body, nor from any Part of it, and therefore needs not to
substitute any, which may be Heads, some over one Church, and some over
another. Indeed the consideration of Man's imbecility, which makes many Heads
necessary, where the burden is too great for one, moved Iethro to be a
Perswader of Moses, that a number of Heads of Rulers might be instituted for
discharge of that duty by parts, which in whole he saw was troublesome. Now,
although there be not in Christ any such defect, or weakness; yet other causes
there be diverse, more than we are able to search into, wherefore it might seem
unto him expedient to divide his Kingdom into many Provinces, and place many
Heads over it, that the Power which each of them has in particular with
restraint, might illustrate the greatness of his unlimited Authority. Besides,
howsoever Christ be Spiritually always united unto every part of his Body,
which is the Church: Nevertheless, we do all know, and they themselves who
allege this, will, I doubt not, confess also, that from every Church here
visible, Christ, touching visible and corporal presence, is removed as far as
Heaven from the Earth is distant. Visible Government is a thing necessary for
the Church; and it does not appear, how the exercise of visible Government over
such Multitudes every where dispersed throughout the World, should consist
without sundry visible Governors, whose Power being the greatest in that
kind, so far as it reaches, they are in consideration thereof termed so far
Heads. Wherefore, notwithstanding the perpetual conjunction, by virtue whereof
our Savior, always remains spiritually united unto the parts of his
Mystical Body, Heads indeed with Supreme Power, extending to a certain
compass, are for the exercise of a visible Regiment not unnecessary. Some
other reasons there are belonging unto this branch, which seem to have been
objected, rather for the exercise of men's wits, in dissolving Sophismes, than
that the Authors of them could think in likelihood, thereby to strengthen their
cause. For example, T. C. l. p. 419. Lk Hen. 8.6.9.
If the Magistrate be Head of the Church within his own Dominion, then is he
none of the Church: For all that are of the Church make the Body of Christ, and
every one of the Church fulfilleth the place of one member of the Body: By
making the Magistrate therefore Head, we do exclude him from being a Member
subject to the Head, and so leave him no place in the Church. By which reason,
the name of a Body Politic, is supposed to be always taken of the inferior
sort alone, excluding the Principal Guides and Governors, contrary to all Men's
customs of speech. The Error arises by misconceiving of some
Scripture-sentences, where Christ as the Head, and the Church as the Body, are
compared or opposed the one to the other. And, because in such comparisons
ooppositions, the Body is taken for those only parts which are subject unto the
Head; they imagine, that who so is the Head of any Church, he is therefore even
excluded from being a part of that Church; That the Magistrate can be none of
the Church, if so we make him the Head of the Church in his own Dominions: A
chief and principal part of the Church therefore. Next, this is surely a
strange conclusion, A Church does indeed make the Body of Christ, being wholly
taken together; and every one in the same Church fulfilleth the place of a
Member in the Body, but not the place of an inferior Member, the which has
Supreme Authority and Power over all the rest. Wherefore, by making the
Magistrate Head in his own Dominions, we exclude him from being a Member
subject unto any other Person, which may visibly there rule in place of a
Superior or Head over him; but so far are we off from leaving him by this
means no place in the Church, that we do grant him the hief place. Indeed the
Heads of those visible Bodies, which are many, can be but parts inferior in
that Spiritual Body which is but one; yea, they may from t^^s be excluded
clean, who notwithstanding ought to be honored, as possessing in order the
highest rooms: But for the Magistrate to be termed, in his Dominions, an Head,
does not bar him from being any way a Part or Member of the Church of God.

As little to the purpose are those other Cavils: A Church which has the
Magistrate for Head, is perfect man without Christ: So that the knitting of our
Savior thereunto, should be an addition of that which is too much. Again, If
the Church be the Body of Christ, and of the Civil Magistrate, it shall have
two heads, which being monstrous, is to the great dishonor of Christ and his
Church. Thirdly, If the Church be planted in a popular estate, then, forasmuch
as all govern in common, and all have Authority, all shall be Heads there, and
no Body at all, which is another Monster. It might be seared what this birth of
so many Monsters together might portend, but that we know how things, natural
enough in themselves, may seem monstrous, through misconceit; which error of
mind is indeed a Monster: and the skilful in Nature's mysteryes, have used to
term it the Womb of Monsters; if any be, it is that troubled Understanding,
wherein, because things lie confusedly mixed together, what they are it
appears not. A Church perfect without Christ, I know not how a man shall
imagine; unless there may be either Christianity without Christ, or else a
Church without Christianity. If Magistrates be Heads of the Church, they are of
necessity Christians, then is their Head Christ. The adding of Christ universal
Head over all, unto Magistrates particular Headship, is no more superfluous in
any Church than, in other Societyes: each is to be both severally subject unto
some Head, and to have a Head also general for them all to be subject unto. For
so in Armies, in Civil Corporations, we see it fares: A Body Politic, in such
respects, is not like a Natural Body; in this, more Heads than one is
superfluous; in that, not. It is neither monstrous, nor yet uncomely for a
Church to have different Heads: for if Christian Churches be in number many,
and every of them a perfect Body by it self, Christ being Lord and Head over
all; Why should we judge it a thing more monstrous for one Body to have two
Heads, than one Head so many Bodies? Him that God has made the Supreme Head of
the whole Church; the Head, not only of that Mystical Body, which the eye of
man is not able to discern, but even of every Christian Politic Society, of
every visible Church in the World? And whereas, Lastly, it is thought so
strange, that in Popular States, a Multitude to it self should be both Body and
Head, all this Wonderment does grow from a little oversight, in deeming that
the Subject wherein Headship ought to reside, should be evermore some one
Person; which thing is not necessary. For in the collective Body that has not
derived as yet the Principality of power into some one or few, the whole of
necessity must be Head over each part; otherwise it could not have power
possibly to make any one certain Person head, inasmuch as the very power of
making a Head belongs unto Headship. These supposed Monsters we see therefore
are no such Giants, as that there should need any Hercules to tame them.

The last difference which we have between the Title of Head when we give it
unto Christ, and when we give it to other Governors, is, that the kind of
Dominion which it imports, is not the same in both: Christ is Head, as being
the Fountain of Life and Ghostly nutriment, the Wellspring of Spiritual
Blessings powered into the Body of the Church, they Heads, as being the
principal instruments for the Churches outward Government; he Head, as Founder
of the House, they, as his chiefest Overseers. Against this is exception
especially taken, and our Purveyours are herein said to have their provision
from the Popish Shambles: for by Fighius and Harding, to prove that Christ
alone is not Head of the Church, this distinction, they say, is brought, that,
according to the inward influence of Grace, Christ only is Head: but, according
to the outward Government, the being of Head is a thing common to him with
others. To raise up Falsehoods of old condemned, and bring it for confirmation
of any thing doubtful, which already has sufficiently been proved an error,
and is worthily so taken, this would justly deserve censuring. But, shall
manifest truth therefore be reproached, because men convicted in some things of
manifest untruth, have at any time thought or alleged it? If too much
eagerness against their Adversaries had not made them forget themselves, they
might remember, where being charged as Maintainers of those very things, for
which others before them have been condemned of Heresy, yet, lest the name of
any such Heretic, holding the same which they do, should make them odious;
they stick not frankly to confess, T. C. l. 5. p. 6^.
That they are not afraid to consent in some points, with Jews and Turks: which
defense, for all that, were a very weak Buckler for such as should consent with
Jews and Turks, in that which they have been abhorted and hated for in the
Church. But as for this distinction of Headship. Spiritual and Mystical of
Jesus Christ, ministerial and outward in others besides Christ: what cause is
there to mislike either Harding, or Pighins, or any other besides for it? That
which they have been reproved for, is, not because they did therein utter an
untruth, but such a Truth as was not sufficient to bear up the Cause which they
did thereby seek to maintain. By this distinction, they have both truly and
sufficiently proved, that the name of Head importing Power and Dominion over
the Church, might be given to others besides Christ, without prejudice to any
part of his honor. That which they should have made manifest, was, The name of
Head, importing the power of universal Dominion over the whole Church of Christ
militant, does, and that by divine right, appertain to the Pope of Rome: They
did prove it lawful to grant unto others, besides Christ, the power of Headship
in a different kind from his; but they should have proved it lawful to
challenge, as they did to the Bishop of Rome, a Power universal in that
different kind. Their fault was therefore in exacting wrongfully so great
Power as they challenged in that kind, and not in making two kinds of Power,
unless some reasons can be showed for which this distinction of Power should be
thought erroneous and false. A little they stir, (although in vain) to prove,
that we cannot with truth make such distinction of Power, whereof the one kind
should agree unto Christ only, and the other be further communicated. Thus
therefore they argue, T. C. l. 2. p. 4. 5.
If there be no Head but Christ, in respect of Spiritual Government, there is
no Head but be in respect of the Word, Sacraments, and Discipline administered
by those whom he has appointed, for as much also as it is his Spiritual
Government: Their meaning is, that whereas we make two kinds of Power, of
which two, the one being Spiritual, is proper unto Christ, the other, men are
capable of, because it is visible and external: We do amiss altogether in
distinguishing, they think, forasmuch as the visible and external power of
Regiment over the Church, is only in relation unto the Word, Sacraments, and
Discipline, administered by such as Christ has appointed thereunto, and the
exercise of this Power is also his Spiritual Government: Therefore we do but
vainly imagine a visible and external Power in the Church differing from his
Spiritual Power. Such Disputes as this, do somewhat resemble the practicing of
Well-willers upon their Friends in the pangs of Death, whose manner is, even
their, to put smoke in their Nostrils, and so to fetch them again, alhough they
know it a matter impossible to keep them living. The kind of affecton which
the Favorers of this laboring cause bear toward it, will not suffer them to
se it dye, although by what means they should make it live, they do not see;
but thy may see that these wrestlings will not help: Can they be ignorant how
little it boteth to overcast so clear a light with some mist of ambiguity in
the name of Spiritual R^iment? To make things therefore so plain, that
henceforward a Childs capacity ma serve rightly to conceive our meaning, we
make the Spiritual Regiment of Christ to ^e generally that whereby his Church
is ruled and governed in things Spiritual. Of this general we make two distinct
kinds; the one invisible, exercised by Christ himself in his own Person; the
other outwardly administered by them, whom Christ does allow, to be Rulers and
Guiders of his Church. Touching the former of these two kinds, we teach that
Christ, in regard thereof, is particularly termed the Head of the Church of
God; neither can any other Creature, in that sense and meaning, be termed Head,
besides him, because it imports the conduct and government of our Souls, by
the hand of that blessed Spirit wherewith we are sealed and marked, as being
peculiarly his. Him only therefore do we acknowledge to be the Lord, which
dwells, lives, and reigns in our hearts; him only to be that Head, which
gives salvation and life unto his Body; him only to be that Fountain from
whence the influence of heavenly Graces distilleth, and is derived into all
parts, whether the Word, or the Sacraments, or Discipline, or whatsoever, be
the means whereby it flows. As for the Power of administering these things in
the Church of Christ, which Power we call the Power of Order, it is indeed both
Spiritual and His; Spiritual, because such properly concerns as the Spirit:
His, because by him it was instituted. Howbeit, neither Spiritual, as that
which is inwardly and invisibly exercised; nor His, as that which he himself,
in Person, does exercise. Again, that power of Dominion, which is indeed the
point of this Controversy, and does also belong to the second kind of
Spiritual Government, namely, unto that Regiment which is external and visible:
this likewise being Spiritual in regard of the manner about which it deals;
and being his, in as much as he approves whatsoever is done by it, must
notwithstanding be distinguished also from that Power whereby he himself in
Person administreth the former kind of his own Spiritual Regiment, because he
himself in Person does not administer this, we do not therefore vainly imagine,
but truly and rightly discern a Power external and visible in the Church,
exercised by men, and severed in nature from that Spiritual Power of Christ's
own Regiment; which Power is termed Spiritual, because it works secretly,
inwardly, and invisibly: His, because none does, nor can it personally
exercise, either besides, or together with him, seeing that him only we may
name our Head, in regard of His; and yet, in regard of that other Power from
this, term others also, besides him, Heads, without any contradiction at all;
which thing may very well serve for answer unto that also which they further
allege against the aforesaid distinction, namely, T. C. 1. p. 413.
That even the outward Societies and Assemblies of the Church, where one or two
are gathered together in his Name, either for hearing of the Word, or for
Prayer, or any other Church-exercise, our Savior Christ being in the midst of
them as Mediator, must be their Head: and if he be not there idle, but doing
the Office of a Head fully, it follows, that even in the outward Societies
and Meetings of the Church, no more man can be called the Head of it, seeing
that our Savior Christ doing the whole Office of the Head himself alone,
leaves nothing to men, by doing whereof they may obtain that Title. Which
Objection I take as being made for nothing but only to maintain Argument: for
they are not so far gone as to argue this in sooth and right good earnest. God
stands (says the Psalmist) in the midst of gods; if God be there present, he
must undoubtedly be present as God; if he be not there idle, but doing the
Office of a God fully, it follows, that God himself alone doing the whole
Office of a God, leaves nothing in such Assemblies to any other, by doing
whereof they may obtain so high a Name. The Psalmist therefore has spoken
amiss, T. C. l. ^. p. 413.
and does ill to call Judges, Gods. Not so; for as God has his Office
differing from theirs, and does fully discharge it even in the midst of them,
so they are not hereby excluded from all kind of Duty, for which that Name
should be given into them also, but in that Duty for which it was given them,
they are encouraged Religiously and carefully to order themselves after the
self-same manner. Our Lord and Savior being in the midst of his Church as
Head, is our comfort, without the abridgement of any one duty; for performance
whereof, others are termed Headsm another kind than he is. If there be of the
ancient Fathers, which say, That thee is but one Head of the Church, Christ;
and that the Minister that baptizeth canno^^e the Head of him that is baptized,
because Christ is the Head of the whole Church: and tat Paul could not be Head
of the Church which he planted, because Christ is the Head of the whole Body:
They understand the name of Head in such sort as we grant, that it is o^
applicable to any other, no not in relation, to the least part of the whole
Churh; he which baptizeth, baptizeth into Christ; he which converteth,
converteth into Christ; he which rules, rules for Christ. The whole Church
can have but one to be Head as Lord and Owner of all; wherefore if Christ be
Head in that kind, it follows, that no other besides can be so either to the
whole or to any part.

To call and dissolve all solemn Assemblies about the Public Affairs of the
Church.
AMongst sundry Prerogatives of Simons Dominion over the Jews, there is
reckoned, as not the least, That no man might gather any great Assembly in the
Land without him. For so the manner of Jewish Regiment had always been, that,
whether the cause for which men assembled themselves in peaceable, good, and
orderly sort were Ecclesiastical, or Civil, Supreme Authority should assemble
them; David gathered all Israel together unto Jerusalem; when the Ark was to be
removed, he assembled the Sons of Aaron and the Levites. Solomon did the like
at such time as the Temple was to be dedicated; when the Church was to be
reformed, Asa in his time did the same: The same upon like occasions was done
afterward by Ioash, Hezekiat, Josiah, and others.

The Consuls of Rome, Polyb. l. 5. demilit. ac domis^t. Romans Discipl.
Polybius affirms to have had a kind of Regal Authority, in that they might
call together the Senate and People whenever it pleased them. Seeing
therefore the Affairs of the Church and Christian Religion, are Public
Affairs, for the ordering whereof more Solemn Assemblies sometimes are of as
great importance and use, as they are for Secular Affairs: It seems no less
an act of Supreme Authority to call the one, then the other. Wherefore the
Clergy, in such wise gathered together, is an Ecclesiastical Senate, which with
us, as in former times, the chiefest Prelate at his discretion did use to
assemble; so that afterward in such considerations as have been before
specified, it seemed more meet to annex the said Prerogative to the Crown. The
plot of reformed Discipline not liking thereof so well, takes order, that
every former Assembly before it breaks up, should it self appoint both the
time and place of their After-meeting again. But, because I find not any thing
on that side particularly alleged against us herein, a longer disputation
about so plain a cause shall not need. The ancient Imperial Law forbids such
Assemblies as the Emperor's Authority did not cause to be made. Lib. 1. de Cul.
illisid. and do conventiculis, cap de Ephe. and Presbyt.
Before Emperors became Christians, the Church had never any General Synod;
their greatest Meeting consisting of Bishops, and others the gravest in each
Province. As for the Civil Governor's Authority, it suffered them only as
things not regarded, or not accounted of at such times as it did suffer them.
So that what right a Christian King has as touching Assemblies of that kind,
we are not able to judge, Hierarch. lib. 6. cap. 1.
till we come to later times, Constant. council. a rheedasio. Sardicen. coosi^ a
Con.
when Religion had won the hearts of the highest Powers. Constantine, (as
Pighius does grant) was not only the first that ever did call any General
Council together, but even the first that devised the calling of them for
consultation about the businesses of God. After he had once given the example,
his Successors a long time followed the same; in so much that St. Hierom to
disprove the Authority of a Synod, which was pretended to be general, Hieron.
cont. ^ussinum. l. 2.
uses this as a forcible Argument, Dic, quis Imperator have Synodum jusserit
convocari? Their Answer hereunto, is no Answer, which say, That the Emperors
did not this without conference had with the Bishops: for to our purpose it is
enough, if the Clergy alone did it not otherwise than by the leave and
appointment of their Sovereign Lords and Kings. Sea omen. l. 6. cap. 7. Ambros.
Epist. 5^.
Whereas therefore it is on the contrary side alleged, that Valentinian the
elder being requested by Catholic Bishops, to grant that there might be a
Synod for the ordering of matters called in question by the Arians, answered,
that he being one of the Laity, might not meddle with such matters, and
thereupon willed, that the Priests and Bishops, to whom the care of those
things belongs, should meet and consult together by themselves where they
thought good. We must, with the Emperor's speech, weigh the occasion and drift
thereof. Valentinian and Valens, the one a Catholic, the other an Arian, were
Emperors together: Valens, the Governor of the East, and Valentinian of the
West Empire. Valentinian therefore taking his Journey from the East, unto the
West parts, and passing for that intent through Thracia, there the Bishops,
which held the soundness of Christian Belief, because they knew that Valent
was their professed Enemy, and therefore if the other was once departed out of
those quarters, the Catholic Cause was like to find very small favor, moved
presently Valentinian about a Council to be assembled under the countenance of
his Authority; who by likelihood considering what inconvenience might grow
thereby, inasmuch as it could not be but a means to incense Valens the more
against them, refused himself to be Author of, or present at any such Assembly;
and of this his denial gave them a colorable reason, to wit, that he was,
although an Emperor, yet a secular Person, and therefore not able, in matters
of so great obscurity, to fit as a competent Judge. But if they which were
Bishops and learned men, did think good to consule thereof together, they
might; Whereupon, when they could not obtain that which they most desired, yet
that which he granted unto them they took, and forthwith had a Council.
Valentinian went on toward Rome, they remaining in consultation, till Valens,
which accompanied him, returned back, so that now there was no remedy, but
either to incurr a manifest contempt, or else at the hands of Valens himself,
to seek approbation of that they had done. To him therefore they became
Suitors: his Answer was short; Either Arianism, or Exile, which they would;
whereupon their Banishment ensued. Let reasonable men now therefore be Judges,
how much this example of Valentinian does make against the Authority, which we
say that Sovereign Rulers may lawfully have, as concerning Synods and Meetings
Ecclesiastical.

Of the Authority of making Laws.
THere are which wonder, that we should account any Statute a Law, which the
High Court of Parliament in England has established about the matters of
Church-Regiment; the Prince and Court of Parliament, having (as they suppose)
no more lawful means to give order to the Church and Clergy in those things,
than they have to make Laws for the Hierarchies of Angels in Heaven; That the
Parliament being a mere Temporal Court, can neither by the law of Nature, nor
of God, have competent power to define of such matters; That Supremacy in this
kind cannot belong unto Kings, as Kings, because Pagan Emperors, whose
Princely power was true Sovereignty, never challenged so much over the Church;
That Power, in this kind, cannot be the right of any Earthly Crown, Prince, or
State, in that they be Christians, forasmuch as if they be Christians, they all
owe subjection to the Pastors of their Souls, That the Prince therefore not
having it himself, cannot communicate it to the Parliament, and consequently
cannot make Laws here, or determine of the Churches Regiment by himself,
Parliament, or any other Court subjected unto him.

The Parliament of England, together with the Convocation annexed thereunto, is
that whereupon the very essence of all Government within this Kingdom does
depend, it is even the body of the whole Realm; it consists of the King, and
of all that within the Land are subject unto him. The Parliament is a Court,
not so merely Temporal, as if it might meddle with nothing but only Leather
and Wool: Those days of Queen Mary are not yet forgotten, wherein the Realm
did submit it self unto the Legate of Pope Julius, at which time, had they been
persuaded, as this man seems now to be, had they thought, that there is no
more force in Laws made by Parliament concerning Church Affairs, then if men
should take upon them to make Orders for the Hierarchies of Angels in Heaven,
they might have taken all former Statutes of that kind as cancelled, and, by
reason of nullity, abrogated. What need was there, that they should bargain
with the Cardinal, and purchase their Pardon by promise made beforehand, that
what Laws they had made, assented unto, or executed, against the Bishop of
Rome's Supremacy, the same they would, in that present Parliament, effectually
abrogate and repeal? Had they power to repeal Laws made, and none to make Laws
concerning the Regiment of the Church? Again, when they had by suit obtained
his confirmation for such Foundations of Bishoprics, Cathedral Churches,
Hospitals, Colleges, and Schools, for such Marriages before made, for such
Institutions into Livings Ecclesiastical, and for all such Judicial Processes,
as having been ordered according to the Laws before in force, but contrary unto
the Canons and Orders of the Church of Rome; were in that respect thought
defective, although the Cardinal in his Letters of Dispensation, did give
validity unto those Acts, even Apostolicae firmitatis robur, the very strength
of Apostolical solidity; A^. 1. and 2 Phil and Mar. cap. 8.
what had all these been without those grave authentical words? Be it enacted
by the Authority of this present Parliament, that all and singular Articles and
Clauses contained in the said Dispensation, shall remain and be reputed and
taken to all intents and constructions in the Laws of this Realm, lawful, good
and effectual to be alleged and pleaded in all Courts Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, for good and sufficient matter either for the Plaintiff or Defendant,
without any Allegation or Objection to be made against the validity of them, by
pretense of any General Council, Canon, or Decree to the contrary. Somewhat
belike they thought there was in this mere Temporal Court, without which the
Popes own mere Ecclesiastical Legate's Dispensation had taken small effect in
the Church of England; neither did they, or the Cardinal imagine any thing
committed against the Law of Nature, or of God, because they took order for the
Churches Affairs, and that even in the Court of Parliament. The most natural
and Religious course in making Laws, is, that the matter of them be taken from
the judgment of the wisest in those things which they are to concern. In
matters of God, to set down a form of Prayer, a solemn confession of the
Articles of the Christian Faith, and Ceremonies meet for the exercise of
Religion; It were unnatural not to think the Pastors and Bishops of our Souls a
great deal more fit, than men of Secular Trades, and Callings: Howbeit, when
all, which the wisdom of all sorts can do, is done for the devising of Laws in
the Church, it is the general consent of all that gives them the form and
vigor of Laws, without which they could be no more unto us than the Council of
Physicians to the sick. Well might they seem as wholesome admonitions and
instructions; but Laws could they never be, without consent of the whole
Church, to be guided by them; whereunto both Nature and the practice of the
Church of God set down in Scripture, is found every way so fully consonant,
that God himself would not impose, no not his own Laws, upon his People, by the
hand of Moses, without their free and open consent. Wherefore, to define and
determine, even of the Churches Affairs by way of assent and approbation, as
Laws are defined in that Right of Power, which does give them the force of
Laws; thus to define of our own Churches Regiment, the Parliament of England
has competent Authority.

Touching that Supremacy of Power which our Kings have in this case of making
Laws, it rests principally in the strength of a negative voice, which not to
give them, were to deny them that, without which they were Kings but by mere
title, and not in exercise of Dominion. Be it in Regiment Popular,
Aristocratical, or Regal, Principality rests in that Person, or those Persons
unto whom is given right of excluding any kind of Law whatsoever it be, before
establishment. This does belong unto Kings, as Kings; Pagan Emperors, even Nero
himself had no less; but much more than this in the Laws of his own Empire.
That he challenged not any interest of giving voice in the laws of the Church,
I hope no man will so construe, as if the cause were conscience, and fear to
encroach upon the Apostles right. If then it be demanded, By what right from
Constantine downward, the Christian Emperors did so far intermeddle with the
Churches affairs, I^dem quod Principi placult, Legis habet vigorem. Inst. ^^ J.
N. G. and C.
either we must herein condemn them, as being over presumptuously bold, or else
judge that, by a Law, which is termed Regia, that is to say, Regal, the People
having derived unto their Emperors their whole power for making of Laws, and by
that means his Edicts being made Laws, what matter soever they did concern, as
Imperial dignity endowed them with competent Authority and power to make Laws
for Religion, so they were thought by Christianity to use their Power, being
Christians, unto the benefit of the Church of Christ was there any Christian
Bishop in the world which did then judge this repugnant unto the dutiful
subjection which Christians do ow to the Pastors of their Souls, to whom, in
respect of their Sacred Order, it is not by us, neither may be denied, that
Kings and Princes are as much, as the very meanest that lives under them,
bound in conscience to show themselves gladly and willingly obedient, receiving
the Seals of Salvation, the blessed Sacraments at their hands, as at the hands
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with all reverence, not disdaining to be taught and
admonished by them, nor withholding from them as much as the least part of
their due and decent honor? All which, for any thing that has been alleged,
may stand very well without resignation of Supremacy of Power in making Laws,
even Laws concerning the most Spiritual Affairs of the Church; which Laws being
made amongst us, are not by any of us so taken or interpreted, as if they did
receive their force from power, which the Prince does communicate unto the
Parliament, or unto any other Court under him, but from Power which the whole
Body of the Realm being naturally possessed with, has by free and deliberate
assent derived unto him that rules over them, so far forth as has been
declared; so that our Laws made concerning Religion, do take originally their
essence from the power of the whole Realm and Church of England, than which,
nothing can be more consonant unto the law of Nature and the will of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

T.C. l.1. p. 192.
To let these go, and return to our own Men; Ecclesiastical Governors, they
say, may not meddle with making of Civil Laws, and of Laws for the
Commonwealth; nor the Civil Magistrate, high or low, with making of Orders for
the Church. It seems unto me very strange, that these men, which are in no
cause more vehement and fierce than where they plead, that Ecclesiastical
Persons may not (...) be Lords, should hold, that the power of making
Ecclesiastical Laws, which thing of all other is most proper unto Dominion,
belongs to none but Ecclesiastical Persons only: Their oversight grows
herein for want of exact observation, what it is to make a Law. Tully, speaking
of the Law of Nature, says, That thereof God himself was Inventor,
Disceptator, Lator, the Deviser, the Discusser, and Deliverer: wherein he
plainly alludeth unto the chiefest parts which then did appertain to his
Public action. For when Laws were made, the first thing was to have them
devised; thesecond to sift them with as much exactness of Judgment as any way
might be used; the next by solemn voice of Sovereign Authority to pass them,
and give them the force of Laws. It cannot in any reason seem otherwise than
most fit, that unto Ecclesiastical Persons the care of devising Ecclesiastical
Laws be committed, even as the care of Civil unto them which are in those
Affairs most skilful. This takes not away from Ecclesiastical Persons, all
right of giving voice with others, when Civil Laws are proposed for Regiment of
the Commonwealth, whereof themselves, though now the World would have them
annihilated, are notwithstanding as yet a part; much less does it cut off that
part of the power of Princes, whereby, as they claim, so we know no reasonable
cause wherefore we may not grant them, without offense to Almighty God, so much
Authority in making all manner of Laws within their own Dominions, that neither
Civil, nor Ecclesiastical do pass without their Royal assent.

In devising and discussing of Laws, Wisdom especially is required; but that
which establishes them, and makes them, is Power; even Power of Dominion; the
Chiefty whereof (amongst us) rests in the Person of the King. Is there any
Law of Christ's, which forbids Kings and Rulers of the Earth to have such
Sovereign and Supreme Power in the making of Laws, either Civil or
Ecclesiastical? If there be, our controversy hathan end. Christ, in his
Church, has not appointed any such Law, concerning Temporal Power, as God did
of old unto the Commonwealth of Israel; but leaving that to be at the World's
free choice, his chiefest care is, that the Spiritual Law of the Gospel might
be published far and wide. They that received the Law of Christ, were, for a
long time, People scattered in sundry Kingdoms, Christianity not exempting them
from the Laws which they had been subject unto, saving only in such cases as
those Laws did enjoin that which the Religion of Christ did forbid: Hereupon
grew their manifold Persecutions throughout all places where they lived; as often
as it thus came to pass, there was no possibility that the Emperors and Kings
under whom they lived, should meddle any whit at all with making Laws for the
Church. From Christ, therefore, having received Power, who doubts, but as
they did, so they might bind them to such Orders as seemed fittest for the
maintenance of their Religion, without the leave of high or low in the
Commonwealth; for as much as in Religion it was divided utterly from them, and
they from it. But when the mightiest began to like of the Christian Faith; by
their means, whole Free-States and Kingdoms became obedient unto Christ. Now
the question is, Whether Kings, by embracing Christianity, do thereby receive
any such Law as takes from them the weightiest part of that Sovereignty which
they had even when they were Heathens: Whether, being Infidels, they might do
more in causes of Religion, than now they can by the Laws of God, being true
Believers. For, whereas in Regal States, the King or Supreme Head of the
Commonwealth, had, before Christianity, a supreme stroke in making of Laws for
Religion; he must by embracing Christian Religion utterly deprive himself
thereof, and in such causes become subject unto his Subjects, having even
within his own Dominions them whose commandment he must obey; unless his Power
be placed in the Head of some foreign Spiritual Potentate: so that either a
foreign or domestical Commander upon Earth, he must admit more now, than before
he had, and that in the chiefest things whereupon Commonwealths do stand. But
apparent it is unto all men which are not Strangers unto the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ, that no State of the World receiving Christianity, is, by any Law
therein contained, bound to resign the Power which they lawfully held before:
but over what Persons, and in what causes soever the same has been in force,
it may so remain and continue still. That which, as Kings, they might do in
matters of Religion, and did in matter of false Religion, being Idolatrous and
Superstitious Kings, the same they are now even in every respect fully
authorized to do in all affairs pertinent to the state of true Christian
Religion. And, T.C. l. 3. p. 51.
concerning the Supreme Power of making Laws for all Persons, in all causes to
be guided by, it is not to be let pass, that the head Enemies of this Headship
are constrained to acknowledge the King endued even with this very Power, so
that he may and ought to exercise the same, taking order for the Church and her
affairs, of what nature of kind soever, in case of necessity: as when there is
no lawful Ministry, which they interpret then to be (and this surely is a point
very remarkable,) wheresoever the Ministry is wicked. A wicked Ministry is no
lawful Ministry; and in such sort no lawful Ministry, that, what does belong
unto them as Ministers by right of their calling, the same to be annihilated in
respect of their bad qualities; their wickedness in it self a deprivation of
right to deal in the affairs of the Church, and a warrant for others to deal in
them which are held to be of a clean other Society, the Members whereof have
been before so peremptorily for ever excluded from power of dealing for ever
with affairs of the Church. They which once have learned thoroughly this Lesson,
will quickly be capable perhaps of another equivalent unto it. For the
wickedness of the Ministry transfers their right unto the King; In case the
King be as wicked as they, to whom then shall the right descend? There is no
remedy, all must come by devolution at length, even as the Family of Brown will
have it, unto the godly among the people, for confusion unto the wise and the
great, by the poor and the simple: Some Kniper doling, with his retinue, must
take this work of the Lord in hand; and the making of Church-Laws and Orders,
must prove to be their right in the end: If not for love of the truth, yet for
shame of gross absurdities, let these contentions and stifling fancies be
abandoned. The cause which moved them for a time to hold a wicked Ministry no
lawful Ministry; and in this defect of a lawful Ministry, authorized Kings to
make Laws and Orders for the Affairs of the Church, till it were well
established, is surely this. First, They see that whereas the continual dealing
of the Kings of Israel in the Affairs of the Church, does make now very strong
against them, the burden whereof they shall in time well enough shake off, if
it may be obtained, that it is indeed lawful for Kings to follow these holy
examples; howbeit no longer than during the case of necessity, while the
wickedness, and in respect thereof, the unlawfulness of the Ministry does
continue. Secondly, They perceive right well, that unless they should yield
Authority unto Kings in case of such supposed necessity, the Discipline they
urge were clean excluded, as long as the Clergy of England, does thereunto
remain opposite. To open therefore a door for her entrance, there is no remedy
but the Tenet must be this: That now when the Ministry of England is
universally wicked, and in that respect has lost all Authority, and is become
no lawful Ministry, no such Ministry as has the right, which otherwise
should belong unto them if they were virtuous and godly, as their Adversaries
are; in this necessity the King may do somewhat for the Church: that which we
do imply in the name of Headship, he may both have and exercise till they be
entered, which will disburthen and ease him of it: till they come, the King is
licensed to hold that Power which we call Headship. But what afterward? In a
Church ordered, T.C. l. 1. p. 19.
that which the Supreme Magistrate has to do, is to see that the Laws of God
touching his Worship, and touching all matters and orders of the Church, be
executed and duly observed; to see that every Ecclesiastical Person do that
Office whereunto he is appointed, to punish those that fail in their Office.
Apol. ^. 40. p. 4
In a word, that which Allain himself acknowledges unto the Earthly power
which God has given him, it does belong to defend the Laws of the Church; to
cause them to be executed, and to punish Rebels and Transgressors of the same:
on all sides therefore it is confessed, that to the King belongs power of
maintaining the Laws made for Church-Regiment, and of causing them to be
observed; but Principality of Power in making them, which is the thing we
attribute unto Kings, this both the one sort, and the other do withstand.

Power to command all Persons, and to be over all Judges in Causes
Ecclesiastical.
Touching the Kings supereminent authority in commanding, and in judging of
Causes Ecclesiastical; First, to explain therein our meaning, It has been
taken as if we did hold, that Kings may prescribe what themselves think good to
be done in the service of God: how the Word shall be taught, how the Sacraments
administered; that Kings may personally sit in the Consistory where the Bishops
do, hearing and determining what Causes soever do appertain unto the Church;
That Kings and Queens in their own proper Persons, are by Judicial Sentence to
decide the Questions which do rise about matters of Faith and Christian
Religion; That Kings may excommunicate; Finally, That Kings may do whatsoever
is incident unto the Office and Duty of an Ecclesiastical Judge. Which opinion,
because we account as absurd, as they who have fathered the same upon us, we do
them to wit, that this is our meaning and no otherwise: There is not within
this Realm an Ecclesiastical Officer, that may by the Authority of his own
place, command universally throughout the Kings Dominions: but they of this
People, whom one may command, are to another commandment unsubject. Only the
Kings Royal Power is of so large compass, that no man, commanded by him
according to the order of Law, can plead himself to be without the bounds and
limits of that Authority. Isay, according to order of Law, because that with us
the highest have thereunto so tied themselves, that, otherwise than so, they
take not upon them to command any. And, that Kings should be in such sort
Supreme Commanders over all men, we hold it requisite, as well for the ordering
of Spiritual, as Civil Affairs; in as much as without universal Authority in
this kind, they should not be able when need is, to do as virtuous Kings have
done. Josiah, 2 Chronicles 24. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
parposing to renew the House of the Lord, assembled the Priests and Levites;
and when they were together, gave them their charge, saying: Go out unto the
Cities of Judah, and gather of Israel money to repair the House of the Lord
from year to year, and haste the things: But the Levites hastened not. Therefore
the King commanded Jehoida, the Chief-priest, and said unto him; Why have thou
not required of the Levites, to bring in out of Judah and Jerusalem, the Tax of
Moses, the Servant of the Lord, and of the Congregation of Israel, for the
Tabernacle of the Testimony? For wicked Athalia, and her Children brake up the
House of the Lord God, and all the things that were dedicated for the House of
the Lord, did they bestow upon Balaam. Therefore the King commanded, and they
made a Chest, and set it at the Gate of the House of the Lord without, and they
made a Proclamation through Judah and Jerusalem, ^ Chron. 6.30 ^.
to bring unto the Lord, the Tax of Moses the Servant of the Lord, laid upon
Israel in the Wilderness. Could either he have done this, or after him Ezekias
the like concerning the celebration of the Passover, but that all sorts of men
in all things did owe unto these their Sovereign Rulers, the same obedience,
which sometimes Iosuah had them by vow and promise bound unto? Jos. 1. 18.
Whosoever shall rebel against thy Commandments, and will not obey thy words in
all thou command him, let him be put to death: only be strong and of a good
courage. Furthermore, Judgment Ecclesiastical we say is necessary for decision
of Controversies rising between man and man, and for correction of faults
committed in the Affairs of God: unto the due execution whereof there are three
things necessary, Laws, Judges, and Supreme Governors of Judgments. What
Courts there shall be, and what causes shall belong unto each Court, and what
Judges shall determine of every cause, and what Order in all Judgments shall
be kept; of these things the Laws have sufficiently disposed, so that his duty
who sits in any such Court, is to judge, not of, but after the same Law,
Just. de O^f. c. ^ud.
Imprimis illud observare debet Iudex, ne aliter judicet quam legibus,
constitutionibus, aut moribus proditum est, ut Imperator Iustinianaus; which
Laws (for we mean the positive Laws of our Realm, concerning Ecclesiastical
Affairs) if they otherwise dispose of any such thing, than according to the Law
of Reason, and of God, we must both acknowledge them to be amiss, and endeavor
to have them reformed: But touching that point, what may be objected, shall
after appear. Our Judges in Causes Ecclesiastical, are either Ordinary or
Commissionary; Ordinary, those whom we term Ordinaries; and such, by the Laws
of this Land, are none but Prelates only, whose Power to do that which they
do, is in themselves, and belonging to the nature of their Ecclesiastical
calling. In Spiritual Causes, a Lay-Person may be no Ordinary; a Commissionary
Judge, there is no let but that he may be; and, that our Laws do evermore
referr the ordinary Judgment of Spiritual Causes unto Spiritual Persons, such
as are termed Ordinaries, no man which knows any thing of the Practice of
this Realm, can easily be ignorant. Now, besides them which are Authorized to
judge in several Territories, there is required an universal Power which
reaches over all, imparting Supreme Authority of Government, over all Courts,
all Judges, all Causes; the operation of which Power, is as well to strengthen,
maintain, and uphold particular Jurisdictions, which happily might else be of
small effect: as also to remedy that which they are not able to help, and to
redress that wherein they at any time do otherwise than they ought to do. This
Power being sometime in the Bishop of Rome, who, by sinister Practices had
drawn it into his hands, was, for just considerations, by Public consent
annexed unto the Kings Royal Seat and Crown; from thence the Authors of
Reformation would translate it into their National Assemblies or Synods, which
Synods are the only helps which they think lawful to use against such Evils in
the Church, as particular Jurisdictions are not sufficient to redress. Eliz
cap. 1.
In which Cause, our Laws have provided, that the Kings supereminent Authority
and Power shall serve: As namely, when the whole Ecclesiastical State, or the
Principal Persons therein, do need Visitation and Reformation; when in any part
of the Church, Errors, Schisms, Herusies, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts,
Enormities, are grown; which men, in their several Jurisdictions, either do
not, or cannot help. Whatsoever any Spiritual Authority and Power (such as
Legates from the Sea of Rome did sometimes exercise) has done or might
heretofore have done, for the remedies of those Evils in lawful sort, (that is
to say, without the violation of the Laws of God, or Nature, in the deed done)
as much in every degree our Laws have fully granted, that the King for ever may
do, not only be setting Ecclesiastical Synods on work, that the thing may be
their Act, and the King their Motioner unto it, for so much perhaps the Masters
of the Reformation will grant: but by Commissions few or many, who having the
Kings Letters Patents, may, in the virtue thereof, execute the premises as
Agents in the right, not of their own peculiar and ordinary, but of his
supereminent Power. When men are wronged by inferior Judges, or have any just
cause to take exception against them; their way for Redress, is to make their
Appeal; and Appeal is a present delivery of him which makes it, out of the
hands of their Power and Jurisdictions from whence it is made. Pope Alexander
having sometimes the King of England at advantage, caused him, amongst other
things, to agree, that as many of his Subjects as would, Mach^avil. Hist.
Florent. 1. ^.
might have appeal to the Court of Rome. And thus (says one) that whereunto a
mean Person at this day would scorn to submit himself, so great a King was
content to he subject to. Notwithstanding, even when the Pope (says he) had so
great Authority amongst Princes which were far off, the Romans he could not
frame to obedience, nor was able to obtain that himself might abide at Rome,
though promising not to meddle with other than Ecclesiastical Affairs. So much
are things that terrify, more feared by such as behold them aloof off than at
hand. Reformers I doubt not in some Causes will admit Appeals, but Appeals made
to their Synods; even as the Church of Rome does allow of them, so they be made
to the Bishop of Rome. 15 Hen. ^ c. 15
As for that kind of Appeal which the English Laws do approve from the Judge
of any certain particular Court unto the King, as the only Supreme Governor
on Earth, who, by his Delegates, may give a final definitive Sentence, from
which no farther Appeal can be made: Will their Platform allow of this?
Surely, forasmuch as in that estate which they all dream of, the whole Church
must be divided into Parishes, in which none can have greater or less Authority
and Power than another; again, the King himself must be but a common Member in
the Body of his own Parish, and the causes of that only Parish, must be by the
Officers thereof determinable: In case the King had so much favor or
preferment, as to be made one of those Officers (for otherwise by their
positions, he were not to meddle any more than the meanest amongst his
Subjects, with the Judgment of any Ecclesiastical Cause) how is it possible
they should allow of Appeals to be made from any other abroad to the King? To
receive Appeals from all other Judges, belongs to the highest in power of
all, and to be in power over All (as touching Judgment in Ecclesiastical
Causes) this, as they think, belongs only to Synods. Whereas therefore, with
us, Kings do exercise over all Things, Persons, and Causes Supreme Power, both
of voluntary and litigious Jurisdictions^ so that according to the one they
incite, reform, and command; according to the other, they judge universally,
doing both in far other sort than such as have ordinary Spiritual power;
oppugned we are herein by some colorable show of Argument, as if to grant thus
much to any Secular Person, it were unreasonable: For since it is (say they)
apparent out of the Chronicles, T.C. l 3. p. 1^4. 2 Chronicles. 19.5. Heb. 5. 1.
that judgment in Church Matters pertains to God; Seeing likewise it is
evident out of the Apostles, that the High Priest is set over those matters in
Gods behalf: It must needs follow, that the Principality or direction of the
Judgment of them, is, by Gods ordinance, appertaining to the High Priest, and
consequently to the Ministry of the Church; and if it be by Gods Ordinance
appertaining unto them, how can it be translated from them to the Civil
Magistrate? Which Argument, briefly drawn into form, lies thus: That which
belongs unto God, may not be translated unto any other, but whom he has
appointed to have it in his behalf: But principality of Judgment in
Church Matters appertains unto God, which has appointed the High Priest, and
consequently the Ministry of the Church alone, to have it in his behalf, Ergo,
it may not from them be translated to the Civil Magistrate. The first of which
Propositions we grant, as also in the second that branch which ascribes unto
God Principality in Church Matters. But, that either he did appoint none, but
only the High Priest to exercise the said Principality for him; or that the
Ministry of the Church may in reason from thence be concluded to have alone the
same Principality by his appointment, these two Points we deny utterly. For,
concerning the High Priest, there is, first, no such Ordinance of God to be
found: Every High Priest (says the Apostle) is taken from amongst men, and is
ordained for men in things pertaining to God; Whereupon it may well be
gathered, that the Priest was indeed Ordained of God, to have Power in things
appertaining unto God: For the Apostle does there mention the Power of offering
Gifts and Sacrifices for Sin, which kind of Power, was not only given of God
unto Priests, but restrained unto Priests only. The power of Jurisdiction and
ruling Authority, this also God gave them, but not them alone: For it is held,
as all men know, that others of the Laity were herein joined by the Law with
them. But, concerning Principality in Church Affairs, (for of this our Question
is, and of no other) the Priest neither had it alone, nor at all, but in
Spiritual or Church Affairs, (as has been already showed) it was the Royal
Prerogative of Kings only. Again, though it were so, that God had appointed the
High Priest to have the said Principality of Government in those matters; yet
how can they who allege this, enforce thereby, that consequently the Ministry
of the Church, and no other ought to have the same, when they are so far off
from allowing so much to the Ministry of the Gospel, as the Priesthood of the
Law had by God's appointment: That we but collecting thereout a difference in
Authority and Jurisdiction amongst the Clergy, to be for the Polity of the
Church not inconvenient; they forthwith think to close up our mouths by
answering, That the Jewish High Priest, had authority above the rest, only in
that they prefigured the Sovereignty of Jesus Christ; As for the Ministers of
the Gospel, it is altogether unlawful to give them as much as the least Title,
any syllable whereof may sound to Principality. And of the Regency which may be
granted, they hold others even of the Laity, no less capable than the Pastors
themselves. How shall these things cleave together? The truth is, that they
have some reason to think it not at all of the fittest for Kings, to sit as
ordinary Judges in matters of Faith and Religion. An ordinary Judge must be of
the quality which in a Supreme Judge is not necessary; Because the Person of
the one is charged with that which the other Authority discharges, without
employing personally himself therein. It is an Error to think, that the King's
Authority can have no force nor power in the doing of that which himself may
not personally do. For first, impossible it is, that at one and the same time,
the King in Person should order so many, and so different affairs, as by his
own power every where present, are wont to be ordered both in peace and war,
at home and abroad. Again, the King in regard of his nonage or minority, may be
unable to perform that thing wherein years of discretion are requisite for
personal action; and yet his authority even then be of force. For which cause
we say, that the King's authority dies not, but is, and works always alike.
Sundry considerations there may be, effectual to withold the King's Person
from being a doer of that which notwithstanding his Power must give force unto,
even in Civil affairs; where nothing does more either concern the duty, or
better beseem the Majesty of Kings, than personally to administer Justice to
their People (as most famous Princes have done;) yet if it be in case of Felony
of Treason, the Learned in the Laws of this Realm do affirm, that well may the
King commit his Authority to another, Stanf. Pleas of the Crown, l. 1. c. 3.
to judge between him and the Offender; but the King being himself there a
Party, he cannot personally sit to give Judgment.

As therefore the Person of the King may, for just considerations, even where
the cause is Civil, be notwithstanding withdrawn from occupying the Seat of
Judgment, and others under his Authority be fit, he unfit himself to judge; so
the considerations for which it were happily no: convenient for Kings to sit and
give Sentence in Spiritual Courts, where Causes Ecclesiastical are usually
debated, can be no bar to that force and efficacy which their Sovereign Power
has over those very Consistories, and for which we hold, without any
exception, that all Courts are the Kings. All men are not for all things
sufficient, and therefore Public affairs being divided, such Persons must be
authorized Judges in each kind, as Common reason may presume to be most fit.
Which cannot of Kings and Princes ordinarily be presumed in Causes merely,
Ecclesiastical; so that even Common sense does rather adjudge this burden unto
other men. We see it hereby a thing necessary, to put a difference, as well
between that Ordinary Jurisdiction which belongs unto the Clergy alone, and
that Commissionary wherein others are for just considerations appointed to join
with them, as also between both these Jurisdictions; And a third, whereby the
King has transcendent Authority, and that in all Causes over both. Why this
may not lawfully be granted unto him, there is no reason. A time there was when
Kings were not capable of any such Power, as namely, when they professed
themselves open Enemies unto Christ and Christianity. A time there followed,
when they, being capable, took sometimes more, sometimes less to themselves, as
seemed best in their own eyes, because no certainty, touching their right, was
as yet determined. The Bishops, who alone were before accustomed to have the
ordering of such Affairs, saw very just cause of grief, when the highest,
favoring Heresy, withstood, by the strength of Sovereign Authority, Religious
proceedings. Whereupon they oftentimes, against this unresistable power,
pleaded the use and custom, which had been to the contrary; namely, that the
affairs of the Church should be dealt in by the Clergy, and by no other; unto
which purpose, the sentences that then were uttered in defense of unabolished
Orders and Laws, against such as did, of their own heads, contrary thereunto;
are now altogether impertinently brought in opposition against them, who use
but that Power which Laws have given them, unless men can show, that there is
in those Laws some manifest iniquity or injustice. T. C. l. 3. p. 155.
Whereas therefore against the force Judicial and Imperial, which Supreme
Authority has, it is alleged, how Constantine terms Church Officers,
Overseers of things within the Church; himself, of those without the Church:
how Augustine witnesses, Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 4. Ep. 162, 165.
that the Emperor not daring to judge of the Bishop's Cause, committed it to
the Bishops; and was to crave pa^^^on of the Bishops, for that by the Donatists
importunity, which made no end to appealing unto him, he was, being weary of
them, drawn to give sentence in a matter of theirs; how Hilary beseeches the
Emperor Constance, to provide that the Governors of his Provinces should not
presume to take upon them the Judgment of Ecclesiastical Causes, to whom only
Commonwealth matters belonged; Lib. 5. ep. 33.
how Ambrose affirms, that Palaces belong unto the Emperor, Churches to the
Minister; That the Emperor has the authority over the Common-walls of the
City, and not in holy things; for which cause he never would yield to have the
Causes of the Church debated in the Princes Consistories, but excused himself
to the Emperor Valentinian, for that being convented to answer concerning
Church Matters in a Civil Court, he came not: We may by these testimonies drawn
from Antiquity, if wellst to consider them, discern how requisite it is that
Authority should always follow received Laws in the manner of proceeding. For,
inasmuch as there was at the first no certain Law, determining what force the
principal Civil Magistrates authority should be of, how far it should reach,
and what order it should observe; but Christian Emperors from time to time did
what themselves thought most reasonable in those affairs; by this means it
comes to pass that they in their practice vary, and are not uniform. Virtuous
Emperors, such as Constantine the Great was, made conscience to swerve
unnecessarily from the custom which had been used in the Church, even when it
lived under Infidels; Constantine, of reverence to Bishops, and their Spiritual
Authority, rather abstained from that which himself might lawfully do, than was
willing to claim a Power, not fit or decent for him to exercise. The Order
which has been before, he ratifieth, exhorting the Bishops to look to the
Church, and promising, that he would do the Office of a Bishop over the
Commonwealth; which very Constantine notwithstanding, did not thereby so
renounce all Authority in judging of Special Causes, but that sometime he took,
as St. Augustine witnesses, even personal cognition of them; howbeit, whether
as purposing to give therein judicially any Sentence, I stand in doubt; for if
the other of whom St. Augustine elsewhere speaks, did, in such sort, judge,
surely there was cause why he should excuse it as a thing not usually done.
Otherwise there is no let, but that any such great Person may hear those
Causes to and fro debated, and deliver in the end his own opinion of them,
declaring on which side himself does judge that the truth is. But this kind of
Sentence binds no side to stand thereunto; it is a Sentence of private
persuasion, and not of solemn jurisdiction, albeit a King, or an Emperor
pronounce it: Again, on the contrary part, when Governors infected with
Heresy were possessed of the Highest Power, they thought they might use it as
pleased themselves, to further by all means that opinion which they desired
should prevail, they not respecting at all what was meet, presumed to command
and judge all men, in all Causes, without either care of orderly proceeding, or
regard to such Laws and Customs as the Church had been wont to observe. So that
the one sort feared to do even that which they might; and that which the other
ought not, they boldly presumed upon; the one sort, of modesty, excused
themselves where they scarce needed; the other, though doing that which was
inexcusable, bare it out with main power, not enduring to be told by any man
how far they roved beyond their bounds. So great odds was between them whom
before we mentioned, and such as the younger Valentinian, by whom St. Ambrose
being commanded to yield up one of the Churches under him unto the Arrians,
whereas they which were sent on his Message, alleged, That the Emperor did
but use his own right, forasmuch as all things were in his power: The Answer
which the holy Bishop gave them, was, That the Church is the House of God, and
that those things that are Gods are not to be yielded up, and disposed of it at
the Emperors will and pleasure; His Palaces he might grant to whomsoever he
pleases, but Gods own Habitation not so. A cause why many times Emperors do
more by their absolute Authority than could very well stand with reason, was
the overgreat importunity of wicked Heretics, who being Enemies to Peace and
Quietness, cannot otherwise than by violent means be supported.

In this respect therefore we must needs think the state of our own Church much
better settled than theirs was; because our Laws have with far more certainty
prescribed bounds unto each kind of Power. All decision of things doubtful,
and correction of things amiss are proceeded in by order of Law, what Person
soever he be unto whom the administration of Judgment belongs. It is neither
permitted unto Prelates nor Prince to judge and determine at their own
discretion, but Law has prescribed what both shall do. What Power the King
has, he has it by Law, the bounds and limits of it are known, the entire
Community gives general order by Law, how all things publicly are to be done,
and the King, as the Head thereof, the Highest in Authority over all, causes,
according to the same law, every particular to be framed and ordered thereby.
The whole Body Politic makes Laws, which Laws gave Power unto the King, and
the King having bound himself to use according unto Law that power, it so
falls out, that the execution of the one is accomplished by the other in most
religious and peaceable sort. There is no cause given unto any to make
supplication, as Hilary did, that Civil Governors, to whom
Common-wealth-matters only belong, may not presume to take upon them the
Judgment of Ecclesiastical causes. If the cause be Spiritual, Secular Courts
do not meddle with it; we need not excuse our selves with Ambrose, but boldly
and lawfully we may refuse to answer before any Civil Judge in a matter which
is not Civil, so that we do not mistake either the nature of the Cause, or of
the Court, as we easily may do both, without some better direction than can be
by the rules of this newfound Discipline. But of this most certain we are,
that our Laws do neither suffer a See the Secture of Edw. 1. and Edw. 2. and
Not. Brev. touching Prohibition. See also in Bracton these Sentences, l. ^. c.
2. Est Jurisdictio onlinaria quae lam delegata, quae pertinet ad Sacer dotium,
and Forum Ecclesiasticum, sicut in causi^ Spiritualibus and Spiritualitari
annexis. Est etiam alia Jurisdictio o^linaria vel delegata quae pertinet a
Coronam, and dignitatem Regis and ad Regnum in causis and placitk rerum
temporalinm ^^o seculari. Again, Cum diversae sint hinc inde jurisdictiones,
and diversi Judices, and diversae causae. debet quibber ipsorum inprim ^
aestimare, an sua sit jurisdictio, ne falcem videatur ponere in Mestem altenam.
Again, Non pertinet ad Regem injungere: poenicentias nic adjudicem secularem,
necetiam ad cos pertinet cognoscire de lis quae lunt Spiritualibus annexa,
sicut de decimis and aliis Ecclesiae proven^ionibus. Again, Non est Lacins
conveniendus coram Judiae Ecclesiastico de aliquo quo lin soro seculari
terminari possit and de beat.
Spiritual Court to entertain those Causes which by the Law are Civil; nor yet,
if the matter be indeed Spiritual, a mere Civil Court to give Judgment of it.
Touching Supreme Power therefore to command all men, and in all manner of
causes of Judgment to be highest, let thus much suffice as well for
declaration of our own meaning, as for defense of the truth therein.

The cause is not like when such Assemblies are gathered together by Suream
Authority concerning other affairs of the Church, and when they meet about the
making of Ecclesiastical Laws or Statutes. For in the one they are only to
advise, in the other to decree. The Persons which are of the one, the King does
voluntarily assemble, as being in respect of quality fit to consult withal;
them which are of the other, he calls by prescript of Law, as having right to
be thereunto called. Finally, the one are but themselves, and their Sentence
has but the weight of their own Judgment; the other represent the whole
Clergy, and their voices are as much as if all did give personal verdict. Now
the question is, Whether the Clergy alone so assembled, ought to have the whole
power of making Ecclesiastical Laws, or else consent of the Laity, may
thereunto be made necessary, and the King's assent so necessary, that his sole
denial may be of force to stay them from being Laws.

If they with whom we dispute were uniform, What Laws may be made for the
affairs of the Church and to whom the power of making them appertains.
strong and constant in that which they say, we should not need to trouble our
selves about their Persons, to whom the power of making Laws for the Church
belongs: for they are sometime very vehement in contention, that from the
greatest thing unto the least about the Church, all must needs be immediately
from God. And to this they apply the pattern of the ancient Tabernacle which
God delivered unto Moses, and was therein so exact, that there was not left as
much as the least pin for the wit of man to devise in the framing of it. To
this they also apply that straight and severe charge which God soosten gave
concerning his own Law, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. and 4. 2. Josh. 1. 7.
Whatsoever I command you, take heed ye do it; Thou shall put nothing thereto,
thou shall take nothing from it: Nothing, whether it be great or small. Yet
sometimes bethinking themselves better, they speak as acknowledging that it
does suffice to have received in such sort the principal things from God, and
that for other matters the Church had sufficient authority to make Laws;
whereupon they now have made it a question, What Persons they are whose right
it is to take order for the Churches affairs, when the institution of any new
thing therein is requisite. Law may be requisite to be made either concerning
things that are only to be known and believed in, or else touching that which
is to be done by the Church of God. The Law of Nature, Thom. l. 8. quael. 108.
^^^. 2.
and the Law of God, are sufficient for declaration in both what belongs unto
each man separately, as his Soul is the Spouse of Christ, yea so sufficient,
that they plainly and fully show, whatsoever God does require by way of
necessary introduction unto the state of everlasting bliss. But as a man lives
joined with others in common society, and belongs to the outward Politic
Body of the Church, albeit the same Law of Nature and Scripture have in this
respect also made manifest the things that are of greatest necessity;
nevertheless, by reason of new occasions still arising, which the Church,
having care of Souls, must take order for as need requires, hereby it comes
to pass, that there is, and ever will be, so great use even of Human Laws and
Ordinances, deducted by way of discourse as a conclusion from the former Divine
and Natural, serving as Principals thereunto. No man doubts, but that for
matters of Action and Practice in the Affairs of God, for manner in Divine
Service, for order in Ecclesiastical proceedings about the Regiment of the
Church, there may be oftentimes cause very urgent to have Laws made: but the
reason is not so plain, wherefore Human laws should appoint men what to
believe. Wherefore in this we must note two things: 1. That in matters of
opinion, the Law does not make that to be truth which before was not, as in
matter of Action is causes that to be a duty, which was not before; but
manifests only and gives men notice of that to be truth, the contrary
whereunto they ought not before to have believed. 2. That opinions do cleave to
the understanding, and are in heat assented unto, it is not in the power of any
Human law to command them, because to prescribe what men shall think belongs
only unto God: Cord creditur, ore fit confessio, says the Apostle. As
opinions are either fit, or inconvenient to be professed, so man's laws has to
determine of them. It may for Public unities sake require men's professed
assent, or prohibit their contradiction to special Articles, wherein, as there
happily has been Controversy what is true, so the same were like to continue
still, not without grievous detriment unto a number of Souls; except Law, to
remedy that evil, should set down a certainty, which no man afterward is to
gainsay. Wherefore, as in regard of Divine laws, which the Church receives
from God, we may unto every man apply those words of wisdom in Solomon, Prove. 6.
My Son keep thou thy Fathers Precepts; Conserva, Fili mi, praecepta Patris
tui: even so concerning the Statutes and Ordinances which the Church it self
makes, we may add thereunto the words that follow, Etut, dimitt as legem Matris
tuae, And forsake thou not thy Mothers law.

It is a thing even undoubtedly natural, that all free and Independent
Societies should themselves make their own Laws, and that this power should
belong to the whole, not to any certain part of a Politic body, though happily
some one part may have greater sway in that action than the rest, which thing
being generally fit and expedient in the making of all Laws, we see no cause
why to think otherwise in Laws, concerning the service of God, which in all
well-ordered States and Commonwealths, is the (...) Archit. de leg. and
Instit. That is; it behooves the Law first to so establish or settle those
things which belong to the Gods, and Divine Powers, and to our Parents, and
universally those things which be virtuous and honorable. In the second place,
those things that be convenient and profitable; for it is fit, that matters of
the less weight should come after the greater.
first thing that Law has care to provide for. When we speak of the right
which naturally belongs to a Commonwealth, we speak of that which must needs
belong to the Church of God. For if the Commonwealth be Christian, if the
People which are of it do publicly embrace the true Religion, this very thing
does make it the Church, as has been showed. So that unless the verity and
purity of Religion do take from them which embrace it, that power wherewith
otherwise they are possessed; look what authority, as touching laws for
Religion, a Commonwealth has simply, it must of necessity being of the
Christian Religion.

It will be therefore perhaps alleged, that a part of the verity of Christian
Religion is to hold the power of making Ecclesiastical Laws a thing
appropriated unto the Clergy in their Synods; and whatsoever is by their only
voices agreed upon, it needs no further approbation to give unto it the
strength of a Law, as may plainly appear by the Canons of that first most
venerable Assembly: where, those things the Apostle and James had concluded,
Acts 15. 7,13, 23.
were afterward published and imposed upon the Churches of the Gentiles abroad
as Laws, the Records thereof remaining still the Book of God for a testimony,
that the power of making Ecclesiastical Laws, belongs to the Successors of
the Apostles, the Bishops and Prelates of the Church of God.

To this we answer, That the Council of Jerusalem is no Argument for the power
of the Clergy to make Laws; For first there has not been sithence, any Council
of like authority to that in Jerusalem: Secondly, The cause why that was of
such authority, came by a special accident: Thirdly, The reason why other
Councels being not like unto that in nature, the Clergy in them should have no
power to make Laws by themselves alone, is in truth so forcible, that, except
some Commandment of God to the contrary can be showed, it ought,
notwithstanding the foresaid example, to prevail.

The Decrees of the Council of Jerusalem, were not as the Canons of other
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, Human, but, very Divine Ordinances: for which cause
the Churches were far and wide commanded every where to see them kept, no
otherwise than if Christ himself had personally on Earth been the Author of
them. Acts 15. 4.
The cause why that Council was of so great Authority and credit above all
others which have been sithence, is expressed in those words of principal
observation. Unto the Holy Ghost, and to us it has seemed good; which form of
speech, though other Councels have likewise used, yet neither could they
themselves mean, nor may we so understand them, as if both were in equal sort
assisted with the power of the Holy Ghost; but the latter had the favor of
that general assistance and presence which Christ does promise unto all his,
Mat. 16, Mat. ult.
according to the quality of their several Estates and Callings; the former,
the grace of special, miraculous, rare and extraordinary illumination, in
relation whereunto the Apostle comparing the Old Testament and the New
together, terms the one a Testament of the Letter, for that God delivered it
written in stone; 2 Cor. 3.
the other a Testament of the Spirit, because God imprinted it in the hearts,
and declared it by the tongues of his chosen Apostles through the power of the
Holy Ghost, feigning both their conceits and speeches in most Divine and
incomprehensible manner. Wherefore, in as much as the Council of Jerusalem did
chance to consist of men so enlightened, it had authority greater than were
meet for any other Council besides to challenge, wherein such kind of Persons
are, as now the state of the Church does stand; Kings being not then that which
now they are, and the Clergy not now that which then they were. Till it be
proved that some special Law of Christ has for ever annexed unto the Clergy
alone the power to make Ecclesiastical laws, we are to hold it a thing most
consonant with equity and reason, that no Ecclesiastical laws be made in a
Christian Commonwealth, without consent as well of the Laity as of the Clergy,
but least of all without consent of the highest Power.

For of this thing no man doubts, namely, that in all Societies, Companies,
Cap. delicta. de excess. Praelator L.per fundum Rusticor* praed and sect.
Religiosum de rerum divis.
and Corporations, what severally each shall be bound unto, it must be with all
their assents ratified. Against all equity, it were, that a man should suffer
detriment at the hands of men for not observing that which he never did either
by himself, or by others, mediately or immediately agree unto. Much more than a
King should constrain all others no the strict observation of any such Human
Ordinance as passes without his own approbation. In this Case therefore
especially, that vulgar Axiom is of force, Gless. dict. 96. c. ^^inam.
Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus tractari and approbari debet. Whereupon Pope
Nicolas, although otherwise not admitting Lay-persons, no not Emperors
themselves, to be present as Synods, does notwithstanding seem to allow of
their presence, when matters of Faith are determined, whereunto all men must
stand bound: Ubinam legistis Imperatores Antecessores vestros, Synodalibus
Conventibus interfuisse; nisi forsitan in quibus de Fide tractatum est, quae
non solum ad Clericos, verum etiam ad Laicos and omnes pertinet Christianos? A
Law, be it Civil or Ecclesiastical, is a Public Obligation, wherein, seeing
that the whole stands charged, no reason it should pass without his privity
and will, whom principally the whole does depend upon. Sicut Laici
jurisdictionem Clericorum perturbare, ita Clerici jurisdictionem Laicorum non
debent minuere* says Innocentius, Extra de judic. novit. As the Laity should
not hinder the Clergy's jurisdiction, so neither is it reason that the Laity's
right should be abridged by the Clergy, says Pope Innocent. But were it so
that the Clergy alone might give Laws unto all the rest, forasmuch as every
Estate does desire to enlarge the bounds of their own Liberties, is it not
easy to see how injurious this might prove to men of other conditions? Peace
and Justice are maintained by preserving unto every Order their Rights, and by
keeping all Estates, as it were, in an even balance; which thing is no way
better done, than if the King, their common Parent, whose care is presumed to
extend most indifferently over all, do bear the chiefest sway in the making
Laws which All must be ordered by; Wherefore of them which in this point
attribute most to the Clergy, I would demand, What evidence there is, whereby
it may clearly be showed, that in ancient Kingdoms Christian, any Canon devised
by the Clergy alone in their Synods, whether Provincial, National, or General,
has, by mere force of their Agreement, taken place as a Law, making all men
constrainable to be obedient thereunto, without any other approbation from the
King, before or afterward, required in that behalf. But what speak we of
ancient Kingdoms, when at this day, even the Papacy it self; the very
Tridentine Council has not every where as yet obtained to have in all points
the strength of Ecclesiastical Laws; Boer. Fyod. hercoic. quast. l. 1. sect. 24.
did not Philip King of Spain, publishing that Council in the Low Countries,
add thereunto an express clause of special provision, that the same should in
no wise prejudice, hurt, or diminish any kind of Privilege, which the King or
his Vassals a fore-time, had enjoyed, touching either possessory Judgments of
Ecclesiastical Livings, or concerning nominations thereunto, or belonging to
whatsoever right they had else in such Affairs. If therefore the Kings
exception taken against some part of the Canons contained in that Council, were
a sufficient bar to make them of none effect within his Territories, it
follows that the like exception against any other part, had been also of like
efficacy; and so consequently that no part thereof had obtained the strength of
a Law, if he which excepted against a part, had so done against the whole: as,
what reason was there, but that the same Authority which limited, might quite
and clean have refused that Council; who so allows the said Act of the
Catholic Kings for good and lawful, must grant that the Canons, even of
General Councils, have but the face of Wise-mens opinions, concerning that
whereof they-treat, till they be publicly assented unto, where they are to
take place as Laws; and that, in giving such public assent, as makes a
Christian Kingdom subject unto those Laws, the King's authority is the
chiefest. That which an University of Men, a Company, or Corporation, does
without consent of their Rector, is as nothing. Except therefore we make the
King's Authority over the Clergy, less in the greatest things, than the power
of the meanest Governor is in all things over the College, or Society, which
is under him; how should we think it a matter decent, that the Clergy should
impose Laws, the Supreme Governors assent not asked?

Yea, that which is more, the Laws thus made, God himself does in such sort
authorize, that to despise them, is to despise in them him. It is a loose and
licentious opinion, which the Anabaptists have embraced, holding that a
Christian man's liberty is lost, and the Soul which Christ has redeemed unto
himself injuriously drawn into servitude under the Yoke of Human power, if any
Law be now imposed besides the Gospel of Christ; in obedience whereunto the
Spirit of God, and not the constraint of men, is to lead us, according to that
of the blessed Apostle, Such as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons
of God, and not such as live in thraldom unto men. Their Judgment is
therefore, That the Church of Christ should admit of no Lawmakers but the
Evangelists, no Courts but Presbyteries, no Punishments but Ecclesiastical
censures: As against this sort, we are to maintain the use of Human laws, and
the continual necessity of making them from time to time: as long as this
present World does last; so likewise the Authority of Laws, so made, does need
much more by us to be strengthened against another sort, who, although they do
utterly condemn the making of Laws in the Church, yet make they a great deal
less account of them than they should do. There are which think simply of Human
laws, that they can in no sort touch the Conscience. That to break and
transgress them, cannot make men in the sight of God culpable, as Sin does;
only when we violate such Laws, we do thereby make our selves obnoxious unto
external punishment in this World, so that the Magistrate may, in regard of
such offense committed, justly correct the Offender, and cause him, without
injury, to endure such pains as Law does appoint, but further it reaches not:
For first, the Conscience is the proper Court of God, the guiltiness thereof is
Sin, and the punishment Eternal death; men are not able to make any Law that
shall command the Heart, it is not in them to make Inward-conceit a Crime, or
to appoint for any crime other punishment than corporal; their Laws therefore
can have no power over the Soul, neither can the heart of man be polluted by
transgressing them. St. Austine rightly desineth Sin to be that which is
spoken, done, or desired, not against any Laws, but against the Law of the
Living God. The Law of God is proposed unto Man, as a Glass wherein to behold
the stains and the spots of their sinful Souls. By it they are to judge
themselves, and when they feel themselves to have transgressed against it, then
to bewail their offenses with David, Against thee only O Lord have I sinned,
and done wickedly in thy sight; that so our present tears may extinguish the
flames, which otherwise we are to feel, and which of God in that day shall
condemn the Wicked unto, when they shall render account of the Evil which they
have done, not by violating Statute-Laws, and Canons, but by disobedience unto
his Law and his Word.

For our better instruction therefore concerning this point, Verum ac proprium
civis a peregrino discrimen est. quo d alter imperio ac potestate vili
obliganur, alter justs Principis alient resputre potest: illum Princips ab
hostium aeque ac Civium injuria tueri re^ttur, hune non leem nisi rogatus and
humaniraus officiis, impulsus, says Bodinde Repub. l 1. c. 6. non mulrum a
fine. p. 61. E^ir. Lug. l. E. in fol. 1586.
first we must note, That the Law of God it self does require at our hands,
Subjection. Be ye subject, says S. Peter; and S. Paul, Let every Soul be
subject; subject all unto such Powers as are set over us. For if such as are
not set over us, require our subjection, we, by denying it, are not disobedient
to the Law of God, or undutiful unto Higher Powers; Because, though they be
such in regard of them over whom they have lawful Dominion, yet having not so
over us, unto us they are not such. Subjection therefore we owe, and that by
the Law of God; we are in Conscience bound to yield it even unto every of them
that hold the seats of Authority and Power in relation unto us. Howbeit, not
all kinds of subjection, unto every such kind of Power: concerning Scribes
and Pharisees, our Savior's Precept was, Whatsoever they shall tell ye, do it.
Was it his meaning, that if they should at any time enjoin the People to levy
an Army, or to sell their Lands and Goods, for the furtherance of so great an
enterprise; and, in a word, that simply whatsoever it were which they did
command, they ought, without any exception, forthwith to be obeyed. No, but
whatsoever they shall tell you, must be understoud in pertinentibus ad
Cathedram, it must be construed with limitation, and restrained unto things of
that kind, which did belong to their place and power: For they had not Power
general, absolutely given them to command all things. The reason why we are
bound in Conscience to be subject unto all such Power, is, because all Powers
are of God.

They are of God either instituting or permitting them; Power is then of Divine
institution, when either God himself does deliver, or men by light of nature
find out the kind thereof. So that the power of Parents over Children, and of
Husbands over their Wives, the power of all sorts of Superiors, made by consent
of Commonwealths within themselves, or grown from agreement amongst Nations,
such power is of God's own Institution in respect of the kind thereof; Again,
if respect be had unto those particular Persons, to whom the same is derived,
if they either receive it immediately from God, as Moses and Aaron did; or from
nature, as Parents do; or from men, by a natural and orderly course, as every
Governor appointed in any Common wealth, by the order thereof, does; then is
not the kind of their Power, only of God's instituting, but the derivation
thereof also, into their Persons, is from him. He has placed them in their
rooms, and does term them his Ministers; Subjection therefore is due unto all
such Powers, inasmuch as they are of God's own institution, even then when they
are of man's creation, Omni Humanae Creaturae: Which things the Heathens
themselves do acknowledge. Hom. 11. 1. 2. A Scepter. swaying King, to whom even
Jupiter himself has given honor, and commandment.
(...).

As for them that exercise Power altogether against Order, although the kind
of Power which they have may be of God, yet is their exercise thereof against
God, and therefore not of God, otherwise than by Permission, as all Injustice
is.

Touching such Acts as are done by that power which is according to his
institution, that God in like sort does authorize them, and account them to be
his; though it were not confessed, it might be proved undeniably. For if that
be acounted our deed, which others do, whom we have appointed to be our Agents,
how should God but approve those deeds, even as his own, which are done by
virtue of that Commission and Power which he has given: Take heed (says
Iehosophat unto his Judges) be careful and circumspect what ye do ye do not
execute the judgments of Man, but of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. The Authority of
Caesar over the Jews, from whence was it? Had it any other ground than the Law
of Nations, which makes Kingdoms, subdued by just War, to be subject unto
their Conquerors? By this Power Caesar exacting Tribute, our Savior confesses
it to be his Right, a Right which could not be withheld without Injury, yea
disobedience herein unto him, and even Rebellion against God. Usurpers of
Power, whereby we do not mean them that by violence have aspired unto places of
Highest Authority, but them that use more Authority than they did ever receive
in form and manner beforementioned; (for so they may do, whose Title to the
rooms of Authority, which they possess, no man can deny to be just and lawful;
even as contrariwise some men's proceedings in Government have been very
orderly, who notwithstanding did not attain to be made Governors, without great
violence and disorder) such Usurpers thereof, as in the exercise of their Power
do more than they have been authorized to do, cannot in Conscience bind any
man unto Obedience.

That subjection which we owe unto lawful Powers, does not only import that we
should be under them by order of our State, but that we show all submission
toward them, both by honor and obedience. He that resists them, resists
God: And resisted they be, if either the Authority it self which they exercise
be denied, as by Anabaptists all Secular Jurisdiction is; or if resistance be
made but only so far forth, as does touch their Persons which are invested
with Power; (for they which said, Nolumus hunc regnare, did not utterly exclude
Regiment; nor did they wish all kind of Government clearly removed; which
would not at the first have David to govern) or if that which they do by virtue
of their Power, namely, their Laws, Edicts, Services, or other Acts of
Jurisdiction, be not suffered to take effect, contrary to the blessed Apostles
most holy rule, Obey them which have the oversight of you, Heb. 13. 17. or if
they do take effect, yet is not the will of God thereby satisfied neither, as
long as that which we do is contemptuously, or repiningly done, because we can
do no otherwise. In such sort the Israelites in the Desert obeyed Moses, and
were notwithstanding deservedly plagued for disobedience. The Apostle's Precept
therefore is, Be subject even for God's cause: Be subject, not for fear, but of
mere Conscience, knowing, that be which resists them, purchases to himself
condemnation. Disobedience therefore unto Laws, which are made by them, is not
a thing of so small account, as some would make it.

Howbeit too rigorous it were, that the breach of every Human Law should be
held a deadly sin: A mean there is between those extremities, if so be we can
find it out.

TO THE READER.
THe pleasures of thy spacious Walks in Mr. Hooker's Temple-Garden ( not
unfitly so called, both for the Temple whereof he was Master, and the Subject,
Ecclesiastical Polity) do promise acceptance to these Flowers, planted and
watered by the same hand, and, for thy sake composed into this Posie.
Sufficiently are they commended by their fragrant smell, in the dogmatical
Truth; by their beautiful colors, in the accurate style; by their medicinable
virtue, against some diseases in our neighbor Churches, now proving
epidemical, and threatening farther infection; by their strait feature and
spreading nature, growing from the root of Faith (which, as here is proved, can
never be rooted up) and extending the branches of Charity to the covering of
Noah's nakedness; opening the windows of Hope to men's misty conceits of their
bemisted Forefathers. Thus, and more than thus, do the Works commend
themselves; The Workman needs a better Workman to commend him; (Alexander's
Picture requires Apelles his Pencil) nay, he needs it not, His own Works
commend him in the Gates; and, being dead, he yet speaks; the Syllables of
that memorable name Mr. Richard Hooker, proclaiming more, than if I should here
style him, a painful Student, a profound Scholar, a judicious Writer, with
other due Titles of his Honor. Receive then this posthume Orphan for his own,
yea, for thine own sake; and if the Printer bath with overmuch haste, like
Mephibosheth's Nurse, lamed the Child with slips and falls, yet be thou of
David's mind, show kindness to him for his Father Ionathan's sake. God grant,
that the rest of his Brethren be not more than lamed, and that at Readiness three
Sons died the same day with him, so those three promised to perfect his Polity,
with other Issues of that learned Brain, be not duried in the Grave with their
renowned Father. Farewell.

W. S.

The CONTENTS of the TREATISES following.
I. A Supplication made to the Council by Master WALTER TRAVERS. II. Master
HOOKERS Answer to the Supplication that Master TRAVERS made to the Council.
III. A learned Discourse of Justification, Works, and how the foundation of
Faith is overthrown. IV. A learned Sermon of the nature of Pride. V. A Remedy
against Sorrow and Fear, delivered in a Funeral Sermon. VI. Of the certainty
and perpetuity of Faith in the Elect: especially of the Prophet Habbakkuk's
Faith. VII. Two Sermons upon part of Saint Jude's Epistle.
A SVPPLICATION Made to the COUNCIL BY Master Walter Travers.
Right Honorable,
THE manifold benefits which all the Subjects within this Dominion do at this
present, and have many years enjoyed, under Her Majesty's most happy and
prosperous reign, by your godly wisdom, and careful watching over this Estate
night and day; I truly and unfeignedly acknowledge from the bottom of my heart,
ought worthily to bind us all, to pray continually to Almighty God for the
continuance and increase of the life and good estate of your Honors, and to be
ready, with all good duties, to satisfy and serve the same to our Power.
Besides public benefits common unto all, I must needs, and do willingly
confess my self to stand bound by most special Obligation to serve and honor
you more than any other, for the honorable favor it has pleased you to
vouchsafe both oftentimes heretofore, and also now of late, in a matter more
dear unto me than any earthly commodity, that is, the upholding and furthering
of my service in the ministering of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. For which cause,
as I have been always careful so to carry my self as I might by no means give
occasion to be thought unworthy of so great a Benefit, so do I still, next unto
her Majesty's gracious countenance, hold nothing more dear and precious to me,
than that I may always remain in your Honors favor, which has oftentimes be
an helpful and comfortable unto me in my Ministry, and to all such as reaped
any fruit of my simple and faithful labor. In which dutiful regard I humbly
beseech you? Honors to vouchsafe to do me this grace, to conceive nothing of
me otherwise, than according to the duty wherein I ought to live, by any
information against me, before your Honors have heard my answer, and been
thoroughly informed of the matter. Which, although it be a thing, that your
wisdoms, not in favor, but in justice, yield to all men, yet the state of the
the calling into the Ministry, whereunto it has pleased God of his goodness
to call me, though unworthiest of all, is so subject to misinformation, as,
except we may find this favor with your Honors, we cannot look for any
other, but that our unindifferent parties may easily procure us to be hardly
esteemed of; and that we shall be made like the poor Fisher-boats in the Sea,
which every swelling wave and billow raketh and runs over. Wherein my Estate
is yet harder than any others of my Rank and Calling, who are indeed to fight
against Flesh and Blood in what part soever of the Lords Host and Field they
shall stand mashalled to serve, yet many of them deal with it naked, and
unfurnished of Weapons: But my service was in a place where I was to encounter
with it well appointed and armed with skill and with authority, whereof as I
have always thus deserved, and therefore have been careful by all good means to
entertain still your Honors favorable respect of me, so have I special cause
at this present, wherein misinformation to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
and other of the High Commission has been able so far to prevail against me,
that by their Letter they have inhibited me to preach, or execute any Act of
Ministry in the Temple or elsewhere, having never once called me before them to
understand by mine answer the truth of such things as had been informed against
me. We have a story in our Books wherein the Pharisees proceeding against our
Savior Christ, without having heard him, is reproved by an honorable
Counselor (as the Evangelist does term him) saying, Does our Law judge a man
before it hear him, and know what he has done? Which I do not mention, to the
end, that by an indirect and covert speech I might so compare those, who have
without ever hearing me, pronounced a heavy sentence against me, for
notwithstanding such proceedings, I purpose by Gods grace to carry my self
toward them in all seeming duty, agreeable to their places: much less do I
presume to liken my Cause to our Savior Christ's, who hold it my chiefest
honor and happiness to serve him, though it be but among the hindes and hired
Servants, that serve him in the basest corners of his House: But my purpose, in
mentioning it, is, to show by the judgment of a Prince and great man in
Israel, that such proceeding stands not with the Law of God, and in a
Princely Pattern to show it to be a noble part of an honorable Counselor,
not to allow of indirect dealings, but to allow and affect such a course in
Justice, as is agreeable to the Law of God. We have also a plain rule in the
Word of God, not to proceed any otherwise against any Elder of the Church; much
less against one that labors in the Word, and in teaching: Which rule is
delivered with this most earnest charge and obtestation, I beseech and charge
thee in the sight of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, that
thou keep those [rules] without preferring one before another, doing nothing of
partiality or including to either part; which Apostolical and most earnest
charge, I referr to your Honors wisdom how it has been regarded in so heavy a
Judgment against me, without ever hearing my Cause; and whethe^, as having God
before their eyes, and the Lord Jesus, by whom all former Judgments shall be
tried again, and, as in the presence of the Elect Angels, Witnesses and
Observers of the Regiment of the Church, they have proceeded thus to such a
sentence. They allege indeed two reasons in their Letters, whereupon they
restrain my Ministry, which, if they were as strong against me as they are
supposed, yet I referr to your Honors wisdoms, whether the quality of such an
Offense as they charge me with, which is in effect but an indiscretion, deserve
so grievous a punishment both to the Church and me, in taking away my
Ministry, and that poor little commodity which it yields for the necessary
maintenance of my life; if so unequal a ballancing of faults and punishments
should have place in the Commonwealth, surely we should shortly have no
Actions upon the Case, nor of Trespass, but all should be Pleas of the Crown,
nor any man amerced, or fined, but for every light offense put to his ransom. I
have credibly heard, that some of the Ministry have been committed for
grievous transgressions of the Laws of God and men, being of no ability to do
other service in the Church than to read, yet has it been thought charitable,
and standing with Christian moderation and temperancy, not to deprive such of
Ministry and Beneficency, but to inflict some more tolerable punishment. Which
I write not because such, as I think, were to be favored, but to show how
unlike their dealing is with me, being through the goodness of God not to be
touched with any such blame, and one, who, according to the measure of the gift
of God, have labored now some years painfully, in regard of the weak estate of
my Body, in preaching the Gospel, and, as I hope, not altogether unprofitably
in respect of the Church. But I beseech your Honors to give me leave briefly to
declare the particular reasons of their Letter, and what Answer I have to make
unto it.

The first is, That, as they say, I am not lawfully called to the Function of
the Ministry, nor allowed to preach according to the Laws of the Church of
England.

For Answer to this, I had need to divide the Points: and first to make answer
to the former, wherein leaving to show what by the Holy Scriptures is required
in a lawful Calling, and that all this is to be found in mine, that I be not
too long for your weighty affairs, I rest.

I thus answer: My calling to the Ministry was such as in the calling of any
thereunto, is appointed to be used by the Orders agreed upon in the National
Synods of the Low Countries, for the direction and guidance of their Churches,
which Orders are the same with those whereby the French and Scottish Churches
are governed, whereof I have showed such sufficient testimonial to my Lord the
Archbishop of Canterbury, as is requisite in such a Matter: whereby it must
needs fall out, if any man be lawfully called to the Ministry in those
Churches, then is my Calling, being the same with theirs, also lawful. But I
suppose, notwithstanding they use this general speech, they mean only, my
Calling is not sufficient, to de^ in the Ministry within this Land, because I
was not made Minister according to that Order which in this Case is ordained by
our Laws. Whereunto I beseech your Honors to consider thoroughly of mine
Answer, because exception now again is taken to my Ministry, whereas having
been heretofore called in question for it, I so answered the matter, as I
continued in my Ministry, and, for any thing I discerned, looked to hear that
no more objected unto me. The communion of Saints (which every Christian man
professes to believe) is such, as that the Acts which are done in any true
Church of Christ's according to his Word, are held as lawful, being done in one
Church as in another. Which, as it holds in other Acts of Ministry, as
Baptism, Marriage, and such like, so does it in the calling to the Ministry; by
reason whereof, all Churches do acknowledge and receive him for a Minister of
the Word, who has been lawfully called thereunto in any Church of the same
Profession. A Doctor created in any University of Christendom, is acknowledged
sufficiently qualified to teach in any Country. The Church of Rome it self, and
the Canon law holds it, that being ordered in Spain, they may execute that
belongs to their Order in Italy, or in any other place. And the Churches of
the Gospel never made any question of it; which if they shall now begin to make
doubt of, and deny such to be lawfully called to the Ministry, as are called by
another Order than our own; then may it well be looked for, that other Churches
will do the like: And if a Minister called in the Low Countries be not lawfully
called in England, then may they say to our Preachers which are there, that
being made of another Order than theirs, they cannot suffer them to execute any
Act of Ministry amongst them; which in the end must needs breed a Schism, and
dangerous divisions in the Churches. Further, I have heard of those that are
learned in the Laws of this Land, that by express Statute to that purpose, Anno
13. upon subscription to the Articles agreed upon, Anno 62. that they who
pretend to have been ordered by another Order than that which is now
established, are of like capacity to enjoy any place of Ministry within the
Land, as they which have been ordered according to that which is now by law in
this case established. Which comprehending manifestly all, even such as were
made Priests, according to the Order of the Church of Rome, it must needs be,
that the Law of a Christian Land, professing the Gospel, should be as
favorable for a Minister of the Word, as for a Popish Priest; which also was
so found in Mr. Whittingham's Case, who, notwithstanding such Replies against
him, enjoyed still the benefit he had by his Ministry, and might have done
until this day, if God had spared him life so long, which, if it be understood
so, and practiced in others, why should the change of the Person alter the
right, which the Law gives to all other?

The place of Ministry whereunto I was called, was not Presentative: and if it
had been so, surely they would never have presented any man whom they never
knew, and the order of this Church is agreeable herein to the Word of God, and
the ancient and best Canons, that no man should be made a Minister sine titulo:
therefore having none, I could not by the Orders of this Church have entered
into the Ministry, before I had a Charge to tend upon. When I was at Antwerp,
and to take a Place of Ministry among the People of that Nation, I see no cause
why I should have returned again over the Seas for Orders here; nor how I could
have done it, without disallowing the Orders of the Churches provided in the
Country where I was to live. Whereby I hope it appears, that my Calling to
the Ministry is lawful, and makes me, by our Law, of capacity to enjoy any
benefit or commodity, that any other by reason of his Ministry may enjoy. But
my Cause is yet more easy, who reaped no benefit of my Ministry by Law,
receiving only a benevolence and voluntary Contribution; and the Ministry I
dealt with, being Preaching only, which every Deacon here may do being
licensed, and certain that are neither Ministers not Deacons. Thus I answer,
the former of these two Points, whereof, if there be yet any doubt, I humbly
desire for a final end thereof, that some competent Judges in Law may determine
of it; whereunto I referr and submit my self with all reverence and duty.

The second is, That I preached without License. Whereunto, this is my Answer:
I have not presumed, upon the Calling I had to the Ministry abroad, to Preach
or deal with any part of the Ministry within this Church, without the consent
and allowance of such as were to allow me unto it: my Allowance was from the
Bishop of London, testified by his two several Letters to the Inner Temple, who
without such testimony would by no means rest satified in it; which Letters
being by me produced, I referr it to your Honors wisdom, whether I have taken
upon me to Preach, without being allowed (as they charge) according to the
Orders of the Realm. Thus having answered the second point also, I have done
with the Objection, of dealing without Calling or License.

The other Reason they allege, is, concerning a late Action, wherein I had to
deal with Mr. Hooker, Master of the Temple. In the handling of which Cause,
they charge me with an Indiscretion, and want of Duty, In that I inveighed (as
they say) against certain Points of Doctrine taught by him as erroneous, not
conferring with him, nor complaining of it to them. My Answer hereunto
stands, in declaring to your Honors the whole course and carriage of that
Cause, and the degrees of proceeding in it, which I will do as briefly as I
can, and according to the truth. God be my witness, as near as my best memory,
and notes of remembrance may serve me thereunto. After that I have taken away
that which seemed to have moved them to think me not charitably minded to Mr.
Hooker; which is, Because he was brought in to Mr. Alveyes Place, wherein this
Church desired that I might have succeeded: which Place, if I would have made
suit to have obtained, or if I had ambitiously affected and sought, I would not
have refused to have satisfied, by subscription, such as the matter them seemed
to depend upon: whereas contrariwise, notwithstanding I would not hinder the
Church to do that they thought to be most for their edification and comfort,
yet did I, neither by Speech nor Letter, make suit to any for the obtaining of
it; following herein that resolution, which I judge to be most agreeable to the
Word and Will of God; that is, that laboring and suing for Places and Charges
in the Church is not lawful. Further, whereas at the suit of the Church, some
of your Honors entertained the Cause, and brought it to a near issue, that
there seemed nothing to remain, but the commendation of my Lord the Archbishop
of Canterbury, when as he could not be satisfied, but by my subscribing to his
late Articles; and that my Answer agreeing to subscribe according to any Law,
and to the Statute provided in that Case, but praying to be respited for
subscribing to any other, which I could not in Conscience do, either for the
Temple (which otherwise he said, he would not commend me to) nor for any other
Place in the Church, did so little please my Lord Archbishop, as he resolved,
that otherwise I should not be commended to it. I had utterly here no cause of
offense against Mr. Hooker, whom I did in no sort esteem to have prevented or
undermined me, but that God disposed of me as it pleased him, by such means and
occasions as I have declared.

Moreover, as I have taken no cause of offense at Mr. Hooker for being
preferred, so there were many Witnesses, that I was glad that the place was
given him, hoping to live in all godly peace and comfort with him, both for
acquaintance and good will which has been between us, and for some kind of
affinity in the marriage of his nearest kindred and mine: Since his coming, I
have so carefully endeavored to entertain all good correspondence and
agreement with him, as I think he himself will bear me witness of many earnest
Disputations and Conferences with him about the matter; the rather, because
that, contrary to my expectation, he inclined from the beginning but smally
thereunto, but joined rather with such as had always opposed themselves to any
good order in this Charge, and made themselves to be brought indisposed to his
present state and proceedings: For, both knowing that God's Commandment
charged me with such Duty, and discerning how much on: peace might further the
good service of God and his Church, and the mutual comfort of us both, I had
resolved constantly to seek for Peace; and though it should fly from me (as I
saw it did by means of some, who little desired to see the good of our Church)
yet, according to the rule of God's Word, to follow after it: Which being so
(as hereof I take God to witness, who searches the heart and reins, and who
by his Son will judge the World, both quick and dead) I hope no charitable
Judgment can suppose me to have stood evil-affected toward him for his Place,
or desirous to fall into any Controversy with him.

Which my resolution I pursued, that, whereas I discovered sundry unsound
matters in his Doctrine (as many of his Sermons tasted of some sour leaven or
other) yet thus I carried my self toward him: Matters of smaller weight, and
so covertly discovered, that no great offense to the Church was to be feared in
them, I wholly passed by, as one that discerned nothing of them, or had been
unfurnished of replies; for others of great moment, and so openly delivered, as
there was just cause of fear, left the Truth and Church of God should be
prejudiced and perilled by it, and such as the Conscience of my Duty and
Calling would not suffer me altogether to pass over, this was my course, to
deliver, when I should have just cause by my Text, the truth of such Doctrine
as he lead otherwise taught, in general speeches, without touch of his Person
in any sort; and further at convenient opportunity to conferr with him in such
points.

According to which determination, whereas he had taught certain things
concerning Predestination, otherwise than the Word of God does, as it is
understood by all Churches professing the Gospel, and not unlike that wherewith
Coranus sometimes troubled his Church, I both delivered the truth of such
points in a general Doctrine, without any touch of him in particular, and
conferred with him also privately upon such Articles. In which Conference, I
remember, when I urged the consent of all Churches and good Writers against him
that I knew; and desired, if it were otherwise, What Authors he had seen of
such Doctrine? He answered me, That his best Author was his own Reason; which I
wished him to take heed of, as a matter standing with Christian modesty and
wisdom, in a Doctrine not received by the Church, not to trust to his own
Judgment so far, as to publish it before he had conferred with others of his
Profession, laboring by daily Prayer and Study, to know the will of God, as he
did, to see how they understood such Doctrine: Notwithstanding, he, with
wavering, replied, That he would some other time deal more largely in the
matter; I wished him, and prayed him not so to do, for the peace of the Church,
which, by such means, might be hazarded; seeing he could not but think, that
men, who make any Couscience of their Ministry, will judge it a necessary
duty in them, to teach the truth, and to convince the contrary.

Another time, upon like occasion of this Doctrine of his, That the assurance
of that we believe by the Word, is not so certain, as of that we perceive by
sense; I both taught the Doctrine otherwise, namely, the assurance of Faith to
be greater, which assured both of things above, and contrary to all sense and
human understanding, and dealt with him also privately upon that point:
According to which course of late, when as he had taught, That the Church of
Rome is a true Church of Christ, and a sanctified Church by profession of that
Truth, which God both revealed unto us by his Son, though not a part and
perfect Church; and further, That be doubted not, but that thousands of the
Fathers, which lived and dyed in the Superstitions of that Church, were saved,
because of their ignorance, which excuses them; 1 Timothy 1. 13.
mis-alledging to that end a Text of Scripture to prove it: The matter being
ofset purpose openly and at large handled by him, and of that moment, that
might prejudice the Faith of Christ, encourage the ill-affected to continue
still in their damnable ways, and others weak in Faith to suffer themselves
easily to be seduced, to the destruction of their Souls, I thought it my most
bounden duty of God, and to his Church, whilst I might have opportunity to
speak with him, to teach the Truth in a general speech in such points of
Doctrine.

At which time I taught, That such as dye, or have died at any time in the
Church of Rome, holding in their ignorance that Faith, which is taught in it,
and namely, Justification in part by Works, could not be said by the Scriptures
to be saved. In which matter, foreseeing that if I waded not warily in it, I
should be in danger to be reported, (as has fallen out since notwithstanding)
to condemn all the Fathers, I said directly and plainly to all men's
understanding, That it was not indeed to be doubted, but many of the Fathers
were saved; but the means (I said) was not their ignorance, which excuses no
man with God, but their knowledge and Faith of the Truth, which it appears
God vouchsafed them, by many notable Monuments and Records extant in all Ages.
Which being the last point in all my Sermon, rising so naturally from the Text
I then propounded, as would have occasioned me to have delivered such matter,
notwithstanding the former Doctrine had been sound; and being dealt in by a
general speech, without touch of his particular; I looked not that a matter of
Controversy would have been made of it, no more than had been of my like
dealing in former time. But, far otherwise than I looked for, Mr. Hooker
showing no grief of Offense taken at my speech all the week long, the next
Sabbath, leaving to proceed upon his ordinary Text, professed to preach again,
that he had done the day before, for some question that his Doctrine was drawn
into, which he desired might be examined with all severitie.

So proceeding, he bestowed his whole time in that discourse, concerning his
former Doctrine, and answering the places of Scripture, which I had alleged,
to prove that a man dying in the Church of Rome, is not to be judged by the
Scriptures to be saved. In which long speech, and utterly impertinent to his
Text, under color of answering for himself, he impugned directly and openly to
all men's understanding, the true Doctrine which I had delivered; and, adding to
his former Points some other like (as willingly one Error follows another)
that is, That the Galatians joining with Faith in Christ, Circumcision, as
necessary to Salvation, might not be saved: And that they of the Church of
Rome, may be saved by such a Faith of Christ as they had, with a general
Repentance of all their Errors, notwithstanding their opinion of Justification
in part by their works and merits: I was necessarily, though not willingly,
drawn to say something to the Points he objected against sound Doctrine, which
I did in a short speech in the end of my Sermon, with protestation of so doing,
no: of any sinister affection to any man, but to bear witness to the Truth,
according to my Calling; and wished, if the matter should needs further be
dealt in, some other more convenient way might be taken for it; wherein, I
hope, my dealing was manifest to the Consciences of all indifferent Hearers of
me that day, to have been according to Peace, and without any uncharitableness,
being duly considered.

For that I conferred with him the first day, I have showed that the Cause
requiring of me the Duty, at the least not to be altogether silent in it, being
a matter of such consequence, that the time also being short, wherein I was to
preach after him, the hope of the fruit of our communication being small, upon
experience of form. Conferences, my expectation being, that the Church should
be no further troubled with it, upon the motion I made of taking some other
course of dealing. I suppose my deferring to speak with him till some fit
opportunity, cannot in Charity be judged uncharitable.

The second day, his unlooked for opposition with the former Reasons, made it
to be a matter that required of necessity some Public answer; which being so
temporate, as I have showed, if notwithstanding it be sensured as uncharitable,
and punished so grievously as it is, What should have been my punishment, if
(without all such cautions and respects as qualified my speech) I had before
all, and in the understanding of all, so reproved him offending openly, that
others might have feared to do the like? which yet, if I had done, might have
been warranted by the rule and charge of the Apostle, Them that offend openly,
rebuke openly, that the rest may also fear; and by his example, who, when Peter
in this very Case which is now between us, had (not in Preaching) but in a
matter of Conversation, not gone with a right foot, as was fit for the truth of
the Gospel, conferred not privately with him, but, as his own rule required,
reproved him openly before all, that others might hear, and fear, and not dare
to do the like. All which reasons together weighed, I hope, will show the
manner of my dealing to have been charitable, and warrantable in every sort.

The next Sabbath day after this, Mr. Hooker kept the way he had entered into
before, and bestowed his whole hour and more only upon the Questions he had
moved and maintained; wherein he so set forth the agreement of the Church of
Rome with us, and their disagreement from us, as if we had consented in the
greatest and weightiest Points, and differed only in certain smaller matters:
Which Agreement noted by him in two chief points, is not such as he would have
made men believe. The one, in that he said, They acknowledge all men sinners,
even the blessed Virgin, though some of them freed her from sin, for the
Council of Trent holds, that she was free from sin. Another, in that he
said, They teach Christ's Righteousness to be the only meritorious cause of
taking away sin, and differ from us only in the applying of it: For Thomas
Aquinas their chief Schoolman, and Archbishop Catherinus teach, That Christ
took away only Original sin, and that the rest are to be taken away by our
selves; yea, the Council of Trent teaches, That Righteousness whereby we are
righteous in God's sight, is an inherent Righteousness: which must needs be of
our own Works, and cannot be understood of the Righteousness inherent only in
Christ's Person, and accounted unto us. Moreover he taught the same time, That
neither the Galatians, nor the Church of Rome, did directly overthrow the
foundation of Justification by Christ alone, but only by consequent, and
therefore might well be saved; or else neither the Churches of the Lutherans,
nor any which bold any manner of Error could be saved; because (says he)
every Error by consequent overthrows the Foundation. In which Discourses,
and such like, he bestowed his whole time and more; which, if he had affected
either the truth of God, or the peace or the Church, he would truly not have
done.

Whose example could not draw me to leave the Scripture I took in hand, but
standing about an hour to deliver the Doctrine of it, in the end, upon just
occasion of the Text, leaving sundry other his unsound speeches, and keeping me
still to the Principal, I confirmed the believing the Doctrine of Justification
by Christ only, to be necessary to the Justification of all that should be
saved, and that the Church of Rome directly denies, that a man is saved by
Christ, or by Faith alone, without the works of the Law. Which my Answer, as it
was most necessary for the service of God, and the Church, so was it without
any immodest or reproachful speech to Mr. Hooker: whose unsound and wilful
dealings in a Cause of so great importance to the Faith of Christ, and
salvation of the Church, notwithstanding I knew well what speech it deserved,
and what some zealous earnest man of the spirit of John and James, ^irnamed
Boanerges, Sons of Thunder, would have said in such a case; Mark 3. 17.
yet I chose rather to content my self in exhorting him to revisit his
Doctrine, 2 Samuel 7.2, 3, 4, 5.
as Nathan the Prophet did the device, which, without consulting with God, he
had of himself given to David, concerning the building of the Temple; and with
Peter the Apostle, Gal. 2.11.14.
to endure to be withstood in such a Case, not unlike unto this. This is
effect, was that which passed between us concerning this matter, and the
invectives I made against him, wherewith I am charged: Which rehearsal, I hope,
may clear me (with all that shall indifferently consider it) of the blames laid
upon me for want of Duty to Mr. Hooker, in not conferring with him, whereof I
have spoken sufficiently already; and to the High Commission, in not revealing
the matter to them, which yet now I am further to answer. My Answer is, That I
protest, no contempt not wilful neglect of any lawful Authority, stayed me from
complaining unto them, but these Reasons following:

First, I was in some hope, that Mr. Hooker, notwithstanding he had been
ovencarried with a show of Charity to prejudice the Truth, yet when it should
be sufficiently proved, would have acknowledged it, or at the lest induced with
Peace, that it might be offered without either offense to him, or to such as
would receive it; either of which would have taken away any cause of just
Complaint. When neither of these fell out according to my expectation and
desire, but that he replied to the Truth, and objected against it, I thought he
might have some doubts and scruples in himself, which yet, if they were
cleared, he would either embrace sound Doctrine, or at lest suffer it to have
its course: Which hope of him I nourished so long, as the matter was not
bitterly and immodestly handled between us.

Another Reason was the Cause it self, which, according to the Parable of the
Tares (which are said to be sown among the Wheat) sprung up first in his Grass:
Therefore, as the Servants in that Place, are not said to have come to complain
to the lord, till the Tares came to show their fruits in their kind: so, I
thinking it yet but a time of discovering of it what it was, desired not their
fickle to cut it down.

For further answer, It is to be considered, that the conscience of my Duty to
God, and to his Church, did bind me at the first, to deliver sound Doctrine in
such Points, as had been otherwise uttered in the Place, where I had now some
years taught the Truth; Ezekiel. 22.33. Ez. 33.6.
Otherwise the rebuke of the Prophet had fallen upon me, for not going up to
the breach, and standing in it, and the peril for answering the blood of the
City, in whose Watchtower I sat; if it had been surprised by my default.
Moreover, my public Protestation, in being unwilling, that if any were not yet
satisfied, some other more convenient way might be taken for it. And lastly,
that I had resolved (which I uttered before to some, dealing with me about the
matter) to have protested the next Sabbath day, that I would no more answer in
that Place, any Objections to the Doctrine taught by any means, but some other
way satisfy such as should require it.

These, I trust, may make it appear, that I failed not in Duty to Authority,
notwithstanding I did not complain, nor give over so soon dealing in the Case:
If I did, how is he clear, which can allege none of all these for himself; who
leaving the expounding of the Scriptures, and his ordinary Calling,
voluntarily discoursed upon School-Points and Questions, neither of
edification, nor of Truth; who, after all this, as promising to himself, and to
untruth, a Victory by my silence, added yet in the next Sabbath day, to the
maintenance of his former Opinions, these which follow?

That no additament takes away the Foundation, except it be a Privative; of
which sort, neither the Works added to Christ by the Church of Rome, nor
Circumcision by the Galatians were: as one denies him not to be a man, that
says, he is a Righteous man, but he that says he is a dead man: Whereby it
might seem, that a man might, without hurt, add Works to Christ, and pray also
that God and Saint Peter would save them.

That the Galatians Case is harder than the Case of the Church of Rome, because
the Galatians joined Circumcision with Christ, which God had forbidden and
abolished; but that which the Church of Rome joined with Christ, were good
Works which God has commanded. Wherein he committed a double fault, one, in
expounding all the questions of the Galatians, and consequently of the Romans,
and other Epistles, of Circumcision only, and the Ceremonies of the Law (as
they do, who answer for the Church of Rome in their Writings) contrary to the
clear meaning of the Apostle, as may appear by many strong and sufficient
reasons: The other, in that he said, the addition of the Church of Rome was of
Works commanded of God. Whereas the least part of the Works whereby they looked
to merit, was of such works; and most were works of Supererogation, and works
which God never commanded, but was highly displeased with, as of Masses,
Pilgrimages, Pardons, pains of Purgatory, and such like: That no one sequel
urged by the Apostle against the Galatians for joining Circumcision with
Christ, but might be us well enforced against the Lutherans; that is, that for
their ubiquity it may be as well said to them, If ye hold the Body of Christ to
be in all places, you are fallen from grace, you are under the curse of the
Law, saying, Cursed be he that fulfilleth not all things written in this Book;
with such like. He added yet further, That to a Bishop of the Church of Rome,
to a Cardinal, yea to the Pope himself, acknowledging Christ to be the Savior
of the World, denying other errors; and being discomforted for want of Works
whereby he might be justified, he would not doubt, but use this speech; Thou
hold the foundation of Christian Faith, though it be but by a slender thread;
thou hold Christ, though but by the hem of his Garment; why should thou
not hope that virtue may pass from Christ to save thee? That which thou hold
of Justification by thy Works, overthrows indeed by consequent the foundation
of Christian Faith; but be of good cheer, thou have not to do with a captionus
Sophister, but with a merciful God, who will justify thee for that thou
hold, and not take the advantage of doubtful construction to condemn thee.
And if this, said he, be an Error, I hold it willingly; for it is the greatest
comfort I have in this World, without which I would not wish either to speak or
to live. Thus far; beng not to be answered in it any more, he was bold to
proceed, the absurdity of which Speech I need not to stand upon. I think the
like to this, and other such in this Sermon, and the rest of this matter, has
not been heard in Public places within this Land, since Queen Mary's days.
What consequence this Doctrine may be of, if he be not by Authority ordered to
revoke it, I beseech your H H. as the truth of God and his Gospel is dear and
precious unto you, according to your godly wisdom to consider.

I have been bold to offer to your H H. a long and tedious Discourse of these
matters; but Speech being like to Tapestry, which if it be folded up, shows
but part of that which is wrought; and being unlapt and laid open, shows
plainly to the eye all the work that is in it, I thought it necessary to unfold
this Tapestry, and to hang up the whole Chamber of it in your most Honorable
Senate, that so you may the more easily discern of all the Pieces, and the
sundry Works and Matters contained in it. Wherein my hope is, your H H. may see
I have not deserved so great a Punishment, as is laid upon the Church for my
sake, and also upon my self, in taking from me the exercise of my Ministry:
Which Punishment, how heavy it may seem to the Church, or fall out indeed to
be, I referr it to them to judge, and spare to write what I fear; but to my
self it is exceeding grievous, for that it takes from me the exercise of my
Calling. Which I do not say is dear unto me, as the means of that little
benefit whereby I live (although this be a lawful consideration, and to be
regarded of me in due place, and of the Authority under whose Protection I most
willingly live, even by God's Commandment both unto them, and unto me:) but
which ought to be more precious unto me than my life, for the love which I
should bear to the glory and honor of Almighty God, and to the edification and
salvation of his Church, for that my life cannot any other way be of like
service to God, nor of such use and profit to men by any means: For which
Cause, as I discern how dear my Ministry ought to be unto me, so it is my
hearty desire, and most humble request unto God, to your H H. and to all the
Authority I live under, to whom any dealing herein belongs, that I may spend
my life according to his Example, who in a word of like sound, of fuller sense,
comparing by it the bestowing of his life to the Offering poured out upon the
Sacrifice of the Faith of God's people, and especially of this Church,
whereupon I have already poured out a great part thereof in the same Calling,
from which I stand now restrained. And, if your H H. shall find it so, that I
have not deserved so great a Punishment, but rather performed the Duty, which a
good and faithful Servant ought, in such case, to do to his Lord, and the
People he puts them in trust withal carefully to keep: I am a most humble
Suitor by these presents to your H H. that, by your godly wisdom, some good
course may be taken for the restoring of me to my Ministry and Place again.
Which so great a favor, shall bind me yet in a greater obligation of Duty
(which is already so great, as it seemed nothing could be added unto it to make
it greater) to honor God daily for the continuance and increase of your good
estate, and to be ready with all the poor means God has given me, to do your H
H. that faithful Service I may possibly perform: But if, notwithstanding my
Cause he never so good, your H H. can by no means pacify such as are offended,
nor restore me again, then am I to rest in the good pleasure of God, and to
commend to your H H. protection, under Her Majesty's, my private life, while it
shall be led in duty; and the Church to him, who has redeemed to himself a
People with his precious Blood, and is making ready to come to judge both the
Quick and the Dead, to give to every one according as he has done in this
life, be it good or evil, to the Wicked and Unbelievers. Justice unto death;
but to the Faithful, and such as love his truth, Mercy and Grace to life
everlasting.

Your Honors most bounden, and most humble Suppliant WALTER TRAVERS, Minister
of the Gospel.

Mr. HOOKER'S ANSWER TO THE SUPPLICATION THAT Mr. TRAVERS Made to the COUNCIL.
To my Lord of Canterbury his Grace.
MY Duty in my most humble wise remembered: May it please your Grace to
understand, That whereas there has been a late Controversy raised in the
Temple, and pursued by Mr. Travers, upon conceit taken at some words by me
uttered, with a most simple and harmless meaning: In the heat of which pursuit,
after three public Invectives, silence being enjoined him by Authority, he
has hereupon, for defense of his proceedings, both presented the Right
Honorable Lords, and others of Her Majesty's Privy Council with a Writing; and
also caused or suffered the same to be Copied out, and spread through the hands
of so many, that well nigh all sorts of men have it in their bosoms: The
matters wherewith I am therein charged, being of such quality as they are, and
my self being better known to your Grace, than to any other of their Honors
besides, I have chosen to offer to your Grace's hands a plain Declaration of my
Innocence in all those things wherewith I am so hardly, and so heavily charged,
lest, if I still remain silent, that which I do for quietness sake, be taken as
an Argument, that I lack what to speak truly and justly in mine own defense.

2. First, because M. Travers thinks it an expedient to breed an Opinion in
men's minds, that the root of all inconvenient events which are now sprung out,
is, the surly and unpeaceable disposition of the man with whom he has to do;
therefore the first in the rank of Accusations laid against me, is, my
intorformity, which have so little inclined to so many, and so earnest
Exhortations and Conferences, as my self, he says, can witness, to have been
spent upon me, for my better fashioning unto good correspondence and agreement.

3. Indeed, when at the first, by means of special Well-willers, without any
suit of mine, as they very well know (although I do not think it had been a
mortal sin, in a reasonable sort, to have showed a moderate desire that way)
yet when by their endeavor, without instigation of mine, some Reverend and
Honorable, favorably affecting me, had procured her Majesties's grant of the
Place; At the very point of my eptring thereinto, the Evening before I was
first to Preach, he came, and two other Gentlemen joined with him: The effect
of his Conference then was, That he thought it his Duty to advise me, not to
enter with a strong hand, but to change my purpose of Preaching there the next
day, and to stay till he had given notice of me to the Congregation, that so
their allowance might seal my Calling. The effect of my Answer was, That, as in
a place where such Order is, I would not break; so here, where in never was, I
might not, of my own head, take upon me to begin it: But liking very well the
motion of the Opinion which I had of his good meaning who made it, requested
him not to mislike my Answer, though it were not correspondent to his mind.

4. When this had so displeased some, that whatsoever was afterward done or
spoken by me, it offended their taste, angry informations were daily sent out,
intelligence given far and wide, what a dangerous Enemy was crept in; the
worst that Jealousy could imagine, was spoken and written to so many, that at
the length some knowing me well, and perceiving how injurious the Reports were,
which grew daily more and more unto my discredit, wrought means to bring Mr.
Travers and me to a second Conference. Wherein, when a common Friend unto us
both, had quietly requested him to utter those things wherewith he found
himself any way grieved: He first renewed the memory of my entering into this
Charge, by virtue only of an Humane Creature (for so the want of that formality
of Popular Allowance was then censured) and unto this was annexed a Catalogue,
partly of causeless Surmises, as, That I had conspired against him, A mere
formality it had been to me in that place; where, as no man had ever used it
before me, so it could neither further me if I did use it, nor hinder me if I
did not.
and that I sought Superiority over him; and partly of Faults, which to note, I
should have thought it a greater offense than to commit, if I did account them
Faults, and had heard them so curiously observed in any other than myself, they
are such silly things, as, Praying in the entrance of my Sermon only, and not
in the end; naming Bishops in my Prayer, Kneeling when I pray, and Kneeling
when I receive the Communion, with such like, which I would be as loath to
recite, as I was sorry to hear them objected, if the rehearsal thereof were not
by him thus wrested from me. These are the Conferences wherewith I have been
wooed to entertain Peace and good Agreement.

5. As for the vehement Exhortations he speaks of, I would gladly know some
reason, wherefore he thought them needful to be used. Was there any thing found
in my Speeches or Dealings that gave them occasion, who are studious of Peace,
to think that I disposed my self to some unquiet kind of Proceedings? Surely,
the special Providence of God I do now see it was, that the first words I spoke
in this Place, should make the first thing whereof I am accused, to appear not
only untrue, but improbable, to as many as then heard me with indifferent
ears; and do, I doubt not, in their Consciences clear me of this suspicion.
Howbeit, I grant this were nothing, if it might he showed, that my Deeds
following were not suitable to my words. If I had spoken of Peace at the first,
and afterward sought to molest and grieve him, by crossing him in his
Function, by storming, if my pleasure were not asked, and my Will obeyed in the
least occurrences, by carping needlessly sometimes at the manner of his
Teaching, sometimes at this, sometimes at that Point of his Doctrine: I might
then with some likelihood have been blamed, as one disdaining a peaceable hand
when it had been offered. But if I be able (as I am) to prove that my self have
now a full year together, born the continuance of such dealings, not only
without any manner of resistance, but also without any such complaint, as might
let or hinder him in his course, I see no cause in the world, why of this I
should he accused, unless it be, lest I should accuse, which I meant not. If
therefore I have given him occasion to use conferences and exhortations to
peace, if when they were bestowed upon me I have despised them, it will not be
hard to show some one Word or Deed wherewith I have gone about to work
disturbance: one is not much, I require but one. Only, I require if any thing
be showed, it may be proved, and not objected only as this is, That I have
joined to such as have always opposed to any good order in his Church, and
made themselves to be thought indisposed to the present estate and proceedings.
The words have reference, as it seems, unto some such things as being
attempted before my coming to the Temple, went not so effectually (perhaps)
forward, as he that devised them would have wished. An Order, as I learn, there
was tendered, that Communicants should neither kneel, as in most places of the
Realm; nor sit, as in this Place the Custom is; but walk to the one side of the
Table, and there standing till they had received, pass afterward away round
about by the other. Which being on a sudden begun to be practiced in the
Church, some sat wondering what it should mean, others deliberating what to
do: Till such time as at length by name one of them being called openly
thereunto, requested that they might do as they had been accustomed, which was
granted; and as Mr. Travers had ministered this way to the rest, so a Curate was
sent to minister to them after their way. Which unprosperous beginning of a
thing (saving only for the inconvenience of needless alterations, otherwise
harmless) did to disgrace that Order, in their conceit who had to allow or
disallow it, that it took no place. For neither could they ever induce
themselves to think it good, and it so much offended Mr. Travers, who supposed
it to be the best, that he since that time, although contented to receive it as
they do, at the hands of others, yet has not thought it meet they should ever
receive out of his, which would not admit that Order of receiving it, and
therefore in my time has been always present not to minister, but only to be
ministered unto.

6. Another Order there was likewise devised, but an Order of much more weight
and importance. This soil in respect of certain Immunities and other
Specialties belonging unto it, seemed likely to bear that which in other places
of the Realm of England does not take. For which cause, request was made to her
Majesty's Privy Council, that whereas it is provided by a Statute, there should
be Collectors and Sidemen in Churches, which thing, or somewhat correspondent
unto it, this place did greatly want; it would please their Honors to motion
such a matter to the Ancients of the Temple. And, according to their honorable
manner of helping forward all motions so grounded, they wrote their Letters, as
I am informed to that effect. Whereupon, although these Houses never had use of
such Collectors and Sidemen as are appointed in other places, yet they both
erected a Box to receive men's Devotions for the Poor, appointing the Treasurer
of both Houses to take care for bestowing it where need was, and granting
further, that if any could he entreated (as in the end some were) to undertake
the labor of observing men's slacknesse in Divine duties, they should be
allowed, their Complaints heard at all times, and the faults they complained
of, if Mr. Alveyes private admonition did not serve, then by some other means
to be redressed; but according to the old received Orders of both Houses.
Whereby the substance of their Honors Letters were indeed fully satisfied. Yet,
because Mr. Travers intended not this, but, as it seemed another thing;
therefore, notwithstanding the Orders which have been taken, and, for any thing
I know, do stand still in as much force in this Church now, as at any time
heretofore, He complains much of the good Orders which he does mean have been
withstood. Now it were hard, if as many as did any ways oppose unto these and
the like Orders, in his persuasion good, do thereby make themselves Dislikers
of the present state and proceeding. It they, whom he aims at, have any other
ways made themselves to be thought such, it is likely he does known wherein,
and will, I hope, disclose wherein it appertains, both the Persons whom he
thinks, and the causes why he thinks them so ill-affected. But whatsoever
the men be, do their Faults make me faulty? They do, if I join my self with
them. I beseech him therefore to declare wherein I have joined with them. Other
joining than this with any man here, I cannot imagine: It may be I have talked,
or walked, or eaten, or interchangeably used the Duties of common humanity with
some such as he is hardly persuaded of. For I know no Law of God or Man, by
force whereof they should be as Heathens and Publicans unto me, that are not
gracious in the eyes of another man, perhaps without cause, or if with cause:
yet such cause as he is privy unto, and not I. Could he, or any reasonable man
think it is a charitable course in me, to observe them that show by external
courtesies a favorable inclination toward him, and if I spy out any one
amongst them, of whom I think not well, hereupon to draw such an accusation as
this against him, and to offer it where he has given up his against me? which
notwithstanding, I will acknowledge to be just and reasonable, if he or any man
living shall show that I use as much as the bare familiar company but of one,
who, by word, or deed has ever given me cause to suspect or conjecture him,
such as here they are termed, with whom complaint is made that I join my self.
This being spoken therefore, and written without all possibility of proof, does
not Mr. Travers give me overgreat cause to stand in some fear, lest he make
too little conscience how he uses his Tongue or Pen? These things are not laid
against me for nothing; they are to some purpose if they take place. For in a
mind persuaded that I am, as he deciphereth me, one which refuses to be at
peace with such as embrace the truth, and side my self with men sinisterly
affected thereunto, any thing that shall be spoken conferring the unsoundness
of my Doctrine, cannot choose but he favorably entertained. This presupposed,
it will have likelihood enough, which afterward follows, that many of my
Sermons have tasted of some sour leaven or other, that in them he has
discovered many unsound matters. A thing much to be lamented, that such a place
as this, which might have been so well provided for, has fallen into the hands
of one no better instructed in the truth. But what if in the end it be found,
that he judges my words, as they do colors, which look upon them with green
spectacles, and think that which they see is green, when indeed that is green
whereby they see.

7. Touching the first point of this discovery, which is about the matter of
Predestination, to set down that I spoke (for I have it written) to declare and
confirm the several branches thereof, would be tedious now in this Writing,
where I have so many things to touch, that I can but touch them only. Neither
is it herein so needful for me to justify my speech, when the very place and
presence where I spoke, does it self speak sufficiently for my clearing. This
matter was not broached in a blind Alley, or uttered where none was to hear
it, that had skill with Authority to control, or covertly insinuated by some
gliding Sentence.

8. That which I taught was at Paul's Cresse; it was not hudled in amongst other
matterr, in such sort that it could pass without noting; it was opened, it was
proved, it was some reasonable time stood upon. I see not which way my Lord of
London, who was present and heard it, can excuse so great a fault, as
patiently, without rebuke or controlment afterward, to hear any man there
teach otherwise than the Word of God does; nor as it is understood by the
private interpretation of some one or two men, or by a special construction
received in some few Books, but, as it is understood by al^ Churches professing
the Gospel, by them all, and therefore even by our own also amongst others. A
man that did mean to prove that he speaks, would surely take the measure of
his words shorter.

9. The next thing discovered, is an opinion about the assurance of men's
perswas^sions in matters of Faith. I have taught, he says, That the assurance
of things which we believe by the Word, is not so certain as of that we
perceive by sense. And, is it as certain? Yea, I taught as he himself, I trust,
will not deny, that the things which God does promise in his Word, are
surerunto us, than any thing which we touch, handle, or see. But are we so sure
and certain of them: If we be, why does God so often prove his Premises unto
us, as he does by argument taken from our sensible experience? We must be surer
of the proof, than of the thing proved, otherwise it is no proof. How is it,
that if ten men do all look upon the Moon, every one of them knows it as
certainly to be the Moon as another; but many believing one and the same
Promise, all have not one and the same fullness of Persuasion? How falls it
out, that men being assured of any thing by sense, can be no surer of it than
they are; whereas the strongest in faith that lives upon the earth, has
always need to labor, and strive, and pray, that his assurance concerning
Heavenly and Spiritual things, may grow, increase, and be augmented?

10. The Sermon wherein I have spoken somewhat largely of this point, was long
before this late Controversy rose between him and me, upon request of some of
my friends, seen and read by many, and amongst many, some who are thought able
to discern: And I never heard that any one of them hitherto, has condemned it
as containing unsound matter. My Case were very hard, if as often as any thing I
speak displeasing one man's taste, my Doctrine upon his only word should be
taken for sour leaven.

11. The rest of this discovery is all about the matter now in question;
wherein he has two faults predominant, would tire out any that should answer
unto every point severally: un apt speaking of School-Controversies, and of my
words so untoward a reciting, that he which should promise to draw a Man's
Countenance, and did indeed express the parts, at leastwise most of them,
truly, but perversely place them, could not represent a more offensive Visage,
than unto me my own speech seems in some places, as he has ordered it. For
answer whereunto, that Writing is sufficient, wherein I have set down both my
words and meaning in such sort, that where this Accusation does deprave the
one, and either mis-interpret, or, without just cause, mis-like the other, it
will appear so plainly, that I may spare very well to take upon me a new
needless labor here.

12. Only at one thing which is there to be found, because Mr. Travers does
here seem to take such a special advantage, as if the matter were unanswerable,
he constrains me either to detect his oversight, or to confess mine own in
it. In settling the Question between the Church of Rome and us, about Grace and
Justification, lest I should give them an occasion to say, as commonly they
do, that when we cannot refute their Opinions, we propose to our selves such
instead of theirs, as we can refute; I took it for the best and most
perspicuous way of teaching, to declare first, how far^ we do agree, and then
to show our disagreement: not generally (as Mr. Travers his His word^ be these,
The next Sabbath day after this, Mr. Hisker kept the way he entered into before,
^^^ bestowed his whole hour and more, only upon the questions he had moved and
maintained. Wherein he so set the agreement of the Church of Rome with us, and
their disagreement from us, as if we had consented in the greatest and
weightiest Points, and differed only in certain smaller matters. Which
Agreement noted by him in two Chief Points, is not such as he would have made
men believe: The one, in that he said they acknowledge all men Siners, even the
Blessed Virgin, though some of them freed her from Sin: For the Council of
Trent holds, that she was free from Sin: Another, In that he said, They
reach Christ's Righteousness to be the only meritorions Cause of taking away
Sin, and differ from as only in the applying of it. For, Thomas Aquinas,
their Chief Schoolman, and Archbishop Catherinus, teach. The Christ took away
only Original sinae, and that the rest are to be taken away by our selves:
yea, the Council of Trent teaches. That the Righteousness whereby we are
righteous in God's sight. Is inherent righteousness, which must needs be our
own works, and cannot be understood of the righteousness inherent only in
Christ's Person, and accounted unto us.
words would carry it, for the easier fastening that upon me, wherewith, saving
only by him, I was never in my life touched;) but about the matter only of
Justification: for further I had no cause to meddle at this time. What was then
my Offense in this Case? I did, as he says, so set it out, as if we had
consented in the greatest and weightiest Points, and differed only in smaller
matters. It will not be found, when it comes to the balance, a light
difference where we disagree, as I did acknowledge that we do, about the very
essence of the Medicine whereby Christ cures our Disease. Did I go about to
make a show of Agreement in the weightiest Points, and was I so fond as not to
conceal our disagreement about this? I do with that some indifferency were
used by them that have taken the weighing of my words.

13. Yea, but our Agreement is not such in two of the chiefest Points, as I
would have men believe it is? And what are they? The one is, I said, They
acknowledge all men sinners, even the Blessed Virgin, though some of them free
her from sin. Put the case I had affirmed, That only some of them free her
from sin, and had delivered it as the most current opinion amongst them, that
she was conceived in sin: does not Bona^ Tature say plainly, Omnesfere, in a
manner all men do bold this ^ does he not bring many reasons wherefore all men
should hold it? Were their voices since that time ever counted, and their
number found smaller which hold it, than theirs that hold the contrary? Let the
question then be, Whether I might say, The most of them acknowledged all men
sinner, even the Blessed Virgin her self. To show, that their general received
opinion is the contrary, the Tridentine Council is alleged, peradventure not
altogether so considerately. For if that Council have by resolute determination
freed her, if it held as Mr. Travers says it does, that she was free from sin;
then must the Church of Rome needs condemn them that hold the contrary: For
what thee Council holds, the same they all do and must hold, But in the
Church of Rome, who knows not, that it is a thing indifferent to think and
defend the one or the other? So that, by this Argument, the Council of Trent
holds the Virgin free from sin; ergo, it is plain that none of them may,
and therefore untrue, that most of them do acknowledge her a Sinner, were for
able to overthrow my supposed Affection, if it were true that the Council did
hold this. But to the end it may clearly appear, how it neither holds this
not the contrary, I will open what many do conceive of the Canon that
concerns this matter. The Fathers of Trent perceived, that if they should
define of this matter, it would be dangerous howsoever it were determined. If
they had freed her from her Original sin, the reasons against them are
unanswerable, which Bonave^ture and others do allege, but especially Thomas,
whose line, as much as may be, they follow. Again, if they did resolve the
other way, they should control themselves in another thing, which i^ no case
might be altered. For they profess to keep no day holy in the honor of an
^^^^holy thing; and the Virgin Conception they honor with a This does much
trouble Thomas, holding her Conception stained with the natural blemish
inherent in mortal seed. And ^^e^e ^^^^ he putieth it est with two Answers; the
one, I h^t^ her Church of Rome does not allow, but tolerate the Feast; which
answer now will not serve: The other, that being sort she was sanct fi^e^
before birth, but on sure how long a while ^her her Conception, therefore under
the names of her Conception-day, they honor the ^it^^ of her Sanctification. So
that besides this, they have ne^^r no soder.3 make the certain allowance of
their Feast, and their uncertain sentence concerning her sin, to clear
together, H^^. ^ ^orl^ quast. 87 on. 8. ab. 2. and 3.
Feast, which they could not abrogate without cancelling a Constitution of
^ystem Quo^^^^. And, that which is worse, the World might parhaps suspect, that
if the Church of Rome did^ amiss before in this, it is not impossible for her
to fail in other things. In the end, they did wisely quo^^ out their Canon by a
middle thread establishing the Feast of the Virgin's Conception, and leaving the
other question doubtful as they found it, giving only a Cavent, that no man
should take the Decree, which pronounces all Mankind originally sinful, for
a definitive Sentence concerning the Blessed Virgin. This in my sight is plain
by their own words, Annot in Romans 5. sect. 9.
Declarat hac ipsa sancta Synod^^, etc. Wherefore our Countrymen at Rhe^^s,
mentioning this Point, are mavelous wary how they speak, they touch it as
though it were a hot coal: Many godly devout men judge, that our blessed Lady
was neither burn not cou^^^d in sin. Is it their wont to speak ainely of things
definitively set down in that Council?

In like sort, we find that the rest, which have since that time of the
Tridentine Synod written of Original sin, are in this Point, for the mostpart,
either silent, or very sparing in speech: and, when they speak, either doubtful
what to think, or whatsoever they think themselves; fearful to set down any
certain Determination. If I be thought to take the Canon of this Council
otherwise than they themselves do, let him expound in, whose Sentence was
neither last asked, not his Pen least occupied in setting it down; I mean
Androdius, whom Gregory the thirteenth has allowed plainly to confessed, that it
is a matter which neither express evidence of Scripture, not the Tradition of
the Fathers, nor the Sentence of Church has determined; Lib. 5. deleas. fidei.
that they are too surly and self-willed, which defending their opinion, are
displeased with them by whom, the other is maintained: Finally, that the Father
of Trent have not set down any certainty about this Question, but lest it
doubtful and indifferent.

Now whereas my words, which I had set down in Writing, before I uttered them,
were indeed these, Although they imagine, that the Mother of our Lord Jesus
Christ, were, for his honor, and by his special protection, preserved clean
from all sin; yet concerning the rest, they teach as we do, that all have
sinned. Against my words they might, with more pretense, take exception,
Because so many of them think she had sin: which exception notwithstanding,
the Proposition being indefinite, and the matter contingent, they cannot take,
because they grant, That many whom they account grave and devout amongst them,
think, that she was clear from all sin. But, whether Mr. Travers did note my
words himself, or take them upon the credit of some other man's noting, the
Tables were faulty wherein it was noted: All men sinners, even the Blessed
Virgin. When my second Speech was rather, All men, except the Blessed Virgin.
To leave this; another fault he finds, that I said, They teach Christ's
Righteousness to be the only meritorious cause of taking away sin, and
differ from us only in the applying of it. I did say, and do, They teach as
we do, that although Christ be the only meritorious cause of our Justice, yet
as a medicine which is made for Health, does not heal by being made, but by
being applied: So, by the merits of Christ, there can be no Life nor
Justification, without the application of his merits: But about the manner of
applying Christ, about the number and power of means whereby he is applied, we
dissent from them. This of our dissenting from them is acknowledged.

14. Our agreement in the former is denied to be such as I pretend. Let their
own words therefore and mine concerning them, be compared. Does not Andradius
plainly confess, Orthod. lib. 3^ In Sent. did. 1. quaest. 4. art. 6.
Our sins do shut, and only the merits of Christ open the entering unto
blessedness? And So to; It is put for a good ground, that all, since the fall
of Adam, obtained Salvation only by the Passion of Christ: Howbeit, as no
cause can be effectual without applying, so neither can any man be saved, to
whom the suffering of Christ is not applied. In a word, who not? When the
Council of Trent, reckoning up the causes of our first Justification, does name
no end, but God's Glory, and our Felicity; no efficient, but his Mercy; no
Instrumental, but Baptism; no meritorious, but Christ; whom to have merited the
taking away of no sin but Original, is not their opinion: which himself will
find, when he has well examined his Witnesses, Catharinus and Thomas. Their
Jesuits are mavelous angry with the men out of whose gleanings Mr. Travers
seems to have taken this, Bellarm. Judic. de lib. Concor. Mend^. 11. Nemo
Catholicorum unquam sic docuit, sed credimus and profitemur Christum in Cruce
pro omnibus omnino peccatis satisfecisse, tam originalibus quam actualibus.
they openly disclaim it; they say plainly, Of all this Catholics, there is no
one this did ever so teach; they make solemn protestation, We believe and
profess, That Christ upon the Cross has altogether satisfied for all sins, as
well Original as Actual. Indeed they teach, that the merit of Christ does not
take away Actual sin, in such sort as it does Original; wherein, if their
Doctrine had been understood, I for my speech had never been accused. As for
the Council of Trent, concerning inherent Righteousness, what does it here? No
man doubts, but they make another formal cause of Justification than we do.
In respect whereof, I have showed you already, that we disagree about the very
essence of that which cures our Spiritual disease. Most time it is which the
grand Philosopher has, Every man judges well of that which he knows; and
therefore till we know the things thoroughly, whereof we judge, it is a point of
judgment to stay our judgment.

15. Thus much labor being spent in discovering the unsoundness of my
Doctrine, some pains he takes further to open faults in the manner of my
teaching, as that, I bestowed my whole hour and more, my time and more than my
time, in discourses utterly impertinent to my Text. Which, if I had done, it
might have past without complaining of to the Privy Council.

16. But I did worse, as he says, I left the expounding of the Scriptures, and
my ordinary Calling, and discoursed upon School-points and questions, neither
of edification, nor of truth. I read no Lecture in the Law, or in Physic. And
except the bounds of ordinary Calling may be drawn like a Purse, how are they
so much wider unto him than to me, that he which in the limits of his ordinary
Calling, should reprove that in me which he understood not; and I laboring
that both he and others might understand, could not do this without forsaking
my Calling? The matter whereof I spoke was such, as being at the first by me
but lightly touched, he had in that place openly contradicted, and solemnly
taken upon him to disprove. If therefore it were a School-question, and unfit
to be discoursed of there, that which was in me but a Proposition only at the
first, wherefore made he a Problem of it? Why took he first upon him to
maintain the negative of that, which I had affirmatively spoken, only to show
mine own opinion, little thinking that ever it would have been a Question? Of
what nature soever the Question were, I could do no less than there explain
my self to them, unto whom I was accused of unsound Doctrine; wherein if to
show, what had been through ambiguity mistaken in my words, or misapplied by
him in this Cause against me, I used the distinctions and helps of Schools; I
trust that herein I have committed no unlawful thing. These School-implements
are acknowledged by grave and wise men not unprofitable to have been invented.
Cal^. l^st. l. ^. c. 6. sect. 9.
The most approved for Learning and Judgment do use them without blame, the
use of them has been well liked in some that have taught even in this very
place before me: the quality of my Hearers is such, that I could not but think
them of capacity very sufficient, for the most part, to conceive harder than I
used any; the cause I had in hand did in my judgment necessarily require them
which were then used: when my words spoken generally, without distinctions had
been perverted, what other way was there for me, but by distinctions to lay
them open in their right meaning, that it might appear to all men, whether they
were consonant to truth or no? And, although Mr. Travers be so inured with the
City, that he thinks it unmeet to use any speech which savoureth of the
School, yet his opinion is no Canon: though unto him, his mind being troubled,
my speech did seem like Fetters and Manacles, yet there might be some more
calmly affected, which thought otherwise; his private judgment will hardly
warrant his bold words, that the things which I spoke, were neither of
edification nor truth. They might edify some other for any thing he knows,
and be true for any thing he proves to the contrary. For it is no proof to
cry: Absurdities, the like whereunto have not been heard in public places
within this Land since Queen Marie's days! If this came in earnest from him, I
am sorry to see him so much offended without cause; more sorry, that his fit^
should be so extreme, to make him speak he knows not what. That I neither
affected the truth of God, nor the peace of the Church; Mihi pro minimo ^est,
it does not much move me, when Mr. Travers does say that, which I trust a
greater than Mr. Travers will gainsay.

17. Now let all this which hitherto he has said be granted him; let it be as
he would have it, let my Doctrine and manner of teaching be as much disallowed
by all men's Judgments as by his, what is all this to his purpose? He
alleges this to be the cause why he brings it in. The High-Commissioners
charge him with an indiscretion and want of duty, in that he inveighed against
certain Points of Doctrine, taught by me as erroneous, not con^erring first
with me, nor complaining of it to them. Which faults, a sea of such matter as
he has hitherto waded in, will never be able to scour from him. For the
avoiding Schism and disturbance in the Church, which must needs grow, if all
men might think what they list, and speak openly what they think; therefore by
a In the Advertisments published in the seventh year of her Majesty's Reign: If
any Preacher, or Parson, Vicar, or Cura^e so licensed, shall fortune to preach
any matter tending to dissension, or to decoration of the Religion and Doctrine
received, that the Hearers denounce the same to the Ordinary, or to the next
Bishop of the same place, but not openly to contrary, or to impugn the same
speech so disorderly uttered, whereby may grew Offense, and Disquiet of the
People, but shall be convinced and reproved by the Ordinary, after such
agreeable order as shall be seen to him, according to the gravity of the
Offense: And that it be presented within one month after the words spoken.
Decree agreed upon by the Bishops, and confirmed by her Majesty's Authority,
it was ordered, That erroneous Doctrine, if it were taught publicly, should
not be publicly refuted; but that notice thereof should be given into such as
are by her Highness appointed to hear, and to determine such Causes. For breach
of which Order, when he is charged with lack of Duty, all the faults that can
be heaped upon me, will make but a weak defense for him: As surely his defense
is not much stronger, when he alleges for himself, That he was in some hope
his speech in proving the truth, and clearing those scraples which I had in my
self, might cause me either to embrace sound Doctrine, or suffer it to be
embraced of others; which, if I did, he should not need to complain: that, It
was meet he should discover first what I had sown, and make it manifest to be
tares, and then desire their Sith to cut it down: that, Conscience did binds
him to do otherwise, than the foresaid Order requires; that, He was unwilling
to deal in that public manner, and wished a more convenient way were taken for
it: that, He had resolved to have protested the next Sabbath day, that he would
some other way satisfy such as should require it, and not deal more in that
place. Be it imagined, [let me not be taken as if I did compare the offenders,
when I do not, but their Answers onely] that a Libeller did make this Apology
for himself, I am not ignorant, that if I have just matter against any man, the
Law is open, there are Judges to hear it, and Courts where it ought to be
complained of; I have taken another course against such or such a man, yet
without breach of Duty; forasmuch as I am able to yield a reason of my doing, I
conceive some hope, that a little discredit amongst men would make him ashamed
of himself, and that his shame would work his amendment; which if it did, other
accusation there should not need; could his answer he thought sufficient, could
it in the judgment of discreet men, free him from all blame? No more can the
hope Mr. Travers conceived, to reclaim me by public speech, justify his fault
against the established Order of the Church.

18. His thinking it meet; he should first openly discover to the People the
Tares that had been sown amongst them, and then require the hand of Authority
to mow them down, does only make it a Question, Whether his opinion that this
was meet, may be a privilege or protection against the lawful Constitution
which had before determined of it as of a thing unmeet. Which Question I leave
for them to discuss whom it most concerns. If the Order be such, that it
cannot be kept without hazarding a thing so precious as a good Conscience, the
peril whereof could be no greater to him, than it needs must be to all others
whom it touches in like Causes; then this is evident, it will be an effectual
motive, not only for England, but also for other Reformed Churches, even
Geniva it self [for they have the like] to change or take that away which
cannot but with great inconvenience be observed. In the mean while the breach
of it may, in such consideration, be pardoned [which truly I wish howsoever it
be] yet hardly defended as long as it stands in force uncancelled.

19. Now, whereas he confesses another way had been more convenient, and that
he found in himself secret unwillingnesse to do that which he did, does he not
say plainly, in effect, that the light of his own Understanding, proved the way
that he took perverse and crooked; Reason was so plain and pregnant against it,
that his Mind was alienated, his Will averted to another course? yet somewhat
there was that so far overruled, that it must needs be done even against the
very stream, what does it bewray? Finally his purposed Protestation, whereby he
meant openly to make it known, that he did not allow this kind of proceeding,
and therefore would satisfy men otherwise, and deal no more in this Place,
shows his good mind in this, that he meant to stay himself from further
offending; but it serves not his turn. He is blamed because the thing he has
done was amiss, and his Answer is, That which I would have done afterward had
been well, if so be I had done it.

20. But as in this he stands persuaded, that he has done nothing besides
duty, so he takes it hardly, that the High Commissioners should charge him
with indiscretion. Wherefore, as if he could so wash his hands, he makes a
long and a large declaration concerning the carriage of himself: how he waded
in matters of smaller weight, and how in things of greater moment; how wary he
dealt; how naturally he took his things rising from the Text; how closely he
kept himself to the Scriptures he took in hand; how much pains he took to
confirm the necessity of believing Justification by Christ only, and to show
how the Church of Rome denies that a man is saved by Faith alone, without
works of the Law; what the Sons of Thunder would have done, if they had been in
his case; that his Answer was very temperate, without immodest or reproachful
speech, that when he might before all have reproved me, he did not, but
contented himself with exhorting me before all, to follow Nathan's example, and
revisit my Doctrine; when he might have followed Saint Paul's example in
reproving Peter, he did not, but exhorted me with Peter, to endure to be
withstood. This Testimony of his discreet carrying himself in the handling of
his matter, being more agreeably framed and given him by another than by
himself, might make somewhat for the praise of his Person; but for defense of
his action unto them by whom he is thought undiscreet, for not concerning
privately before he spoke, will it serve to answer, that when he spoke, he did
it considerately? He perceives it will not, and therefore adds reasons, such
as they are: as namely, how he purposed at the first to take another course,
and that was this, Publicly to deliver the truth of such Doctrine as I had
otherwise taught, and at convenient opportunity to conferr with me upon such
points. Is this the rule of Christ? If thy Brother offend openly in his speech,
control it first with contrary speech openly, and conferr with him afterward
upon it, when convenient opportunity serves? Is there any Law of God or Man,
whereupon to ground such a Resolution? any Church extant in the World, where
Teachers are allowed thus to do, or to be done unto? He cannot but see how
weak an allegation it is, when he brings in his following this course, first
in one matter, and so afterward in another, to approve himself, now following
it again. For if the purpose of doing of a thing so uncharitable be a fault,
the deed is a greater fault; and does the doing of it twice, make it the third
time fit and allowable to be done? The weight of the Cause, which is his third
defense, relieveth him as little. The weightier it was, the more it required
considerate advice and consultation, the more it stood him upon to take good
heed, that nothing were rashly done or spoken in it. But he means weighty, in
regard of the wonderful danger, except he had presently withstood me without
expecting a time of Conference. This Cause being of such moment that might
prejudice the Faith of Christ, encourage the ill-affected to continue still in
their damnable ways, and other weak in Faith, to suffer themselves to be
seduced, to the destruction of their Souls, he thought it his bounden duty to
speak before he talked with me. A man that should read this, and not know what
I had spoken, might imagine that I had at the least denied the Divinity of
Christ. But they which were present at my speech, and can testify, that
nothing passed my lips more than is contained in their Writings, whom, for
soundness of Doctrine, Learning, and Judgment, Mr. Travers himself does, I
dare say, not only allow, but honor; they which heard, and do know, that the
Doctrine here signified in so fearful manner, the Doctrine that was so
dangerous to the Faith of Christ, that was so likely to encourage ill-affected
men to continue still in their damnable ways; that gave so great cause to
tremble for fear of the present destruction of Souls, was only this, I doubt
not but God was merciful to save thousands of our Fathers, living heretofore in
the Popish Superstition, in as much as they sinned ignorantly; and this spoken
in a Sermon, the greatest part whereof was against Popery, they will hardly be
able to discern how CHRISTIANITY should herewith be so grievously shaken.

21. Whereby his fourth excuse is also taken from him. For what does it boot
him to say, The time was short wherein he was to preach after me, when his
Preaching of this matter perhaps ought, surely might have been either very well
omitted, or at least more conveniently for a while deferred; even by their
Judgments that cast the most favorable aspect toward these his hasty
proceedings. The poison which men had taken at my hands, was not so quick and
strong in operation, as in eight days to make them past cure; by eight days
delay, there was no likelihood that the force and power of his Speech could
dye; longer meditation might bring better and stronger proofs to mind, than
extemporal dexterity could furnish him with: And, who does know whether Time,
the only Mother of sound Judgment and discreet dealing, might have given that
action of his some better ripeness, which, by so great festination has, as a
thing born out of time, brought small joy unto him that begat it? Does he think
it had not been better, that neither my speech had seemed in his eyes as an
Arrow sticking in a thigh of Flesh; nor his own as a Child whereof he must
needs be delivered by an hour? His last way of disburthening himself, is by
casting his Load upon my Back, as if I had brought him by former Conferences
out of hope, that any fruit should ever come of conferring with me. Loath I am
to rip up those Conferences, whereof he makes but a slippery and loose
relation. In one of them the question between us was, Whether the persuasion of
Faith concerning remission of sins, eternal life, and whatsoever God does
promise unto man, be as free from doubting, as the persuasion which we have by
sense concerning things tasted, felt, and seen? For the Negative, I mentioned
their example, whose Faith in Scripture is most commended, and the experience
which all faithful men have continually had of themselves. For proof of the
Affirmative, which he held. I desiring to have some reason, heard nothing but
all good Writers oftentimes incul^a^ed. At the length, upon request to see some
one of them, Peter Martyr's Common places were brought, where the leaves were
turned down, at a place sounding to this effect. That the Gospel does make
Christians more virtuous; than moral Philosophy does make Heat hens: which came
not near the questions by many miles.

22. In the other Conference he questioned about the matter of Reprobation,
misliking first, that I had termed God a permissive, and no positive cause of
the evil, which the Schoolmen do call malum cuspae. Secondly, that to their
Objection who say, If I be elected, do what I will, I shall be saved, I had
answered, that the will of God in this thing is not absolute, but conditional,
to save his Elect believing, fearing, and obediently, serving him. Thirdly,
that to stop the mouths of such as grudge and repine against God for rejecting
Cast aways, I had taught that they are not rejected, no not in the purpose and
counsel of God, without a foreseen worthiness of rejection going, though not
in time, yet in order^ before^ For if God's electing do in order^ (as needs it
must) presuppose the foresight of their being that are elected, though they be
elected before they be; nor only the positive foresight of their being, but
also the permissive of their being miserable, because Election is through
mercy, and mercy does always presuppose misery: it follows, that the very
Chosen of God acknowledge to the praise of the riches of his exceeding free
compassion, that when he in his secret determination set it down, Those shall
live and not dye, they lay as ugly spectacles before him, as Lepers covered
with dung and mine, as ulcers putrified in their Fathers ^oyns, miserable,
worthy to be had in detestation; and shall any forsaken Creature be able to say
unto God, Thou did plunge me into the depth, and assign me unto endless
torments, only to satisfy thine own will, finding nothing in me for which I
could seem in thy sight so well worthy to feel everlasting flames?

23. When I saw that Mr. Travers carped at these things, only because they lay
not open, I promised at some convenient time to make them clear as light both
to him and all others. Which, if they that reprove me will not grant me leave
to do, they must think that they are for some cause or other more desirous to
have me reputed an unsound man, then willing that my sincere meaning should
appear and be approved. When I was further asked what my grounds were? I
answered, that Saint Paul's words concerning this Cause were my grounds. His
next Demand, What Author I did follow in expounding Saint Paul, and gathering
the Doctrine out of his words, against the judgment (he says) of all
Churches, and all good Writers. I was well assured, that, to control this
overreaching speech, the sentences which I might have cited out of
Church-Confessions, together with the have learned Monuments of former times,
and not the meanest of our own, were tho i^ number than perhaps he would
willingly have heard of: but what had this booted me? For, although he himself
in generality do much use those formal speeches, All churches and all good
Writers: yet, as he holds it, in Pulpit, lawful to say in general, the
Pa^uims think this, or the Heathens that, but utterly unlawful to cite any
sentence of theirs that say it: so he gave me at that time great cause to
think, than my particular alleging of other men's words, to show their
agreement with mine, would as much have displeased his mind, as the thing it
self for which it had been alleged; for he knows how often he has in
public place bitten me for this although I did never in any Sermon use many of
the Sentences of other Writers, and do make most without any; having always
thought it meetest, neither to affect nor contemn the use of them.

24. He is not ignorant, that in the very entrance to the talk, which we had
privately at that time, to prove it unlawful altogether in Preaching, either
for confirmation, declaration, or otherwise, to cite any thing but mere
Canonical Scripture, he brought in, The Scripture is given by inspiration, and
is profitable to teach, improve, etc. urging much the vigor of these two
Clauses; The man of God and every good work. If therefore the work were good
which he required at my hands, if privately to show why I thought the Doctrine
I had delivered to be according to Saint Paul's meaning, were a good work, can
they which take the place before alleged for a Law, condemning every man of
God, who^ in doing the work of Preaching any other way uses human Authority,
like it in me, if, in the work of strengthening that which I had preached, I
should bring forth the testimonies and the sayings of mortal men? I alleged
therefore that which might under no pretense in the world be disallowed, namely
reasons, not meaning thereby mine own reason, as now it is reported, but true,
sound, divine reason; reason whereby chose Conclusions might be out of Saint
Paul demonstrated, and not probably discoursed of only; reason, proper to that
science whereby the things of God are known; Theological Reason, without
Principles in Scripture that are plain, soundly deduced more doubtful
inferences, in such sort that being heard they cannot be denied, not any thing
repugnant unto them received, but whatsoever was before otherwise by
miscollecting gathered out of dark places, is thereby forced to yield it self,
and the true consonant meaning of Sentences not understood, is brought to
light. This is the reason which I intended. If it were possible for me to
escape the Ferula in any thing I do or speak, I had undoubtedly escaped in
this. In this I did that which by some is enjoined as the only allowable, but
granted by all as the most sure and safe way, whereby to resolve things doubted
of in matters appertaining to Faith and Christian Religion. So that Mr. Travers
had here small cause given him to be weary of conferring, unless it was in
other respects, than that poor one which is here pretended, that is to say, the
little hope he had of doing me any good by conference.

25. Yet behold his first reason of not complaining to the High Commission, is,
That since I offended only through an over-charitable inclination, he conceived
good hope, when I should see the truth cleared, and some scruples, which where
in my mind, removed by his diligence, I would yield. But what experience
soever he had of former Conferences, how small soever his hope was, that fruit
would come of it, if he should have conferred, will any man judge this a Cause
sufficient, why to open his mouth in public, without any one word privately
spoken: He might have considered the men do sometimes reap, where they sow but
wish small hope; he might have considered, that although unto me (whereof he
was not certain neither) but if to me his labor should be as Water spilt or
poured into a torn dish, yet to him it could not be fruitless to do that,
which Order in Christian Churches, that which Charity amongst Christian men,
that which at many men's hands, even common humanity it self, at his, many
other things besides, did require. What fruit could there come of his open
contradicting in so great haste, with so small advice, but such as must needs
be unpleasant, and mingled with much ace^bity? Surely, he which will take upon
him to defend, that, in this, there was no oversight, must beware, left, by
such defenses, he leave an opinion dwelling in the minds of men, that he is
more stiff to maintain what he has done, then careful to do nothing but that
which may justly be maintained.

26. Thus have I, as near as I could, seriously answered things of weight: with
smaller I have dealt, as I thought their quality did require. I take no joy in
striving, I have not been nuzled or trained up in it. I would to Christ they
which have at this present enforced me hereunto, had so ruled their hands in
any reasonable time, that I might never have been constrained to strike so much
as in mine own defense. Wherefore to prosecute this long and redious contention
no further, I shall wish that your Grace and their Honors (unto whose
intelligence the dutiful regard, which I have of their Judgments, makes me
desirous, that as accusations have been brought against me, so that this my
answer thereunto may likewise come) did both with the one the other, as
Constantine with Books containing querulous matter. Whether this be convenient
to be wished or no, I cannot tell: But since there can come nothing of
contention, but the mutual waste of the Parties contending, till a common enemy
dance in the ashes of them both, I do wish heartily that the grave advice which
Constantine gave for re-uniting of his Clergy so many times, upon some small
occasions, in so lamentable sort divided; or rather the strict Commandment of
Christ unto his, that they should not be divided at all; may at the length, if
it be his blessed will, prevail so far, at least in this corner of the
Christian world, to the burying and quite forgetting of strife, together with
the Causes that have either bred it, or brought it up, that things of small
moment never disjoyn them, whom one God, one Lord, one Faith, one Spirit, one
Baptism, bands of so great force have linked; that a respectively eye toward
things wherewith we should not be disquieted, make us not, as through infirmity
the very Patriarchs themselves sometimes were, full gorged, unable to speak
peaceably to their own Brother. Finally, that no strife may ever be heard of
again, but this, Who shall hate strife most, who shall pursue peace and unity
with swiftest paces.

To The Christian Reader.
WHereas many desirous of resolution in some Points handled in this learned
Discourse, were earnest to have it Copied out; to case so many labors, it has
been thought most worthy and very necessary to be printed: that not only they
might be satisfied, but the whole Church also hereby edified. The rather,
because it will free the Author from the suspicion of some Errors, which he
has been thought to have favored. Who might well have answered with Cremutius
in Tacitus, Lib. 4. Ann.
Verba mea arguuntur, adeo factorum innocens sum. Lib. 1. Hist.
Certainly, the event of that time wherein he lived, showed that to be true,
which the same Author spoke of a worse, Cui deerat inimicus, per amicos
oppressus; and that there is not minus periculum ex magna fama, quam ex mala.
In vita Agricolae.
But he has so quit himself, that all may see how, as it was said of Agricola,
Simul suis virtutibus, simul vitiis aliorum, in ipsam gloriam praeceps
agebatur. Touching whom I will say no more, but that which my Author said of
the same man, Lib. ^.
Integritatem, etc. in tanto viro refer, injuria virtutum fuerit. But as of
all other his Writings, so of this I will add that which Velleius spoke in
commendation of Piso, Nemo fuit, qui megis quae agenda erant curaret, sine ulla
ostentatione agendi. So not doubting, good Christian Reader, of thy assent
herein, but wishing thy favorable acceptance of this Work (which will be an
inducement to set forth others of his Learned labors) I take my leave, from
Corpus Christi College in Oxford, the sixth of July, 1612.

Thine in Christ Jesus, HENRY IACKSON.

A LEARNED DISCOURSE OF Justification, Works, and how the Foundation of FAITH
is overthrown.
HABAK. 1. 4. The wicked does compass about the righteous: therefore perverse
Judgment does proceed.
FOR the better manifestation of the Prophets meaning in this place the wicked,
of whom he says, that They: Secondly, the righteous, that are compassed
Therefore perverse judgment proceeds. Touching the first, There are two
kinds of wicked men, of whom in the fist of the former to the Corinthians, the
blessed Apostle speaks thus: 1 Cor. 5. 13.
Do ye not judge them that are within; But God judges them that art without.
There are wicked therefore whom the Church may judge, and there are wicked whom
God only judges: wicked within, and wicked without the walls of the Church.
If within the Church, particular persons be apparently such, as cannot
otherwise be reformed; the rule of the Apostolical judgment is this, Separate
them from among you: if whole Assemblies, this: 2 Cor. 6. 7.
Separate your selves from among them: For what society has light with
darkness? But the wicked; whom the Prophet means, were Babylonians, and
therefore without. For which cause we heard at large heretofore in what sort he
urges God to judge them.

2. Now concerning the righteous, their neither it, nor ever was any mere
natural man absolutely righteous in himself, that is to say, void of all
unrighteousness of all sin. We dare not except, no not the blessed Virgin her
self, of whom although we say with St. Augustine, for the honor sake which we
owe to our Lord and Savior Christ, we are not willing in this cause, to move
any question of his Mother: yet for as much as the Schools of Rome have made it
a question; we may answer with Or whosoever it be, that was the author of those
Homilies that go under his name.
Eusebius Emissenus, who, speaks of her and to her in this effect: Thou
did, by special Prerogative nine months together entertain within the Closet
of the Flesh, the hope of all the ends of the Earth, the honor of the World,
the common joy of Men. He, from whom all things had their beginning, had his
beginning from thee; of the Body he took the blood, which was to be shed for
the life of the World; of thee he took that which even for thee be paid.
Knowing how the Schoolmen hold this question, some Critical wits may perhaps
half suspect that these two words, Per se, are Inmates. But ^l the place which
they have, be their own, their sense can be none other than that which I have
given them by a paraphrastical interpretation.
A peccati enim veteris nexu, per se non est immunis ipsa genitrix Redemptoris:
The Mother of the Redeemer himself, is not otherwise loosed from the bond of
ancient sin, than by redemption: if Christ have paid a ransom for all, even
for her, it follows, that all, without exception, were Captives. If one have
died for all, then all were dead in sin; all sinful therefore, none
absolutely righteous in themselves; but we are absolutely righteous in Christ.
The World then must show a righteous man, otherwise not able to show a man that
is perfectly righteous: Christ is made to us Wisdom, Justice, Sanctification,
and Redemption: Wisdom, because he has revealed his Fathers will: Justice,
because he has offered up himself a Sacrifice for sin: Sanctification, because
he has given us his Spirit, Redemption, because he has appointed a day to
vindicate his Children out of the bonds of Corruption into liberty which is
glorious. How Christ is made Wisdom, and how Redemption, it may be declared,
when occasion serves. But how Christ is made the Righteousness of men, we are
now to declare.

3. There is a glorifying Righteousness of men in the World to come: as there
is a justifying and sanctifying Righteousness here. The Righteousness,
wherewith we shall be clothed in the World to come, is both perfect and
inherent. That whereby here we are justified is perfect; but not inherent. That
whereby we are sanctified, is inherent, but not perfect. This opens a way to
the understanding of that grand question, which hangs yet in controversy
between us and the Church of Rome, about the matter of justifying Righteousness.

They teach as we do, that God does justify the Soul of man alone, without any
co-effective cause of Justice.
4. First, although they imagine, that the Mother of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, were, for his honor, and by his special protection, preserved clean
from all sin: yet touching the rest, they teach as we do, That Infants that
never did actually offend, have their Natures defiled, destitute of Justice,
averted from God; That in making man righteous, none do efficiently work with
God, but God. They teach as we do, that unto Justice no man ever attained, but
by the Merits of Jesus Christ. Deus si^e ^eido co-effectvo animam justificat.
Ca. sal. de qundripart just. l. 6. c. Idem lib. 3. c. 9.
They teach as we do, That although Christ as God, be the efficient; as Man,
the meritorious cause of our Justice; yet in us also there is some thing
required. God is the cause of our natural life, in him we live: but he
quickneth not the Body without the Soul in the Body. Christ has merited to
make us just: but, as a medicine, which is made for health, does not head by
being made, but by being applied; so, by the merits of Christ there can be no
Justification, without the application of his Merits. Thus far we join hands
with the Church of Rome.

The difference between the Parish and on about Justification.
5. Wherein then do we disagree? We disagree about the future and offense of the
Medicine, whereby Christ cures our Disease; about the (...) of applying it;
about the number, and the power of means, which God requires in as for the
effectual applying thereof to our Souls comfort. When they are re(...) that the
righteousness is, whereby a Christian man is justified: they Tho. Aq^a. 1. 2.
quaest. 100. Gratia gratum facieus, ^^ est. justificam, est in animo quiddam
gerle and pusitiv^, qualites quaedam (art. 2 concl.) supernaturali, non eadem
cum virtute insula, ut Magister; sed eliquid (art. 3.) praeter virtates,
insuse^; sidem, spem, charitatem, hablurdo cuaedem (art. 3. ad. 3.) que
presuppomitur in virturibos asba sicur earuin principium and rador, essentiam
anima tanquam subjectum occupat non potentias, sed ob ipsa (art. 4 ad 1.)
effluence vi^ tutis in potentias animae, per quas potentiae morentur ad actus
phar. vid. quasi. 113. de Justificarione.
answer, that it is a Divine Spiritual quality; which quality received into the
Soul, does first make it to be one of them, who are born of God? and secondly,
indue it with power, to bring forth such works, as they do that are born of
him, even as the Soul of Man being joined to his Body, does first make him to
be of the number of reasonable Creatures, and secondly, enable him to perform
the natural Functions which are proper to his kind; That it makes the Soul
amiable and gracious in the sight of God, in regard whereof it is termed Grace;
That is purges, purifieth, and washes out all the stains, and pollutions of
sins, that by it, through the merit of Christ we are delivered as from sin, so
from eternal death and condemnation, the reward of sin. This Grace they will
have to be applied by infusion, to the end, that as the Body is warm by the
heat which is in the Body, so the Soul might be righteous by inherent Grace:
which Grace they make capable of increase; as the Body may be more and more
warm, so the Soul more and more justified, according as Grace should be
augmented; the augmentation whereof is merited by good Works, as good Works are
made meritorious by it. Wherefore, the first receipt of Grace in their Divinity,
is, the first Justification; the increase thereof, the second Justification. As
Grace may be increased by the merit of good Works: so it may be diminished by
the demerit of sins venial, it may be lost by mortal sin. In as much therefore
as it is needful in the one case to repair, in the other to recover the loss
which is made: the infusion of Grace has her sundry after-meals; for the which
cause, they make many ways to apply the infusion of Grace. It is applied to
Infants, through Baptism, without either Faith or Works, and in them really it
takes away Original sin, and the punishment due unto it; It is applied to
Infidels and wicked men in the first Justification, through Baptism without
Works, yet not without Faith; and it takes away both Sins Actual and
Original together, with all whatsoever punishment, eternal or temporal, thereby
deserved. Unto such as have attained the first Justification, that is to say,
the first receipt of Grace, it is applied farther by good Works to the increase
of former Grace, which is the second Justification. If they work more and more,
Grace does more increase, and they are more and more justified. To such as
diminished it by venial sins, it is applied by Holy Water. Ave Marie's,
Crossings, Papal Salutations, and such like, which serve for reparations of
Grace decayed. To such as have lost it through mortal sin, it is applied by
the Sacrament (as they term it) of Penance: which Sacrament has force to
conferr Grace anew, yet in such sort, that being so conferred, it has not
altogether so much power, as at the first. For it only cleanses out the stain
or guilt of sin committed; and changes the punishment eternal into a
temporal satisfactory punishment here, if time do serve; if not, hereafter to
be endured, except it be lightened by Masses, Works of Charity, Pilgrimages,
Fasts, and such like; or else shortened by pardon for term, or by plenary pardon
quite removed, and taken away. This is the mystery of the man of sin. This
maze the Church of Rome does cause her Followers to tread, when they ask her
the way to Justification. I cannot stand now to untip this Building, and to si^
it piece by piece; only I will pass by it in few words, that that may befall
B^ in the presence of that which God has builded, as happened unto Dagon before
the Ark.

6. Doubtless, says the Apostle, I have counted all things loss, and judge
them to be doing, that I may win Christ; and to be found in him, not having my
own righteousness, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God through Faith. Whether they speak of the first or
second Justification, they make it the essence of a Divine quality inherent,
they make it Righteousness which is in us. If it be in us, then is it ours, as
our Souls are ours though we have them from God, and can hold them no longer
than pleases him; for if he withdraw the breath of our nostrils, we fall to
dust: but the Righteousness wherein we must be found, if we will be justified,
is not our own, therefore we cannot be justified by any inherent quality.
Christ has merited righteousness for as many as are found in him. In him God
finds us, if we be faithful, for by Faith we are incorporated into Christ.
Then, although in our selves we be altogether sinful and unrighteous, yet even
the man which is impious in himself, full of iniquity, full of sin; him being
found in Christ through Faith, and having his sin remitted through
Repentance; him God upholdeth with a gracious eye, puts away his sin by
not imputing it, takes quite away the Punishment due thereunto by pardoning
it, and accepts him in Jesus Christ, as perfectly righteous, as if he had
fulfilled all that was commanded him in the Law: shall I say more perfectly
righteous than if himself had fulfilled the whole Law? I must take heed what I
say: but the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5.21.
God made him to be sin for us who knew no sin: that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. Such we are in the sight of God the Father, as is
the very Son of God himself. Let it be counted folly or frenzy, or fury,
whatsoever; it is our comfort, and our wisdom; we care for no knowledge in the
World but this, That man has sinned, and God has suffered; That God has made
himself the Son of Man, and that men are made the righteousness of God. You see
therefore that the Church of Rome, in teaching Justification by inherent Grace,
does pervert the truth of Christ, and that by the hands of the Apostles we have
received otherwise than she reaches. Now concerning the righteousness of
Sanctification, we deny it not to be inherent: we grant, that unless we work,
we have it not: only we distinguish it as a thing different in nature from the
righteousness of Justification: we are righteous the one way, by the faith of
Abraham; the other way, except we do the works of Abraham, we are not
righteous. Of the one St. Paul, To him that works not, but believes, Romans 4
6.
Faith is counted for Righteousness. Of the other, St. John, Qui facit
Iustitiam, justus est; He is righteous which works Righteousness. Of the
one, St. Paul does prove by Abraham's Example, that we have it of Faith without
Works. Of the other, St. James by Abraham's Example, that by Works we have it,
and not only by Faith. St. Paul does plainly sever these two parts of
Christian righteousness one from the other. For in the sixth to the Romans thus
he writes, Being freed from sin; Romans 6.
and made Servants to God, ye have your fruit in Holiness, and the end
everlasting life. Ye are made free from sin, and made Servants unto God; this
is the righteousness of Justification: ye have your Fruit in Holiness; this is
the righteousness of Sanctification. By the one, we are interessed in the right
of inheriting; by the other we are brought to the actual possession of eternal
bliss, and so the end of both is everlasting life.

7. The Prophet Habakh, does here term the Jews Righteous men, not only
because being justified by Faith they were free from sin: but also because they
had their measure of fruits in Holiness. According to whose example of
charitable Judgment, which leaves it to God to discern what we are, and
speaks of them according to that which they do profess themselves to be,
although they be not holy men, whom men do think, but whom God does know indeed
to be such: yet let every Christian man know, that in Christian equity, he
stands bound for to think and speak of his Brethren, as of men that have a
measure in the fruit of Holiness, and a right unto the Titles, wherewith God,
in token of special favor and mercy, vouchsafes to honor his chosen
Servants. So we see the Apostle of our Savior Christ, do use every where the
name of Saints; so the Prophet the name of Righteous, But let us all be such as
we desire to be termed: Reatus impii est pium nomen, says, Salvianus; Godly
names do not justify godless men. We are but upbraided, when we are honored
with names and Titles, whereunto our lives and manners are not suitable, If
indeed we have our fruit in Holiness, notwithstanding we must note, that the
more we abound therein, the more need we have to crave that we may be
strengthened and supported: Our very virtues may be snares unto us. The enemy,
that waits for all occasions to work our ruin, has found it harder to
overthrow an humble Sinner, than a proud Saint. There is no man's case so
dangerous, as his whom Satan has persuaded, that his own righteousness shall
present him pure and blameless in the sight of God. If we could say, we were
not guilty of any thing at all in our Consciences (we know our selves far from
this innocence; we cannot say, we know nothing by our selves; but if we could)
should we therefore plead not guilty before the presence of our Judge, that
sees further into our hearts than we our selves can do? If our hands did never
offer violence to our Brethren, a bloody thought does prove us Murderers
before him: If we had never opened our mouth to utter any scandalous,
offensive, or hurtful word, the cry of our secret cogitations is heard in the
ears of God. If we did not commit the sins, which daily and hourly either in
deed, word, or thoughts we do commit; yet in the good things which we do, how
many defects are these intermingled! God, in that which is done, respects the
mind and intention of the doer. Cut off then all those things wherein we have
regarded our own glory, those things which men do to please men, and to
satisfy our own liking, those things which we do for any by-respect, not
sincerely and purely for the love of God: and a small score will serve for the
number of our righteous deeds. Let the holiest and best things which we do be
considered: we are never better affected unto God than when we pray; yet when
we pray, how are our affections many times distracted! how little reverence do
we show unto the grand Majesty of God, unto whom we speak! How little remorse
of our own miseries! How little taste of the sweet influence of his tender
mercies do we feel! Are we not as unwilling many times to begin, and as glad to
make an ends; as if in saying, Call upon me, he had set us a very burdensome
task? it may seen somewhat extreme, which I will speak; therefore let every one
judge of it, even as his own heart shall tell him, and no otherwise; I will but
only make a demand: If God should yield unto us, not as unto Abraham, If
fifty, forty, thirty, twenty, yea, or if ten good Persons could be found in a
City, for their sakes that City should not be destroyed: but, and if he should
make us an offer thus large; Search all the Generations of men, sithence the
Fall of our Father Adam, find one man, that has done one Action, which has
past from him pure, without any strain or blemish at all, and for that one
man's only action, neither Man nor Angel shall feel the torments which are
prepared for both. Do you think that this ransom, to deliver Men and Angels,
could be found to be among the Sons of men? The best things which we do, have
somewhat in them to be pardoned. How then can we do any thing meritorious, or
worthy to be rewarded? Indeed, God does liberally promise whatsoever
appertains to a blessed life, to as many as sincerely keep his Law, though
they be not exactly able to keep it. Wherefore we acknowledge a dutiful
necessity of doing well, but the meritorious dignity of doing well, we utterly
renounce. We see how far we are from the perfect righteousness of the Law, the
little fruit which we have in holiness, it is, God knows, corrupt and
unfound: we put no confidence at all in it, we challenge nothing in the world
for it, we dare not call God to reckoning, as if we had him in our Debt-books:
our continual suit to him, is, and must be, to bear with our infirmities, and
pardon our offenses.

8. But the People of whom the Prophet speaks, were they all, or were the
most part of them such as had care to walk uprightly? Did they thirst after
righteousness? did they with? did they long with the righteous Prophet? Oh that
our ways were so direct, that we might keep thy Statutes? Did they lament with
the righteous Apostle? Oh miserable men, the good which we wish and purpose,
and strive to do, we cannot? Romans 7. 19.
No, the words of the other Prophet concerning this People, do show the
contrary. How grievously has Esaias mourned over them! O sinful Nation, laden
with Iniquity, wicked Se^d, corrupt Children! All which notwithstanding, so
wide are the bowels of his Compassion enlarged, that he denies us not, no, not
when we were laden with Iniquity, leave to commune familiarly with him, liberty
to crave and entreat, that what Plagues soever we have deserved, we may not be
in worse case than Unbelievers, that we may not be hemmed in by Pagans and
Infidels. Jerusalem is a sinful polluted City: but Jerusalem compared with
Babylon, is righteous And shall the Righteous be overborn? shall they be
compassed about by the Wicked? But the Prophet does not only complain; Lord
how comes it to pass, that thou handlest us so hardly, of whom thy Name is
called, and bear with the Heathen-Nations, that despise thee? No, he
breaks out through extremity of grief, and infers violently: This
proceeding is perverse, the Righteous are thus handled; therefore perverse
judgment does proceed.

9. Which illation contains many things, whereof it were better much both for
you to hear, and me to speak, if necessity did not draw me to another task.
Paul and Barnabas being requested to preach the same things again which once
they had preached, Acts 13. 41; 44.
thought it their Duty to satisfy the godly desires of men, sincerely affected
to the truth. Nor may it seem burdenous for me, nor for you unprofitable, that
I follow their example, the like occasion unto theirs being offered me. When we
had last the Epistle of St. Paul to the Hebrew; in hand, and of that Epistle
these words: Heb. 1. 2.
In these last days he has spoken unto us by his Son: After we had thence
collected the nature of the visible Church of Christ; and had defined it to be
a community of men sanctified through the profession of the Truth, which God
has taught the World by his Son; By Sanctification, I mean a separation from
others not profession as they do; For true Holiness consists not in
professing, but in obeying the truth of Christ.
and had declared, That the scope of Christian Doctrine is the comfort of them
whose hearts are overcharged with the burden of sin; and had proved that the
Doctrine professed in the Church of Rome, does bereave men of comfort, both in
their lives, and in their deaths: The conclusion in the end, whereunto we came,
was this, The Church of Rome being in Faith so corrupted, as she is, and
refusing to be reformed, as she does, we are to sever our selves from her; the
example of our Fathers may not retain us in communion with that Church, under
hope that we so continuing, may be saved as well as they. God, I doubt no^, was
merciful to save thousands of them, though they lived in Popish Superstitions,
inasmuch as they sinned ignorantly: but the Truth is now laid before our Eyes.
The former part of this last Sentence, namely, these words: I doubt not, but
God was merciful to save thousands of our Fathers living in Popish
Superstitions, inasmuch as they seemed ignorantly: This Sentence, I beseech you
to mark, and to fist it with the severity of austere judgment, that if it be
found to be gold, it may be suitable to the precious foundation whereon it was
then laid, for I protest, that if it be hay or stubble, my own hand shall see
fire on it. Two questions have risen by this speech before alleged: The one,
Whether our Fathers, infected with Popish Errors and Superstitions, may be
saved? The other, Whether their ignorance be a reasonable inducement to make us
think they might? We are then to examine, first, what possibility; then, what
probability there is, that God might be merciful unto so many of our Fathers.

10. So many of our Fathers living in Popish Superstitions, yet by the mercy of
God be saved? No; this could not be: God has spoken by his Angel from Heaven,
unto his People concerning Babylon (by Babylon we understand the Church of
Rome; Apoc. 18. 4.
) Go out of her my People, that ye be not Partakers of her Plagues. For answer
whereunto; first, I do not take the words to be meant only of Temporal
plagues; of the Corporal death, sorrow, famine and fire, whereunto God in his
wrath had condemned Babylon; and that to save his chosen People from these
Plagues, he says, Go out, with like intent, as in the Gospel, speaking of
Ierusalem's desolations, he says, Matthew. 24. 16.
Let them that are in Judea, fly unto the Mountains, and them that are in the
midst thereof depart one: or, as in the former times to Lot, Genesis 19. 15.
Arise, take thy Wife and thy Daughters which are there, lest thou be destroyed
in the punishment of the City: but forasmuch as here it is said, Go out of
Babylon; we doubt, their everlasting destruction, which are Partakers therein,
is either principally meant, or necessarily employed in this Sentence. How then
was it possible for so many of our Fathers to be saved, since they were so far
from departing out of Babylon, that they took her for their Mother, and in her
bosom yielded up the Ghost?

11. First, for the Plagues being threatened unto them that are Partakers in the
sins of Babylon, we can define nothing concerning our Fathers, our of this
Sentence: unless we show what the sins of Babylon be; and what they be which
are such Partakers of them, that their everlasting plagues are inevitable. The
sins which may be common both to them of the Church of Rome, and to others
departed thence, must be severed from this question. He which says, Department
of Babylon, lest ye be partakers of her sons: shows plainly, that he means
such sins, as, except we separate ourselves, we have no power in the World to
avoid; such impieties, as by their Law they have established, and whereunto all
that are among them, either do indeed assent, or else are, by powerful means,
forced in show and appearance, to subject themselves. As for example, in the
Church of Rome it is maintained. That the same credit and reverence that we
give to the Scriptures of God, ought also to be given to unwritten verities,
That the Pope is Supreme head ministerial over the Universal Church-militant;
That the Bread in the Eucharist is transubstantiated into Christ; That it is to
be adored, and to be offered up unto God, as a Sacrifice propitiatory for quick
and dead; That Images are to be worshipped; Saints to be called upon as
Intercessors, and such like. Now, because some Heresies do concern things only
believed, as, the transubstantiation of the Sacramental Elements in the
Eucharist; some concern things which practiced and put in ure, as, the
adoration of the Elements transubstantiated: we must note, that erroneously the
practice of that is sometime received, whereof the doctrine, that teaches it,
is not heretically maintained. They are all partakers of the maintenance of
Heresies, who by word or deed allow them, knowing them, although not knowing
them to be Heresies; as also they, and that most dangerously of all others, who
knowing Heresy to be Heresy, do notwithstanding in worldly respects, make
semblance of allowing that, which in heart and judgment they condemn: But
Heresy is heretically maintained, by such as obstinately hold it, after
wholesome admonition. Of the last sort, as of the next before, I make no doubt,
but that their condemnation, without an actual repentance, is inevitable. Lest
any man therefore should think, that in speaking of our Fathers, I should speak
indifferently of them all: let my words I beseech you be well marked: I doubt
not, but God was merciful to save them sands of our Fathers: which thing, I
will now, by God's assistance, set more plainly before your eyes.

12. Many are partakers of the error, which are not of the heresy of the
Church of Rome. The people, following the conduct of their guides, and
observing as they did, exactly, that which was prescribed, thought they did God
good service, when indeed they did dishonor him. This was their error: but the
Heresy of the Church of Rome, their dogmatical Positions opposite unto
Christian truth, what one man amongst ten thousand, did ever understand? Of
them, which understand Roman Heresies, and allow them, all are not a like
partakers in the action of allowing. Some allow them as the first founders and
establishers of them: which crime touches none but their Popes and Councels;
the people are dear and free from this. Of them which maintain Popish Heresies,
not as Authors, but receivers of them from others, all maintain them not as
Masters. In this are not the people partakers neither, but only the Predicants
and Schoolmen. Of them which have been partakers in this sin of teaching Popish
Heresy, there is also a difference; for they have not all been Teachers of all
Popish Heresy. Put a difference, Verse.
says S. Jude, have compassion upon some. Shall we lap up all in one
condition? Shall we cast them all headlong? Shall we plunge them all into that
infernal and everlasting flaming lake? Them that have been partakers of the
errors of Babylon, together with them which are in the Heresy? them which have
been the Authors of Heresy, with them that by terror and violence have been
forced to receive it? Them who have taught it, with them whose simplicity has
by slights and conveyances of false Teachers, been seduced to believe it? Them
which have been partakers in one, with them which have been partakers in many?
Them which in many, with them which in all?

13. Notwithstanding I grant, that although the condemnation of them be more
tolerable then of these: yet from the man that labors at the plough, to him
that sits in the Vatican; to all partakers in the sins of Babylon; to our
Fathers, though they did but erroneously practice that which the guide
heretically taught; to all without exception, plagues were due. The pit is
ordinarily the end, as well of the guide, as of the guided in blindness. But woe
worth the hour wherein we were born, except we might promise our selves better
things; things which accompany man's salvation, even where we know that worse,
and such as accompany condemnation are due. Then must we show some way how
possibly they might escape. What way is there that sinners can find to escape
the judgment of God, but only by appealing to the seat of his saving mercy?
Which mercy, with origin, we do not extend to Devils and damned spirits. God
has mercy upon thousands, but there be thousands also which he hardneth.
Christ has therefore set the bounds, he has fixed the limits of his saving
mercy within the compass of these terms: God sent not his own Son to condemn
the World, but that the World through him might be saved. John 3. 17.
In the third of S. John's Gospel mercy is restrained to believers: I Will that
believes shall not be condemned; I Will that believes not, is condemned already,
because he believes not in the Son of God. In the second of the Revelation,
mercy is restrained to the penitent. For of Iezabel and her Sectarics, thus he
speakth: I gave her space to repent, and she repented not. Behold, I will cast
her into a bed, and them that commit fornication with her into great
affliction, except they repent them of their works, and I will kill her
children with death. Our hope therefore of the Fathers is, if they were not
altogether faithless and impenitent, that they are saved.

14. They are not all faithless that are weak in assenting to the truth, or
stiff in maintaining things opposite to the truth of Christian Doctrine. But as
many as hold the foundation which is precious, though they hold it but weakly,
and as it were with a slender thread, although they frame many base and
unsuitable things upon it, things that cannot abide the trial of the fire; yet
shall they pass the fiery trial and be saved, which indeed have builded
themselves upon the Rock, which is the foundation of the Church. If then our
Fathers did not hold the foundation of Faith, there is no doubt but they were
faithless. If many of them held it, then is therein no impediment, but many of
them might be saved. Then let us see what the foundation of Faith is, and
whether we may think that thousands of our Fathers being in Popish
Superstitions, did notwithstanding hold the foundation.

15. If the Foundation of Faith do import the general ground whereupon we rest
when we do believe, the Writings of the Evangelists and the Apostles are the
foundation of the Christian Faith: Credimus quia legimus, says S. Jerome: Oh
that the Church of Rome did as They misinterpret, not only by making false and
corrupt glosses upon the Scripture, but also by forcing the old vulgar
Translation as the only Authentical: Howbeit, they refuse ^o Book which is
Canonical, though they admit sundry which are not.
soundly interpret these fundamental Writings whereupon we build our Faith, as
she does willingly hold and embrace them.

16. But if the name of Foundation do note the principal thing which is
believed: then is that the Foundation of our Faith which St Paul has to
Timothy: 1 Timothy 3. 16.
God manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, etc. that of Nathaniel,
John 1. 49.
Thou art the Son of the living God: thou art the King of Israel: that of the
Inhabitants of Samaria, John 44.
This is Christ the Savior of the world: he that directly denies this, does
utterly raze the very foundation of our Faith. I have proved heretofore, that
although the Church of Rome has played the Harlot worse then ever did Israel,
yet are they not, as now the Synagogue of the Jews which plainly deny Christ
Jesus, quite and clean excluded from the new Covenant. But as Samaria compared
with Jerusalem is termed Aholath, a Church or Tabernacle of her own;
contrariwise, Jerusalem Aholibath, the resting place of the Lord: so,
whatsoever we term the Church of Rome, when we compare her with Reformed
Churches, still we put a difference, as then between Babylon and Samaria, so
now between Rome and the Heathenish Assemblies: Which Opinion I must and will
recall; I must grant and will, that the Church of Rome together with all her
children, is clean excluded. There is no difference in the World between our
Fathers and Saracens, Turks and Painims, if they did directly deny Christ
crucified for the salvation of the World.

17. But how many millions of them were known so to have ended their lives,
that the drawing of their breath has ceased with the uttering of this Faith,
Christ my Savior, my Redeemer Jesus? Answer is made, That this they might
unfainedly confess, and yet be far enough from Salvation. For behold, says the
Apostle, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing. Gal. 5. 2.
Christ in the work of man's salvation is alone: the Galathians were cast away
by joining Circumcision and the other Rites of the Law with Christ: the Church
of Rome does teach her children to join other things likewise with him;
therefore their says, their belief does not profit them any thing at all. It
is true that they do indeed join other things with Christ: but how: Not in the
work of Redemption it self, which they grant, that Christ alone has performed
sufficiently for the salvation of the whole world; but in the application of
this inestimable treasure, that it may be effectual to their salvation: how
demurely soever they confess, that they seek remission of sins no otherwise
then by the blood of Christ, using humbly the means appointed by him to apply
the benefit of his holy Blood; they teach indeed, so many things pernicious in
Christian Faith, in setting down the means whereof they speak, that the very
foundation of Faith which they hold is thereby Plainly in all men's sight whose
eyes God has enlightened on behold this truth. For they which are in error, are
in darkness, and see not that which in light is plain, in that which they reach
concerning the natures of Christ^ they held the same with Nestorius fully, the
same with ^^^^he^ about the proprieties of his nature.
plainly overthrown, and the force of the blood of Jesus Christ extinguished.
We may therefore disputing with them, urge them even with as dangerous sequels,
as the Apostle does the Galatians. But I demand, If some of those Galatians
heartily embracing the Gospel of Christ, sincere and sound in Faith (this one
only error excepted) had ended their lives before they were ever taught how
perilous an opinion they held; shall we think that the danger of this error
did so overweigh the benefit of their faith, that the mercy of God might not
save them? I grant they overthrew the foundation of Faith by consequent; does
not that so likewise which the The opinion of the Lutherans though it be no
direct denial of the foundation, may notwithstanding be damnable unto some; and
I do not think but that in many respects it is less damnable, as at this day
some maintain it, than it was in them which held it at first; as Luther and
others, whom I had an eye unto in this speech. The Question is not, Whether ^o
error with such and such circumstances: but simply, Whether an error
overthrowing the foundation, do exclude all possibility of salvation, if it be
not r^enated, and expressly repented of.
Lutheran Churches do at this day so stiffly and so firmly maintain? For mine
own part I dare not here deny the possibility of their salvation which have
been the chiefest instruments of ours, albeit they carried to their grave a
persuasion so greatly repugnant to the truth. Forasmuch therefore as it may be
said of the Church of Rome, she has yet a little strength, she does not
directly deny the foundation of Christianity: I may, I trust without offense,
persuade my self that thousands of our Fathers in former times living and dying
within her walls, have found mercy at the hands of God.

18. What, although they repented not of their errors? God forbid that I should
open my mouth to gainsay that which Christ himself has spoken: Except ye
repent, ye shall all perish. And if they did not repent they perished. But
withal note, that we have the benefit of a double Repentance: the least sin
which we commit in Deed, Thought, or Word, is death without Repentance. Yet how
many things do escape us in every of these, which we do not know? How many,
which we do not observe to be sins? And without the knowledge, without the
observation of sin, there is no actual Repentance. It cannot then be chosen,
but that for as many as hold the foundation, and have holden all Sins and
Errors in hatred, the blessing of Repentance for unknown Sins and Errors is
obtained at the hands of God, through the gracious mediation of Jesus Christ,
for such suitors as cry with the Prophet David: Purge me, O Lord, from my
secret sins.

19. But we wash a wall of lome, we labor in vain, all this is nothing; it
does not prove; it cannot justify that which we go about to maintain. Infidels
and Heathen men are not so godless, but that they may no doubt, cry God mercy,
and desire in general to have their sins forgiven them. To such as deny the
foundation of Faith there can be no Salvation (according to the ordinary course
which God does use in saving men) without a particular repentance of that
Error. The Galathians thinking that unless they were circumcised, they could
not be saved, overthrew the foundation of Faith directly: therefore if any of
them did die so persuaded, whether before or after they were told of their
Errors, their end is dreadful; there is no way with them but one, death and
condemnation. For the Apostle speaks nothing of men departed, but says
generally of all, If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. Ye are
abolished from Christ, whosoever are justified by the Law; ye are fallen from
grace, Gal. 5. Of them in the Church of Rome the reason is the same. For whom
Antichrist has seduced, concerning them did not S. Paul speak long before,
they received not the word of truth, that they might not be saved? 2 These. 2.
11.
therefore God would send them strong delusions to believe lies, that all they
might be damned which believe not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. And S. John, All that dwell upon the earth shall worship him,
whose names are not written in the book of life, Apoc. 13. Apoc. 13. v. ^.
Indeed many in former times as their Books and Writings do yet show, held the
foundation, to wit, salvation by Christ alone, and therefore might be saved.
God has always had a Church amongst them, which firmly kept his saving truth.
As for such as hold with the Church of Rome, that we cannot be saved by Christ
alone without works; they do not only by a circle of consequence, but directly
deny the foundation of Faith; they hold it not, no not so much as by a thread.

20. This to my remembrance, being all that has been opposed with any
countenance or show of reason, I hope, if this be answered, the cause in
question is at an end. Concerning general Repentance therefore: what? a
Murderer, a Blasphemer, an unclean person, a Turk, a Jew, any sinner to escape
the wrath of God by a general Repentance, God forgive me? Truly, it never came
within my heart, that a general Repentance does serve for all sins: it serves
only for the common over-sights of our sinful life, and for the faults which
either we do not mark, or do not know that they are faults. Our Fathers were
actually penitent for sins, wherein they knew they displeased God; or else they
fall not within the compass of my first speech. Again, that otherwise they
could not be saved, than holding the foundation of Christian Faith, we have not
only affirmed, but proved. Why is it not then confessed, that thousands of our
Fathers which lived in Popish Superstitions, might yet by the mercy of God be
saved? First, if they had directly denied the very foundations of Christianity,
without repenting them particularly of that sin, he which says, There could be
no salvation for them, according to the ordinary course which God does use in
saving men, grants plainly, or at the least closely insinuates, that an
extraordinary privilege of mercy might deliver their souls from Hell, which is
more then I required. Secondly, if the foundation be denied, it is denied for
fear of some Heresy which the Church of Rome maintains. But how many were
there amongst our Fathers, who being seduced by the common Error of that
Church, never knew the meaning of her Heresies? So that although all Popish
Heretics did perish; thousands of them which lived in Popish Superstitions
might be saved. Thirdly, seeing all that held Popish Heresies, did not hold all
the Heresies of the Pope: why might not thousands which were infected with
other leaven, live and die unsowred with this, and so be saved?

Fourthly, If they all held this Heresy, many there were that held it, no
doubt; but only in a general form of words, For this is the only thing
alleged to prove the impossibility of their salvation: The Church of Rome
joyneth works with Christ, which is a denial of the foundation, and unless we
hold the foundation, we cannot be saved.
which a favorable Interpretation might expound in a sense differing far
enough from the poisoned conceit of Heresy. As for example; Did they hold,
that we cannot be saved by Christ without good works? We our selves do, I
think, all say as much, with this Construction, salvation being taken as in
that sentence, Cord creditur ad justitiam, Ore fit confessio ad salutem,
except Infants and Men, cut off upon the point of their conversion; of the rest
none shall see God, but such as seek peace and holiness, though not as a Cause
of their salvation, yet as a Way which they must walk which will be saved. Did
they hold, that without works we are not justified? Take justification so as it
may also imply sanctification, and St. James does say as much. For except there
be an ambiguity in the same term, St. Paul and St. James do contradict each the
other: which cannot be. Now there is no ambiguity in the name either of Faith,
or of Works, being meant by them both in one and the same sense. Finding
therefore, that Justification is spoken of by St Paul, without implying
Sanctification, when he proves that a man is justified by faith without works;
finding likewise that justification does sometime imply sanctification also
with it: I suppose nothing to be more sound, then so to interpret St James,
speaking not in that sense, but in this.

21. We have already showed, that there be two kinds of Christian
righteousness: the one without us, which we have by imputation; the other in us
which consists of faith, hope, and charity, and other Christian Virtues: And
S. James does prove that Abraham had not only the one, because the thing
believed was imputed unto him for righteousness; but also the other, because he
offered up his Son. God gives us both the one justice and the other; the one
by accepting us for righteous in Christ, the other by working Christian
righteousness in us. The proper and most immediate efficient cause in us of
this latter is the Spirit of adoption we have received into our hearts. That
whereof it consists, whereof it is really and formally made, are those
infused virtues, proper and peculiar unto Saints, which the Spirit in the very
moment when first it is given of God brings with it: the effects whereof are
such actions as the Apostle does call the fruits of works, the operation of the
Spirit: The difference of the which operations from the root whereof they
spring, makes it needful to put two kinds likewise of sanctifying
righteousness, Habitual, and Actual. Habitual, that holiness, wherewith our
souls are inwardly endued, the same instant, when first we begin to be the
Temples of the Holy Ghost. Actual, that holiness, which afterward beautifieth
all the parts and actions of our life, the holiness for which Enoch, Job,
Zachary, Elizabeth, and other Saints, are in the Scriptures so highly
commended. If here i^ he demanded, which of these we do first receive: I
answer, that the Spirit, the virtue of the spirit, the habitual justice, which
is ingrafted, the external justice of Jesus Christ, which is imputed; these we
receive all at one and the same time; whenever we have any of these, we have
all, they go together: Yet since, no man is justified except he believe, and no
man believes except he has Faith, and no man except he has received the
spirit of Adoption, has Faith: forasmuch as they do necessarily infer
justification, and justification does of necessity presuppose them: we must
needs hold that imputed righteousness, in dignity being the chiefest, is
notwithstanding in order to the last of all these? but Actual righteousness,
which is the righteousness of good works succeeds all, follows after all,
both in order and time. Which being attentivly marked, shows plainly how the
faith of true Believers cannot be divorced from hope and love^ how faith is a
part of sanctification, and yet unto justification necessary; how faith is
perfected by good works, and not works of ours without faith: Finally, how our
Fathers might hold, that we are justified by Faith alone, and yet hold truly
that without works we are not justified. Did they think that men do merit
rewards in heaven, by the works they perform on earth? The Ancients use
meriting for obtaining, and in that sense they of Wittenberg have it in their
Confession; We teach that good works commanded of God, are necessarily to be
done, and by the free kindness of God they merit their certain rewards.
Therefore speaking as our Fathers did, and we taking their speech, in a ^ound
meaning, as we may take our Fathers, and might for as much as their meaning is
doubtful, and charity does always interpret doubtful things favorably: what
should induce as to think that rather the damage of the worst construction did
light upon them all, then that the blessing of the better was granted unto
thousands? Fifthly, if in the worst construction that may be made, they had
generally all embraced it living, might not many of them dying utterly renounce
it? Howsoever men when they sit at ease, do vainly tickle their hearts with the
vain conceit of I know not what proportionable correspondence, between their
merits and their rewards, which in the trance of their high speculations they
dream that God has measured, weighed, and laid up, as it were in bundles for
them: notwithstanding, we see by daily experience, in a number even of them,
that when the hour of death approaches, when they secretly hear themselves
summoned forthwith to appear, and stand at the Bar of that Judge, whose
brightness causes the eyes of the Angels themselves to dazel, all these idle
imaginations do then begin to hide their faces; to name merits then, is to lay
their souls upon the rack, the memory of their own deeds is loathsome unto them,
they forsake all things, wherein they have put any trust or confidence; no
staff to lean upon, no ease, no rest, no comfort then, but only in Jesus
Christ.

22. Wherefore if this proposition were true: To hold in such wise, as the
Church of Rome does, that we cannot be saved by Christ alone without works, is
directly to deny the foundation of Faith; They may cease to put any confidence
in works, and yet never think living in Popish superstition they did amiss
Pighius dyed Popish, and yet denial Popery in the Article of Justification by
works long before his death.
I say, that if this proposition were true: nevertheless so many ways I have
showed, whereby we may hope that thousands of our Fathers which lived in popish
superstition, might be saved. But what if it be not true? What if neither that
of the Galathians, concerning Circumcision; nor this of the Church of Rome by
Works be any direct denial of the foundation as it is affirmed, that both are?
I need not wade so far as to discuss this Controversy, the matter which first
was brought into question being so clear, as I hope it is. Howbeit because I
desire, that the truth even in that also should receive light, I will do mine
endeavor to set down somewhat more plainly; First, the foundation of Faith,
what it is: Secondly, what is directly to deny the foundation: Thirdly whether
they whom God has chosen to be heirs of life, may fall so far as directly to
deny it: Fourthly, whether the Galathians did so by admitting the error about
Circumcision and the Law; Last of all, whether the Church of Rome for this one
opinion of Works, may be thought to do the like, and thereupon to be no more a
Christian Church, than are the Assemblies of Turks and Jews.

23. This word Foundation being figuratively used, What the foundation of says
is: V^caeto ad con^ionem multitudine, quae coalesecre in populi unial corpus
nu^a et pra^erquam I legibus poterat, Live. de Romans lib. 1. Ephesians. 1. 23. and 4.
1^. Ephesians. 2. 20.
has always reference to somewhat which resembles a material building, as
both that Doctrine of Laws and the community of Christians do. By the Masters
of Civil Policy nothing is so much inculcated, as that Commonweals are founded
upon Laws; for that a multitude cannot be compacted into one body otherwise
then by a common acception of Laws, whereby they are to be kept in order, The
ground of all civil Laws is this: No man ought to be hurt or injured by
another: Take away this persuasion, and yet take away all the Laws: take away
Laws, and what shall become of Common-weals? So it is in our spiritual
Christian Community: I do not mean that Body Mystical, whereof Christ is only
the head, that Building undiscernable by mortal eyes, wherein Christ is the
chief corner stone: but I speak of the visible Church; the foundation whereof
is the doctrine which the Prophets and the Apostles professed. The mark whereunto
their Doctrine tends, is pointed at in these words of Peter unto Christ. Thou
have the words of eternal life: John 6. 63.
In those words of Paul to Timothy, The holy Scriptures are able to wake thee
wise unto salvation. 2 Timothy 3. 15.
It is the demand of nature it self, What shall we do to have eternal life? The
desire of immortality and the knowledge of that, whereby it may be obtained, is
so natural unto all men, that even they who are not persuaded, that they shall,
do notwithstanding wish, that they might know a way how to see no end of life.
And because natural means are not able still to resist the force of Death:
there is no people in the earth so savage, which has not devised some
supernatural help or other, to fly for aid and succor in extremities, against
the enemies of the Laws. A longing therefore to be saved, without understanding
the true way how, has been the cause of all the Superstitions in the World. O
that the miserable state of others, which wander in darkness, and wot not
whither they go, could give us understanding hearts, worthily to esteem the
riches of the mercy of God toward us, before whose eyes the doors of the
Kingdom of Heaven are set wide open^ should we offer violence unto it? it
offers violence unto us, and we gather strength to withstand it. But I am
besides my purpose, when I fall to bewail the cold affection which we bear
toward that whereby we should be saved; my purpose being only to set down,
what the ground of salvation is. The Doctrine of the Gospel proposes salvation
as the end: And does it not teach the way of attaining thereunto? Yet the
Damosel possessed with a spirit of divination, spoke the truth: Acts 16. 17. Heb.
10. 20.
These men are the Servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of
Salvation: A new and living way which Christ has prepared for us, through the
vail, that is, his flesh; Salvation purchased by the death of Christ. By this
foundation the children of God before the written Law were distinguished from
the sons of men; Genesis 49. Job. 19.
the reverend Patriarks both possessed it living, and spoke expressly of it at the
hour of their death. It comforted Job in the midst of grief: as it was
afterward the anker-hold of all the righteous in Israel, from the writing of
the Law, to the time of grace. Every Prophet making mention of it. It was
famously spoken of about the time, when the coming of Christ to accomplish the
promises, which were made long before it, drew near, that the sound thereof was
heard even amongst the Gentiles. When he was come, as many as were his,
acknowledged that he was their Salvation; he, that long expected hope of
Israel; he, that Seed, in whom all the Nations of the earth shall be blessed.
So that now he is a name of ruin, Acts 4.18.
a name of death and condemnation, unto such as dream of a new Messiah, to as
many as look for salvation by any other but by him. For amongst men there is
given no other name under heaven whereby we must be saved. Thus much S. Mark
does intimate by that, which he does put in the front of this book, making his
entrance with these words: The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son
of God. His Doctrine he terms the Gospel, because it teaches Salvation; the
Gospel of Jesus Christ the son of God, because it teaches salvation by him.
This is then the foundation, whereupon the frame of the Gospel is erected; that
very Jesus whom the Virgin conceived of the holy Ghost, Luke 1. 11. 1 Cor. 3.
whom Simeon embraced in his arms, whom Pilat condemned, whom the Jews
crucified, whom the Apostles preached, he is Christ, the Lord, the only
Savior of the World: Other foundation can no man lay. Thus I have briefly
opened that principle in Christianity, which we call the foundation of our
faith. It follows now that I declare unto you, what is directly to overthrow
it. This will be better opened, if we understand, what it is to hold the
foundation of Faith.

24. There are which defend, that many of the Gentiles, who never heard the
Name of Christ, held the foundation of Christianity, and why? they acknowledged
many of them, the Providence of God, his infinite wisdom, strength, power; his
goodness, and his mercy toward the Children of men; that God has judgment in
store for the wicked, but for the righteous, which serve him, rewards, etc. In
this which they confessed, that lies covered which we believe; in the
Rudiments of their knowledge concerning God, the foundation of our Faith
concerning Christ, lies secretly wrapped up, and is vertually contained:
therefore they held the foundation of Faith, though they never had it. Might we
not with as good a color of Reason defend, that every Plowman has all the
Sciences, wherein Philosophers have excelled? For no man is ignorant of their
first Principles, which do vertually contain, whatsoever by natural means is or
can be known. Yea, might we not with as great reason affirm, that a man may put
three mighty Oaks wheresoever three Akoms may be put? For vertually an Akom is
an Oak. To avoid such Paradoxes, we teach plainly, that, To hold the
foundation, is, in express terms to acknowledge it.

25. Now, because the foundation is an affirmative Proposition, they all
overthrow it, who deny it; they directly overthrow it, who deny it directly;
and they overthrow it by consequent, or indirectly, which hold any one
assertion whatsoever, whereupon the direct denial thereof may be necessarily
concluded, What is the Question between the Gentiles and Us, but this, Whether
salvation be by Christ? What between the Jews and Us, but this, Whether by this
Jesus, whom we call Christ, yea or no? This is to be the main point whereupon
Christianity stands, it is clear by that one sentence of Festus concerning
Paul's accusers: They brought no crime of such things as I supposed, but had
certain questions against him of their superstition, and of one Jesus, which
was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive. Where we see that Jesus, dead and
raised for the Salvation of the World, is by Jesus denied, despised by a
Gentile, by a Christian Apostle maintained. The Fathers therefore in the
Primitive Church when they wrote; Tertullian, the book which he called
Apologeticus; Minutius Faelix, the Book which he intitleth Octavius, Arnobius;
the seventh books against the Gentiles; Chrysostom, his Orations against the
Jews; Eusebius, his ten books of Evangelical demonstration: they stand in
defense of Christianity against them, by whom the foundation thereof was
directly denied. But the writings of the Fathers against Novatians, Pelagians,
and other Heretics of the like note, refel Positions, whereby the foundation
of Christian Faith was overthrown by consequent only. In the former sort of
Writings the foundation is proved; in the latter, it is alleged as a proof,
which to men that had been known directly to deny, must needs have seemed a
very beggarly kind of disputing. All Infidels therefore deny the foundation of
Faith directly; by consequent, many a Christian man, yea whole Christian
Churches have denied it, and do deny it at this present day. Christian
Churches, the foundation of Christianity: not directly, for then they cease to
be Christian Churches; but by consequent, in respect whereof we condemn them as
erroneous, although for holding the foundation we do and must hold them
Christians.

26. We see what it is to hold the foundation; what directly, and what by
consequent to deny it. The next thing which follows, is, whether they whom
God has chosen to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, may once
effectually called, and through faith justified truly, afterward fall so far,
as directly to deny the foundation, which their hearts have before embraced
with joy and comfort in the Holy Ghost; for such is the faith, which indeed
does justify. Devils know the same things which we believe, and the minds of
the most ungodly may be fully persuaded of the Truth; which knowledge in the
one, and in the other, is sometimes termed faith, but equivocally, being indeed
no such faith as that, whereby a Christian man is justified. It is the Spirit
of Adoption, which works faith in us, in them not: the things which we
believe, are by us apprehended, not only as true, but also as good and that to
us: as good, they are not by them apprehended; as true, they are. Whereupon
follows the third difference; the Christian man the more he increases in
faith, the more his joy and comfort abounds: but they, the more sure they are
of the truth, the more they quake and tremble at it. This begets another
effect, where the hearts of the one sort have a different disposition from the
other. Non ignoro plerosque conscientia meritorum, nihil se esse per mortem
magis optare quam credere, Malunt cuim extingui penitus, quam ad supplicia
reparari. I am not ignorant, says Minutius, that there be many, who being
conscious what they are to look for, do rather wish that they might, then think
that they shall cease, when they cease to live; because they hold it better
that death should consume them unto nothing, then God revive them unto
punishment. So it is in other Articles of Faith, whereof wicked men think, no
doubt, many times they are too true: On the contrary side, to the other, there
is no grief or torment greater, then to feel their persuasion weak in things^
whereof when they are persuaded, they reap such comfort and joy of spirit: such
is the faith whereby we are justified; such, I mean, in respect of the quality.
For touching the principal object of Faith, longer then it holds the
foundation whereof we have spoken, it neither justifies, nor is, but cease
to be faith; when it cease to believe, that Jesus Christ is the only Savior
of the World. The cause of life spiritual in us, is Christ, not carnally or
corporally inhabiting, but dwelling in the soul of man, as a thing which (when
the mind apprehends it) is said to inhabit or possess the mind. The mind
conceives Christ by hearing the Doctrine of Christianity, as the light of
Nature does the mind to apprehend those truths which are merely rational, so
that saving truth, which is far above the reach of Humane Reason, cannot
otherwise, then by the Spirit of the Almighty, be conceived, All these are
implied, wheresoever any of them is mentioned as the cause of the spiritual
life. Wherefore if we have read, that Romans 8. 10.
the spirit is our life; or, Phil. 2. 15.
the Word our life; or, Col. 3.4.
Christ our life: We are in very of these to understand, that our life is
Christ, by the hearing of the Gospel, apprehended as a Savior, and assented
unto through the power of the Holy Ghost. The first intellectual conceit and
comprehension of Christ so embraced, 1 Pet. 1.
St. Peter calls the seed whereof we be new born: Ephesians. 2. 9.
our first embracing of Christ, is our first reviving from the state of death
and condemation. John 5. 11.
He that has the Son, has life, says St. John, and he that has not the Son
of God has not life. If therefore he which once has the Son, may cease to
have the Son, though it be for a moment, he cease for that moment to have
life. But the life of them which have the Son of God, is everlasting in the
world to come. 1 John 5. 13. Perpetuity of says. Romans 6. 10. John 14. 19.
But because as Christ being raised from the dead dyed no more, death has no
more power over him: so justified man, being allied to God in Jesus Christ our
Lord, does as necessarily from that time forward always live, as Christ, by
whom he has life, liyeth always, I might, if I had not otherwhere largely done
it already, show by many and sundry manifest and clear proofs, how the motions
and operations of life are sometime so indiscernable, and so secret, that they
seem stone-dead, who notwithstanding are still alive unto God in Christ.

For as long as that abides in us, which animateth, quickneth, and gives
life, so long we live, and we know, that the cause of our Faith abides in us
for ever. I. Christ the Fountain of Life, may flit and leave the Habitation,
where once he dwells What shall become of his Promise, I am with you to the
Worlds end? If the Seed of God, which contains Christ, may be first
conceived, and then cast out: how does S. Peter term it immortal? 1 Pet. 1. 1.
How does St. John affirm, 2 John 3. 9.
It abides? If the Spirit, which is given to cherish, and preserve the Seed of
Life, may be given and taken away, how is it the earnest of our inheritance
until Redemption? Ephesians. 1. 4. 5. John 4. 14.
how does it continue with us for ever? If therefore the man which is once just
by faith, shall live by Faith, and live for ever, it follows, that he which
once does believe the foundation, must needs believe the foundation forever. If
he believe it for ever, how can he ever directly deny it? Faith holding the
direct affirmation; the direct negation, so long as Faith continues, is
excluded.

Object. But you will say, That as he that is to day holy, may to morrow
forsake his holiness, and become impure, as a friend may change his mind, and
be made an enemy; as hope may wither: so says may dye in the heart of man, the
Spirit may be quenched, Grace may be extinguished, they which believe may be
quite turned away from the Truth,

Sol. The case is clear, long experience has made this manifest, it needs no
proof. I grant we are apt, prone, and ready to forsake God; but is God as ready
to forsake us? Our minds are changeable; is His so likewise? Whom God has
justified has not Christ assured, that it is his Fathers will to give them a
Kingdom? Notwithstanding, it shall not be otherwise given them, than if they
continue grounded and stablished in the Faith, and be not moved away from the
hope of the Gospel; if they abide in love and holiness. Coll. 1. 23.
Our Savior therefore, when he spoke of the sheep effectually called, 1 Timothy
2. 15. John 10.
and truly gathered into his fold, I give unto-them eternal life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hands; in promising
to save them, he promised, no doubt, to preserve them in that, without which
there can be no salvation, as also from that whereby it is irrecoverably lost.
Every error in things appertaining unto God, is repugnant unto Faith; every
fearful cogitation, unto hope; unto love, every straggling inordinate desire;
unto holiness, every blemish wherewith either the inward thoughts of our
minds, or the outward actions of our lives are stained. But heresy, such as
that of Ebion, Gerinthus, and others, against whom the Apostles were forced to
bend themselves, both by word, and also by writing; that repining
discouragement of heart, which tempts God, whereof we have Israel in the
Desert for a pattern; coldness, such as that in the Angels of Ephesus; soul
sins, known to be expressly against the first, or second table of the Law, such
as Noah, Monasses, David, Solomon, and Peter committed: These are each in their
kind so opposite to the former virtues, that they leave no place for salvation
without an actual repentance. But Infidelity, extreme despair, hatred of God
and all goodness, obduration in Sin cannot stand where there is but the least
spark of Faith, hope, love and sanctity, even as cold in the lowest degree
cannot be, where heat in the highest degree is found. Whereupon I conclude,
that although in the first kind, no man lives, which sins not; and in the
second, as perfect as any do live, may sin: yet since the man which is born of
God, 1 John 3. ^.
has a promise, That in him the Seed of God shall abide; which Seed is a sure
Preservative against the sins that are of the third suit: Greater and clearer
assurance we cannot have of any thing, than of this, that from such sins God
shall preserve the Righteous, as the apple of his Eye for ever. Directly to
deny the foundation of Faith, is plain Infidelity; where Faith is entered, there
Infidelity is for ever excluded: Therefore by him which has once sincerely
believed in Christ, the foundation of Christian Faith can never be directly
denied? Did not Peter? Did not Marcellinus? Did not others both directly deny
Christ, after that they had believed; and again believe, after they had denied?
No doubt, as they confess in words, whose Condemnation is nevertheless their
not believing: (for example we have Judas:) So likewisewise, they may believe
in Heart, whose Condemnation, without Repentance, is their not Confessing.
Although therefore, Peter and the rest, for whose Faith Christ has prayed,
that it might not fail, did not by denial, sin the Sin of Infidelity, which
is an inward abnegation of Christ; (for if they had done this, their Faith had
clearly failed:) Yet, because they sinned notoriously and grievously,
committing that which they knew to be expressly forbidden by the Law, which
says, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve,
necessary it was, that he which purposed to save their Souls, should, as he did
touch their Hearts with true unfeigned repentance, that his mercy might restore
them again to life, whom Sin had made the children of Death and Condemnation.
Touching the point therefore, I hope I may safely set down, that if the
Justified err, as he may, and never come to understand his error, God does
save him through general repentance: But if he fall into Heresy, he calls
him at one time or other by actual repentance; but from Infidelity, which is an
inward direct denial of the foundation, he preserves him by special providence
for ever. Whereby we may easily know, what to think of those Galatians, whose
hearts were so possessed with the love of the Truth, that, if it had been
possible, they would have plucked out their eyes to bestow upon their Teachers.
It is true, that they were greatly Howsoever men be changed (for changed they
may be, even the best amongst men) if they that have received, as it seems
some of the Galatians which fell into error, not received the Gifts and Graces
of God, which are called, (...), such as Faith, Hope, and Charity are, which
God does never take away from him, to whom they are given, as less repented him
to have given them; if such might be so far changed by error, as that the
very root of Faith should be quite extinguished in them, and so their Salvation
utterly lost: It would shake the hearts of the strongest and stoutest of us
all. See this contrary in Beza his observations upon the harmony of Confessions.
changed, both in persuasion and affection: so that the Galatians, when Saint
Paul wrote unto them, were not now the Galatians which they had been in former
time, for that through error they wandered, although they were his sheep, I do
not deny, but that I should deny, that they were his sheep, if I should grant,
that through error they perished. It was a perilous opinion that they held,
perilous even in them that held it only as an Error, because it overthrows
the foundation by consequent. But in them which obstinately maintain it, I
cannot think it less than a damnable Heresy. We must therefore put a
difference between them which err of ignorance, retaining nevertheless a mind
desirous to be instructed in Truth, and them, which after the Truth is laid
open, persist in the stubborn defense of their blindness. Heretical defenders,
froward and stiff-necked Teachers of Circumcision, the blessed Apostle calls
Dogs: Silly men, who were seduced to think they taught the Truth, he pitieth,
he takes up in his arms, he lovingly imbraceth, he kisseth, and with more than
fatherly tenderness does so temper, qualify, and correct the speech he uses
toward them, that a man cannot easily discern, whether did most abound, the
love which he bare to to their godly Affection, or the grief which the danger
of their Opinion bred him. Their Opinion was dangerous; was not theirs also,
who thought the Kingdom of Christ should be Earthly? was not theirs, which
thought the Gospel only should be preached to the Jews? What more opposite to
Prophetical Doctrine, concerning the coming of Christ, than the one?
concerning the Catholic Church, than the other? Yet they which had these
Fancies, even when they had them, were not the worst men in the World. The
Heresy of Free Will was a millstone about the Pelagians neck; shall we
therefore give Sentence of Death inevitable against all those Fathers in the
Greek Church, which being mis-perswaded, dyed in the Error of Free Will? Of
these Galatians therefore, which first were justified, and then deceived, as I
can see no cause, why as many as dyed before admonition, might not by mercy be
received, even in error; so I make no doubt, but as many as lived till they
were admonished, found the mercy of God effectual in converting them from their
Error convicted, and afterward maintained, ^^ more than error; for although
opinion be the same it was, in which respect I still call it error, yet they
are not now the same they were when they are taught what the Truth is, and
plainly raught.
error, lest any one that is Christ's should perish. Of this I take it, there
is no Controversy: Only against the Salvation of them that dyed, though before
admonition, yet in error, it is objected; that their opinion was a very plain
direct denial of the foundation. If Paul and Barnabas had been so persuaded,
they would happily have used the terms otherwise, speaking of the Masters
themselves, who did first set that error abroach, Acts 15. 9.
Certain of the Sect of the Pharisees which believed. What difference was there
between these Pharisees, and other Pharisees, from whom, by a special
description they are distinguished, but this? These which came to Antioch,
teaching the necessity of Circumcision, were Christians; the other, enemies of
Christianity. Why then should these be tenned so distinctly Believers, if they
did directly deny the foundation of our Belief; besides which, there was no
other thing, that made the rest to be no Believers? We need go no farther than
Saint Paul's very reasoning against them, for proof of this matter; Seeing you
know God, or rather are known of God? how turn you again to impotent Rudiments?
the Gal. 4.14.15.
Law engenders Servants, her Children are in bondage: Verse. 18.
They which are begotten by the Gospel, are free. Verse. 21.
Brethren, we are not Children of the Servant, but of the Freewoman, and will
ye yet be under the Law? That they thought it unto Salvation necessary, for the
Church of Christ to Verse. 8.
observe days, and months, and times, and years, to keep the Ceremonies and
Sacraments of the Law, this was their error. Yet he which condemns their
error, confesses, that, notwithstanding, they knew God, and were known of
him; he takes not the honor from them to be termed Sons, begotten of the
immortal seed of the Gospel. Let the heaviest words which he uses, be weighed;
consider the drift of those dreadful Conclusions: If ye be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing: As many as are justified by the Law, are fallen from
Grace. It had been to no purpose in the World so to urge them, had not the
Apostle been persuaded, that at the hearing of such Sequels, No benefit by
Christ, a defection from Grace, their hearts would tremble and quake within
them: And why? because that they knew, that in Christ, and in Grace, their
Salvation lay, which is a plain direct acknowledgement of the Foundation. Lest
I should herein seem to hold that which no one learned or godly has done, let
these words be considered, which import as much as I affirm. ^^er. de Unit.
Eccles. servants.
Surely those Brethren, which in Saint Paul's time, thought that God did lay a
necessity upon them to make choice of days and meats, spoke as they believed,
and could not but in words condemn the liberty, which they supposed to be
brought in against the Authority of Divine Scripture. Otherwise it had been
needless for Saint Paul to admonish them, not to condemn such as eat without
scrupulosity, whatsoever was set before them. This error, if you weigh what it
is of it self, did at once overthrow all Scriptures, whereby we are taught
Salvation by Faith in Christ, all that ever the Prophets did soretell, all that
ever the Apostles did preach of Christ, it drew with it the denial of Christ
utterly: Insomuch, that Saint Paul complains, that his labor was lost upon
the Galatians, unto whom this error was obtruded, affirming, that Christ, if
so be they were circumcised, should not profit them any thing at all. Yet so
far was Saint Paul from striking their names out of Christ's book, that he
commands others to entertain them, to accept with singular humanity, to use
them like Brethren: he knew man's imbecility, he had a feeling of our
blindness which are mortal men, how great it is, and being sure that they are
the Sons of God whosoever be endued with his fear, would not have them
counted Enemies of that whereunto they could not as yet frame themselves to be
Friends, but did ever upon a very Religious affection to the Truth, willingly
reject the truth. They acknowledged Christ to be their only and perfect
Savior, but saw not how repugnant their believing the necessity of Mosaical
Ceremonies was to their Faith in Jesus Christ. Hereupon a reply is made, that
if they had not directly denied the foundation, they might have been saved; but
saved they could not be, therefore their opinion was, not only by consequent,
but directly; a denial of the foundation. When the question was about the
possibility of their Salvation, their denying of the foundation was brought to
prove, that they could not be saved: now, that the Question is about their
denial of the foundation, the impossibility of their Salvation is alleged to
prove, they denied the foundation. Is there nothing which excludes men from
Salvation, but only the foundation of Faith denied? I should have thought,
that, besides this, many other things are death unto as many as understanding
that to cleave thereunto, was to fall from Christ, did notwithstanding cleave
unto them. But of this enough. Wherefore I come to the last Question, Whether
that the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, concerning the necessity of Works unto
Salvation, be a direct denial of our Faith?

27. I seek not to obtrude unto you any private Opinion of mine own; the best
learned in our profession, are of this Judgment, That all the corruptions of
the Church of Rome, do not prove her to deny the Foundation directly; if they
did, they should grant her simply to be no Christian Church. Calr. Ey. 108.
But, I supopose, says one, that in the Papacy some Church remains, a Church
crazed, or, if you will, broken quite in pieces, forlorn, misshapen, yet some
Church: his reason is this, Antichrist must sit in the Temple of God. Lest any
man should think such Sentences as these to be true, only in regard of them
whom that Church is supposed to have kept by the special providence of God, as
it were, in the secret corners of his Bosom, free from infection, and as sound
in the Faith, as we trust, by his mercy, we our selves are; I permit it to your
wise considerations, whether it be more likely, that as frenzy, though it take
away the use of reason, does notwithstanding prove them reasonable Creatures
which have it, because none can be frantic but they: So Antichristianity being
the bane and plain overthrow of Christianity, may nevertheless argue, the
Church where Antichrist sits, to be Christian, Neither have I ever hitherto
heard or read any one word alleged of force to warrant, that God does
otherwise, than so as in the two next Questions before has been declared,
bind himself to keep his Elect from worshipping the Beast, and from receiving
his mark in their foreheads: but he has preserved, and will preserve them from
receiving any deadly wound at the hands of the Man of Sin, whose deceit has
prevailed over none unto death, but only unto such as never loved the Truth,
such as took pleasure in unrighteousness: They in all ages, whose hearts have
delighted in the principal Truth, and whose Souls have thirsted after
righteousness, if they received the mark of Error, the mercy of God, even
erring, and dangerously erring, might save them; if they received the mark of
Heresy, the same mercy did, I doubt not, convert them. How far Romish
Heresies may prevail over God's Elect, how many God has kept falling into
them, how many have been converted from them, is not the question now in hand:
for if Heaven had not received any one of that coat for these thousand years,
it may still be true, that the Doctrine which this day they do profess, does
not directly deny the foundation, and so prove them simply to be no Christian
Church. One I have alleged, whose words, in my ears, sound that way: shall I
add another, whose speech is plain? I deny her not the name of a Church, says
another, no more than to a man the name of a man, Morn. de Eccles.
as long as he lives, what sickness soever he has. His Reason is this,
Salvation is Jesus Christ, which is the mark which joyneth the Head with the
Body, Jesus Christ with the Church, is so cut off by many merits, by the merits
of Saints, by the Popes Pardons, and such other wickedness, that the life of
the Church boldeth by a very thread, yet still the life of the Church holds. A
third has these words, Za^ch. pra^^ar. de Relig.
I acknowledge the Church of Rome, even at this present day, for a Church of
Christ, such a Church as Israel did Jeroboam yet a Church. His reason is this,
Every man sees, except he willingly hoodwink himself, that as always, so now,
the Church of Rome holds firmly and steadfastly the Doctrine of Truth
concerning Christ; and baptizeth in the name of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost; confesses and avoucheth Christ for the only Redeemer of the
World, and the Judge that shall sit upon quick and dead, receiving true
Believers into endless joy, faithless and godless men being cast with Satan and
his Angels into flames unquenchable.

28. I may, and will, rein the question shorter than they do. Let the Pope
take down his top, and captivate no more men's Souls by his Papal Jurisdiction;
let him no longer count himself Lord Paramount over the Princes of the World,
no longer hold Kings as his Servants paravaile; Let his stately Senate submit
their Necks to the yoke of Christ, and cease to die their Garments, like Edom,
in Blood; Let them from the highest to the lowest, hate and forsake their
Idolatry, abjure all their Errors and Heresies, wherewith they have any way
perverted the truth; Let them strip their Churches, till they leave no polluted
ragg, but only this one about her, By Christ alone, without works we cannot be
saved: It is enough for me, if I show, that the holding of this one thing, does
not prove the foundation of Faith directly denied in the Church of Rome.

29. Works are an addition: Be it so, what then? the foundation is not
subverted by every kind of addition: Simply to add unto those fundamental
words, is not to mingle Wine with Water, Heaven and Earth, things polluted with
the sanctified blood of Christ: Of which Crime, indict them which attribute
those operations in whole or in part to any Creature, which in the work of our
Salvation wholly are peculiar unto Christ; and If I open my mouth to speak in
their defense, if I hold my peace, and plead not against them as long as breath
is within my Body, let me be guilty of all the dishonor that ever has been
done to the Son of God. But the more dreadful a thing it is to deny salvation
by Christ alone, the more slow and fearful I am, except it be too manifest, to
lay a thing so grievous to any man's charge. Let us beware, lest if we make too
many ways of denying Christ, we scarce leave any way for our selves truly and
soundly to confess him. Salvation only by Christ is the true foundation
whereupon indeed Christianity stands. But what if I say, You cannot besaved
only by Christ, without this addition, Christ believed in heart, confessed with
mouth, obeyed in life and conversation? Because I add, do I therefore deny
that which I did directly affirm? There may be an additament of explication,
which overthrows not, but proves and concludes the Proposition, whereunto
it is annexed. He which says, Peter was a Chief Apostle, does prove that Peter
was an Apostle: He which says, Our Salvation is of the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 13.
through Sanctification of the Spirit, and Faith of the Truth, proves that our
Savation is of the Lord. But if that which is added be such a privation as
takes away the very essence of that whereunto it is added, then by the sequel
it overthrows it. He which says, Judas is a dead man, though in word he
grants Judas to be a man, yet in effect he proves him by that very speech no
man, because death depriveth him of being. In like sort, he that should say,
our Election is of Grace for our Works sake, Romans 11. 6.
should grant in sound of words; but indeed by consequent deny that our
Election is of Grace; for the Grace which electeth us, is no Grace, if it elect
us for our Works sake.

30. Now whereas the Church of Rome adds Works, we must note further, that
the adding of I deny not but that the Church of Rome requires some kind of
works which she ought not to require at men's hands. But our question in general
about the adding of good works, not whethere such or such Works be goed. In
this comparison, it is enough to touch so much of the matter in question
between St. Paul and the Galatians, as infers those Conclusions. Ye are
fallen from grace, Christ can profit you nothing: which Conclusions will fo^low
Circumcision and Rites of the Law Ceremonial, if they be required as things
necessary to Salvation. This only was a ledged against me? and need I touch
more than was all edged?
Works is not like the adding of Circumcision unto Christ, Christ came not to
abrogate and put away good Works: he did, to change Circumcision, for we see
that in place thereof, he has substituted holy Baptism. To say, Ye cannot be
saved by Christ, except ye be circumcised, is to add a thing excluded, a thing
not only not necessary to be kept, but necessary not to be kept by them that
will be saved. On the other side, to say, Ye cannot be saved by Christ without
Works, is to add things, not only not excluded, but commanded, as being in
their place, and in their kind necessary, and therefore subordinated unto
Christ, by Christ himself, by whom the web of Salvation is spun: Mat. 5. 20.
Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Stribes and
Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. They were Luke 11. 39.
rigorous exacters of things not utterly to be neglected, and left undone,
washing and tything, etc. As they were in these, so must we be in judgment and
the love of God. Christ, in Works Ceremonial gives more liberty, in Mat. 5. 21.
moral much less, than they did. Works of Righteousness therefore are added in
the one Proposition; as in the other, Circumcision is.

31. But we say, our Salvation is by Christ alone; therefore howsoever, or
whatsoever we add unto Christ in the matter of Salvation, we overthrow Christ.
Our Case were very hard, if this Argument, so universally meant as it is
proposed, were sound and good. We our selves do not teach Christ alone,
excluding our own Faith, unto Justification; Christ alone, excluding our own
Works, unto Sanctification; Christ alone, excluding the one or the other
unnecessary unto Salvation. It is a childish Cavil wherewith in the matter of
Justification, our Adversaries do so greatly please themselves, exclaiming,
that we tread all Christian virtues under our feet, and require nothing in
Christians but Faith, because we teach that Faith alone justifies: whereas by
this speech we never meant to excluded either Hope or Charity from being always
joined as inseparable Mates with Faith in the man that is justified; or Works
from being added as necessary Duties, required at the hands of every justified
man: But to show that Faith is the only hand which puts on Christ unto
Justification; and Christ the only Garment, which, being so put on, covers
the shame of our defiled natures, hides the imperfection of our Works,
preserves us blameless in the sight of God, before whom otherwise, the
weakness of our Faith were cause sufficent to make us culpable, yea, to shut
us from the Kingdom of Heaven, where nothing that is not absolute can enter.
That our dealing with them he not as childish as theirs with us: when we hear
of Salvation by Christ alone, considering that [ alone] as an exclusive
Particle, we are to note what it does exclude, and where. If I say, Such a
Judge only ought to determine such a case, all things incident to the
determination thereof, besides the Person of the Judge, as Laws, Depositions,
Evidences, etc. are not hereby excluded; Persons are not excluded from
witnessing herein, or assisting, but only from determining and giving
Sentence. How then is our Salvation wrought by Christ alone: Is it our meaning,
that nothing is requisite to man's Salvation but Christ to save, and he to be
saved quietly without any more ado? No, we acknowledge no such Foundation. As
we have received, so we teach, that besides the bare and naked work, wherein
Christ without any other Associate, finished all the parts of our Redemption,
and purchased Salvation himself alone; for conveyance of this eminent blessing
unto us, many things are of necessity required, as to be known and chosen of
God before the foundation of the World; in the World to be called, justified,
sanctified; after we have lest the World, to be received unto glory; Christ in
every of these has somewhat which he works alone. Through him, according to
the Eternal purpose of God, Ephesians. 2. 7. 15.
before the foundation of the World, Born, Crucified, Buried, Raised, etc. we
were in a gracious acceptance known unto God, long before we were seen of men:
God knew us, loved us, was kind to us in Jesus Christ, in him we were elected
to be Heirs of Life. Thus far God through Christ has wrought in such sort
alone, that our selves are mere Patients, working no more than dead and
senseless Matter, Wood, Stone, or Iron, does in the Artificers hands; no more
than Clay, when the Potter appoints it to be framed for an honorable use;
nay, not so much: for the matter whereupon the Craftsman works he chooses,
being moved by the fitness which is in it to serve his turn; in us no such
thing. Touching the rest which is laid for the foundation of our Faith, it
imports farther, That Gal 3. 8.
by him we are called, that we have 1 Pet. 2. 9. and 5 3.
Redemption, Ephesians. 1. 7.
Remission of sins through his Isa. 53. 11. Jer. 23. 6.
blood, Health by his Ephesians. 3. 25.
stripes, Justice by him; that Mat. 19. 27.
he does sanctify his Church, and make it glorius to himself, that 2 Thessalonians. 2.
15.
entrance into joy shall be given us by Him; yea, all things by him alone.
Howbeit, not so by him alone, as if in us to our Gal. 2. 16. end 3. 3. 2 Thessalonians.
2. 13.
Vocation, the hearing of the Gospel; to our Justification, Faith; to our
Sanctification, the fruits of the Spirit; to our entrance into rest,
perseverance in Hope, in Faith, in Holiness, were not necessary.

32. Then what is the fault of the Church of Rome? Not that she requires Works
at their hands which will be saved: but that she attributes unto Works a power
of satisfying God for Sin; yea, a virtue to merit both Grace here, and in
Heaven Glory. That this overthrows the foundation of Faith, I grant
willingly; that it is a direct elenyal thereof, Iutterly deny: What it is to
hold, and what directly to deny the foundation of Faith. I have already opened.
Apply it particularly to this Cause, and there needs no more ado. The thing
which is handled, if the form under which it is handled be added thereunto, it
shows the foundation of any Doctrine whatsoever. Christ is the Matter whereof
the Doctrine of the Gospel treats; and it treats of Christ, as of a Savior.
Salvation therefore by Christ is the foundation of Christianity: as for works,
they are a thing subordinate, no otherwise than because our Sanctification
cannot be accomplished without them: The Doctrine concerning them is a thing
builded upon the foundation; therefore the Doctrine which adds unto them the
power of satisfying, or of meriting, adds unto a thing sabordinated, builded
upon the foundation, not to the very foundation it self; yet is the foundation
by this addition consequently overthrown, forasmuch as out of this addition it
may be negatively concluded, He which makes any work good, and acceptable in
the sight of God, to proceed from the natural freedom of our will; he which
gives unto any good works of ours, the force of satisfying the wrath of God
for sin, the power of meriting either earthly or heavenly rewards; he which
holds Works going before our Vocation, in congruity to merit our Vocation.
Works following our first, to merit our second Justification, and by condignity
our last Reward in the Kingdom of Heaven, pulls up the Doctrine of Faith by
the roots, for out of every of these, the plain direct denial thereof may be
necessarily concluded. Not this only, but what other Heresy is there, that
does not raze the very foundation of Faith by consequent? Howbeit, we make a
difference of Heresies; accounting them in the next degree to infidelity, which
directly deny any one thing to be, which is expressly acknowledged in the
Articles of our Belief; for out of any one Article so denied, the denial of the
very foundation it self is straightway inferred. As for Example, if a man
should say, Hac ^a^io Ecclesiastici Sacramenti and Catholicae F^ici est, vt qui
par^em ^ivini Sacrimenti negar, partem ^^ ^al^at cu^sir^^, Iratuim sibi ^onn^
^a and cuncorp^^ata sunc omnia, ^t aliud ^^ae a^io sta^e non possie, and
quiunum ex omnibus denegaveri^^ alia^^ emnia tradid^ss: non presir, Cassian.
lib. 6. de Incarnat. Dom. If he obst^a^cly stand in denial. page 193.
There is no Catholic Church, it follows immediately thereupon, that this
Jesus whom we call the Savior, is not the Savior of the World; because all
the Prophets hear witness, that the true Messiah should show light unto the
Gentiles; that is to say, gather such a Church as is Catholic, not restrained
any longer unto one circumcised Nation. In the second rank we place them, out
of whose Positions, the denial of any the foresaid Articles may be with like
facility concluded: such as are they which have denied, with Hebion, or with
Maercion, his Humanity; an example whereof may be that of Cassianus, defending
the Incarnation of the Son of God, against Nestorius Bishop of Antioch, which
held, That the Virgin, when she brought forth Christ, did not bring forth the
Son of God, but a sole and mere man: out of which Heresy, the denial of the
Articles of the Christian says he deduceth thus, Acts 20. 23. Lib 2. ^e in
car. Them. cap. 14.
If thou do deny our Lord Jesus Christ, in denying the Son, thou can not
choose but deny the Father; for, according to the voice of the Father himself,
He that has not the Son, has not the Father. Wherefore denying, him which is
begotten, thou deniest him which does beget. Again, denying the Son of God to
have been born in the Flesh, how can thou believe him to have suffered?
believing not his Passion, what remains, but that thou deny his Resurrection?
For we believe him not raised, except we first believe him dead: Neither can
the reason of his rising from the dead stand, without the faith of his death
going before. The denial of his Death and Passion, inserreth the denial of his
Rising from the Depth. Whereupon it follows, that thou also deny his
Ascension into Heaven. The Apostle affirms, That he which ascended, did first
descend; so that, as much as lies in thee, our Lord Jesus Christ has neither
risen from the depth, nor is ascended into Heaven, nor sits on the right
hand of God the Father, neither shall be come at the day of the final account
which is looked for, nor shall judge the Quick and the Dead. And dare thou
yet set foot in the Church? Can thou think thy self a Bishop, when thou have
denied all those things whereby thou do obtain a Bishoply Calling? Nestorius
confessed all the Articles of the Creed, but his opinion did imply the denial
of every part of his Confession. Heresies there are of the third sort, such as
the Church of Rome maintains, which be removed by a greater distance from the
foundation, although indeed they overthrow it. Yet because of that weakness,
which the Philosopher notes in men's capacities, when he says, That the common
sort cannot see things which follow in reason, when they follow, as it were,
afar off by many deductions; therefore the repugnancy of such Heresy and the
foundation, is not so quickly, or so easily found, but that an Heretic of
this, sooner than of the former kind, may directly grant, and consequently
nevertheless deny the foundation of Faith.

33. If reason be suspected, trial will show that the Church of Rome does no
otherwise, by teaching the Doctrine she does teach concerning good works. Offer
them the very fundamental words, and what man is there that will refuse to
subscribe unto them? Can they directly grant, and directly deny one and the
very self-same thing? Our own proceedings in disputing against their works
satisfactory and meritorious, do show not only that they hold, but that we
acknowledge them to hold the foundation, notwithstanding their opinion. For are
not these our Arguments against them? Christ alone has satisfied and appeased
his Fathers wrath: Christ has merited Salvation alone. We should do fondly to
use such Disputes, neither could we think to prevail by them, if that whereupon
we ground, were a thing which we know they do not hold, which we are assured
they will not grant. Their very Answers to all such Reasons as are in this
Controversy brought against them, will not permit us to doubt, whether they
hold the foundation or no. Can any man that has read their Books concerning
this matter, be ignorant how they draw all their Answers unto these heads? That
the remission of all our sins, the pardon of all whatsoever punishments thereby
deserved, the rewards which God has laid up in Heaven, are by the Blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ purchased, and obtained sufficiently for all men: but for no
man effectually for his benefit in particular, except the blood of Christ be
applied particularly to him, by such means as God has appointed that to work
by. That those means of themselves, being but dead things, only the blood of
Christ is that which pu^teth life, force, and efficacy in them to work, and to
be available, each in his kind, to our Salvation. Finally, that Grace being
purchased for us by the blood of Christ, and freely without any merit on desert
at the first bestowed upon us, the good things which we do, after Grace
received, be thereby made satisfactory and meritorious. Some of their Sentences
to this effect, I must allege for mine own warrant. If we desire to hear
foreign Judgments, Levis of Orane^. l. Merlit. cap. last. ^.
we find in one this Confession, He that could reckon how many the virtues and
merits of our Savior Jesus Christ has been, might likewise understand how
many the benefits have been that are to come to us by him, for so much as men are
made Partakers of them all by means of his Passion: by him it given unto us
remission of our Sins, Grace, Glory, Liberty, Praise, Salvation, Redemption,
Justification, Justice, Satisfaction, Sacraments, Merits, and all other things
which we had, and were behoveful for our Salvation. In another, we have these
Oppositions and Answers made unto them: Paulgarola let. 11.
All Grace is given by Christ Jesus: True, but not except Christ Jesus be
applied. He is the propitiation for our sin; by his stripes we are healed, he
has offered himself up for in: all this is true, but apply it. We put all
satisfaction in the blood of Jesus Christ; but we hold, that the means which
Christ has appointed for us in the Case to apply it, are our penal works. Our
Contrymen in Rhemes make the like answer, Anno^. in 1 John 1.
That they seek Salvation no other way than by the Blood of Christ; and that
humbly they do use Prayers, Fastings, Alms, Faith, Charity, Sacrifice,
Sacraments, Priests, only as the means appointed by Christ, to apply the
benefit of his holy Blood unto them: touching our good Works, that in their own
natures they are not meritorious, nor answerable to the joys of Heaven; it
comes by the Grace of Christ, and not of the Work it self, that we have by
well doing a right to Heaven, and deserve it worthily. If any man think that I
seek to varnish their Opinions, to set the better foot of a lame Cause foremost;
Let him know, that since I began thoroughly to understand their meaning, I have
found their halting greater than perhaps it seems to them which know not the
deepnesse of Satan, as the blessed Divine speaks. For, although this be proof
sufficient, that they do not directly deny the foundation of Faith, yet, if
there were no other leaven in the lump of their Doctrine but this, this were
sufficient to prove, that their Doctrine is not agreeable to the foundation of
Christian Faith. The Pelogians being overgreat friends unto Nature, made
themselves Enemies unto Grace, for all their confessing, that men have their
Souls, and all the faculties thereof, their wills, and all the ability of their
wills from God. And is not the Church of Rome still an Adversary unto Christ's
Merits, because of her acknowledging, that we have received the power of
meriting by the blood of Christ: Sir Thomas Moor sets down the odds between
us and the Church of Rome in the matter of Works, In his Book of Consolation.
thus. Like as we grant them, that no good work of man is rewardable in Heaven
of its own nature, but through the mere goodness of God, that lists in set so
high a price upon so poor a thing; and that this price God sets through
Christ's Passion, and for that also they be his own Works with us; for good
works to God-word works no man, without God work in him: and as we grant them
also, that no man may be proud of his works, for his imperfect working; and for
that in all that man may do; he can do God no good, but is a Servant
unprofitable, and does but his bare duty: as we, I say, grant unto them these
things, so this one things or twain do they grant us again, That men are bound
to work good works, if they have time and power; and that whose works in true
faith most, shall be most rewarded: but then set they thereto. That all his
Rewards shall be given him for his Faith alone, and nothing for his Works at
all, because his Faith is the thing, they say, that forces him to work well. I
see by this of Sir Thomas Moor, how easy it is for men of the greatest
capacity, to mistake things written or spoken, as well on the one side as on
the other. Their Doctrine, as he thought, makes the work of man rewardable in
the World to come, through the goodness of God, whom it pleased to set so high
a price upon so poor a thing: and ours, that a man does receive that eternal
and high reward, not for his Works, but for his Faiths sake, by which he
works: whereas in truth our Doctrine is no other than that we have learned at
the feet of Christ; namely, That God does justify the believing man, yet not
for the worthiness of his belief, but for the worthiness of him which is
believed; God rewards abundantly every one which works, yet not for any
meritorious dignity which is, or can be in the Work, but through his mere mercy
by whose Commandment he works. Contrariwise, their Doctrine is, That as pure
Water of it self has no savor, but if it pass through a sweet Pipe, it
takes a pleasant smell of the Pipe through which it passes: so, although
before Grace received, our Works do neither satisfy nor merit; yet after,
they do both the one and the other. Every virtuous Action has then power in
such to satisfy; that if we our selves commit no mortal sin, no heinous
crime, whereupon to spend this treasure of satisfaction in our own behalf, it
turns to the benefit of other men's release, on whom it shall please the
Steward of the House of God to bestow it; so that we may satisfy for our
selves and others; but merit only for our selves. In meriting, our Actions do
work with two hands; Works of Superetogation.
with one they get their morning stipend, the increase of Grace; with the other
their evening hire, the everlasting Crown of Glory. Indeed they teach, that our
good Works do not these things as they come from us, but as they come from
Grace in us; which Grace in us is another thing in their Divinity, than is the
mere goodness of God's mercy toward us in Christ Jesus.

34. If it were not a long deluded Spirit which has possession of their
Hearts; were it possible but that they should see how plainly they do herein
gainsay the very ground of Apostolic Faith? Is this that Salvation by Grace,
whereof so plentiful mention is made in the Scriptures of God? Was this their
meaning, which first taught the World to look for Salvation only by Christ? By
Grace, the Apostle says, and by Grace in such sort as a Gift: a thing that
comes not of our selves, nor of our Works, lest any man should boast, and
say, I have wrought out my own Salvation. By Grace they confess; but by Grace
in such sort, that as many as wear the Diadem of Bliss, they wear nothing but
what they have won. The Apostle, as if he had foreseen how the Church of Rome
would abuse the World in time, by ambiguous terms, to declare in what sense the
name of Grace must be taken, when we make it the cause of our Salvation, says,
He saved us according to his mercy: which mercy, although it exclude not the
washing of our new birth, the renewing of our Hearts by the Holy Ghost, the
Means, the Virtues, the Duties which God requires of our hands which shall be
saved; yet it is so repugnant unto Merits, that to say, We are saved for the
worthiness of any thing which is ours, is to deny we are saved by Grace. Grace
bestows freely; and therefore justly requires the glory of that which is
bestowed. We deny the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ; we abuse, disanul, and
annihilate the benefit of his bitter passion, if we test in these proud
imaginations, that life is deservedly ours, that we merit it, and that we are
worthy of it.

35. Howbeit, considering how many virtuous and just men, how many Saints, how
many Martyrs, how many of the Ancient Fathers of the Church, have had their
sundry perilous Opinions: and amongst sundry of their Opinions this, that they
hoped to make God some part of amends for their sins, by the voluntary
punishment which they laid upon themselves, because by a Consequent it may
follow hereupon, that they were injurious unto Christ: shall we therefore make
such deadly Epitaphs, and set them upon their Graves, They denied the
foundation of Faith directly, they are damned, there is no Salvation for them?
Saint Austin says of himself, Errare passum, Hareticus isse nolo. And, except
we put a difference between them that err, and them that obstinately persist
in Error, how is it possible that ever any man should hope to be saved?
Surely, in this Case, I have no respect of any Person either alive or dead.
Give me a man, of what estate or condition soever, yea, a Cardinal or a Pope,
whom in the extreme point of his life affliction has made to know himself,
whose heart God has touched with true sorrow for all his sins, and filled
with love toward the Gospel of Christ, whose eyes are opened to see the Truth,
and his mouth to renounce all Heresy and Error, any wise opposite thereunto:
This one opinion of Merits excepted, he thinks God will require at his hands,
and because he wants, therefore trembles, and is discouraged; it may be I am
forgetful, and unskilful, not furnished with things new and old, as a wise and
learned Scribe should be, nor able to allege that, whereunto, if it were
alleged, he does hear a mind most williing to yield, and so to be recalled,
as well from this, as from other Errors: And shall I think, because of this
only Error, that such a man touches not so much as the hem of Christ's
garment? If he do, Wherefore should not I have hope, that virtue may proceed
from Christ to save him? Because his Error does by consequent overthrow his
Faith, shall I therefore cast him off, as one that has utterly cast off
Christ? one that holds not so much as by a slender thread? No, I will not be
afraid to say unto a Pope or Cardinal in this plight, Be of good comfort, we
have to do with a merciful God, ready to make the best of a little which we
hold well, and not with a captious Sophister. which gathers the worst out of
every thing wherein we err. Is there any Reason, that I should be suspected,
or you offended for this speech? Is it a dangerous thing to imagine that such
men may find mercy? Let all Affection be laid aside^ Let the Matter
indifferently be considered.
The hour may come, when we shall think it a blessed thing to hear, that if our
sins were the sins of the Pope and Cardinals, the bowels of the mercy of
God are larger. I do propose unto you a Pope with the neck of an Emperor under
his feet; a Cardinal, riding his horse to the bridle in the blood of Saints:
but a Pope or a Cardinal sorrowful, penitent, dis-robed, stripped, not only of
usurpec' power, but also delivered and recalled from Error and Antichrist,
converted and lying prostrate at the foot of Christ: and shall I think that
Christ shall spurn at him? and shall I cross and gainsay the merciful promises
of God, generally made unto penitent sinners, by opposing the name of a Pope or
Cardinal? What difference is there in the world between a Pope and a Cardinal,
and John a Style in this Case? If we think it impossible for them, if they be
once come within that rank, to be afterward touched with any such remorse, let
that he granted. The Apostle says, If I, or an Angel from heaven preach unto,
etc. Let it be as likely, that S. Paul, or an Angel from Heaven should preach
Heresy, as that a Pope or Cardinal should be brought so far forth to
acknowledge the truth: yet if a Pope or Cardinal should, what find we in their
Persons why they might not be saved? It is not the Persons you will say, but
the Error wherein I suppose them to dye, which excludes them from the hope of
mercy, the opinion of merits does take away all possibility of Salvation from
them. What if they hold it only as an Error? Although they hold the truth
truly and sincerely in all other parts of Christian Faith? Although they have
in some measure all the Virtues and Graces of the Spirit, all other tokens of
God's Elect Children in them? Although they be far from having any proud
presumptuous opinion; that they shall be saved by the worthiness of their
deeds? Although the only thing which troubles and molested them, be but a
little too much dejection, somewhat too great a fear, rising from an erroneous
conceit, that God would require a worthiness in them, which they are grieved
to find wanting in themselves? Although they be not obstinate in this
persuasion? Although they be willing, and would be glad to forsake it, if any
one reason were brought sufficient to dispove it? Although the only let, why
they do not forsake it ere they dye, be the ignorance of the means, by which
it might be disproved? Although the cause why the ignorance in this point is
not removed, be the want of knowledge in such us should be able, and are not,
to remove it? Let me dye, if ever it be proved, that simply an Error does
exclude a Pope or a Cardinal in such a case, utterly from hope of life. Surely,
I must confess unto you, if it be an Error, that God may be merciful to save
men even when they err, my greatest Comfort is my Error; were it not for the
love I bear unto this Error. I would never wish to speak, nor to live.

36. Wherefore to resume that mother-Sentence, whereof I little thought that so
much trouble would have grown, I doubt not but that God was merciful to save
thousands of our Fathers, living in Papish. Superstitions, inasmuch as they
sinned ignorantly. Alas! what bloody matter is there contained in this
Sentence, that it should be an occasion of so many hard Censures? Did I say,
that thousands of our Fathers might be saved? I have showed which way it cannot
be denied. Did I say, I doubt not but they were saved? I see no impiety in this
Persuasion, though I had no reason for it. Did I say, Their ignorance did make
me hope they did find mercy, and so were saved? What hinders Salvation but
Sin? Sins are not equal; and Ignorance, though it does not make Sin to be
no Sin, yet seeing it did make their sin the less, why should it not make
our hope concerning their life, the greater? We pity the most, and doubt not
but God has most compassion over them that sin for want of understanding. As
much is confessed by sundry others, almost in the self-same words which I have
used. It is but only my evil hap, that the same Sentences which savor Verity
in other men's books, should seem to bolster Heresy, when they are once by me
recited. If I be deceived in this point, not they, but the blessed Apostle has
deceived me. What I said of others, the same he said of himself, I obtained
mercy for I did it ignorantly. Construe his words, and you cannot misconstrue
mine. I spoke no otherwise, I meant no otherwise, than he did.

37. Thus have I brought the question concerning our Fathers, at length, unto
an end. Of whose estate, upon so fit an occasion as was offered me, handling
the weighty causes of separation between the Church of Rome and us, and the
weak motives which are commonly brought to retain men in that Society; amongst
which motives, the examples of our Fathers deceased is one; although I saw it
convenient to utter the Sentence which I did, to the end that all men might
thereby understand, how untruly we are said to condemn as many as have been
before us otherwise persuaded than we our selves are; yet more than that one
Sentence, I did not think it expedient to utter, judging it a great deal meeter
for us to have regard to our own estate, than to sift over-curiously what is
become of other men. And fearing, left that such questions as these, if
voluntarily they should be too far waded in, might seem worthy of that rebuke,
which our Savior thought needful in a case not unlike, What is this unto
thee? When I was forced, much beside my expectation, to render a reason of my
speech, I could not but yield at the Call of others, and proceed so far as
Duty bound me, for the fuller satisfying of minds. Wherein I have walked, as
with Reverence, so with Fear: with Reverence, inregard of our Fathers, which
lived in former times; not without Fear, considering them that are alive.

38. I am not ignorant, how ready men are to feed and sooth up themselves in
evil. Shall I (will the man say, that loves the present World, more than he
loves Christ) shall I incurr the high displeasure of the mightiest upon Earth?
Shall I hazard my Goods, endanger my Estate, put my self into jeopardy, rather
than to yield to that which so many of my Fathers embraced, and yet found
favor in the sight of God,? Curse ye Meroz, says the Lord, curse bar
Inhabitants, because they helped not the Lord, they helped him not against the
Mighty. If I should not only not help the Lord against the Mighty, but help to
strengthen them that are mighty, against the Lord; worthily might I fall under
the burden of that Curse, worthy I were to bear to bear my own Judgment: But,
if the Doctrine which I reach, be a flower gathered in the Garden of the Lord;
a part of the saying Truth of the Gospel: from whence notwithstanding,
poisonous Creatures do suck-venom: I can but wish it were otherwise, and
content my self with the lord that has befallen me, the rather, because it
has not befallen me alone. Saint Paul taught a Truth, and a comfortable truth,
when he taught, that the greater our misery is, in respect of our Iniquities,
the readier is the mercy of God for our release. If we seek unto him, the more
we have sinned, the more praise, and glory, and honor unto him that pardons
our sin. But mark what sewd Collections were made hereupon by some: Why then
am I condemned for a Sinner? And the Apostle (as we are blamed, and as some
affirm that we say, Why do we not evil that good may come of it?) he was
accused to teach that which ill-disposed People did gather by his teaching,
though it were clean not only besides, but against his meaning. The Apostle
adds, Their Condemnation (which thus do) is just. I am not hasty to apply
Sentences of Condemnation. I wish from mine Heart their Conversion, whosoever
are thus perversely affected. For I must needs say, Their Case is fearful, their
Estate dangerous, which harden themselves, presuming on the mercy of God
toward others. It is true, that God is merciful, but let us beware of
presumptuous sins. God delivered Jonah from the bottom of the Sea, will you
therefore cast your selves headlong from the tops of Rocks, and say in your
Hearts, God shall deliver us? He pitieth the Blind that would gladly see; but
will he pity him that may see, and hardens himself in blindness? No, Christ
has spoken too much unto you, to claim the privilege of your Fathers.

39. As for us that have handled this Cause concerning the condition of our
Fathers, whether it be this thing or any other, which we bring unto you, the
Counsel is good which the Wise man gives, Stand thou fast in thy sure
understanding, in the way and knowledge of the Lord, and have but one manner of
word, and follow the Word of peace and righteousness. As a loose tooth is a
grief to him that eats: so does a wavering and unstable word in speech, that
tends to instruction, offend. Shall a wise man speak words of the wind,
says Eliphaz, leight, unconstant, unstable words? Surely the wisest may speak
words of the wind, such is the untoward Constitution of our nature, that we
do neither so perfectly understand the way and knowledge of the Lord, nor so
steadfastly embrace it when it is understood; nor so graciously utter it, when
it is embraced; not so peaceably maintain it, when it is uttered; but that the
best of us are over-taken sometime through blindness, sometime through
hastiness, sometime through impatience, sometimes through other passions us
the mind, whereunto (God does know) we are too subject. We must therefore be
contented both to pardon others, and to crave that others may pardon us for
such things. Let no man, that speaks as a man, think himself, while he
lives, always freed from scapes and over-sights in his speech. The things
themselves which I have spoken unto you are sound, howsoever they have seemed
otherwise unto some: at whose hands I have, in that respect, received Injury. I
willingly forget it: although indeed, considering the benefit which I have
reaped by this necessary speech of Truth, I rather incline to that of the
Apostle, They have not injured me at all. I have cause to wish them as many
Blessings in the Kingdom of Heaven, as they have forced me to utter words and
syllables in this Cause; wherein I could not be more sparing of speech than I
have been. It becomes no man, says Saint Ierom, to be patient in the crime
of Heresy. Patient, as I take it, we should be always, though the crime of
Heresy were intended; but silent in a thing of so great Consequence I could
not, beloved, I durst not be; especially the love which I bear to the truth of
Christ Jesus, being hereby somewhat called in question. Whereof I beseech them
in the meekness of Christ, that have been the first original cause, to
consider that a Watchman may cry ( an Enemy) when indeed a Friend comes. In
which Cause, as I deem such a Watchman more worthy to be loved for his Care,
than mis-liked for his Error: So I have judged it my own part in this, as much
as in me lies, to take away all suspicion of any unfriendly intent or meaning
against the Truth, from which, God does know, my heart is free.

40. Now to you, Beloved, which have heard these things, I will use no other
words of admonition, than those that are offered me by St. James, My Brethren,
have not the Faith of our glorious Lord Jesus, in respect of Persons. Ye are
not now to learn. that as of it self it is not hurtful, so neither should it be
to any scandalous and offensive in doubtful cases, to hear the different
judgments of men. Be it that Cephas has has one interpretation, and Apollos
has another; that Paul is of this mind, and Barnabas of that; if this offend
you, the fault is yours. Carry peaceable minds, and you may have comfort by
this variety.

Now the God of Peace, give you peaceable minds, and turn it to your
everlasting comfort.

A LEARNED SERMON OF THE NATURE OF PRIDE.
HABAK. 2. 4. His mind swells, and is not right in him: But the Just by his
Faith shall live.
THE nature of Man being much more delighted to be led than drawn, does many
times stubbornly resist Authority, when to Persuasion it easily yields.
Whereupon the Wisest Lawmakers have endeavored always, that those Laws might
seem most reasonable, which they would have most inviolably kept. A Law simply
commanding or forbidding, is but dead in comparison of that which expresses
the reason wherefore it does the one or the other. And surely, even in the Laws
of God, although that he has given Commandment, be in it self a reason
sufficient to exact all obedience at the hands of men; yet a forcible
inducement it is to obey with greater alacrity and cheerfulness of mind, when
we see plainly, that nothing is imposed more than we must needs yield unto,
except we will be unreasonable. In a word, whatsoever be taught, be it Precept
for direction of our Manners; or Article for instruction of our Faith; or
document any way for information of our minds, it then takes root and
abides, when we conceive not only what God does speak, but why. Neither is it
a small thing, which we derogate as well from the honor of his Truth, as from
the comfort, joy and delight which we our selves should take by it, when we
loosely slide over his speech, as though it were as our own is, commonly vulgar
and trivial: Whereas he utters nothing but it has, besides the substance of
Doctrine delivered, a depth of wisdom, in the very choice and frame of words to
deliver it in: The reason whereof being not perceived; but by greater intention
of brain, than our nice minds for the most part can well away with, fain we
would bring the World, if we might, to think it but a needless curiosity, to
rip up any thing further than extemporal readness of wit does serve to reach
unto. Which course, if here we did list to follow, we might tell you, that in
the first branch of this Sentence, God does condemn the Babylonian's pride; and
in the second teach, what happiness of state shall grow to the righteous by the
constancy of their Faith, notwithstanding the troubles which now they suffer;
and after certain notes of wholesome instruction hereupon collected, pass over
without detaining your minds in any further removed speculation. But, as I
take it, there is a difference between the talk that beseems Nurses among
Children, and that which men of Capacity and Judgment do or should receive
instruction by.

The mind of the Prophet being erected with that which has been hitherto
spoken, receives here for full satisfaction a short abridgement of that which
is afterward more particularly unfolded. Wherefore as the question before
disputed of does concern two sorts of men, the Wicked flourishing as the Bay,
and the righteous like the withered Grass, the one full of pride, the other
cast down with utter discouragement: so the answer which God does make for
resolution of doubts hereupon arisen, has reference unto both sorts, and this
present sentence containing a brief Abstract thereof comprehends summarily as
well the fearful estate of iniquity over-exalted, as the hope laid up for
righteousness oppressed. In the former branch of which Sentence, let us first
examine what this rectitude or straitness imports, which God denies to be in
the mind of the Babylonian. All things which God did create, he made them at
the first, true, good, and right. True, in respect of correspondence unto that
pattern of their Being, which was eternally drawn in the Counsel of God's
foreknowledge; Good, in regard of the use and benefit which each thing
yields unto other; Right, by an'apt conformity of all parts with that end
which is outwardly proposed for each thing to tend unto. Other things have ends
proposed, but have not the faculty to know, judge, and esteem of them, and
therefore as they tend thereunto unwittingly, so likewise in the means whereby
they acquire their appointed ends, they are by necessity so held, that they
cannot divert from them. The ends why the Heavens do move, the Heavens
themselves know not, and their motions they cannot but continue. Only men in
all their actions know what it is which they seek for, neither are they by any
such necessity tied naturally unto any certain determinate mean to obtain their
end by, but that they may, if they will, forsake it. And therefore in the whole
World, no Creature but only man, which has the last end of his actions
proposed as a recompense and reward, whereunto his mind directly bending it
self, is termed right or strait, otherwise perverse.

To make this somewhat more plain, we must note, that as they which travel from
City to City, enquire ever for the straightest way, because the streightest is
that which soonest brings them unto their journeys end: So we having here, as
the Apostle speaks, no abiding City, but being always in travel toward that
place of joy, immortality, and rest, cannot but in every of our deeds, words,
and thoughts, think that to be best, which with most expedition leads us
thereunto, and is for that very cause termed right. That Sovereign good, which
is the eternal fruition of all good, being our last and chiefest felicity,
there is no desperate Despiser of God and godliness living, which does not wish
for. The difference between right and crooked minds, is in the means which the
one of the other eschew or follow, Certain it is, that all particular things
which are naturally desired in the world, as Food, Raiment, Honor, Wealth,
Pleasure, Knowledge, they are subordinated in such wise unto that future Good
which we look for in the World to come, that even in them there lies a direct
way tending unto this. Otherwise we must think, that God making promises of
good things in this life, did seek to pervert men, and to lead them from their
right minds. Where is then the obliquity of the mind of man? his mind is
perverse, came, and crooked, not when it bends it self unto any of these
things, but when it bends so, that it swerveth either to the right hand or to
the left, by excess or defect, from that exact rule whereby Human actions are
measured. The rule to measure and judge them by, is the Law of God. For this
cause, the Prophet does make so often and so earnest suit, O direct me in the
way of thy Commandments: As long as I have respect to thy Statules, I am sure
not to tread amiss. Under the name of the Law; we must comprehend not only that
which God has written in Tables and Leaves, but that which Nature also has
engraven in the hearts of men. Else how should those Heathens which never had
Books, but Heaven and Earth to look upon, be convicted of Perverseness? But the
Gentiles which had not the Law in Books, had, says the Apostle, the effect of
the Law written in their hearts.

Then seeing that the heart of man is not right exactly, unless it be found in
all parts such, that God examining and calling it unto account with all
severity of rigor, be not able once to charge it with declining or swarving
aside, (which absolute perfection when did God ever find in the Sons of mere
mortal men?) Does it not follow, that all Flesh must of necessity fall down and
confess, We are not dust and ashes, but worse, our minds from the highest to
the lowest are not right? If not right, then undoubtedly not capable of that
blessedness which we naturally seek, but subject unto that which we most
abhor, Anguish, Tribulation, Death, Woe, endless Misery. For whatsoever misseth
the way of Life, the issue thereof cannot be but Perdition. By which reason,
all being wrapped up in sin, and made thereby the Children of Death, the
minds of all men being plainly convicted not to be right, shall we think that
God has endued them with so many excellencies, more not only than any, but
then all the Creatures in the World besides, to leave them in such estate, that
they had been happier if they they had never been? Here comes necessarily in
a new way unto Salvation, so that they which were in the other perverse, may in
this be found strait and righteous. That the way of Nature, this the way of
Grace. The end of that way, Salvation merited, presupposing the righteousness
of men's works; their Righteousness, a natural hability to do them; that
hability, the goodness of God which created them in such perfection. But the
end of this way, Salvation bestowed upon men as a Gift, presupposing not their
righteousness, but the forgiveness of their unrighteousness, Justification;
their Justification, not their natural ability to do good, but their hearty
sorrow for their not doing, and unfeigned belief in him, for whose sake
not-doers are accepted, which is their Vocation; their Vocation, the Election
of God, taking them out from the number of lost Children; their Election a
Mediator in whom to be elect: This Mediation, inexplicable Mercy; his Mercy,
their Misery, for whom he vouchsafed to make himself a Mediator. The want of
exact distinguishing between these two ways, and observing what they have
common, what peculiar, has been the cause of the greatest part of that
confusion whereof Christianity at this day labors. The lack of diligence in
searching, laying down, and inuring men's minds with those hidden grounds of
Reason, whereupon the least particular in each of these are most firmly and
strongly builded, is the only reason of all those scruples and uncertainties
wherewith we are in such sort entangled, that a number despair of ever
discerning what is right or wrong in any thing. But we will let this matter
rest, whereinto we stepped to search out a way how some minds may be, and are
right truly, even in the sight of God, though they be simply in themselves not
right.

Howbeit, there is not only this difference between the just and impious, that
the mind of the one is right in the sight of God, because his obliquity is not
imputed; the other perverse, because his sin is unrepented of: but even as
lines that are drawn with a trembling hand, but yet to the point which they
should, are thought ragged and uneven, nevertheless direct in comparison of
them which run clean another way; so there is no incongruity in terming them
right-minded men, whom though God may charge with many things amiss, yet they
are not as those hideous and ugly Monsters, in whom, because there is nothing
but wilful opposition of mind against God, a more than tolerable deformity is
noted in them, by saying, that their minds are not right. The Angel of the
Church of Thyatyra, unto whom the Son of God sends this greeting, I know thy
works, and thy love, and service, and faith, notwithstanding, I have a few
things against thee, was not as he unto whom Saint Peter, Thou have no
fellowship in this business, for thy heart is not right in the sight of God. So
that whereat the orderly disposition of the mind of man should be this;
Perturbation, and sensual Appetites all kept in awe by a moderate and sober
will, in all things frained by Reason; Reason, directed by the Law of God and
Nature; this Babylonian had his mind, as it were, turned upside down: In him
unreasonable cecity and blindness trampled all Laws both of God and Nature
under seet; Wilfulness tyrannized over Reason; and Brutish Sensuality over
Will: An evident token, that his outrage would work his overthrow, and procure
his speedy ruin. The Mother whereof was that which the Prophet in these words
signified, His mind does swell.

Immoderate swelling, a token of very eminent breach, and of inevitable
destruction: Pride, a vice which cleaves so fast unto the hearts of men, that
if we were to strip our selves of all faults one by one, we should undoubtedly
find it the very last and hardest to put off. But I am not here to touch the
secret itching humor of vanity wherewith men are generally touched. It was a
thing more than meanly inordinate, wherewith the Babylonian did swell. Which
that we may both the better conceive, and the more easily reap profit by the
nature of this vice, which sets the whole World out of course, and has put
so many even of the wisest besides themselves, is first of all to be inquired
into. Secondly, the dangers to be discovered, which it draws inevitably after
it, being not cured. And last of all, the ways to cure it.

Whether we look upon the gifts of Nature, or of Grace, or whatsoever is in the
World admired as a part of man's excellency, adorning his Body, beautifying his
Mind, or externally any way commending him in the account and opinion of men,
there is in every kind somewhat possible which no man has, and somewhat had
which few men can attain unto. By occasion whereof, there grows disparagement
necessarily; and by occasion of disparagement, Pride through men's ignorance.
First therefore, although men be not proud of any thing which is not, at lest
in opinion good, yet every good thing they are not proud of, but only of that
which neither is common unto many, and being desired of all, causes them which
have it, to be honored above the rest. Now there is no man so void of brain,
as to suppose that Pride consists in the bare possession of such things; for
then to have Virtue were a Vice, and they should be the happiest men who are
most wretched, because they have least of that which they would have. And
though in speech we do intimate a kind of vanity to be in them of whom we say,
They are Wise men and they know it, yet this does not prove, That every Wiseman
is proud which does not think himself to be blockish. What we may have and know
that we have it without offense, do we then make offensive, when we take joy
and delight in having it? What difference between men enriched with all
abundance of earthly and heavenly Blessings, and Idols gorgeously attired, but
this, The one takes pleasures in that which they have, the other none? If we
may be possessed with Beauty, Strength, Riches, Power, Knowledge, if we may be
privy to what we are every way, if glad and joyful for our own welfare, and in
all this remain unblameable; nevertheless some there are, who granting thus
much, doubt whether it may stand with humility to accept those testimonies of
Praise and Commendation, those Titles, Rooms, and other Honors which the World
yields, as acknowledgements of some men's excellencies above others. For
inasmuch as Christ has said unto those that are his; The Kings of the Gentiles
reign over them, and they that bear rule over them are called, Gracious Lords;
Be ye not so: the Anabaptist hereupon urges equality amongst Christians, as if
all exercise of Authority were nothing else but Heathenish Pride. Our Lord and
Savior had no such meaning. But his Disciples feeding themselves with a vain
imagination for the time, that the Messiah of the World should in Jerusalem
erect his Throne, and exercise Dominion with great pomp and outward
stateliness, advanced in honor and Terrene Power above all the Princes of the
Earth, began to think how with their Lord's condition, their own would also
rise: that having left and forsaken all to follow him, their Place about him
should not be mean: and because they were many, it troubled them much, which of
them should be the greatest man. When suit was made for two by name, that of
them one might sit at his right hand, and the other at his left, the rest began
to stomach, each taking it grievously, that any should have what all did
affect; their Lord and Master, to correct this humor, turns aside their
cogitations from these vain and fansieful conceits, giving them plainly to
understand, that they did but deceive themselves. His coming was not to
purchase an earthly, but to bestow on heavenly Kingdom, wherein they (if any)
shall be greatest, whom unfeigned Humility makes in this World lowest and
least amongst others: Ye are they which have continued with me in my
temptations, therefore I leave unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed
me, that ye may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit on Seats, and
judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. But my Kingdom is no such Kingdom as ye
dream of. And therefore these hungry ambitious contentions are seemlier in
Heathens, than in you. Wherefore from Christ's intent and purpose nothing is
further removed, than dislike of distinction in Titles and Callings annexed for
Order's sake unto Authority, whether it be Ecclesiastical or Civil. And when we
have examined thoroughly what the nature of this Vice is, no man knowing it, can
be so simple, as not to see an ugly shape thereof apparent many times in
rejecting Honors offered, more than in the very exacting of them at the hands
of men. For as Judas his care for the Poor was mere covetousness; and that
frank-hearted wastfulness spoken of in the Gospel, thrift^ so, there is no
doubt, but that going in rags may be Pride, and Thrones be clothed with
unfeigned humility.

We must go further therefore and enter somewhat deeper, before we can come to
the Closet wherein this Poison lies. There is in the heart of every proud man,
first, an error of understanding; a vain opinion whereby he thinks his own
excellency, and by reason thereof; his worthiness of estimation, regard and
honor, to be greater than in truth it is. This makes him, in all his
affections, accordingly to raise up himself, and by his inward affections his
outward acts are fashioned. Which, if you list to have exemplified, you may
either by calling to mind things spoken of them, whom God himself has in
Scripture specially noted with this fault; or, by presenting to your secret
cogitations that which you daily behold in the odious lives and manners of
high-minded men. It were too long to gather together so plentiful an harvest of
examples in this kind as the sacred Scripture affords. That which we drink
in at our ears, does not so piercingly enter, as that which the mind does
conceive by sight. Is there any thing written concerning the Assyrian Monarch
in the tenth of Esaias, of his swelling mind, his haughty looks, his great and
presumptuous taunts: By the power of mine own hand I have done all things, and
by mine own wisdom I have subdued the World? Any thing concerning the Dames of
Sion, in the third of the Prophet Esaias, of their stretched-out Necks, their
immodest Eyes, their Pageant-like, stately, and pompous Gate? Any thing
concerning the practices of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, of their impatience to
live in subjection, their mutinies, repining at lawful Authority, their
grudging against their Superiors Ecclesiastical and Civil? Any thing
concerning Pride in any sort of Sect, which the present face of the World does
not, as in a glass, represent to the view of all men's beholding? So that if
Books, both profane and holy, were all lost, as long as the manners of men
retain the estate they are in: for him that observes, how that when men have
once conceived an overweening of themselves, it makes them in all their
affections to swell, how deadly their hatred, how heavy their displeasure, how
un-appeaseable their indignation and wrath is above other men's, in what manner
they compose themselves to be as Heteroclits, without the compass of all such
Rules as the common sort are measured by; how the Oaths which religious hearts
do tremble at, they affect as principal graces of speech; what felicity they
take to see the enormity of their crimes above the reach of Laws and
punishments; how much it delights them when they are able to appale with the
cloudiness of their looks; how far they exceed the terms wherewith man's nature
should be limited; how high they bear their heads over others; how they
brow-beat all men which do not receive their Sentences as Oracles, with
mavelous applause and approbation; how they look upon no man, but with an
indirect countenance, nor hear any thing saving their own praise, with
patience, nor speak without scornfulness and disdain; how they use their
Servants, as if they were Beasts, their Inferiors as Servants, their Equals as
Inferiors, and as for Superiors they acknowledge none; how they admire
themselves as venerable, puissant, wise, circumspect provident, every way
great, taking all men besides themselves for ciphers, poor, inglorious, silly
creatures, needless burdens of the earth, off-scowrings, nothing: in a word,
for him which marketh how irregular and exorbitant they are in all things, it
can be no hard thing hereby to gather, that Pride is nothing but an inordinate
elation of the mind, proceeding from a false conceit of men's excellency in
things honored, which accordingly frames also their deeds and behavior,
unless they be cunning to conceal it; For a foul scarr may be covered with a
fair cloth: And, as proud as Lucifer, may be in outward appearance lowly.

No man expects Grapes of Thistles; nor from a thing of so bad a nature, can
other than suitable fruits be looked for. What harm soever in private Families
there grows by disobedience of Children, stubbornness of Servants,
untractableness in them who although they otherwise may rule, yet should, in
consideration of the imparity of their sex, be also subject; whatsoever, by
strife amongst men combined in the fellowship of greater Societies, by tyranny
of Potentates, ambition of Nobles, rebellion of Subjects in Civil States; by
Heresies, Schisms, Divisions in the Church; naming Pride, we name the Mother
which brought them forth, and the only Nurse that feeds them. Give me the
hearts of all men humbled; and what is there that can overthrow or disturb the
peace of the World? Wherein many things are the cause of much evil; but Pride,
of all.

To declaim of the swarms of Evils issuing out of Pride, is an easy labor. I
rather wish, that I could exactly prescribe, and persuade effectually the
remedies, whereby a sore so grievous might be cured, and the means how the
pride of swelling minds might be taken down. Whereunto so much we have already
gained, that the evidence of the Cause, which breeds it, points directly
unto the likeliest and fittest helps to take it away: Diseases that come of
fullness, emptiness must remove. Pride is not cured, but by abating the Error
which causes the Mind to swell. Then seeing that they swell by mis-conceit of
their own excellency; for this cause, all which tend to the beating down of
their Pride, whether it be advertisement from men, or from God himself
chastisement; it then makes them cease to be proud, when in causes them to
see their error in over-seeing the thing they were proud of. At this mark Job,
in his Apology unto his eloquent Friends, aims. For perceiving how much they
delighted to hear themselves talk, as if they had given their poor afflicted
familiar a schooling of mavelous deep and rare instruction, as if they had
taught him more than all the World besides could acquaint him with: his Answer
was to this effect: Ye swell, as though ye had conceived some great matter; but
as for that which ye are delivered of, who knows it not? Is any man ignorant
of these things? At the same mark the blessed Apostle drives: Ye abound in all
things, ye are rich, ye reign, and would to Christ we did reign with you: But
boast not. For what have ye, or are ye of your selves? To this mark, all those
humble Confessions are referred, which have been always frequent in the mouths
of Saints, truly wading in the trial of themselves: as that of the Prophet's,
We are nothing but soreness and festered corruption: our very light is
darkness, and our righteousness is self unrighteousness; That of GREGORY, Let
no man ever put confidence in his own deserts: Sordet in conspectu Iudicis,
quod fulget in conspectu operantis, In the sight of the dreadful Judge, it is
noysom, which in the doer's judgment makes a beautiful show: That of ANSELM, I
adore thee, I bless thee, Lord God of Heaven, and Redeemer of the World, with
all the power, ability, and strength of my heart and soul, for thy goodness so
unmeasurably extended; not in regard of my merits, whereunto only torments
were due, but of thy mere unprocured benignity. If these Fathers should be
raised again from the dust, and have the Books laid open before them, wherein
such Sentences are found as this: Works no other than the value, desert, price,
and worth of the joys of the kingdom of Heaven; Heaven, in relation to our
works, as the very stipend, which the hired Labourer covenanteth to have of him
whose work he does, as a thing equally and justly answering unto the time and
weight of his travels, rather than to a voluntary or bountiful gift. If, I say,
those reverend fore-rehearsed Fathers, whose Books are so full of Sentences,
witnessing their Christian humility, should be raised from the dead, and behold
with their eyes such things written; would they not plainly pronounce of the
Authors of such Writs, that they were fuller of Lucifer than of Christ; that
they were proud-hearted men, and carried more swelling minds than sincerely
and feelingly known Christianity can tolerate?

But as unruly Children, with whom wholesome admonition prevails little; are
notwithstanding brought to fear that everafter, which they have once well
smarted for; so the Mind which falls not with Instruction, yet under the rod
of Divine chastisement cease to swell. If therefore the Prophet David,
instructed by good experience, have acknowledged: Lord, I was even at the point
of clean forgetting my self, and so straying from my right mind: but thy Rod
has been my Reformer; it has been good for me, even as much as my Soul is
worth, that I have been with sorrow troubled: If the blessed Apostle did need
the corrosive of sharp and bitter strokes, left his Heart should swell with too
great abundance of heavenly Revelations, surely, upon us whatsoever God in this
World does, or shall inflict, it cannot seem more than our Pride does exact,
not only by way of revenge, but of remedy. So hard it is to cure a sore of such
quality as Pride is, in as much as that which rooteth out other Vices, causes
this, and (which is even above all conceit) if we were clean from all spot and
blemish both, of other faults; of Pride, the fall of Angels does make it almost
a question, whether we might not need a Preservative still, left we should
happily wax proud that we are not proud. What is Virtue, but a medicine, and
Vice, but a Wound? Yet we have so often deeply wounded our selves with
Medicine; that God has been fain to make wounds medicinable; to cure by Vice
where Virtue has stricken; to suffer the just man to fall, that being raised,
he may be taught what Power it was which upheld him standing: I am not afraid
to affirm it boldly with St. Augustine, That men puffed up through a proud
opinion of their own sanctity and holiness, receive a benefit at the hands of
God, and are assisted with his Grace, when with his Grace they are not
assisted, but permitted, and that grievously to transgress; whereby, as they
were in overgreat liking of themselves supplanted, so the dislike of that
which did supplant them, may establish them afterward the surer. Ask the very
Soul of Peter, and it shall undoubtedly make you it self this Answer; My eager
Protestations, made in the glory of my ghostly strength, I am ashamed of^ but
those Crystal tears wherewith my sin and weakness was bewailed, have procured
my endless joy; my Strength has been my Ruin, and my Fall my Stay.

A REMEDY AGAINST Sorrow and Fear, DELIVERED IN A FUNERAL SERMON.
JOHN 14. 27. Let not your Hearts be troubled, nor Fear.
THE Holy Apostles having gathered themselves together by the special
appointment of Christ, and being in expectation to receive from him such
Instructions as they had been accustomed with, were told, that which they least
looked for, namely, That the time of his departure out of the World was now
come. Whereupon they fell into consideration: first, of the manifold benefits
which his absence should bereave them of; and secondly of the sundry evils
which themselves should be subject unto, being once bereaved of so gracious a
Master and Patron. The one consideration overwhelmed their Souls with
heaviness: the other with fear. Their Lord and Savior, whose words had cast
down their hearts, raises them presently again with chosen sentences of sweet
encouragement. My dear, it is for your own sakes I leave the World. I know the
affections of your hearts are tender, but if your love were directed with that
advised and staid judgment which should be in you, my speech of leaving the
World, and going unto my Father, would not a little augment your joy. Desolate
and comfortless I will not leave you; in Spirit I am with you to the Worlds
end, whether I be present or absent, nothing shall ever take you out of these
hands: my going is to take possession of that, in your names, which is not only
for me, but also for you prepared; where I am, you shall be. In the mean while,
my peace I give, not as the World gives, give I unto you: Let not your hearts
be troubled, nor fear. The former part of which Sentence having otherwhere
already been spoken of, this unacceptable occasion to open the latter part
thereof here, I did not look for. But so God disposes the ways of men. Him I
heartily beseech, that the thing which he has thus ordered by his Providence,
may, through his gracious goodness turn unto your comfort.

Our Nature for coveteth preservation from things hurtful. Hurtful things being
present, do breed heaviness; being future, do cause fear. Our Savior to abate
the one, speaks thus unto his Disciples: Let not your Hearts be troubled,
and, to moderate the other, adds Fear not. Grief and heaviness in the
presence of sensible Evils cannot but trouble the minds of men. It may
therefore seem that Christ required a thing impossible. Be not troubled. Why,
how could they choose? But we must note this being natural, and therefore
simply not reproveable, is in us good or bad, according to the causes for which
we are grieved, or the measure of our grief. It is not my meaning to speak so
largely of this affection, as to go over all particulars whereby men do one way
or other offend in it, but to teach it so far only as it may cause the very
Apostles equals to swerve. Our grief and heaviness therefore is reproveable,
sometime in respect of the cause from whence, sometime in regard of the measure
whereunto it grows.

When Christ, the life of the World, was led unto cruel death, there followed a
number of People and Women, which Women bewailed much his heavy case. It was a
natural compassion which caused them, where they saw undeserved miseries, there
to pour forth unrestrained tears. Nor was this reproved. But in such readiness
to lament where they less needed, their blindness in not discerning that for
which they ought much rather to have mourned; this our Savior a little
touches, putting them in mind that the tears which were wasted for him, might
better have been spent upon themselves. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for
me, weep for your selves, and for your children. It is not, as the Stoics have
imagined, a thing unseemly for a Wise man to be touched with grief of mind:
but to be sorrowful when we least should; and where we should lament, there to
laugh, this argues our small wisdom. Again, when the Prophet David confesses
thus of himself, I grieved to see the great prosperity of godless men, how they
flourish and go untoucht, Psalm. 73. Himself hereby opens both our common and
his peculiar imperfection, whom this cause should not have made so pensive. To
grieve at this, is to grieve where we should not, because this grief does rise
from Error. We err when we grieve at wicked men's impunity and prosperity,
because their Estate being rightly discerned, they neither prosper nor go
unpunished. It may seem a Paradox, it is truth, That no wicked man's estate is
prosperous, fortunate, or happy. For what though they bless themselves, and
think their happiness great? Have not frantic Persons many times a great
opinion of their own wisdom? It may be that such as they think themselves,
others also do account them. But what others? Surely such as themselves are.
Truth and Reason discerns far^ otherwise of them. Unto whom the Jews wish all
prosperity, unto them the phrase of their speech is to wish Peace. Seeing then
the name of Peace contains in it all parts of true happiness, when the
Prophet says plainly, That the Wicked have no peace, how can we think them to
have any part of other than vainly imagined Felicity? What wise man did ever
account Fools happy? If Wicked men were wise, they would cease to be wicked.
Their Iniquity therefore proving their Folly, how can we stand in doubt of
their misery? They abound in those things which all men desire. A poor
happiness to have good things in possession, Ecclus. 6. 2.
A man to whom God has given Riches, and Treasures, and Honor, so that he
wants nothing for his Soul of all that it desires, but yet God gives him
not the power to eat thereof; such a felicity Solomon esteems but as a
vanity, a thing of nothing. If such things add nothing to men's happiness,
where they are not used, surely Wicked men that use them ill, the more they
have, the more wretched. Of their Prosperity therefore we see what we are to
think. Touching their Impunity, the same is likewise but supposed. They are
oftener plagued than we are aware of. The pangs they feel are not always written
in their forehead. Though Wickedness be Sugar in their mouths, and Wantonness
as Oil to make them look with cheerful Countenance, nevertheless if their
Hearts were disclosed, perhaps their glittering state would not greatly be
envied. The voices that have broken out from some of them, O that God had given
me a heart senseless, like the flints in the rocks of stone? which as it can
taste no pleasure, so it feels no woe; these and the like speeches are surely
tokens of the curse which Zophar in the Book of Job pours upon the head of
the impious man, He shall suck the gall of Asps, and the Viper's tongue shall
slay him. If this seem light, because it is secret, shall we think they go
unpunished, because no apparent Plague is presently seen upon them? The
Judgments of God do not always follow crimes, as Thunder does Lightning; but
sometimes the space of many Ages coming between. When the Sun has shined fair
the space of six days upon their Tabernacle, we know not what Clouds the
seventh may bring. And when their punishment does come, let them make their
account, in the greatness of their sufferings to pay the interest of that
respite which has been given them. Or if they chance to escape clearly in this
World, which they seldom do; in the Day when the Heavens shall shrivel as a
scrowl, and the Mountains move as frighted men out of their places, what Cave
shall receive them? What Mountain or Rock shall they get by entreaty to fall
upon them? What covert to hide them from that wrath, which they shall neither
be able to abide or avoid? No man's misery therefore being greater than theirs
whose impiety is most fortunate; much more cause there is for them to bewail
their own infelicity, than for others to be troubled with their prosperous and
happy estate, as if the hand of the Almighty did not, or would not touch them.
For these causes, and the like unto these, therefore, Be not troubled.

Now, though the cause of our heaviness be just, yet may not our affections
herein be yielded unto with too much indulgency and favor. The grief of
Compassion, whereby we are touched with the feeling of other men's woes, is of
all other least dangerous: Yet this is a le^^ unto sundry duties, by this we
are apt to spare sometimes where we ought to strike. The grief which our own
sufferings do bring, what temptations have not risen from it? What great
advantage Satan has taken even by the godly grief of hearty contrition for
sins committed against God, the near approaching of so many afflicted Souls,
whom the conscience of sin has brought unto the very brink of extreme
despair, does but too abundantly show. These things, wheresoever they fall,
cannot but trouble and molest the mind. Whether we be therefore moved vainly
with that which seems hurtful, and is not; or have just cause of grief, being
pressed indeed with those things which are grievous, our Savior's Lesson is,
touching the one, Be not troubled; not over-troubled for the other. For, though
to have no ^eeling of that which merely concerns us, were stupidity,
nevertheless, seeing that as the Author of our Salvation was himself
Consecrated by affliction, so the way which we are to follow him by, is not
strewed with rushes, but set with thorns; be it never so hard to learn, we must
learn to suffer with patience, even that which seems almost impossible to be
suffered, that in the hour when God shall call us unto our trial, and turn this
honey of peace and pleasure wherewith we swell, into that gall and bitterness
which Flesh does shrink to taste of, nothing may cause us in the troubles of
our Souls to storm, and grudge, and repine at God, but every Heart be enabled
with divinely-inspired courage, to inculcate unto it self, Be not troubled; and
in those last and greatest Conflicts to remember, that nothing may be so sharp
and bitter to be suffered, but that still we our selves may give our selves
this encouragement, Even learn also patience, O my Soul.

Naming Patience, I name that virtue which only has power to stay our Souls
from being over-excessively troubled: A virtue, wherein, if ever any, surely
that Soul had good experience, which extremity of pains, having chased out of
the Tabernacle of this Flesh, Angels, I nothing doubt, have carried into the
bosom of her Father Abraham. The death of the Saints of God is precious in his
sight. And shall it seem unto us superfluous at such times as these are, to
hear in what manner they have ended their lives? The Lord himself has not
disdained so exactly to register in the Book of Life, after what sort his
Servants have closed up their days on Earth, that he descends even to their
very meanest actions, what meat they have longed for in their Sickness, what
they have spoken unto their Children, Kinsfolks, and Friends, where they have
willed their dead Carcasses to be laid, how they have framed their Wills and
Testaments: yea, the very turning of their Faces to this side or that, the
setting of their Eyes, the degrees whereby their natural Heat has departed
from them, their Cries, their Groans, their Pantings, Breathings, and
Last-gaspings, he has most solemnly commended unto the memory of all
Generations. The care of the living both to live and dye well, must needs be
somewhat increased, when they know that their departure shall not be foulded up
in silence, but the ears of many be made acquainted with it. Again, when they
hear how mercifully God has dealt with others in the hour of their last need,
besides the praise which they give to God, and the joy which they have, or
should have, by reason of their Fellowship and Communion of Saints, is not
their hope also much confirmed against the day of their own dissolution?
Finally, the sound of these things does not so pass the ears of them that are
most loose and dissolute of life, but it causes them sometime or other to wish
in their hearts, Oh, that we might dye the death of the Righteous, and that our
end might be like his! Howbeit, because to spend herein many words, would be to
strike even as many wounds into their minds, whom I rather wish to comfort:
Therefore concerning this virtuous Gentlewoman, only this little I speak, and
that of knowledge, She lived a Dove, and dyed a Lamb. And, if amongst so many
Virtues, hearty Devotion toward God, toward Poverty tender Compassion,
Motherly Affection toward Servants; toward Friends even serviceable kindness,
mild behavior, and harmless meaning toward all, if where so many Virtues
were eminent, any be worthy of special mention, I wish her dearest Friends of
that sex to be her nearest Followers in two things: Silence, saving only where
duty did exact speech; and Patience, even then when extremity of pains did
enforce grief. Blessed are they that dye in the Lord. And concerning the dead
which are blessed, let not the hearts of any living be overcharged, with grief
over-troubled.

Touching the latter affection of Fear, which respects evil to come, as the
other which we have spoken of does present evils; first, in the nature thereof
it is plain, that we are not of every future evil afraid. Perceive we not how
they, whose tenderness shrinketh at the least raze of a Needle's Point, do
kiss the Sword that peirceth their Souls quite through? If every Evil did cause
Fear, Sin, because it is Sin, would be feared; whereas properly Sin is
not feared as Sin, but only as having some kind of harm annexed. To teach
men to avoid sin, it had been sufficient for, the Apostle to say, Fly it.
But to make them afraid of committing sin, because the naming of Sin sufficed
not, therefore he adds further, That it is as a Serpent which stingeth the
Soul. Again, be it that some nocive or hurtful thing be toward us, must fear
of necessity follow hereupon? Not, except that hurtful thing do threaten us
either with destruction or vexation, and that such as we, have neither a
conceit of ability to resist, nor of utter impossibility to avoid. That which
we know our selves able to withstand, we fear not; and that which we know are
unable to deferr or diminish, or any way avoid, we cease to fear; we give our
selves over to bear and sustain it. The evil therefore which is feared, must be
in our persuasion unable to be resisted when it comes, yet not utterly
impossible for a time in whole or in part to be shunned. Neither do we much
fear such evils, except they be imminent and near at hand; nor if they be near,
except we have an opinion that they be so. When we have once conceived an
opinion, or apprehended an imagination of such evils pressed, and ready to invade
us; because they are hurtful unto our nature, we feel in our selves a kind of
abhorring; because they are thought near, yet not present, our nature seeks
forthwith how to shift and provide for it self; because they are evils which
cannot be resisted, therefore she does not provide to withstand, but to shun
and avoid. Hence it is, that in extreme fear, the Mother of Life contracting
herself, avoiding as much as may be the reach of evil, and drawing the heat
together with the spirits of the Body to her, leaves the outward parts cold,
pale, weak, feeble, unapt to perform the functions of Life; as we see in the
fear of Balthazar King of Babel. By this it appears, that Fear is nothing
else but a perturbation of the mind, through an opinion of some imminent evil,
threatening the destruction or great annoyance of our Nature, which to shun, it
does contract and deject it self.

Now because, not in this place only, but otherwhere often, we hear it
repeated, Fear not; it is by some made a question, Whether a man may fear
destruction or vexation without sinning? First, the reproof wherewith Christ
checketh his Disciples more than once, O men of little Faith, wherefore are ye
afraid? Secondly, the punishment threatened in Revelat. 21. viz. the Lake, and
Fire, and Brimstone, not only to Murderers, unclean Persons, Sorcerers,
Idolaters, Liars, but also to the fearful and faint-hearted: this seems to
argue, That Fearfulness cannot but be finne. On the contrary side we see, that
he which never felt motion unto sin, had of this affection more than a slight
feeling. How clear is the evidence of the Spirit, That in the days of his Flesh
be offered up Prayers and Supplications, with strong cries and tears, unto him
that was able to save him from death, and was also heard in that which he
feared, Heb. 5.7. Whereupon it follows, that Fear in it self is a thing not
sinful. For, is not Fear a thing natural, and for men's preservation necessary,
implanted in us by the provident and most gracious Giver of all good things, to
the end, that we might not run headlong upon those mischiefs wherewith we are
not able to encounter, but use the remedy of shunning those Evils which we have
not ability to withstand? Let that People therefore which receive a benefit by
the length of their Prince's days, the Father or Mother which rejoices to see
the Offspring of their Flesh grow like green and pleasant Plants, let those
Children that would have their Parents, those men that would gladly have their
Friends and Brethrens days prolonged on earth (as there is no natural-hearted
man but gladly would) let them bless the Father of Lights, as in other things,
so even in this, that he has given man a fearful heart, and settled naturally
that affection in him, which is a preservation against so many ways of death.
Fear then, in it self, being mere Nature, cannot, in it self, be Sin, which Sin
is not Nature, but thereof an accessory deprivation.

But in the matter of Fear we may sin, and do, two ways. If any man's danger
be great, theirs is greatest that have put the fear of danger farthest from
them. Is there any estate more fearful than that Babylonian Strumpet's, that
sits upon the tops of seven Hills, glorying, and vaunting, I am a Queen,
etc. Revel. 18.7. How much better and happier are they, whose estate has been
always as his who speaks after this sort of himself, Lord, from my youth have
I born thy yoke: They which sit at continual ease, and are settled in the lees
of their security; look upon them, view their countenance, their speech, their
gesture, their deeds, Put them in fear, O God, says the Prophet, that so they
may know themselves to be but men; Worms of earth, dust and ashes, frail,
corruptible, feeble things. To shake off security therefore, and to breed fear
in the hearts of mortal men, so many admonitions are used concerning the power
of Evils which beset them, so many threatenings of calamities, so many
descriptions of things threatened, and those so lively, to the end they may
leave behind them a deep impression of such as have force to keep the heart
continually waking. All which do show, that we are to stand in fear of nothing
more than the extremity of not fearing.

When fear has delivered us from that pit, wherein they are sunk that have put
far from them the evil day; that have made a league with death, and have said,
Tush, we shall feel no harm; it stands us upon to take heed it cast us not
into that, wherein Souls destitute of all hope are plunged. For our direction,
to avoid, as much as may be, both extremities, that we may know, as a
Ship-master by his Card, how far we are wide, either on the one side, or on
the other; we must note, that in a Christian man there is, First, Nature:
Secondly, Corruption perverting Nature: Thirdly, Grace, correcting and amending
Corruption. In fear, all these have their several operations: Nature teaches
simply, to wish preservation and avoidance of things dreadful; for which cause
our Savior himself prays, and that often, Father, if it be possible. In
which cases, corrupt Nature's suggestions are, For the safety of Temporal life,
not to stick at things excluding from eternal; wherein how far, even the best
may be led, the chiefest Apostle's frailty teaches. Were it not therefore for
such cogitations as, on the contrary side, Grace and Faith minisheth, such as
that of Job, Though God kill me; that of Paul, Scio cui credidi, I know him on
whom I do rely; small evils would soon be able to overthrow even the best of
us. A wise man, says Solomon, does see a plague coming, and hides himself. It
is Nature which teaches a Wise man in fear to hide himself, but Grace and
Faith does teach him where. Fools care not to hide their heads: but where shall
a Wise man hide himself, when he fears a Plague coming? Where should the
frighted Child hide his head, but in the bosom of his loving Father? where a
Christian but under the shadow of the Wings of Christ his Savior? Come my
People, says God in the Prophet, Enter into thy Chamber, hide thy self, etc.
Isa. 26. But because we are in danger; like chased Birds, like Doves, that seek
and cannot see the resting holes, that are right before them; therefore our
Savior gives his Disciples these encouragements beforehand, that Fear might
never so amaze them, but that always they might remember, that whatsoever Evils
at any time did beset them, to him they should still repair for comfort,
counsel, and succor. For their assurance whereof, his Peace he gave them, his
Peace he left unto them, not such Peace as the World offers, by whom his name
is never so much pretended, as when deepest treachery is meant; but Peace which
passes all understanding, Peace that brings with it all happiness, Peace
that continues for ever and ever, with them that have it.

This Peace, God the Father grant, `for his Son's sake; unto whom, with the
Holy Ghost, three Persons, one Eternal, and Everliving God, be all Honor, and
Glory, and Praise, now and for ever,

Amen.
A Learned and Comfortable SERMON. Of the certainty and perpetuity of FAITH in
the ELECT: Especially of the Prophet Habakkuk's FAITH.
HABAK. 1. 4. Whether the Prophet Habakkuk, by admitting this cogitation into
his mind, The Law does fail, did thereby show himself an Unbeliever?
WE have seen in the opening of this clause, which concerns the weakness of
the Prophet's Faith? First, what things they are whereunto the Faith of sound
Believers does assent: Secondly, wherefore all men assent not thereunto: and
Thirdly, why they that do, do it many times with small assurance. Now,
because nothing can be so truly spoken, but through misunderstanding it may be
depraved; therefore to prevent, if it be possible, all mis-construction in this
cause; where a small error cannot rise but with great danger, it is perhaps
needful ere we come to the fourth Point, that something be added to that which
has been already spoken concerning the third.

That mere natural men do neither know nor acknowledge the things of God, we do
not marvel, because they are spiritually to be discerned: but they in whose
hearts the light of Grace does shine, they that are taught of God, why are they
so weak in Faith? why is their assenting to the Law so scrupulous? so much
mingled with fear and wavering? It seems strange, that ever they should
imagine the Law to fail. It cannot seem strange if we weigh the reason. If the
things which we believe be considered in themselves, it may truly be said, that
Faith is more certain than any Science: That which we know, either by sense, or
by infallible demonstration is not so certain as the Principles. Articles, and
Conclusions of Christian Faith. Concerning which we must note, that there is a
certainty of evidence, and a certainty of adherence. Certainty of evidence we
call that, when the mind does assent unto this or that, not because it is true
in it self, but because the truth is clear, because it is manifest unto us. Of
things in themselves most certain, except they be also most evident, our
persuasion is not so assured, as it is of things more evident, although in
themselves they be less certain. It is as sure, if not surer, that there be
spirits as that there he men: but we be more assured of these than of them,
because these are more evident. The truth of some things is so evident, that no
man which hears them can doubt of them: as when we hear that a part of any
thing is less than the whole, the mind is constrained to say, This is true. If
it were so in matters of Faith, then, as all men have equal certainty of this,
so no Believer should be more scrupulous and doubtful than another. But we
find the contrary. The Angels and Spirits of the Righteous in Heaven, have
certainty most evident of things spiritual: but this they have by the light of
glory. That which we see by the light of Grace, though it he indeed more
certain, yet it is not to us so evidently certain, as that which sense, or the
light of Nature, will not suffer a man to doubt of. Proofs are vain and
frivolous, except they be more certain than is the thing proved: and do we not
see how the Spirit every where in the Scripture proving matters of Faith,
labors to confirm us in the things which we believe by things whereof we
have sensible knowledge? I conclude therefore, that we have less certainty of
evidence concerning things believed, than concerning sensible or naturally
perceived. Of these, who does doubt at any time? Of them, at sometime, who
doubts not? I will not here allege the sundry confessions of the perfectest
that have lived upon earth, concerning their great imperfections this way;
which, if I did, I should dwell too long upon a matter sufficiently known by
every faithful man that does know himself.

The other, which we call the certainty of adherence, is, when the heart does
cleave and stick unto that which it does believe: This certainty is greater in
us than the other. The reason is this, The faith of a Christian does apprehend
the words of the Law, the promises of God, not only as true, but also as good;
and therefore even then when the evidence which he has of the Truth is so
small, that it grieveth him to feel his weakness in assenting thereto; yet is
there in him such a sure adherence unto that which he does but faintly and
fearfully believe, that his Spirit having once truly tasted the heavenly
sweetness thereof, all the world is not able quite and clean to remove him from
it: but he striveth with himself to hope against all reason of believing, being
settled with Job upon this unmovable resolution, Though God kill me, I will not
give ever trusting in him. For why? This lesson remains for ever imprinted in
him, It is good for me to cleave unto God, Psalm. 37.

Now the minds of all men being so darkened, as they are with the foggy damp of
original corruption, it cannot be that any man's heart living should be either
so enlightened in the knowledge, or so established in the love of that wherein
his Salvation stands, as to be perfect, neither doubting nor shrinking at
all. If any such were, what does let why that man should not be justified by
his own inherent righteousness? For Righteousness inherent, being perfect, will
justify. And perfect Faith is a part of perfect Righteousness inherent; yea, a
principal part, the root and the Mother of all the rest: so that if the Fruit
of every Tree be such as the Root is, Faith being perfect, as it is, if it be
not at all mingled with distrust and fear, what is there to exclude other
Christian virtues from the like perfections? And then what need we the
righteousness of Christ? His Garment is superstuous? we may be honorably
clothed with our own Robes, if it be thus. But let them beware who challenge
to themselves a strength which they have not, left they lose the comfortable
support of that weakness which indeed they have.

Some show, although no soundness of ground, there is, which may be alleged
for defense of this supposed-perfection in certainty touching matters of our
Faith: as first that Abraham did believe, and doubted not: secondly, that the
spirit which God has given us to no other end, but only to assure us that we
are the Sons of God; to embolden us to call upon him as our Father, to open our
eyes, and to make the truth of things believed evident unto our minds; is much
mightier in operation than the common light of nature, whereby we discern
sensible things: wherefore we must needs be more sure of that we believe, than
of that we see; we must needs be more certain of the mercies of God in Christ
Jesus, than we are of the light of the Sun when it shines upon our faces. To
that of Abraham, He did not doubt: I answer that this negation does not exclude
all fear, all doubting; but only that which cannot stand with true Faith. It
freeth Abraham from doubting through Infidelity, not from doubting through
Infirmity; from the doubting of Unbelievers, not of weak Believers; from such a
doubting as that whereof the Prince of Samaria is attainted, who hearing the
promise of sudden Plenty in the midst of Extreme Dearth, answered, Though the
Lord would make windows in Heaven, were it possible so to come to pass? But
that Abraham was not void of all doubting, what need we any other proof than
the plain evidence of his own words? Genesis 17. 17. The reason which is taken
from the power of the Spirit were effectual, if God did work like a natural
Agent, as the fire does inflame, and the Sun enlighten; according to the
uttermost ability which they have to bring forth their effects. But the
incomprehensible wisdom of God does limit the effects of his power, to such a
measure as seems best unto himself. Wherefore he works that certainty in
all, which suffices abundantly to their Salvation in the life to come; but in
none so great as attaineth in this life unto perfection. Even so, O Lord, it
has pleased thee; even so it is best and fittest for us, that feeling still
our own Infirmities, we may no longer breathe than pray, Adjuva Domine, Help
Lord our incredulity. Of the third Question, this, I hope, will suffice, being
added unto that which has been thereof already spoken. The fourth Question
rests, and so an end of this Point.

That which comes last of all in this first branch to be considered concerning
the weakness of the Prophet's Faith, is, Whether he did by this very thought,
The Law does fail, quench the Spirit, fall from Faith, and show himself an
Unbeliever or no? The Question is of moment; the repose and tranquillity of
infinite Souls does depend upon it. The Prophet's case is the case of many;
which way soever we cast for him, the same way it passes for all others. If in
him this cogitation did extinguish Grace; why the like thoughts in us should
not take the like effect, there is no cause. Forasmuch therefore as the matter
is weighty, dear and precious, which we have in hand; it behooves us with so
much the greater chariness to wade through it, taking special heed both what we
build, and whereon we build, that if our Building be Pearl, our Foundation be
not Stubble; if the Doctrine we teach be full of comfort and consolation, the
ground whereupon we gather it be sure: otherwise we shall not save, but deceive
both our selves and others In this we know we are not deceived, neither can we
deceive you, when we teach that the Faith whereby ye are sanctified, cannot
fail; it did not in the Prophet, it shall not in you. If it be so, let the
difference be showed between the condition of Unbelievers and his, in this or
in the like imbecility and weakness. There was in Habakkuk, that which Saint
John does call the seed of God, meaning thereby, the first grace which God
powers into the hearts of them that are incorporated into Christ; which having
received, if because it is an adversary to Sin, we do therefore think we
sin not both otherwise, and also by distrustful and doubtful apprehending of
that which we ought steadfastly to believe, surely, we do but deceive our
selves. Yet they which are of God, do not sin either in this, or in any
thing, any such sin as does quite extinguish Grace, clean cut them off from
Christ Jesus: because the seed of God abides in them, and does shield them
from receiving any irremediable wound. Their Faith when it is at strongest is
but weak; yet even then, when it is at the weakest, so strong, that utterly it
never fails, it never perishes altogether, no not in them who think it
extinguished in themselves. There are, for whose sakes I dare not deal slightly
in this Cause, sparing that labor which must be bestowed to make it plain. Men
in like agonies unto this of the Prophet Habakkuk's, are, through the extremity
of grief, many times in judgment so confounded, that they find not themselves
in themselves. For that which dwells in their hearts they seek, they make
diligent search and enquiry. It abides, it works in them, yet still they ask
where? Still they lament as for a thing which is past finding: they mourn as
Rachel, and refuse to be comforted, as if that were not which indeed is; and,
as if that which is not, were; as if they did not believe when they do; and,
as if they did despair when they do not. Which, in some, I grant, is but a
melancholy passion, proceeding only from that dejection of mind, the cause
whereof is in the Bod^, and by bodily means can be taken away. But where there
is no such bodily cause, the mind is not lightly in this mood, but by some of
these three occasions: One, that judging by comparison, either with other men,
or with themselves at some other time more strong, they think imperfection to
be a plain deprivation, weakness to be utter want of Faith. Another cause is:
they often mistake one thing for another. Saint Paul wishing well to the Church
of Rome, prays for them after this sort: The God of Hope fill you with all
joy of Believing. Hence an error grows, when men in heaviness of Spirit,
suppose they lack Faith, because they find not the sugared joy and delight
which indeed does accompany Faith, but so as a separable accident, as a thing
that may be removed from it; yea, there is a cause why it should be removed.
The light would never be so acceptable, were it not for that usual intercourse
of darkness. Too much honey does turn to gall, and too much joy even spiritual,
would make us Wantons. Happier a great deal is that man's case, whose Soul by
inward desolation is humbled, than he whose heart is through abundance of
Spiritual delight lifted up, and exalted above measure. Better it is sometimes
to go down into the pit with him, who beholding darkness, and bewailing the
loss of inward joy and consolation, cries from the bottom of the lowest hell,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? than continually to work arm in arm
with Angels, to fit, as it were, in Abraham's bosom, and to have no thought, no
cogitation, but, I thank my God it is not with me as it is with other men. No;
God will have them that shall walk in light, to feel now and then what it is to
sit in the shadow of death. A grieved spirit therefore is no argument of a
faithless mind. A third occasion of men's mis-judging themselves, as if they
were faithless when they are not, is; They fasten their cogitations upon the
distrustful suggestions of the flesh, whereof finding great abundance in
themselves, they gather thereby; surely, unbelief has full dominion, it, has
taken plenary possession of me; if I were faithful it could not be thus. Not
marking the motions of the Spirit, and of Faith, because they lie buried and
overwhelmed with the contrary: when notwithstanding, as the blessed Apostle
does acknowledge, that the Spirit groaneth, and that God hears when we do
not; so there is no doubt, but that our Faith may have, and has her private
operations secret to us, yet known to him by whom they are. Tell this to a man
that has a mind deceived by too hard an opinion of himself, and it does but
augment his grief: he has his answer ready, Will you make me think otherwise
than I find, than I feel in my self? I have thoroughly considered, and
exquisitely sifted all the corners of my heart, and I see what there is; never
seek to persuade me against my knowledge, I do not, I know I do not believe.
Well, to favor them a little in their weakness: let that be granted which they
do imagine; be it that they be faithless and without belief. But are they not
grieved for their unbelief? They are. Do they not wish it might, and also
strive that it may be otherwise? We know they do. Whence comes this, but from
a secret love and liking which they have of those things that are believed? No
man can love things which in his own opinion are not. And if they think those
things to be, which they show that they love when they desire to believe them;
then must it needs be, that by desiring to believe, they prove themselves true
Believers: For without Faith, no man thinks that things believed are. Which
argument all the subtilty of infernal powers will never be able to dissolve.
The Faith therefore of true Believers, though it has many and grievous
down-falls, yet does it still continue invincible; it conquereth, and
recovereth it self in the end. The dangerous conflicts whereunto it is subject,
are not able to prevail against it. The Prophet Habakkuk remained faithful in
weakness, though weak in Faith. It is true, such is our weak and wavering
nature, we have no sooner received Grace, but we are ready to fall from it; we
have no sooner given our assent to the Law that it cannot fall, but the next
conceit which we are ready to embrace, is, that it may, and that it does fail.
Though we find in our selves a most willing heart to cleave unseparably unto
God, even so far as to think unfeignedly with Peter, Lord, I am ready to go
with thee into Prison and to death: yet how soon, and how easily, upon how
small occasions are we changed, if we be but a while let alone, and left unto
our selves? The Galatians to day, for their sakes which teach them the truth of
Christ, are content; if need were, to pluck out their own eyes, and the next
day ready to pluck out theirs which taught them. The love of the Angel to the
Church of Ephesus, how greatly enflamed, and how quickly slacked? the higher we
flow, the nearer we are unto an ebb, if men be respected as mere men, according
to the wonted course of their alterable inclination, without the heavenly
support of the Spirit. Again, the desire of our ghostly enemy is so incredible,
and his means so forcible to overthrow our Faith, that whom the blessed
Apostle knew betrothed and made hand-fast unto Christ, to them he could not
write but with great trembling: I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy,
for I have prepared you to one Husband, to present you a pure Virgin unto
Christ: but I fear, lest at the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so
your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity which is in Christ. The
simplicity of Faith which is in Christ, takes the naked promise of God, his
bare Word, and on that it rests. This simplicity the Serpent labors
continually to pervert, corrupting the mind with many imaginations of
repugnancy and contrariety between the promise of God and those things which
sense or experience, or some other fore-conceived persuasion has imprinted.
The word of the promise of God unto his People, is, I will not leave thee, nor
forsake thee: upon this the simplicity of Faith rests, and is not afraid of
famine. But mark how the subtilty of Satan did corrupt the minds of that
Rebellious generation, whose Spirits were not faithful unto God. They beheld
the desolate state of the desert in which they were, and by the wisdom of their
sense concluded the promise of God to be but folly: Can God prepare a Table in
the Wilderness? The word of the promise to Sarah, was, Thou shall bear a Son.
Faith is simple, and doubts not of it: but Satan, to corrupt this simplicity
of Faith, entangleth the mind of the Woman with an argument drawn from common
experience to the contrary: A woman that is old; Sarah, now to be acquainted
again with forgotten passions of youth! The word of the promise of God by Moses
and the Prophets, made the Savior of the World so apparent unto Philip, that
his simplicity could conceive no other Messiah than Jesus of Nazareth the Son
of Joseph. But to stay Nathaniel, left being invited to come and see, he should
also believe, and so be saved, the subtilty of Satan casts a mist before his
eyes, puts in his head, against this, the common conceived persuasion of all
men concerning Nzaareth; Is it possible that any good thing should come from
thence? this stratagem he does use with so great dexterity, that the minds of
all men are so strangely bewitched with it, that it bereaveth them for the time
of all perceivance of that which should relieve them and be their comfort; yea,
it takes all remembrance from them, even of things wherewith they are most
familiarly acquainted. The people of Israel could not be ignorant, that he
which led them through the Sea, was able to feed them in the Des^rt: but this
was obliterated, and put out by the sense of their present want. Feeling the
hand of God against them in their food, they remember not his hand in the day
that he delivered them from the hand of the Oppressor, Sarah was not then to
learn, That with God all things were possible. Had Nathaniel never noted how
God does choose the base things if this World to disgrace them that are most
honorably esteemed? The Prophet Habakkuk knew, that the promises of Grace,
protection and favor which God in the Law does make unto his People, do not
grant them any such immunity as can free and exempt them from all
chastisements, he knew, that, as God said, I will continue for ever my mercy
toward them; so he likewise said, Their transgressions I will punish with a
rod: he knew, that it could not stand with any reason, we should set the
measure of our own punishments, and prescribe unto God how great, or how long,
our sufferings shall be; he knew, that we were blind, and altogether ignorant
what is best for us; that we sue for many things very unwisely against our
selves, thinking we ask Fish, when indeed we crave a Serpent: he knew, that
when the thing we ask is good, and ye: God seems slow to grant it; he does
not deny, but deferr our Petitions, to the end we might learn to desire great
things greatly: all this he knew. But beholding the Land which God had severed
for his own People, and seeing it abandoned unto Heathen Nations; viewing how
reproachfully they did tread it down, and wholly make havoc of it at their
pleasure; beholding the Lords own Royal Seat made an heap of Stones, his Temple
defiled, the carkasles of his Servants cast out for the fowls of the air to
devour, and the flesh of his meek ones for the beasts of the fields to feed
upon; being conscious to himself how long and how earnestly he had cried,
Succou^^^, O God of our welfare, for the Glory of thine own Name; and feeling
that their sore was still increased; the conceit of repugnancy between this
which was objected to his eyes, and that which Faith, upon promise of the Law,
did look for, made so deep an impression, and so strong, that he disputes not
the matter, but without any further inquiry or search, infers as we see: The
Law does fail.

Of us who is here, which cannot very soberly advice his Brother? Sir, you must
learn to strengthen your Faith by that experience which heretofore you have had
of God's great goodness toward you, Per ea quae agnoscas praestita, discas
sperare promissa; By those things which you have known performed, learn to hope
for those things which are promised. Do you acknowledge to have received much?
Let that make you certain to receive more: Habenti debitur, To him that has,
more shall be given. When you doubt what you shall have, search what you have
had at God's hands. Make this reckoning, that the benefits which he has
bestowed, are Bills obligatory and sufficient Sureties that he will bestow
further. His present Mercy is full a warrant of his future love, because whom
he loves, he loves unto the end. Is it not thus? Yet if we could reckon up as
many evident, clear, undoubted signs of God's reconciled love toward us, as
there are years, yea days, yea hours past over our heads; all these set
together have no such force to confirm our Faith, as the loss, and sometimes
the only fear of losing a little transitory goods, credit, honor, or favor
of men, a small calamity, a matter of nothing to breed a conceit, and such a
conceit as is not easily again removed; that we are clean crossed out of God's
hook, that he regards us not, that he looks upon others, but passes by us
like a Stranger, to whom we are not known. Then we think, looking upon others,
and comparing them with our selves; Their Tables are furnished day by day,
earth and ashes are our bread: they sing to the Lute, and they see their
Children dance before them; our hearts are heavy in our bodies as lead, our
sighs beat as thick as a swift Pulse, our tears do wash the beds wherein we
lie: the Sun shines fair upon their foreheads; we are hanged up like Bottles
in the smoke, cast into corners like the sherds of a broken Pot: tell not us of
the promises of God's favor, tell such as do reap the fruit of them; they
belong not to us, they are made to others: the Lord be merciful to our
weakness, but thus it is. Well, let the frailty of our Nature, the subtilty of
Satan, the force of our deceivable imaginations be, as we cannot deny, but they
are things that threaten every moment the utter subversion of our Faith; Faith
notwithstanding is not hazarded by these things. That which one sometimes told
the Senators of Rome, Ego sic existimabam, P. C. ^ntipatrem sape meum
praedicantem eudiveram, Qui vestram amicitia^s diligenter colerent, cos multum
laborem suscipere, caeterum ex omnibus maxim tutos esse: As I have often heard
my Father acknowledge, so I my self did ever think, that the friends and
favorers of this State charged themselves with great labor, but no man's
condition so safe as theirs; the same we may say a great deal more justly in
this case: Our Fathers and Prophets, our Lord and Master has full often
spoken, by long experience we have found it true; as many as have entered their
names in the mystical book of life, cos maximum si laborem suscipere, they have
taken upon them a laboursome, a toylsome, a painful profession, sed omnium
maxim tutos esse, but no man's security like to theirs. Simon, Simon, Satan
has desired to win now thee as wheat; Here is our toil: but I have prayed for
thee, that thy Faith fail not, this is our safety. No man's condition sure as
ours: the Prayer of Christ is more than sufficient both to strengthen us, be we
never so weak: and to overthrow all adversary power, be it never so strong and
potent. His Prayer must not exclude out labor: their thoughts are vain, who
think that their watching can preserve the City which God himself is not
willing to keep. And are not theirs as vain, who think that God will keep the
City, for which they themselves are not careful to watch? The Husbandman may
not therefore burn his Plough, nor the Merchant forsake his Trade, because God
Has promised, I will not forsake thee. And do the promises of God concerning
our stability, think you, make it a matter indifferent for us, to use, or not
to use the means whereby to attend, or not to attend to reading? to pray, or
not to pray, that we fall not into temptations? Surely, if we look to stand in
the faith of the Sons of God, we must hourly, continually be providing and
setting our selves to strive. It was not the meaning of our Lord and Savior in
saying, Father keep them in thy name, that we should be careless to keep our
selves. To our own safety, our own sedulity is required. And then blessed for
ever and ever be that Mothers Child, whose Faith has made him the Child of
God. The Earth may shake, the Pillars of the World may tremble under us: the
countenance of the Heaven may be appaled, the Sun may lose his light, the Moon
her beauty, the Stars their glory: but concerning the man that trusts in God,
if the fire have proclaimed it self unable, as much as to singe a hair of his
head; if Lions, Beasts ravenous by nature, and keen with hunger, being set to
devour, have, as it were, religiously adored the very flesh of the Faithful
man, what is there in the World that shall change his Heart, overthrow his
Faith, alter his affection toward God, or the affection of God to him? If I be
of this note; who shall make a separation between me and my God? shall
tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword? No, I am persuaded, that neither tribulation, nor anguish, nor
persecution, or famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor sword, nor death, nor
life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature, shall ever
prevail so far over me. I know in whom I have believed; I am not ignorant whose
precious blood has been shed for me; I have a Shepherd full of kindness, full
of care, and full of power, unto him I commit my self, his own finger has
engraven this sentence in the Tables of my heart: Satan has desired to winnow
thee as wheat, but I have prayed that thy Faith fail not: Therefore the
assurance of my hope I will labor to keep as a Jewel unto the end; and by
labor, through the gracious mediation of his Prayer, I shall keep it.

To the Worshipful Mr. GEORGE SUMMASTER, Principal of Broad-Gates Hall in
Oxford, Henry Iackson wishes all Happiness.
SIR,
YOur kind acceptance of a former testification of that respect I owe you,
has made me venture to show the World these godly Sermons under your name. In
which, as every point is worth observation, so some especially are to be noted,
The first, that, as the spirit of Prophecy is from God himself, who does
inwardly heat and enlighten the hearts and minds of his holy Penmen, (which
if some would diligently consider, they would not puzzle themselves with the
contentions of Scot, and Thomas, Whether God only, or his Ministering Spirits,
do infuse into men's minds prophetical Revelations, per species
intelligibiles) so God framed their words also. Whence he holy Father St.
Augustine religiously observes, Lib 4. cap. 6. de d^ct. chr.
That all those who understand the Sacred Writers, will also perceive, that
they ought not to use other words than they did, in expressing those heavenly
Mysteries which their hearts conceived, as the Blessed Virgin did our Savior,
By the Holy Ghost, The greater is Castell-o his offense, who has labored to
teach the Prophets to speak otherwise than they have already. Much like to that
impious King of Spain, Alphonsus the tenth, who found fault with God's works,
Si, inquit, Creationi assuissiem. Mundum melius ordinassem, Rob. Tol^^. lib. 4.
cap. 5.
If he had been with God at the Creation of the World, the World had gone
better than now it does. As this man found fault with God's works, so did the
other with God's words; but, because we have a most sure word of the Prophets,
to which we must take heed, 2 Pet. 1.
I will let his words pass with the wind, having elsewhere spoken to you more
largely of his errors, P^i^^ in Orit. D. A^nold.
whom notwithstanding for his other excellent parts, I much respect.

You shall moreover from hence understand, how Christianity consists not in
formal and seeming purity (under which, who knows not notorious Villainy to
m^sk?) but in the heart root. Whence the Author truly teaches, that Mockers,
which use Religious as a Cloak, to put off and on; as the Weather serves, are
worse than Pagans and Infidels. Where I cannot omit to show, how justly this
kind of men has been reproved by that renowned Martyr of Jesus Christ, E.
Latimer, both because it will be opposite in this purpose, and also free that
Christian Worthy from the slanderous reproaches of him, who was, if ever any,
Parsons in 3. convers.
a Mo^ker of God, Religion, and all good men. But first I must desire you, and
in you all Readers, not to think lightly of that excellent man, for using this
and the like witty similitudes in his Sermons. For whosoever will call to
mind, with what riff-raff God's people were fed in those days, when their
Priests, whose lips should have preserved Knowledge, Mal. 1. 7.
preached nothing else but dreams and false miracles of counterfeit Saints,
Canus locur. l. 11. c. 5. Vi^ ver. lib. 2. de corrupt. art Hard. lib. 4.
enrolled in that s^ttish Legend coined and amplified by a drousie head,
between sleeping and waking. He that will consider this, and also how the
People were delighted with such toys (God sending them strong delusions that
they should believe lies) and how hard it would have been for any man, wholly,
and upon the sudden, to draw their minds to another bent, will easily
perceive, both how necessary it was to use Symbolical Discourse, and how wisely
and moderately it was applied by the religious Father, to the end he might lead
their understanding so far, till it were so convinced, informed, and settled,
that it might forget the means and way by which it was led, and think only of
that it had acquired Far in all such mystical speeches who knows not that the
end for which they are used is only to be thought upon?

This then being first considered* let us hear the story, as it is related by
Mr. Fox: Pac. 1903. edit. 1570.
Mr. Latuner (says he in his Sermon gave the People certain Cards out of the
fifth, sixth, and seventh chapters of Matthew. For the chief Triumph in the
Cards be limited the Heart, as the principal thing that they should serve God
withal, whereby he quite overthrew all hypocritical and external Ceremonies,
not tending to the necessary furtherance of God's holy Word and Sacraments. By
this, he exhorted all men to serve the Lord with inward heart, and true
affection, and not with outward Ceremonies; adding moreover to the praise of
that Triumph, that though it were never so small, yet it would take up the best
Coat-card beside in the Bunch, yea, though it were the King of Clubs, etc.
meaning thereby, how the Lord would be worshipped and served in simplicity of
the heart, and verity, wherein consists true Christian Religion, etc. Thus
Master Fox.

By which it appears, that the holy man's intention was to lift up the Peoples
hearts to God, and not that he made a Sermon of playing at Cards, and taught
them how to play at Triumph, and played (himself) at Cards in the Pulpit, as
that base companion In the third part of the 3. conversions of England; in the
Examination of Foxes Saints, c. 14. sect. 53.54. p. 215.
Parsons reports the matter, in his wonted scurrilous vein of railing, whence
he calls it a Sect. 55.
Christmas-Sermon. Now he that will think ill of such Allusions, may, out of
the abundance of his folly, jest at Demosthenes for his story of the Plut. in
Demosthen.
Sheep, Wolves, and Dogs; and Live. Dec. 1.l.2. an. V.C. 60
Menenius, for his fiction of the Belly. But, hinc illae lacrymae, The good
Bishop meant that the Romish Religion came not from the heart, but consisted in
outward Ceremonies: Which sorely grieved Parsons, who never had the least
warmth or spark of honesty. Whether B. Latimer compared the Bishops to the
Knave of Clubs, as the Fellow interprets him, I know not: I am sure Parsons, of
all others, deserved those colors; and so I leave him. We see then, what
inward purity is required of all Christians, which if they have, then in
Prayer, and all other Christian duties, they shall lift up pure hands, as the 1 Timothy 2.8.
Apostle speaks, not as Annal. tom. ^. An. 59. n. 109,110 and tom. 2. An. 132.
number.
Baronius would have it, washed from sins with holy water; but pure, that is,
holy, free from the pollution of sin, as the Greek word (...) does signify.

You may also see here refused those calumnies of the Papists; that we abandon
all religious Rites, and godly duties, as also the confirmation of our Doctrine
touching certainty of Faith (and so of Salvation) which is so strongly denied
by some of that Faction, that they have told the world, S. Paulus de sua salute
incertus Kicheom Jesuit. 1.2. c. 12. Idolat. Huguen. p. 119. in marg edit. Lat.
Mogunt. 113. interpret. Marcel. Bomper. Jesuita.
S. Paul himself was uncertain of his own salvation. What then shall we say,
but pronounce a woe to the most strict observers of St. Francis rules, and his
Canonical Discipline (though they make him even Witness the verses of Horatius
a Jesuit. recited by Posse. Biblioth. Select. part. 2.l.17. c. 19. Exue
Franciscum tunica laceroque cucul^o. Qui Franciscus erat, jam tibi Christus
eri^. Francisci exuri^s (si qua licet) indue Christium: Jam Francisco; erit,
qui modo Christus erat, The like has Bencius another Jesuit.
equal with Christ) and the most meritorious Monk that ever was registered in
their Calendar of Saints? But we, for our comfort, are otherwise taught out of
the holy Scripture, and therefore exhorted to build our selves in our most holy
Faith, that so, when 2 Cor.3.1.
our earthly house of this Tabernacle shall be destroyed, we may have a
Building given of God, a house not made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens.

This is that which is most piously and feelingly taught in these few leaves,
so that you shall read nothing here, but what, I persuade my self, you have
long practi^ed in the constant course of your life. It remains only, that you
accept of these Labors tendered to you by him, who wishes you the long joys of
this world, and the eternal of that which is to come.

Oxon. from Corp. Christi College, this 13. of January, 1613.
TWO SERMONS Upon Part of Saint Judes Epistle.
The First Sermon.
Epist. JUDE, Verse 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. But ye, beloved, remember the words
which were spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ:

How that they told you, that there should be Mockers in the last time, which
should walk after their own ungodly lusts.

These are makers of Sects, fleshly, having not the Spirit.

But ye, beloved, edify your selves in your most holy Faith, praying in the
Holy Ghost.

And keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ, unto eternal life.


THE occasions whereupon, together with the end wherefore, this Epistle was
written, is opened in the front and entry of the same. There were then, as
there are now, many evil and wickedly disposed Persons, not of the Mystical
Body, yet within the visible bounds of the Church, men which were of old
ordained to condemnation, ungodly men, which turned the grace of our God into
wantonness, and denied the Lord Jesus. For this cause the Spirit of the Lord is
in the hand of Jude, the Servant of Jesus, and Brother of James, to exhort them
that are called, and sanctified of God the Father, that they would earnestly
contend to maintain the Faith, which was once delivered unto the Saints. Which
Faith, because we cannot maintain, except we know perfectly; first, against
whom; secondly, in what sort it must be maintained; therefore in the former
three verses of that parcel of Scripture which I have read, the Enemies of the
Cross of Christ are plainly described; and in the latter two, they that love
the Lord Jesus, have a sweet Lesson given them, how to strengthen and stablish
themselves in the Faith. Let us first therefore examine the description of
these Reprobates concerning Faith; and afterward come to the words of the
Exhortation; wherein Christians are taught how to rest their hearts on God's
eternal and everlasting Truth. The description of these godless Persons is
twofold, general, and special. The general does point them out, and show what
manner of men they should be. The Particular points at them, and says
plainly, These are they. In the general description, we have to consider of
these things: First, when they were described, They were told of before.
Secondly, the men by whom they were described, They were spoken of by the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ. Thirdly, the days, when they should be
manifest unto the World, they told you, They should be in the last time.
Fourthly, their disposition and whole demeanor, Mockers, and Walkers after
their own ungodly lusts.

2. In the third to the Philippians, the Apostle describes certain: They are
men, (says he) of whom I have told you often, and now with tears I tell you of
them, their God is their belly, their glory and rejoicing is in their own
shame, they mind earthly things.

These were Enemies of the Cross of Christ, Enemies whom he saw, and his eyes
gusht out with tears to behold them. But we are taught in this place, how the
Apostles spoke also of Enemies, whom as yet they had not seen, described a
family of men as yet unheard of, a generation reserved for the end of the
World, and for the last time; they had not only declared what they heard and
saw in the days wherein they lived, but they have prophesied also of men in
time to come. And you do well (said St. Peter) in that ye take heed to the
words of Prophecy, so that ye first know this, that no Prophecy in the
Scripture comes of any man's own resolution. No Prophecy in Scripture comes
of any man's own resolution: For all Prophecy, which is in Scripture, came by
the secret inspiration of God. But there are Prophesies which are no Scripture;
yea, there are Prophesies against the Scripture. My Brethren, beware of such
Prophesies, and take heed you heed them not. Remember the things that were
spoken of before; but spoken of before by the Apostles of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Take heed to Prophesies, but to Prophesies which are in
Scripture; for both the manner and matter of those Prophesies do show plainly,
that they are of God.

Of the spirit of Prophecy received from God himself.
3. Touching the manner, how men, by the spirit of Prophecy in holy Scripture,
have spoken and written of things to come, we must understand, that, as the
knowledge of that they spoke, so likewise the utterance of that they knew, came
not by these usual and ordinary means, whereby we are brought to understand the
mysteries of our Salvation, and are wont to instruct others in the same. For
whatsoever we know, we have it by the hands and Ministry of men, which lead us
along like Children, from a letter to a syllable, from a syllable to a word,
from a word to a line, from a line a to a sentence, from a sentence to a side,
and so turn over. But God himself was their Instructor, he himself taught them,
partly by Dreams and Visions in the Night, partly by Revelations in the Day,
taking them aside from amongst their Brethren, and talking with them, as a man
would talk with his Neighbor in the way. This they became acquainted even with
the secret and hidden Counsels of God, they saw things, which themselves were
not able to utter, they behold that whereat men and Angels are astonished. They
understood in the beginning, what should come to pass in the last days.

Of the Prophers manner of speech.
4. God, which lightened thus the eyes of their understanding, giving them
knowledge by unusual and extraordinary means, did also miraculously himself
frame and fashion their Words and Writings, in so much that a greater
difference there seems not to be between the manner of their knowledge, than
there is between the manner of their speech and ours. When we have conceived a
thing in our hearts, and thoroughly understand it, as we think, within our
selves; ^re we can utter in such sort, that our Brethren may receive
instruction or comfort at our mouths, how great, how long, how earnest
meditation are we forced to use? And after much travail, and much pains, when
we open our lips to speak of the wonderful works of God, our tongues do faulter
within our mouths, yea many times we disgrace the dreadful mysteries of our
Faith, and grieve the spirit of our Hearers by words unsavory, and unseemly
speeches: Job 15. 2, 3.
Shall a Wiseman fill his Belly with the Eastern wind, says Eliphaz? shall a
Wiseman dispute with words not comely? or with talk that is not profitable?
Yet behold, even they that are wisest amongst us living, compared with the
Prophets, seem no otherwise to talk of God, than as if the Children which are
carried in arms, should speak of the greatest matters of State. They whose
words do most show forth their wise understanding, and whose lips do utter the
purest knowledge, so long as they understand and speak as men, are they not
fain sundry ways to excuse themselves? Sometimes acknowledging with the
Wiseman, Wisd. 2. 15.
Hardly can we discern the things that are on earth, and with great labor
find we out the things that are before us. Who can then seek out the things
that are in Heaven? Sometimes confessing with Job the righteous, in treating of
things too wonderful for us, we have spoken we wist not what. Sometimes ending
their talk, as does the History of the Macchabees; if we have done well, and as
the Cause required, it is that we desire; if we have spoken slenderly and
barely, we have done we could. But God has made my mouth like a sword, says
Esaias. Esaias 49. 5.
And we have received, says the Apostle, not the spirit of the World, but the
spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are given to us of
God, which things also we speak, not in words, which man's wisdom teaches, but
which the Holy Ghost does teach. This is that which the Prophets mean by those
Books written full within, and without; which Books were so often delivered
them to eat, not because God fed them with Ink and Paper, but to teach us, that
so often as he employed them in this heavenly Work, they neither spoke nor wrote
any word of their own, but uttered syllable by syllable as the Spirit put it
into their mouths, no otherwise than the Harp or the Lute does give a sound
according to the discretion of his hands that holds and strikes it with
skill. The difference is only this: An instrument, whether it be a Pipe or
Harp, makes a distinction in the times and sounds, which distinction is well
perceived of the Hearer, the Instrument it self understanding not what is Piped
or Harped. The Prophets and holy men of God, not so: I opened my mouth, says
Ezekiel, and God reached me a scroul, saying, Son of man, cause thy Belly to
eat, and fill thy Bowels with this I give thee; I ate it, Ezekiel 3.
and it was sweet in my mouth as honey, says the Prophet. Yea sweeter, I am
persuaded, than either honey or the honey comb. For herein they were not like
Harps or Lutes, but they felt, they felt, the power and strength of their own
words. When they spoke of our peace, every corner of their hearts was filled
with joy. When they prophesied of mournings, lamentations, and woes to fall
upon us, they wept in the bitterness and indignation of Spirit, the arm of the
Lord being mighty and strong upon them.

5. On this manner were all the Prophecy of holy Scripture. Which Prophesies,
although they contain nothing which is not profitable for our instruction, yet
as one Star differs from another in glory, so every word of Prophecy has a
treasure of matter in it, but all matters are not of like importance, as all
Treasures, are not of equal price. The chief and principal matter of Prophecy
is the promise of Righteousness, Peace, Holiness, Glory, Victory, Immortality,
unto every Soul which believes, that Jesus is Christ, of the Jew first, and of
the Gentile. Now because the doctrine of Salvation to be looked for by Faith in
him, who was in outward appearance as it had been a man forsaken of God; in him
who was numbered, judged, and condemned with the wicked; in him whom men did see
busseted on the face, scofft at by Soldiers, scourged by Tormentors, hanged on
the Cross, pierced to the Heart; in him whom the eyes of many Witnesses did
behold, when the anguish of his Soul enforced him to roar, as if his heart had
rent in sunder; O my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? I say, because the
doctrine of Salvation by him, is a thing improbable to a natural man, that
whether we preach to the Gentile, or to the Jew, the one condemns our Faith
as madness, the other as Blasphemy; therefore to establish, and confirm the
certainty of this saving Truth in the hearts of men, the Lord, together with
their Preachings, whom he sent immediately from himself to reveal these things
unto the World, mingled Prophesies of things, both Civil and Ecclesiastical,
which were to come in every age from time to time, till the very last of the
latter days, that by those things wherein we see daily their words fulfilled
and done, we might have strong consolation in the hope of things which are not
seen, because they have revealed as well the one as the other. For when many
things are spoken of before in Scripture, whereof we see first one thing
accomplished, and then another, and so a third, perceive we not plainly, that
God does nothing else but lead us along by the hand, till he have settled us
upon the rock of an assured hope, that not one jot or tittle of his Word shall
pass till all be fulfilled? It is not therefore said in vain, that these
godless wicked ones were spoken of before.

6. But by whom? By them whose words, if men or Angels from Heaven gainsay,
they are accursed; by them, whom whosoever despises, despises not them, but
me, says Christ. If any man therefore does love the Lord Jesus (and woe worth
him that loves not the Lord Jesus!) hereby we may know that he loves him
indeed, A natural (...) perceives nor heavenly things.
if he despise not the things that are spoken of by his Apostles; whom many
have despised even for the baseness and simpleness of their Persons. For it is
the property of fleshly and carnal men to honor and dishonor, credit and
discredit the words and deeds of every man, according to that he wants or
has without. If a man with gorgeous apparel come amongst us, James 2.
although he be a Thief or a Murderer (for there are Thieves and Murderers in
gorgeous apparel) be his heart whatsoever, if his Coat be of Purple, or Velvet,
or Tissue, every one rises up, and all the reverend Solemnities we can use,
are too little. Acts 12.
But the man that serves God, is contemned and despised amongst us for his
Poverty. Herod speaks in judgment, and the People cry out, The voice of God,
and not of man. Acts 17.
Paul preaches Christ, they term him a Trifler. Hearken, beloved: Has not God
chosen the Poor of this World, that they should be rich in Faith. Has he not
chosen the Reffuse of the World to be Heirs of his Kingdom, which he has
promised to them that love him? Has he not chosen the Off-scowrings of Men to
be the Lights of the World, and the Apostles of Jesus Christ? Men unlearned,
yet how fully replenished with understanding? Few in number, yet how great in
power? Contemptible in show, yet in Spirit how strong? how wonderful? I would
fai^^ learn the mystery of the eternal generation of the Son of God, says
Hilary. Whom shall I seek? Shall I get me to the Schools of the Grecians? Why?
I have read, Ubi Sapiens? ubi Scriba? ubi Conquisitor hujus saculi? These
Wisemen in the World must needs be dumb in this, because they have rejected
the wisdom of God. Shall I beseech the Scribes and Interpreters of the Law, to
become my Teachers? how can they know this, since they are offended at the Cross
of Christ? It is death for me to be ignorant of the unsearchable mystery of the
Son of God: of which mystery notwithstanding I should have been ignorant, but
that a poor Fisherman, unknown, unlearned, new come from his Boat, with his
Clothes wringing-wet, has opened his mouth and taught me, In the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. These poor silly
Creatures have made us rich in the knowledge of the mysteries of Christ.

7. Remember therefore that which is spoken of by the Apostles; Whose words, if
the Children of this World do not regard, is it any marvail? They are the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus; not of their Lord, but of ours. It is true which
one has said in a certain place, Apostolicam sidem seculi homo non capit, A
man sworn to the World, is not capable of that Faith which the Apostles do
teach. What mean the Children of this World then to tread in the Courts of our
God? What should your Bodies do at Bethel, whose Hearts are at Bethaven? The
god of this World, whom ye serve, has provided Apostles and Teachers for you,
Chaldeans, Wizzards, Soothsayers, Astrologers, and such like: Hear them. We
must not halt between two opinion:.
Tell not us, that ye will sacrifice to the Lord our God, if we will sacrifice
to Ashtaroth or Melcom; that ye will read our Scriptures, if we will listen to
your Traditions; that if ye may have a Mass by permission, we shall have a
Communion with good leave and liking; that ye will admit the things that are
spoken of by the Apostles of our Lord Jesus, if your Lord and Master may have
his Ordinances observed, and his Statutes kept. Solomon took it (as he well
might) for an evident proof, that she did not bear a motherly affection to her
Child, which yielded to have it cut in diverse parts. He cannot love the Lord
Jesus with his heart, which lends one ear to his Apostles, and another to
false Apostles: which can brook to see a mingle-mangle of Religion and
Superstition, Ministers and Massing-Priests, Light and Darkness, Truth and
Error, Traditions and Scriptures. No; we have no Lord, but Jesus; no Doctrine,
but the Gospel; no Teachers, but his Apostles. Were it reason to require at the
hand of an English Subject, obedience to the Laws and Edicts of the Spaniards?
I do marvel, that any man bearing the name of a Servant of the Servants of
Jesus Christ, will go about to draw us from our Allegiance. We are his sworn
Subjects; it is not lawful for us to hear the things that are not told us by
his Apostles. They have told us, that in the last days there shall be Mockers;
therefore we believe it; Credimus quia legimus, We are so persuaded, because we
read it must be so. If we did not read it, we would not teach it: Nam qua libro
Legis non continentur, ea nec nosse debemus, says Hilary: Those things that
are not written in the book of the Law, we ought not so much as to be
acquainted with them. Remember the words which were spoken of before, by the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ.

8. The third thing to be considered in the description of these men of whom we
speak, is the time, wherein we should be manifested to the World. Nocker^ in
the last time.
They told you, there should be mockers in the last time. Noah at the
commandment of God, built an Ark, and there were in it Beasts of all sorts,
clean and unclean. A Husbandman planteth a Vineyard, and looks for Grapes,
but when they come to the gathering, behold, together with Grapes there are
found also wild Grapes. A rich man prepares a great Supper, and bids many,
but when he sits him down, he finds amongst his Friends here and there a
man whom he knows not. This has been the state of the Church ^it hence the
beginning. God always has mingled his Saints with faithless and godless
Persons, as it were the clean with the unclean, Grapes with sour grapes, his
Friends and Children with Aliens and Strangers. Marvel not then, if in the last
days also ye see the men, with whom you live and walk arm in arm, laugh at
your Religion, and blaspheme that glorious name, whereof you are called. Thus
it was in the days of the Patriarks and Prophets; and are we better than our
Fathers? Albeit we suppose, that the blessed Apostles, in foreshewing what
manner of men were set out for the last days, meant to note a calamity special
and peculiar to the Ages and Generations, which were to come: As if he should
have said; As God has appointed a time of Seed for the Sower, and a time of
Harvest for him that reapeth, as he has given unto every Herb and every Tree
his own fruit, and his own season, not the season nor the fruit of another (for
no man looks to gather Figgs in the Winter, because the Summer is the season
for them; nor Grapes of Thistles, because Grapes are the fruit of the Vine) so
the same God has appointed sundry for every Generation of them, other men for
other times, and for the last times the worst men, as may appear by their
properties, which is the fourth point to be considered of in this description.

9. They told you, that there should be Mockers: Mockers.
He means men that shall use Religion as a Cloak, to put off, and on, as the
weather serves; such as shall, with Herod, hear the Preaching of John Baptist
to day, and to morrow condescend to have him beheaded; or with the other Herod,
say, they will worship Christ, when they purpose a massacre in their hearts,
kiss Christ with Judas, and betray Christ with Judas. These are Mockers. For
Ishmael the Son of Hagar laughed at Isaac, which was heir of the Promise; so
shall these men laugh at you as the maddest People under the Sun, if ye be like
Moses, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. And why? God has not given them
eyes to see, nor hearts to conceive that exceeding recompense of your reward.
The promises of Salvation made to you are matters wherein they can take no
pleasure, even as Ishmael took no pleasure in that promise, wherein God had
said unto Abraham, In Isaac shall thy seed be called; because the Promise
concerned not him, but Isaac. They are termed for their impiety toward God,
Mockers; and for the impurity of their life and conversation, Walkers
after-their own ungodly lusts. Saint Peter, in his second Epistle, and third
Chapter, sounds the very depth of their impiety: showing, first, how they
shall not shame at the length to profess themselves profane, and i^^eligious,
by flat denying the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and de^ding the sweet and
comfortable promises of his appearing: Secondly, that they shall not be only
de^iders of all Religion, but also disputers against God, using. Truth to
subvert the Truth: yea, Scriptures themselves to disprove Scriptures. Being in
this sort Mockers, they must needs be also Followers of their own ungodly
lusts. Being Atheists in persuasion, can they choose but be Beasts in
conversation? For why remove they quite from them the feat of God? Why take
they such pains to abandon, and put out from their hearts all sense, all taste,
all feeling of Religion? but only to this end and purpose, that they may
without inward remorse and grudging of Conscience give over themselves to all
uncleanness. Surely the state of these men is more lamentable, Mockers worse
than Pagans and Infidel^.
than is the condition of Pagans and Turks. For at the bare beholding of Heaven
and Earth, the Infidel's heart by and by does give him, that there is an
eternal, infinite, immortal, and ever-living God; whose hands have fashioned
and framed the World; he knows, that every House is builded of some man,
though he see not the man which built the House; and he considers, that it
must be God, which has built and created all things; although, because the
number of his days be few, he could not see when God disposed his Works of old,
when he caused the light of his Clouds first to shine, when he laid the
Cornerstone of the Earth, and swadled it with bands of Water and Darkness,
when he caused the Morning Star to know his place, and made bars and doors to
shut up the Sea within his House, saying, Hitherto shall thou come, but no
further: he has no eyewitness of these things: Yet the light of Natural
reason has put this wisdom in his re^ns, and has given his Heart thus much
understanding. Bring a Pagan to the Schools of the Prophets of God; prophecy
to an Infidel, rebuke him, lay the judgments of God before him, make the
secret sins of his heart manifest, and he shall fall down and worship God.
They that crucified the Lord of Glory, were not so far past recovery, but that
the preaching of the Apostles was able to move their hearts, and to bring them
to this. Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Agrippa, that sat in judgment
against Paul for Preaching, yielded notwithstanding thus far unto him, Almost
thou perswadest me to become a Christian. Although the Jews for want of
knowledge have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God; yet I
bear them record, says the Apostle, That they have a zeal. The Athenians, Romans
10.
a people having neither zeal, nor knowledge, yet of them also the same Apostle
bears witness, Ye men of Athens, I perceive ye are (...), some way
religious: but Mockers, walking after their own ungodly lusts, they have
smothered every spark of that heavenly light, they have stifled even their very
natural understanding. O Lord, thy Mercy is over all thy works, thou savest Man
and Beast! yet a happy case it had been for these men, if they had never been
born: and so I leave them.

10. Saint Jude having his mind exercised in the Doctrine of the Apostles of
Jesus Christ, concerning things to come in the last time, Judas vit sapien^ and
certi usic^.
became a man of wise and staid judgment. Grieved he was, to see the departure
of many, and their falling away from the Faith, which before they did profess:
grieved, but not dismayed. With the simpler and weaker sort it was otherwise:
Their countenance began by and by to change, they were half in doubt they had
deceived themselves in giving credit to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Saint Jude, to comfort and refresh these silly Babes, takes them up in his
arms, and shows them the men at whom they were offended. Look upon them that
forsake this blessed Profession wherein you stand: they are now before your
eyes; view them, mark them, are they not carnal? are they not like to noysom
carrion cast out upon the Earth? is there that Spirit in them which cries Abba
Father in your bosoms? Why should any man be discomforted? Have you not heard,
that there should be Mockers in the last time? These verily are they, that now
do separate themselves.

11. For your better understanding, what this severing and separating of
themselves does mean, we must know, that the multitude of them which truly
believe (howsoever they be dispersed far and wide each from other) is all one
Body, whereof the Head is Christ; one building, whereof he is the Cornerstone,
to whom they as the Members of the Body being knit, and as the stones of the
Building, being coupled, grow up to a man of perfect stature, and rise to an
holy Temple in the Lord. That which linketh Christ to us, is his mere mercy and
love toward us. That which tyeth us to him, is our faith in the promised
Salvation revealed in the Word of Truth. That which uniteth and joyneth us
amongst our selves, in such sort that we are now as if we had but one Heart and
one Soul, is our love. Who be inwardly in Heart the lively Members of this
Body, and the polished stones of this Building, coupled and joined to Christ,
as flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones, by the mutual bond of his
unspeakable love toward them, and their unseig^ed faith in him, thus linked
and fastened each to other by a spiritual, sincere, and hearty affection of
love, without any manner of simulation; who be Jews within, and what their
names be; none can tell, save he whose eyes do behold the secret disposition of
all men's hearts. We, whose eyes are too dim to behold the inward man, must
leave the secret judgment of every Servant to his own Lord, accounting and
using all men as Brethren, both near and dear unto us, supposing Christ to love
them tenderly, so as they keep the profession of the Gospel, and join in the
outward communion of Saints. Whereof the one doth-warrantize unto us their
Faith, the other their love, till they fall away, and forsake either the one,
or the other, or both; and then it is no injury to term them as they are. When
they separate themselves, they are (...), not judged by us, but by their own
doings. Men do separate themselves either by Heresy, Schism, or Apostasy. If
they lose the bond of Faith, which then they are justly supposed to do, when
they frowardly oppugn any principal point of Christian Doctrine, Three fold
Separation: 1. Heresy.
this is to separate themselves by Heresy. If they break the bond of Unity,
whereby the Body of the Church is coupled and knit in one, as they do which
wilfully forsake all external Communion with Saints in holy Exercises purely
and orderly established in the Church, this is to separate themselves by
Schism. 2. Scism.
If they willingly cast off, and utterly forsake both profession of Christ, and
communion with Christians, taking their leave of all Religion, this is to
separate themselves by plain Apostasy. And Saint Jude, to express the manner
of their departure, 3. Apostasy.
which by Apostasy fell away from the Faith of Christ, says, They separated
themselves; noting thereby, that it was not constraint of others, which forced
them to depart, it was not infirmity and weakness in themselves; it was not
fear of Persecution to come upon them, whereat their hearts did fail; it was
not grief of torment, whereof they had tasted, and were not able any longer to
endure them: No, they voluntarily did separate themselves with a fully settled,
and altogether determined purpose, never to name the Lord Jesus any more, nor
to have any fellowship with his Saints, but to bend all their counsel, and all
their strength, to raze out their memorial from amongst them.

12. Now, because that by such examples, not only the hearts of Infidels were
hardened against the Truth, but the minds of weak Brethren also much troubled,
the Holy Ghost has given sentence of these Backsliders, that they were carnal
men, and had not the Spirit of Christ Jesus, lest any man having an overweening
of their Persons, should be overmuch amazed and offended at their fall. For
simple men, not able to discern their Spirits, were brought by their Apostasy,
thus to reason with themselves, If Christ be the Son of the Living God, if he
have the words of Eternal life, if he be able to bring Salvation to all men
that come unto him, what means this Apostasy, and unconstrained departure?
Why do his Servants so willingly forsake him? Babes, be not deceived, his
Servants forsake him not. They that separate themselves were amongst his
Servants, but if they had been of his Servants, they had not separated
themselves. Infallible ev^dence in the Faithful, that they are Gods Children.
They were amongst us, not of us, says John; and Saint Jude proves it,
because they were carnal, and had not the Spirit. Will you judge of Wheat by
Chaff, which the wind has scattered from amongst it? Have the Children no
Bread, because the dogs have not tasted it? Are Christians deceived of that
Salvation they look for, because they were denied the joys of the life to come,
which were no Christians? What if they seemed to be Pillars and principal
Upholders of our Faith? What is that to us, which know that Angels have fallen
from Heaven? Although if these men had been of us indeed (O the blessedness of
a Christian man's estate!) they had stood surer than the Angels that had never
departed from their place. Wherein now we marvel not at their departure at all,
neither are we prejudiced by their falling away, because they were not of us,
since they are fleshly, and have not the Spirit. Children abide in the House for
ever; they are Bondmen, and Bond-women, which are cast out.

13. It behooves you therefore greatly every man to examine his own estate, and
to try whether you be bond or free, children or no children. I have told you
already, that we must beware we presume not to sit as Gods in judgment upon
others, and rashly, as our conceit and fancy does lead us so to determine of
this man, he is sincere, or of that man, he is an Hypocrite, except by their
falling away they make it manifest and known that they are. For who art thou
that take upon thee to judge another before the time? Judge thyself. God has
left us infallible evidence, whereby we may at any time give true and righteous
sentence upon our selves. We cannot examine the hearts of other men, we may our
own. That we have passed from death to life we know it, says St. John, because
we love the Brethren: And know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is
in you, except you be Reprobates? I trust, Beloved, we know that we are not
Reprobates, because our Spirit does bear us record, that the faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ is in us.

14. It is as easy a matter for the Spirit within you to tell whose ye are, as
for the eyes of your Body to judge where you sit, or in what place you stand.
For, what says the Scripture? Ye which were in times past Strangers and
Enemies, because your minds were set an evil works, Christ has now reconciled
in the body of his Flesh through death, to make you holy, and umblameable, and
without fault in his sight: If you continue grounded and established in the
Faith, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, Collos. 1. And in the
third to the Colossians, Ye know, that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward
of that Inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ. If we can make this account
with our selves, I was in times past dead in Trespasses and Sins, I walked
after the Prince that rules in the Air, and after the Spirit that works in
the Children of Disobedience, but God, who is rich in mercy, through his great
love, wherewith he loved me, even when I was dead, has quickened me in Christ.
I was fierce, heady, proud, high-minded; but God has made me like the Child
that is newly weaned: I loved pleasures more than God, I followed greedily the
joys of this present World; I esteemed him, that erected a Stage or Theater,
more than Solomon, which built a Temple to the Lord; the Ha^p, Viol, Timbrel,
and Pipe, Men-singers, and Women-singers were at my Feast; it was my felicity
to see my Children dance before me: I said of every kind of vanity, O how
sweet art thou in my Soul! All which things now are crucified to me, and I to
them: Now I hate the pride of life, and pomp of this world; now I take as great
delight in the way of thy Testimonies, O Lord, as in all Riches; now I find
more joy of heart in my Lord and Savior, than the Worldly-minded-man, when his
Wheat and Oil do much abound: Now I taste nothing sweet, but the Bread which
came down from Heaven, to give life unto the World: Now mine eyes see nothing,
but Jesus rising from the dead: Now my ears refuse all kind of melody, to hear
the Song of them that has gotten victory of the Beast, and of his Image, and
of his Mark, and of the number of his Name, that stand on the Sea of Glass,
having the Harps of God, and singing the Song of Moses the Servant of God, and
the Song of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty, just and true are thy ways, O King of Saints. Surely, if the Spirit
have been thus effectual in the secret work of our Regeneration unto newness of
life; if we endeavor thus to frame our selves anew, then we may say boldly
with the blessed Apostle in the tenth to the Hebrews, We are not of them which
withdraw our selves to perdition, but which follow Faith to the conservation of
the Soul. For they which fall away from the grace of God, and separate
themselves unto perdition, they are fleshly and carnal, they have not God's
holy Spirit. But unto you, because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit
of his Son into your hearts, to the end ye might know, that Christ has built
you upon a Rock unmovable; that he has registered your names in the Book of
life; that he has bound himself in a sure and everlasting Covenant, to be your
God, and the God of your Children after you, that he has suffered as much,
groaned as often, prayed as heartily for you, as for Peter, O Father keep them in
thy Name! O Righteous Father, the World has not known thee, but I have known
thee, and these have known that thou have sent me. I have declared thy name
unto them, and will declare it, that the love wherewith thou have loved me, may
be in them, and I in them. The Lord of his infinite mercy give us hearts
plentifully fraught with the treasure of this blessed assurance of Faith unto
the end.

15. Here I must advertise all men, The Papists falsely accuse^ us of Heresy
and Apostasy.
that have the testimony of God's holy fear within their Breasts, to consider
how unkindly and injuriously our own Contrymen and Brethren have dealt with
us by the space of four and twenty years, from time to time, as if we were the
men of whom St. Jude here speaks; never ceasing to charge us, some with
Scism, some with Heresy, some with plain and manifest Apostasy, as if we had
clean separated our selves from Christ, utterly forsaken God, quite abjured
Heaven, and trampled all Truth and Religion under our feet. Against this third
sort, God himself shall plead our Cause in that day, when they shall answer us
for these words, nor we them. To others, by whom we are accused for Schism and
Heresy, we have often made our reasonable, and, in the sight of God, I trust,
allowable Answers. For in the way which they call Heresy, Acts 2^.
we worship the God of our Fathers, believing all things which are written in
the Law and the Prophets. That which they call Schism, we know to be our
reasonable service unto God, and obedience to his voice, which cries shrill in
our ears, Go out of Babylon my People, that you be not Partakers of her sins,
and that ye receive not of her Plagues. Apoc. 18.
And therefore when they rise up against us, having no quarrel but this, we
need not seek any farther for our Apology, than the words of Abiah to Iereboam
and his Army, 2 Chronicles. 13. O Jeroboam and Israel, hear you me, Ought you not to
know, that the Lord God of Israel has given the Kingdom over Israel to David
for ever, even to him, and to his Sons, by a Covenant of Salt? that is to say,
an everlasting Covenant. Jesuits and Papists, hear ye me, ought you not to
know, that the Father has given all power unto the Son, and has made him the
only Head over his Church, wherein he dwells as an Husbandman in the midst
of his Vineyard, manuring it with the sweat of his own brows, not letting it
forth to others? For, as it is in the Canticles, Ca^t. 8. 11.
Solomon had a Vineyard in Baalhamon, he gave the Vineyard unto Keepers, every
one bringing forth the fruit thereof a thousand pieces of Silver; but my
Vineyard, which is mine, is before me, says Christ. It is true, this is meant
of the Mystical Head set over the Body, which is not seen. But as he has
reserved the Mystical Administration of the Church invisible unto himself, so
he has committed the Mystical Government of Congregations visible to the
Sons of David, by the same Covenant; whose Sons they are, in the governing of
the Flock of Christ, whomsoever the Holy Ghost has set over them, to go before
them, and to lead them in several Pastures, one in this Congregation, another
in that; as it is written, Acts ^^.
Take heed unto your selves; and to all the Flock, whereof the Holy Ghost has
made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his
own blood. Neither will ever any Pope or Papist, under the Cope of Heaven, The
Popes usurped Supremacy.
be able to prove the Romish Bishop's usurped Supremacy over all Churches, by
any one word of the Covenant of Salt, which is the Scripture. For the Children
in our streets do now laugh them to scorn, when they force, Thou art Peter; to
this purpose. The Pope has no more reason to draw the Charter of his universal
Authority from hence, than the Brethren had to gather by the words of Christ,
in the last of St. John, that the Disciple, whom Jesus loved, should not dye.
If I will that he ^arry till I come, what is that to thee? says Christ.
Straitways a report was raised amongst the Brethren, that this Disciple should
not dye. Yet Jesus said not to him, He shall not dye; but, If I will that he
^arry till I come, what is that to thee? Christ has said in the sixteenth of
St. Matthew's Gospel, to Simon the Son of Jonas, I say to thee, Thou art Peter.
Hence an opinion is held in the World, That the Pope is universal Head of all
Churches. Yet Jesus said not, The Pope is universal Head of all Churches; but,
Ta es Petrus, Thou art Peter. Howbeit, as Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, the
servant of Solomon, rose up and rebelled against his Lord, and there were
gathered unto him vain men and wicked, which made themselves strong against
Roboam, the son of Solomon, because Roboam was but a Child, and
tenderhearted, and could not resist them: So the Son of Perdition, and Man of
Sin, being not able to brook the words of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
which forbad his Disciples to be like Princes of Nations, They bear rule that
are called Gracious, it shall not be so with you, has risen up and rebelled
against his Lord; and to strengthen his arm he has crept into the Houses
almost of all the Noblest Families round about him, and taken their Children
from the Cradle, to be his Cardinals: He has fawned upon the Kings and Princes
of the Earth, and by Spiritual Cozenage has made them sell their lawful
Authority and Jurisdiction, Council delector. Cardin. Laurent Soriu^ Coun. de
reb. gest. 1 Pio ^. Urancise. Sans^vi^ de guherm Rerum, ^^h. l. ^ Cap. de Jud.
are scal. and ^oldap.
for Titles of Catholicus, Christianissimus, Defensor Fidei, and such like; he
has proclaimed sale of Pardons, to inveigle the ignorant; built Seminaries to
allure young men, desirous of Learning; erected Stews, to gather the dissolute
unto him. This is the Rock whereupon his Church is built. Hereby the man is
grown huge and strong, like the Cedars, which are not shaken with the wind,
because Princes have been as Children, over-tender hearted, and could not
resist.

Hereby it is come to pass, as you see this day, that the Man of Sin does war
against us, not by men of a Language which we cannot understand, but he comes
as Iereboam against Judah, and brings the fruit of our own Bodies to eat us
up, that the bowels of the Child may be made the Mother's grave; and has
caused no small number of our Brethren to forsake their Native Country, and
with all disloyalty to cast off the yoke of their Allegiance to our dread
Sovereign, whom God in mercy has set over them; for whose safeguard, if they
carried not the hearts of Tigers in the bosoms of men, they would think the
dearest blood in their Bodies well spent. But now, says Abiah to Jeroboam, Ye
think ye be able to resist the Kingdom of the Lord, which is in the hands of
the Sons of David. Ye be a great multitude, the golden Calves are with you,
which Jeroboam made you for gods: Have ye not driven away the Priests of the
Lord, the Sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you Priests like the
People of Nations? Whosoever comes with a young Bullock, and seven Rams, the
same may be a Priest of them that are no gods. If I should follow the
Comparison, and here uncover the Cup of those deadly and ugly Abominations
wherewith this Jeroboam, of whom we speak, has made the Earth so drunk, that
it has retled under us, I know your godly Hearts would loath to see them. For
my own part, I delight not to take in such filth; I had rather take a Garment
upon my Shoulders, and go with my face from them, to cover them. The Lord open
their Eyes, and cause them, if it be possible, at the length to see, how they
are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked! Put it, O Lord,
in their hearts, to seek white Raiment, and to cover themselves, that their
filthy nakedness may no longer appear! For, beloved in Christ, we bow our
Knees, and lift up our hands to Heaven in our Chambers secretly, and openly in
our Churches we pray heartily and hourly, even for them also: though the Pope
has given out as a Judge, in a solemn Declaratory Sentence of Excommunication
against this Land, That our gracious Lady has quite abolished Prayers within
her Realm; and his Scholars, whom he has taken from the midst of us, have in
their published Writings charged us: nor only nor to have any holy Assemblies
unto the Lord for Prayer, but to hold a Common School of Sin and Flattery; to
hold Sacrilege to be God's Service; Unfaithfulness, and breach of Promise to
God, to give it to a Strumpet, to be a Virtue; to abandon Fasting, to abhor
Confession, to mislike with Penance; to like well of Usury; to charge none with
restitution; to find no good before God in single life; not in no
well-working, that all men, as they fall to us, are much worse, and more, than
before, corrupted. I do not add one word, or syllable, unto that which Mr.
Bristow, a man both born and sworn amongst us, has taught his hand to deliver
to the view of all. I appeal to the Conscience of every Soul, that has been
truly converted by us, Whether his heart were never raised up to God by our
Preaching; Whether the words of our Exhortation never w^^^g any tear of a
penitent heart from his eyes; Whether his Soul never reaped any joy, and
comfort, any consolation in Christ Jesus by our Sacraments, and Prayers, and
Psalms, and Thanksgiving; Whether he were never bettered, but always worsed by
us.

O merciful God! If Heaven and Earth in this case do not witness with us, and
against them, let us be razed out from the Land of the Living! Let the Earth on
which we stand, swallow us quick, as it has done Corah, Dathan, and Abiram!
But if we belong unto the Lord our God, and have not forsaken him: if our
Priests, the Sons of Aaron, minister unto the Lord, and the Levites in their
Office: if we offer unto the Lord every morning and every evening the
Burnt-offerings, and sweet Incense of Prayers, and Thanksgiving; 1 Chronicles. 13.
if the Bread be set in order upon the pure Table, and the Candlestick of Gold,
with the Lamps thereof, burn every morning; that is to say, if amongst us God's
blessed Sacraments be duly administered, his holy Word sincerely and daily
preached; if we keep the Watch of the Lord our God, and if ye have forsaken
him: then doubt ye not, this God is with us as a Captain, his Priests with
sounding Trumpets must cry alarm against you; O ye Children of Israel, fight
not against the Lord God of your Fathers, for ye shall not prosper. Verse 12.


THE SECOND SERMON.
Epist. JUDE, Verse 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. But ye, beloved, remember the words
which were spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ:

How that they told you, that there should be Mockers in the last time, which
should walk after their own ungodly lusts.

These are makers of Sects, fleshly, having not the Spirit.

But ye, beloved, edify your selves in your most holy Faith, praying in the
Holy Ghost.

And keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ, unto eternal life.


HAving otherwhere spoken of the words of Saint Jude, going next before,
concerning Mockers, which should come in the last time, and Backsliders, which
even then should fall away from the Faith of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ;
I am now by the aid of Almighty God, and through the assistance of his good
Spirit, to lay before you the words of Exhortation, which I have read.

2. Wherein first of all, whosoever has an eye to see, let him open it, and he
shall well perceive, how careful the Lord is for his Children, how desirous to
see them profit and grow up to a manly stature in Christ, how loath to have
them any way misled, either by examples of the wicked, or by inticements of
the world, and by provocation of the flesh, or by any other means forcible to
deceive them, and likely to estrange their hearts from God. For God is not at
that point with us, that he cares not whether we sink or swim. No, he has
written our names in the Palm of his Hand, in the Signet upon his Finger are we
graven; in Sentences not only of Mercy, but of Judgment also, we are
remembered. He never denounces Judgments against the Wicked, but he makes some
Proviso for his Children, as it were for some certain privileged Persons.
Touch not mine Anointed, do my Prophets no harm: Hurt not the Earth, nor the
Sea, nor the Trees, till we have sealed the Servants of God in their Foreheads.
He never speaks of godless men, but he adjoyneth words of comfort, or
admonition, or exhortation, whereby we are moved to rest and settle our hearts
on him. In the second to Timothy, the third Chapter, Evil men (says the
Apostle) and deceivers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and bring
deceived. But continue thou in the things which thou have learned. And in the
first ^^ Timothy, the sixth Chapter, Some ^^^^ lusting after man ^^, have erred
drown he Faith; and pierced, themselves thorg^ with many ^^rrows ^^^^ thou, O
man of God, ^^y these ^^^ things, and follow after righteousness, godliness,
faith, love, patience, meekness. In the second to the Thessalonians, the
second Chapter, They have not deceived the love of the Truth, that they might
be saved, God shall send them strong delusions, that they may believe lies. But
we ought to give thanks always to God for you, Brethren, beloved of the Lord,
because God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through
sanctifications of the Spirit, and faith in the Truth. And in this Epistle of
St. Jude, There shall come Mockers in the last time, walking after their own
ungodly lusts. But believed, edify ye your selves in your most holy Faith.

3. These sweet Exhortations, which God puts every where in the mouths of
the Prophets and Apostles of Jesus Christ; are evident tokens, that God sits
nor in Heaven careless and unmindful of our estate. Can a Mother forget her
Child? Surely, a Mother will hardly forget her Child. But if a Mother be
happily found unnatural and do forget the fruit of her own Womb, yet God's
judgments show plainly, that he cannot forget the man whose heart he has
framed and fashioned a new, in simplicity and truth to serve and fear him. For
when the wickedness of man was so great, and the Earth so filled with
cruelties, that it could not stand with the righteousness of God any longer to
forbear, wrathful sentences brake out from him, like Wine from a Vessel that
has no vent: Genesis 6.3. and 13.
My Spirit (says he) can struggle and strive no longer, an end of all flesh is
come before me. Yet then did Noah find grace in ^ of the Lord, I will
establish my Covenant with thee (says God) thou shots go into the Ark; Genesis
6.^ and 1^.
thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons wives with thee.

4. Do we not see what shift God does make for Lot, and for his Family, in the
^^ of Genesis, lest the fiery destruction of the wicked should overtake him.
Overnight the Angels make enquiry, what Sons and Daughters, or Sons in law,
what weal^^ and substance he had. They charge him to carry out all, Genesis 19. 12.
Whatsoever thou have in the City, bring it out. God seems to stand in a
kind of fear, lest some thing or other would be left behind. And his will
was, that nothing of that which he had, nor an hoof of any Beast, not a thread
of any Garment, should be findged with that fire. I^ the morning the Angels
fail not to call him up, and to hasten him forward, Genesis 19. 15.
Arise, take thy Wife, and thy Daughters which are here, that they be no^
destroyed in the punishment of the City. The Angels having spoken again and
again. Lot for all this lingereth out the time still, till at the length they
were forced to take both him, and his wife, and his daughters by the arms, (the
Lord being merciful unto him) and to carry them forth, and set them without the
City. Verse 1^.


5. Was there ever any Father thus careful to save his Child from the ^lame? A
man would think, that now being spoken unto to escape for his life, and not to
look behind him, nor to ^arry in the Plain, but to hasten to the Mountain, and
there to save himself, he should do it gladly. Yet behold, now he is so far off
from a cheerful and willing heart to do whatsoever is commanded him for his own
weal, that he begins to reason the matter, as if God had mistaken one place
for another, sending him to the ^^, when salvation was in the City. Not, so, my
Lord, I beseech thee, Behold, thy Servant has found grace in thy sight, and
thou have magnified thy mercy which thou have showed unto me in saving my life.
I cannot escape in the Mountain, lest some evil take me, and I dye. Here is a
City hard by, a small thing; O, let me escape thither (is it not a small
thing?) and my Soul shall live. Well, God is contended to yield to any
conditions, Behold, I have recived thy request concerning this thing also, I
will spare this City for which thou have spoken; haste thee; save thee there;
For I can do nothing till thou come thither.

6. He could do nothing! Not because of the weakness of his strength (for who
is like unto the Lord in power?) but because of the greatness of his Mercy,
which would not suffer him to lift up his arm against that City, nor to pour
out his wrath upon that place; where his righteous Servant had a fancy to
remain, and a desire to dwell. O the depth of the riches of the mercy and love
of God! God is afraid to offend us, which are not afraid to displease him! God
can do nothing till he have saved us, which can find in our hearts rather to
do any thing than to serve him. It contenteth him not to exempt us, when the
Pit is dug for the Wicked; to comfort us at every mention which is made of
Reprobates and godless men; to save us as the apple of his own eye, when fire
comes down from Heaven to consume the Inhabitants of the Earth; except every
Prophet, and every Apostle, and every Servant whom he sends forth, do come
laden with these or the like exhortations, O beloved, edify your selves in
your most holy Faith, Give your selves to Prayer in the Spirit, keep your
selves in the love of God; Look for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal life.

7. Edify your selves. The speech is borrowed from material Builders, and must
be spiritually understood. It appears in the sixth of Saint John's Gospel by
the Jews, that their mouths did water too much for bodily food, Our Fathers,
say they, did eat Manna in the Desert, as it is written, He gave them Bread
from Heaven to eat; Lord, evermore give us of this Bread! Our Savior, to turn
their appetite another way, makes them this answer, I am the Bread of Life; he
that comes to me shall not hunger; and he that believes in me, shall never
thirst.

8. An usual practice it is of Satan, to cast heaps of worldly baggage in our
way, that whilst we desire to heap up gold as dust, we may be brought at the
length to esteem vilely that Spiritual Bliss. Christ, in Matthew. 6. to correct
this evil affection, puts us in mind to lay up treasure for our selves in
Heaven. The Apostle, ^ Tim. Chapter 3. misliking the vanity of those Women
which attired themselves more costly than beseemed the Heavenly Calling of such
as professed the fear of God, wills them to cloth themselves with
Shamefastness, and Modesty, and to put on the Apparel of Good works. Taliter
pigmentata, Deum habehitis amatorem, says Tertullian. Put on Righteousness as
a Garment; instead of Civit, have Faith, which may cause a savor of life to
issue from you, and God shall be enamoured, he shall be ravished with your
beauty. These are the Ornaments, and Bracelets, and Jewels which inflame the
love of Christ, and set his heart on fire upon his Spouse. We see how he
breaks out in the Canticles at the beholding of this attire, How fair art
thou, and how pleasant art thou, O my Love, in these pleasures!

9. And perhaps St. Jude exhorts us here not to build our Houses, but our
selves, foreseeing by the Spirit of the Almighty, which was with him, that
there should be men in the last days like to those in the first, which should
encourage and stir up each other to make Brick, and to burn it in the fire, to
build Houses huge as Cities, and Towers as high as Heaven, thereby to get them
a name upon Earth; men that should turn out the poor, and the Fatherless, and
the Widow, to build places of rest for Dogs and Swine in their rooms; men that
should lay Houses of Prayer even with the ground, and make them Stables where
God's people have worshipped before the Lord. Surely this is a vanity of all
vanities, and it is much amongst men; a special sickness of this age. What it
should mean, I know not, except God have set them on work to provide fuel
against that day when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from Heaven with his
mighty Angels in flaming fire. What good comes unto the owners of these
things, says Solomon, but only the beholding thereof with their eyes? Martha,
Martha, thou busiest thy self about many things, One thing is necessary. Ye are
too busy, my Brethren, with Timber and Brick; they have chosen the better
part, they have taken a better course that build themselves. Ye are the Temples
of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and will walk in
them; and they shall be my People, and I will be their God.

10. Which of you will gladly remain, or abide in a misshapen, a ruinous, or a
broken House? And shall we suffer sin and vanity to drop in at our eyes, and
at our ears, and at every corner of our Bodies, and of our Souls, knowing that
we are the Temples of the Holy Ghost? which of you receives a Guest whom he
honors, or whom he loves, and does not sweep his Chamber against his
coming? And shall we suffer the Chambers of our Hearts and Consciences to lie
full of vomiting, full of filth, full of garbidge, knowing that Christ has
said, I and my Father will come and dwell with you? Is it meet for your Oxen to
lie in Parlors, and your selves to lodge in Cribs? Or is it seemly for your
selves to dwell in your seiled houses, and the House of the Almighty to lie
waste, whose House ye are yourselves; Do not our eyes behold, how God every day
overtaketh the wicked in their Journeys, how suddenly they pop down into the
Pit? how God's judgments for their Crimes come so swiftly upon them, that they
have not the leisure to cry, Alas? how their life is cut off like a thread in a
moment? how they pass like a shadow? how they open their mouths to speak, and
God takes them even in the midst of a vain or an idle Word? And dare we for
all this lie down, take our rest, The Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
eat our meat securely and carelessly in the midst of so great and so many
ruins? Blessed and praised for ever and ever be his Name, who perceiving of
how senseless and heavy metal we are made, has instituted in his CHURCH a
Spiritual Supper, and an Holy Communion, to be Celebrated often, That we might
thereby be occasioned often to examine these Buildings of ours, in what case
they stand. For, since God does not dwell in Temples which are unclean, since a
Shrine cannot be a Sanctuary unto him; and this Supper is received as a Seal
unto us, that we are his House and his Sanctuary; that his Christ is as truly
united to me, and I to him, as my arm is united and knit unto my shoulder; that
he dwells in me as verily, as the elements of Bread and Wine abide within me;
which persuasion, by receiving these dreadful mysteries, we profess our selves
to have: a due comfort, if truly; and if in hypocrisy, then woe worth us.
Therefore ere we put forth our hands to take this blessed Sacrament, we are
charged to examine and to try our hearts, whether God be in us of a truth or
no: and if by Faith and love unfeigned we be found the Temples of the Holy
Ghost, then to judge, whether we have had such regard every one to our
building, that the Spirit which dwells in us has no way been vexed, molested
and grieved; or if it have, as no doubt sometimes it has by incredulity,
sometimes by breach of charity, sometimes by want of zeal, sometimes by spots
of life, even in the best and most perfect amongst us; (for who can say his
heart is clean?) O then to fly unto God by unfeigned repentance, to fall down
before him in the humility of our Souls, begging of him whatsoever is needful
to repair our decays, before we fall into that desolation whereof the Prophet
speaks, saying, Lam. 2. 13.
Thy breach is great like the Sea, who can heal thee?

11. Receiving the Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord after this sort (you
that are Spiritual, judge what I speak) is not all other Wine like the Water of
Merah, being compared to the Cup, which we bless? Is not Manna like to gall,
and our bread like to Manna? Is there not a taste, a taste of Christ Jesus, in
the heart of him that eats? Does not he which drinks, behold plainly in
this Cup, that his Soul is bathed in the blood of the Lamb? O beloved in our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, if ye will taste how sweet the Lord is, if ye
will receive the King of Glory, Build your selves.

12. Young men, I speak this to you; for ye are his House, because by Faith ye
are Conquerors over Satan, and have overcome that evil. Fathers, I speak it
also to you; ye are his House, because ye have known him, who is from the
beginning. Sweet Babes, I speak it even to you also; ye are his House, because
your sins are forgiven you for his names sake. Matrons and Sisters, I may not
hold it from you, ye are also the Lord's building; and as Saint Peter speaks,
Heirs of the grace of life as well as we. Though it be forbidden you to open
your mouths in Public Assemblies, yet ye must be inquisitive in things
concerning this Building, which is of God, with your Husbands and Friends at
home; not as Delilah with Sampson, but as Sarah with Abraham; whose Daughters
ye are, whilst ye do well, and build your selves.

13. Having spoken thus far of the Exhortation, as whereby we are called upon
to edify and build our selves; it remains now, that we consider the things
prescribed, namely, wherein we must be built. This prescription stands also
upon two points, the thing prescribed, and the adjuncts of the thing. And that
is, our most pure and holy Faith.

14. The thing prescribed is Faith. For, as in a chain which is made of many
links, if you pull the first, you draw the rest; and, as in a Ladder of many
staves, if you take away the lowest, all hope of ascending unto the highest
will be removed: So, because all the Precepts and Promises in the Law, and in
the Gospel do hang upon this, Believe; and because the last of the graces of
God does so follow the first, that he glorifieth none, but whom he has
justified, nor justifies any, but whom he has called to a true, effectual,
and lively Faith in Christ Jesus; therefore St. Jude exhorting us to build our
selves, mentions here expressly only Faith, as the thing wherein we must be
edified; for that Faith is the ground and the glory of all the welfare of this
Building.

Ephesians. 4.
15. Ye are not Strangers and Foreigners, but Citizens with the Saints, and of
the Household of God (says the Apostle) and are built upon the foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone,
in whom all the Building being coupled together, grows unto an holy Temple in
the Lord, in whom ye also are built together to be the habitation of God by the
Spirit. And we are the habitation of God by the Spirit, if we believe; for it
is written, Whosoever confesses, that Jesus is the Son of God, in him God
dwells, and he in God. The strength of this habitation is great, it
prevails against Satan, it conquereth Sin, it has Death in cerision;
neither Principalities nor Powers can throw it down; it leads the World
captive, and brings every enemy, that rises up against it, to confusion and
shame, and all by Faith; for this is the Victory that overcommeth the World,
even our Faith. Who is it that overcommeth the World, but he which believes
that Jesus is the Son of God?

1 John 4.
16. The strength of every Building, which is of God, stands not in any man's
arms or legs; it is only in our Faith, as the valor of Sampson lay only in
his hair. 1 John 5.
This is the reason, why we are so earnestly called upon to edify our selves
in Faith. Not as if this bare action of our minds, whereby we believe the
Gospel of Christ, were able in itself, as of it self, to make us unconquerable,
and invincible, like stones, which abide in the Building for ever, and fall not
out. No, it is not the worthiness of our believing, it is the virtue of him in
whom we believe, by which we stand sure, as houses that are builded upon a
Rock. He is a Wiseman, which has builded his house upon a Rock; for he has
chosen a good foundation, and no doubt his house will stand; but how shall it
stand; Verily, by the strength of the Rock which bears it, and by nothing
else. Our Fathers, whom God delivered out of the Land of Egypt, Mat. 9.
were a People that had no Peers amongst the Nations of the Earth, because they
were built by Faith upon the Rock, which Rock is Christ. And the Rock (says
the Apostle, in the first to the Corinthians, the tenth Chapter) did follow
them. Whereby we learn not only this, that being built by Faith on Christ, as
on a Rock, and grafted into him as into an Olive, we receive all our strength
and fatness from him; but also, that this strength and fatness of ours ought
to be no cause why we should be high-minded, and not work out our salvation
with a reverent trembling, and holy fear. For if thou boasts thy self of thy
Faith, know this, That Christ chose his Apostles, his Apostles chose not him;
that Israel followed not the Rock, but the Rock followed Israel; and that thou
bear not the Root, Romans 11.
but the Root thee. So that every Heart must thus think, and every Tongue must
thus speak, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, nor unto any thing which is
within us, but unto thy name only, only to thy Name belongs all the praise
of all the Treasures and Riches of every Temple which is of God. This excludes
all boasting and vaunting of our Faith.

1 John 2.
17. But this must not make us careless to edify our selves in Faith. It is the
Lord that delivers men's souls from death, but not except they put their trust
in his mercy. It is God that has given us eternal life, but no otherwise than
thus, If we believe in the name of the Son of God; for he that has not the
Son of God, has not life. It was the Spirit of the Lord which came upon
Sampson, and made him strong to tear a Lion, as a man would rend a Kid; but his
strength forsook him, and he became like other men, when the Razor had touched
his Head. It is the power of God whereby the Faithful have subdued Kingdoms,
wrought Righteousness, obtained the Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions,
quenched the violence of Fire, escaped the edge of the Sword: but take away
their Faith, and does not their strength forsake them? are they not like unto
other men?

18. If ye desire yet farther to know, how necessary and needful it is that we
edify and build up our selves in Faith, mark the words of the blessed Apostle,
Without Faith it is impossible to please God. If I offer unto God all the Sheep
^^d Oxen that are in the World, if all the Temples that were builded since the
days of Adam till this hour, were of my foundation; if I break my very heart
with calling upon God, and wear out my tongue with preaching; if I sacrifice my
body and my soul unto him, and have no Faith, all this avails nothing.
Without Faith it is impossible to please God. Our Lord and Savior therefore
being asked in the sixth of St. John's Gospel, No pleasu^^ of God without Faith.
What shall we do that we might work the works of God? makes answer, This is
the work of God, that ye believe in him whom he has sent.

19. That no work of ours, no building of our selves in any thing can be
available or profitable unto us, except we be edified and built in Faith, What
need we to seek about for long proof? Look upon Israel, once the very chosen
and peculiar of God, to whom the adoption of the Faithful, and the glory of
Cherubims, and the Covenants of Mercy, and the Law of Moses, and the service of
God, and the promises of Christ were made impropriate, who not only were the
Offspring of Abraham, Father unto all them which do believe, but Christ their
Offspring, which is God to be blessed for evermore.

20. Consider this People, and learn what it is to build your selves in Faith.
They were the Lord's Vine: He brought it out of Egypt, he threw out the Heathen
from their places, that it might be planted; he made room for it, and caused it
to take root, till it had filled the earth; the Mountains were covered with the
shadow of it, and the boughs thereof were as the goodly Cedars; she stretched
out her branches unto the Sea, and her boughs unto the River. But, when God
having sent both his Servants and his Son to v^si^s this Vine; they neither
spared the one, nor received the other, but stoned the (...)s, and crucified
the Lord of glory which came unto them; then began the curse ^^ God to come
upon them, even the curse whereof the Prophet David has spoken, saying, Psalm.
69.
Let their table be made a snare, and a net, and a stumbling block, even for a
recompense unto them: Let their eyes be darkened, Romans 11.
that they do not see, how down their backs for ever, keep them down. And
sithence the hour that the measure of their infidelity was first made up, they
have been spoiled with Wars, eaten up with Piagues, spent with Hunger and
Famine; they wander from place to place, and are become the most ^ase and
contemptible people that are under the Sun. Ephraim, which before was a terror
unto Nations, and they trembled at his voice, is now by infidelity so vile,
that he seeme^h as a thing cast out to be trampled under men's feet. In the
midst of these desolations they cry, Retur^, Psalm. 10. 1^.
we beseech thee, O God of hosts, look down from heaven, behold and visit their
Vine: but their very Prayers are turned into sin, and their cries are no better
than the lowing of ^easts before him. Well, says the Apostle, by their
anbelief they are broken off, and thou do standby thy Faith: Behold therefore
the bountifulness, and severity of God; toward them severity, because they
have fallen; bountifulness toward thee, if thou continue in his bountifulness,
Verse ^2.
or else thou shall be cut off. If they forsake their unbelief; and be grafted
in again, and we at any time for the hardness of our hearts be broken off, it
will be such a judgment as will amaze all the Powers and Principalities which
are above. Who has searched the counsel of God concerning this secret? And who
does not see, Hosea 1. 2. nor my people. Verse 6. not obtaining mercy.
that Infidelity does threaten Lo-ammi unto the Gentiles, as it has brought
Lo-ruchama upon the Jews? It may be that these words seem dark unto you. But
the words of the Apostle, in the eleventh to the Romans, are plain enough, If
God have not spared the natural branches, take heed, take heed lest he spare
not thee: Build thy self in Faith. Thus much of the thing which is prescribed,
and wherein we are exhorted to edify our selves. Now consider the Condition
and Properties which are in this place annexed unto Faith. The former of them
(for there are but two) is this, Edify your selves in your Faith.

21. A strange, and a strong delusion it is wherewith the man of Sin has
bewitched the World; a forcible spirit of Error it must needs be which has
brought men to such a senseless and unreasonable persuasion as this is, not
only that men clothed with mortality and sin, as we our selves are, can do
God so much service as shall be able to make a full and perfect satisfaction
before the Tribunal seat of God for their own sins; yea, a great deal more
than is sufficient for themselves: but also, that a man at the hands of a
Bishop or a Pope, for such or such a price, may buy the overplus of other men's
merits, purchase the fruits of other men's labors, and build his Soul by
another man's faith. Is not this man drowned in the gall of bitterness? Is his
heart right in the sight of God? Can he have any part or fellowship with Peter,
and with the Successors of Peter, which thinks so vilely of building the
precious Temples of the Holy Ghost? Let his money perish with him; and he with
it, because he judges that the Gift of God may be sold for money.

22. But, beloved in the Lord, deceive not your selves, neither suffer ye your
selves to be deceived: Ye can receive no more ease nor comfort for your Souls
by another man's faith, than warmth for your Bodies by another man's clothes;
or sustenance by the bread which another man does eat. The just shall live by
his own Faith. Let a Saint, yea a Martyr, content himself, that he has
cleansed himself of his own sins, says Tertullian: No Saint or Martyr can
cleanse himself of his own sins. But if so be a Saint or a Martyr can cleanse
himself of his own sins, it is sufficient that he can do it for himself. Did
ever any man by his death deliver another man from death, except only the
Son of God? He indeed was able to Safe Conduct a Thief from the Cross to
Paradise: for to this end he came, that being himself pure from sin, he might
obey for Sinners. Thou which think to do the like, and supposest that thou
can justify another by thy Righteousness, if thou be without sin, then lay
down thy life for thy Brother; dye for me. But if thou be a Sinner, even as I
am a Sinner, how can the Oil of thy Lamp be sufficient both for thee and for
me? Virgins that are wise, get ye Oil, while ye have day, into your own Lamps:
For out of all peradventure, others, though they would, can neither give nor
sell. Edify your selves in your own most holy faith. And let this be observed
for the first property of that wherein we ought to edify our selves.

23. Our Faith being such, is that indeed which St. Jude does here term Faith;
namely, a thing most holy. The reason is this, We are justified by Faith: For
Abraham believed, and this was imputed unto him for Righteousness. Being
justified, all our iniquities are covered; God beholds us in the
Righteousness which is imputed, and not in the Sins which we have committed.

24. It is true, we are full of sin, both original and actual; whosoever
denies it, is a double Sinner, for he is both a Sinner and a Liar. To deny
sin, is most plainly and clearly to prove it, because he that says he has no
sin, lies, and by lying proves that he has sin.

25. But imputation of Righteousness has covered the sins of every Soul which
believes; God by pardoning our sin, has taken it away: So that now, although
our transgressions be multiplied above the hairs of our head, yet being
justified, we are as free, and as clear, as if there were no one spot or stain
of any uncleanness in us. For it is God that justifies; And who shall lay any
thing to the charge of God's chosen? says the Apostle, in Romans 8.

26. Now sin being taken away, we are made the righteousness of God in Christ:
for David speaking of this Righteousness, says, Blessed is the man whose
iniquities are forgiven. No man is blessed, but in the righteousness of God.
Every man whose sin is taken away, is blessed. Therefore every man whose sin is
covered, is made the Righteousness of God in Christ. This Righteousness does
make us to appear most holy, most pure, most unblameable before him.

27. This then is the sum of that which I say, Faith does justify,
Justification washes away sin; sin removed, we are clothed with the
righteousness which is of God; the righteousness of God makes us most holy.
Every of these I have proved by the testimony of God's own mouth. Therefore I
conclude, That Faith is that which makes us most holy, in consideration
whereof, it is called in this place, Our most holy says.

28. To make a wicked and a sinful man most holy through his believing, is more
than to create a World of nothing. Our faith most holy! Surely, Solomon could
not show the Queen of Sheba, so much treasure in all his Kingdom, as is lapt up
in these words. O that our hearts were stretched out like tenis, and that the
eyes of our understanding were as bright as the Sun, that we might thoroughly
know the riches of the glorious inheritance of the Saints, and what is the
exceeding greatness of his power toward us, whom he accepts for pure, and
most holy, through our believing. O that the Spirit of the Lord would give this
Doctrine entrance into the slony and brazen heart of the Jew, which follows
the Law of Righteousness, but cannot attain unto the righteousness of the Law!
Wherefore, says the Apostle, they seek righteousness, and not by faith;
wherefore they stumble at Christ, they are bruised, shivered to pieces as a
ship that has run herself upon a Rock. O that God would cast down the eyes of
the proud, and humble the souls of the high-minded! that they might at the
length abhor the garments of their own flesh, which cannot hide their
nakedness, and put on the faith of Christ Jesus, as he did put it on which has
said, Doubtless I think all thing; but loss, for the excellent knowledge-sake
of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted all things loss, and do judge
them to be dung, that I might win Christ, and might be found in him, not having
mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the
says of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through faith. O that
God would open the Ark of Mercy, wherein this Doctrine lies, and set it wide
before the eyes of poor afflicted Consciences, which fly up and down upon the
water of their afflictions, and can see nothing but only the gulf and deluge
of their sins, wherein there is no place for them to rest their feet. The God
of pity and compassion give you all strength and courage, every day, and every
hour, and every moment, to build and edify your selves in this most pure and
holy faith. And thus much both of the thing prescribed in this Exhortation, and
also of the properties of the thing, Build your selves in your most holy faith.
I would come to the next branch, which is of Prayer, but I cannot lay this
matter out of my hands, till I have added somewhat for the applying of it, both
to others, and to our selves.

29. For your better understanding of matters contained in this Exhortation,
Build your selves, you must note, that every Church and Congregation does
consist of a multitude of Believers, as every House is built of many Stones.
And although the nature of the Mystical body of the Church be such, that it
suffers no distinction in the invisible members, but whether it be Paul or
Apollos, Prince or Prophet, he that is taught or he that teaches, all are
equally Christ's, and Christ is equally theirs: yet in the external
administration of the Church of God, because God is not the Author of
Confusion, but of Peace; it is necessary that in every Congregation there be a
distinction, if not of inward dignity, yet of outward degree; so that all are
Saints, or seem to be Saints, and should be as they seem: But are all Apostles?
If the whole Body were an eye, where were then the hearing? God therefore has
given some to be Apostles, and some to be Pastors, etc. for the edification of
the body of Christ. In which work, we are God's laborers (says the Apostle)
and ye are God's husbandry, and God's building.

30. The Church, respected with reference unto administration Ecclesiastical,
does generally consist but of two sorts of men, the Laborers, and the
Building; they which are ministered unto, and they to whom the work of the
Ministry is committed; Pastors, and the Flock over whom the Holy Ghost has
made them Overseers. If the Guide of a Congregation, be his name or his degree
whatsoever, be diligent in his Vocation, feed the flock of God which depends
upon him, caring for it, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind; not as though he would tyrannize over God's
heritage, but as a pattern unto the Flock, wisely guiding them: If the People
in their degree do yield themselves frameable to the truth, not like rough
stone or flint, refusing to be smoothed and squared for the building: if the
Magistrate do carefully and diligently survey the whole order of the work,
providing by Statutes and Laws, and bodily punishments, if need require, that
all things may be done according to the rule which cannot deceive; even as
Moses provided, that all things might be done according to the pattern which he
saw in the Mount; there the words of this Exhortation are truly and effectually
heard. Of such a Congregation every man will say, Behold a people that are
wise, a people that walk in the Statutes and Ordinances of their God, a people
full of knowledge and understanding, a people that have skill in building
themselves. Where it is otherwise, there, at by sloathfulness the roof does
decay; and as by idleness of bands the House droppeth through, as it is in
Eccles. 10. 18. so first one piece, and then another of their building shall
fall away, till there be not a stone left upon a stone.

31. We see how fruitless this Exhortation has been to such as bend all their
travel only to build and manage a Papacy upon earth, without any care in the
Worl^ of building themselves in their most holy faith. God's people have
enquired at their mouths, What shall we do to have Eternal life? Wherein shall
we build and edify our selves? And they have departed home from their
Prophets, and from their Priests, laden with Doctrines which are Precepts of
men: they have been taught to tire out themselves with bodily exercise: those
things are enjoined them, which God did never require at their hands, and the
things he does require are kept from them; their eyes are fed with pictures,
and their ears are filled with melody, but their souls do wither, and starve,
and pine away; they cry for bread, and behold stones are offered them; they ask
for fish, and see they have Scorpions in their hands. Thou see, O Lord, that
they build themselves, but not in faith; they feed their Children, but not with
food: their Rulers say with shame, Bring, and not build. But God is Righteous;
their drunkenness stinketh, their abominations are known, their madness is
manifest, the wince has bound them up in her wings, and they shall be ashamed
of their doings. Ephraim, says the Prophet, is joined to Idols, let him alone.
I will turn me therefore from the Priests which do minister unto Idols, and
apply this Exhortation to them, whom God has appointed to feed his Chosen in
Israel.

32. If there be any feeling of Christ, any drop of heavenly dew, or any spark
of God's good spirit within you, stir it up, be careful to build and edify,
first, your selves, and then your flocks, in this most holy Faith.

33. I say, first, your selves; For, h^ which will set the hearts of other men
on fire with the love of Christ, must himself burn with love. It is want of
faith in our selves, my Brethren, which makes us Careless.
wretchless in building others. We forsake the Lords inheritance, and feed it
not. What is the reason of this? Our own desires are settled where they should
not be. We our selves are like those women which have a longing to eat coals,
and lime, and filth; we are fed, some with honor, some with ease, some with
wealth; the Gospel waxes loathsome and unpleasant in our taste; how should we
then have a care to feed others with that, which we cannot fancy our selves! If
Faith wax cold and slender in the heart of the Prophet it will soon perish from
the ears of the People. Amos ^.11,12
The Prophet Amos speaks of a famine, saying, I will send a famine in the
Land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water; but of hearing the Word of
the Lord. Men shall wander from sea to sea, and from the North unto the East
shall they ran to and fro, to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not find
it. Judgment must begin at the House of God, says Peter. Yea, I say, at the
Sanctuary of God, 1 Pet. 4. 17.
this judgment must begin. This famine must begin at the heart of the Prophet.
He must have darkness for a vision, he must stumble at noon day, as at the
twilight; and then truth shall fall in the midst of the streets; then shall
the people wander from sea to sea, and from the North unto the East shall they
run to and fro, to seek the Word of the Lord.

34. In the second of Haggai, Speak now, says God to his Prophet, Speak now to
Zerubbabel, the Son of Shealtiel, Prince of Judah, and to Iehoshua, the Son of
Iehosadak the High Priest, and to the residue of the people, saying, Who is
left among you, that saw this House in her first glory, and how do you see it
now? Is not this House in your eyes, in comparison of it, is nothing? The
Prophet would have all men's eyes turned to the view of themselves, every sort
brought to the consideration of their present state. This is no place to show
what duty Zerubbabel or Iehoshuah does owe unto God in this respect. They have,
I doubt not, such as put them hereof in remembrance. I ask of you, which are a
part of the residue of God's Elect and chosen people, Who is there amongst you
that has taken a survey of the House of God, as it was in the days of the
blessed Apostles of Jesus Christ? Who is there amongst you, that has seen and
considered this Holy Temple in her first glory? And how do you see it now? Is
it not in comparison of the other, almost as nothing? when ye look upon them
which have undertaken the charge of your Souls, and know how far these are, for
the most part, grown out of kind, how few there be that tread the steps of
their ancient Predecessors, ye are easily filled with indignation, easily drawn
unto these complaints, wherein the difference of present, from former times, is
bewailed; easily persuaded to think of them that lived to enjoy the days which
now are gone, that surely they were happy in comparison of us that have
succeeded them: Were not their Bishops men unreproveable, wise, righteous,
holy, temperate, well-reported of, even of those which were without? Were not
their Pastors, Guides, and Teachers, able and willing to exhort with wholesome
Doctrine, and to reprove those which gainsaid the Truth? had they Priests made
of the reffuse of the people? were men, like to the children which were in
Niniveh, unable to discern between the right hand and the left, presented to
the charge of their Congregations? did their Teachers leave their flocks over
which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers? did their Prophets enter upon
holy things as spoils, without a reverend calling? were their Leaders so
unkindly affected toward them, that they could find in their hearts to sell
them as sheep or oxen, not caring how they made them away? But, Beloved,
deceive not your selves. Do the faults of your Guides and Pastors offend you?
it is your fault if they be thus faulty. Nullus quimalum Rectorem patitur, cum
accuset; quia sai fuit meriti, perversi Pastoris subjacere ditioni, says St.
Gregory, whosoever thou art, whom the inconvenience of an evil Governor does
press, accuse thy self, and not him; his being such, is thy deserving. O ye
disobedient Children, turn again, says the Lord, Jer. 3. 14, 15.
and then will I give you Pastors according to mine own heart, which shall feed
you with knowledge and understanding. So that the only way to repair all
ruins, breaches, and offensive decays in others, is to begin reformation at
your selves. Which that we may all sincerely, seriously, and speedily do, God
the Father grant for his Son our Savior Jesus sake, unto whom, with the Holy
Ghost, three Persons, one Eternal, and Everlasting God, be honor, and glory,
and praise for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

