A SURVEY Of the Insolent and Infamous LIBEL, ENTITLED, NAPHTALI, etc.

Wherein several things, falling in debate in these times are considered; and
some Doctrines in Lex Rex and the Apolog. Narration (called by this Author
Martyrs) are brought to the touchstone.

PART I. Representing the dreadful aspect of Naphtali's Principles upon the
powers ordained by God, and detecting the horrid consequences in practice
necessarily resulting from such Principles, if owned and received by people.

Job 13.7.9.11. Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him?
Is it good that he should search you out? or as one man mocketh another, do ye
so mock him? Shall not his excellency make you afraid, and his dread fall upon
you?

Psalm. 144.10. It is he that gives Salvation unto Kings, who delivers David
his servant from the hurtful sword.

Prove. 24.21, 22. My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change: For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who
knows the ruin of them both?

Printed, Anno Dom. M. DC. LXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
IT has been, and is the lot of the Lord's Militant-Church, to be tossed with
manifold tempests, and to be (as it were) grinded betwixt the two millstones of
a professedly profane and atheistical world, and of a party pretending highly
for Truth and Piety, hanging out the Flag of the fairest Profession for both;
whiles both are really undermined and fought against. Such are the destroying
methods of that ghostly enemy of men's Souls, that not succeeding in his work of
pestering the Church by profaneness, (these who have received the truth in
love, and have it intimately ingrafted in their hearts, abhorring that way;
yea, such as have but the literal knowledge of the Gospel, being thereby moved
to abstain from, and led to escape the gross pollutions that are in the world)
He takes another course, debauching some cleanly like instruments under fair
forms of godliness, without the power of it, to promote the efficacy of his
deceit upon well-meaning people, ensnaring them (by their means) into erroneous
Doctrines, or impious and scandalous Practices. As the former ages of the
Church of Christ, have abounded in experiences of this kind; So also, since the
light of the blessed Reformation (after a long and dark night) did break up,
the enemy has studiously sowed his tares while the good grain was in sowing,
and in deep deceitfulness accommodating his tentations to the course then begun
and carried on, would put in to be a Reformer, and did yoke in his
lightsome-like and well-dressed Agents to be (with others) purgers and builders
of the Church of God. By these men, walking under most specious colors of
great humility, fervent zeal, sincere devotion, real mortification and
self-denial, (graces, where they are in truth, never sufficiently valued) he
did insinuate himself into, and possess himself of the minds of the simple,
apt to believe every thing, and led them away captive into most dangerous
errors and damnable practices: So that in the event, these shining
glorious-like purgers and builders of the Temple of God, proved dreadful
defilers and destroyers thereof. This moved the heroic Worthies employed by
God to waste and pull down the Kingdom of Antichrist, to turn their golden and
mighty pens against that glittering seed of the Serpent, these celestial
Prophets (as they were then termed) who by overdoing, were undoing the work of
God in their hands; and who, under pretense of further and through Reformation
(as they called it) did really hinder the course of the Gospel. What wrestlings
the eminent Servants of God, Luther (who was by them accounted a little less
Antichrist then the Roman, and who dyed an heart-broken man because of them)
Zwinglius, Melanchton, Calvin, Bucer, Bullinger and many others, had with this
sort of men, their own Writings, and the Histories of that time can testify.
We speak of the Sect of the Anabaptists, (so called from their most common, but
not from their greatest errors) a Sect which under much toleration, because of
the seeming harmlessness and holiness of its favorers, grew to that strength
in Germany, Switzerland and other parts, that it became formidable to the
States and Countries where it had place, and which at last (letting the mask
fall off) did break forth fearfully in gross voluptuousness, tumults, rapines,
horrid murders, bloodshed and rebellions against lawful Magistrates and
Princes, (whom they thought they were called of God to root out, as being the
ungodly of the world) And in these tumults, confusions and rebellions, there
perished above one hundred thousand men. The contagion of this way has, less
or more, spread it self to some other reformed Churches; and lately did come to
some strength in Britain: A thing which was justly feared, and wisely foreseen,
by men of great gravity, judgment and wisdom in our Neighbor Land, Dr.
Whitgift and Mr. Hookers
near one hundred years ago; who expressed in their Writings, their jealousies
and fears, that England might be taken and tainted with the infection of that
evil. These godly, sage and sagacious persons, were neither so transported with
passion, nor so void of charity, as to impute the direct intention of bringing
in the errors of that way, unto those who were contrary minded to them in the
matters of Church Discipline. But, when they seriously considered the tendency
and consequence of some of their Principles who were vehement for the form of
Discipline, which they desired to obtrude upon that Church, and the conformity
of some of their Practices to the way of the Sect of the Anabaptists in other
Countries; they did, upon too good ground, fear the breaking out of that evil,
which we in our days have seen come to pass in a very high measure: And, who
knows where it shall sist? It is a thing too too evident, that under sundry
external forms of Government; that mystery of iniquity works to the confusion
of humane Societies, to the bringing of divine Ordinances into contempt, and to
the introducing of Libertinism, Quakerism, Rantism and Atheism. That
Chamelion-like and various Sect, can shroud it self under diverse external forms
of Church Government. If it be true that Dr. Ames. says, Fresh Suit, p. 93.
the Anabaptists in Zealand and Friesland have their own Bishops: in the
Congregational and Independent way, there are many of that stamp; nor is the
Presbyterian way so privileged, but that under the lap thereof, men of that
furious spirit do lurk.

It is not intended by any thing that shall be said of the naughty courses of
others, to cast any blot upon those who are deemed the moderate men of that
way. Only it must be said, that they would do themselves a great deal of right,
if the concerns of Gods glory, and the honor of his reformed Churches, the
compassion due to Souls seduced, and ready to be seduced, and the true interest
of their own Reputation might prevail with them, by some evidence of a public
deed to disclaim and damn the scandalous and shameful Doctrines and Practices,
whereby evil men strive to support the Presbytery. Otherwise, what marvel is
it, that they be looked upon in the esteem of these who value them as involved
in the guilty connivance and consent to all the vile things that issue from
Napht. and his party? And that this Libeller be looked upon as the common
allowed Advocate of the Presbytery, and who reads the Book, will with some
ground say, crimine ab uno disce omnes. Neither is it our design or will, to
grieve or give offense to the generation of the humble, meek and self-denyed
seekers of Gods face, partakers with us of the same precious faith, and running
to obtain the same prize of the inheritance with us, (however differing in
judgment in some particulars) nor shall we take them as partakers with this
furious Author and his adherents. For who can imagine, that a meek people, who
has the promise of Gods teaching, should be so far transported, as to take the
circumstantials of Religion, for the great and weighty matters of the Law and
Gospel, without which known and beloved, none can come to God? Who can think,
that an intelligent people should account, that the concerns of Christ's Kingdom
and their own salvation, does lie with so much stresse upon this point, that
the weakest and most ignorant Minister shall have a potestative parity with the
man of greatest Gifts, Learning and Knowledge; that the Minister weakest in his
Prudentials, should have equal Authority in mannaging the matters of Gods
house, with the wisest and one of the most noted prudence; that the youngest,
rawest, most unexperienced Minister, should have as much power in ruling the
house of God, as the man fullest of years, whose judgment is consolidated and
ripened for Government, and who has for a long time given such documents of
good and wise behavior, that makes him fitter to rule the younger sort, then
to be ruled by them? Or, who can see the prejudice to Christ's Kingdom and
precious souls, if such a worthy person (as is described) be entrusted with an
inspection over other Brethren and Churches in a reasonable bounds, not with a
dominative or lordly power, but paternal and fatherly; not to do after his own
arbitrament, and as one unchallengeable in his actions, but to be regulated by
acts of the Church and Land, and to be responsible to his Superiors in case of
maleversation, not to rule solly, but with the consent and counsel of
Presbyters? Can this way be disrellished by sober Christians, being so strongly
pleaded by the light of sound reason, making so much for the comeliness and
order of Christ's Church, being so suitable and correspondent to the ancient
Government of the Church of Israel (where there were Priests and chief Priests,
and several ranks of Ministers, an order which was neither typical nor
temporal, but has a standing reason reaching us) being so conform to the
beginnings of Christ's ordering the New Testament Ministry (where there were
Apostles above the seventy Disciples) being so agreeable to the Apostles
constitution of the Government of the Churches of the New Testament, which was
in an imparity of Power in Ministers, (as is luculently exemplified in the
Power of Timothy and Titus, who were no Evangelists, nor ever accounted so by
the Spirit of God) And finally, our ascended glorious Savior, having honored
persons invested with that precedence by Letters written by his Secretary John
unto them, Rev. 2.3. chap. wherein he shows the approbation of their office and
power, reproving their neglects, yet honoring them with the style of Angels to
the Churches, or his Messengers in special manner. To the Angel of the Church
of Ephesus, etc. which cannot without notable perversion of the Scripture be
otherwise understood, but of single persons presiding over Presbyters. And this
order Christ's Church and dear Spouse, having since that time retained in all
places, where Churches were constitute without exception, in all times without
interruption, until this last Age, wherein through hatred of corruptions
adhering thereto under Popery, and because of the enimity of the popish Bishops
to the Reformation, some have utterly, without any reason, rejected the office
it self. Who can think, that a Christian people will not readily follow the
footsteps of the flock in former generations? Neither is there any intention
to provoke any fearers of God, who have been perhaps in an hour of tentation
miscarried to irregular courses, following too readily in the simplicity of
their hearts cunning leaders, who have had too much dominion over their faith;
these we judge worthy of greatest tenderness in dealing with them: nor are we
without hope, that God who stills the noise of the seas, the noise of the
waves, and the tumult of the people, Ps. 65. v. 7. will in time allay their
animosities and rebuke the stormy wind and seas of their passions, that they
may be still, and that he will bring them to consider their ways wherein they
have exceeded, and give them to know how ill and bitter a thing it is to
forsake their own mercies in the ordinances of God, for the want or having of
this or that form of external Government. But these we aim at in this parallel
with Anabaptists, are the Naphtalian party, i. e. the furious sort of these,
who under the conduct of this teacher and his like, make sport of rebellions,
murders, assassinations, that have so hardened and harnessed their hearts (as
appears by their writings and deeds) that they have become stout in a dedolent
greediness to commit any wickedness, which they account meet to serve their
design, as if their supposed good cause could legittimat the worst course, who
make no reckoning, as their Doctor here professes, of overturning Thrones,
making the Land drunk with the blood of the Inhabitants, multiplying
fatherless and widows in the midst thereof, and introducing greatest
confusions and calamities, that may make all faces gather blackness, and all to
smite on the thigh, crying, alas for the day! if so be, they may upon the ruins
of all, erect the idol of pretended parity of Ministers; which when they have
set up, the imperious agitators will, (as they have done formerly) baffle, if
any offer be to level them to others, and howsoever the weaker brethren must be
entertained with fair words, and noddified with notional disputes anent their
parity with the best, that they may think themselves somewhat: yet, how
disdainfully was it, and yet would be taken if these low shrubs should essay a
practical parity with the tall Cedars in the Government of affairs. Imparity
was then without a title, now it is with it, and there is our change and great
defection; and surely that which has been, will be, and there is no new thing
under the Sun.

This furious Napht. coming in upon the back of the Apology, as another
invenomed Egg, hatched (be-like) by one and the same Cockatrice; the second
justifying the rebellion to which the first did instigate, and inflaming to
more, may let them, who will not shut their own eyes, see the mystery of
Anabaptistical confusion, working and spreading: for, although the Author
pretends highly for Presbytery, which he and his accomplices (Hawks of the
right nest) have long ago hewed down in this Church, as to the practice of it:
Yet, evident it is, that his pretenses for Presbytery are but Prefaces to some
further great design of mischief to the Church and State. For, having sold
himself to work confusion and rebellion, he goes about to overthrow all the
powers ordained of God in most cyclopick boldness, displaying a banner against
all invested lawfully with any degree of Civil or Church power, bending his
spirit to the uttermost, to renew and revive our confusions, and to bear people
in hand, that grossest rebellion is religious duty and real godliness. And in
managing his matters, the Author behaves not himself like Naphtali, (the hind
let loose, which gives goodly words, or words of goodliness, fairness and
pleasantness, as, Genesis 49.21. it is said of Naphtali; who therefore is
satisfied with favor, and full of the blessing of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 33.23.) But,
as in his heart there are evil treasures of wickedness; So, in his lips and pen
there is a burning fire, he strives to inflame all with the rage of his tongue,
and runs upon all sorts of Authorities from the highest to the lowest, like a
savage Beast or wild Boar let loose to waste and confound miserably both the
visible Kingdom of Christ in the Land, and the civil Kingdom thereof settled
upon the best foundations; and that his Book might want nothing of the
compleatness of an infamous Libel, he falls upon particular persons by name, to
asperse their credit, the constant integrity of whose conversation, will easily
stop his foul lying mouth in the consciences of Gods people who know them.

What to do anent this bundle of impudent lies and falsehoods, gross slanders
and revilings, was much doubted. Upon the one hand, it was thought best to
neglect the rage of this man (if one that has so much renounced humanity, as
he is here seen to do, may be so termed) least by being noticed, he might think
himself somewhat, especially least people (who as they affect, are ordinarily
opinionated) might have too much matter to feed their humor, to furnish their
light discourses, and to ensnare their souls, by representing to them the
matters of this Libell (worthy to be buried in oblivion) they being too apt
(whatever salvo might be added) to receive the poison without the antidote
according to their prejudices. It seemed also a matter full of tediousness to a
well composed heart, to enter into a fire of endless strife and continual
reciprocation of altercations, wherein a man is not likely to find more truth
then he has already, (truth in the most important matters in the Book, having
been of old fully vindicated by learned hands, and nothing now opposed, but old
songs, chanted over and over again) although like enough to lose much of that
charity and calm and composed temper of heart which he had before. What man is
he, that knowing, how much more important work he has upon his hand, for his
own salvation, and honoring God in his station in the world, would willingly
engage in endless contests with persons, whose idleness gives them too great
opportunity of evil doing; and who having cast by the Lords work in building
his Church, are too much set to do Satan's work in dissipating the same? It
seemed honorable enough to decline this contention and strife, which is like
the letting out of waters, in expectation that either the man's conscience (if
it be not infinitely corrupted) may confute him in most of his assertions and
standers, or that his manifest unchristian dealing may help to open the eyes of
such he labors to delude, and bring them to abhor his way, or that the
really religious and righteous dealings of Church and State may more forcibly
put him to silence then words or writings can. Sometimes keeping silence is
seasonable, the man according to Gods own heart, would not suffer Shimei's
revilings to be repayed upon the head of that dead dog; Hezekiah discharged to
answer a word to railing Rabshakeh; Jeremiah the Prophet contradicted by the
false Prophet Hananiah, went his way and said nothing; the wise Solomon forbids
to take heed to all words that are spoken and to answer a fool according to his
folly. The Lord of Kings and Prophets, sometimes answered not his accusers a
word. So it seemed fit to let alone an insolent and froward railer and mocker,
and not to lavish out precious time, which might be better bestowed, upon one
that gives such visible evidences both of a reasonless and unchristian spirit,
whose Libel may be reckoned amongst the things quae spreta exolescunt, and
worthy to be answered with nothing but silence and contempt. But upon the other
hand, it seemed something hard, (especially in such a distempered time) to
suffer an insolent person, in whose mouth is a rod of pride, to cast the truth
down to the ground without control, and to tread upon and triumph over a holy
and righteous cause, and upon honorable persons of all ranks, engaged in the
maintenance thereof in so abusive, despiteful and intolerable a way, and not
give him any check. Not to put some stop to this furious driver, who again and
again assaults this Church with vile lies and reproaches, looked like the
deserting and betraying of an honest and honorable cause, or like the
hirelings seeing the wolf and flying and leaving the flock to be destroyed with
delusion, fugisti quia tacuisti. There is an evil silence that leaves men in
sin, as well as an evil speaking that leads men to sin; and we are not only to
give an account pro otioso verbo, but pro otioso silencio; for, idle silence,
when God and the public necessity of the Church, or Society whereof we are
members, calls for a valiant (not brutishly violent and forcible that way, such
as this man pleads for) and rational contending for the truth. It is sinful
pusillanimity, and not warrandable prudence to see truth fall in the streets
and not lift it up. And verily, this man seems to be amongst these, of whom
Solomon says, Prove. 26.5. who must be answered, least he seem wise in his own
conceit; and to be amongst these, Tit. 1.10, 11. unruly and vain talkers and
deceivers, (...), whose mouths must be stopped, that the gangrane of his words
may not creep further to the consumption and subversion of Church and State.

But the great difficulty, in dealing with this man of no forehead, (or if he
have any, it is of the hardest metal) of little conscience, but of infinite
loquacity, and of a most unbridled tongue, which is a treasure of all reviling
language, (whereof he is exceedingly profuse, in bestowing it upon persons of
all ranks) The great difficulty (I say) in dealing with him was how to moderate
and temper a style of writing toward such a one; Difficile est Satyram non
scribere contra Satyrum: for hardly can a man meet in any book with more bitter
invectives against all Authorities and Dignities, appointed and approven by
God, then are here to be found. All that have gone that path before him, seem
but children in wickedness in comparison of him. He deserves to be in the first
class of these, Jude 8. who despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities. Yet
it must be confessed, that the man deserves well (albeit beside his intention)
of all the Authorities civil and ecclesiastical in the Land, for while others
do politickly keep in, supprimit Orator quae rusticus edit inepte, He has
plainly laid open the spirit of the faction, for which he is Advocate, and
gives (as we will hear) fair warning to the King, that he must not expect
impunity (if they can have their will,) and to all the Nobles and Magistrates,
whose places and dignities, forfeited (as he says) by them, private persons,
in a Phineas-like spirit, are allowed to possess, removing and taking order
with them for great apostasy and patronising abominations (as he speaks) but
especially to all the ministry, (whom he calls Wolves and Thieves) and mainely
to the Bishops what they are to expect; for loading them outragiously with all
sorts of reproaches, which his wicked heart could prompt him to utter, he
directly endeavors to stir up the people to embrew their hands in their blood,
and to destroy them in their innocence, with tragical ohs! awakening the rage
of the rudest multitude (which he calls zeal of God) to execute judgment on
them, that the fierce anger of God may be turned away; and tells them if they
do not so, they are plagued with stupidity and blindness. All sorts of rulers
in the Land, may see their dittay and their doom drawn in this Libell; and the
man should have thanks for discovering the malicious bloody and cruel designs
of his party, that these who are concerned, being forewarned, may be
fore-armed, professa perdunt odia vendictae locum; when the snare is set in a
man's sight, he deserves to fall into it, that will fall into it. When a man's
deadly enemies proclaim their intentions, if he take not warning and be not
upon his guard, who will not think, that in his lifetime he were worthy of a
fair hood and bells, and because he perishes in the snare that was set in his
sight, he will be thought worthy of Abners Epitaph, Dyed Abner as a fool dies?
This man will make us wise, whither we will or not, and force us to keep our
eyes in our head.

But as to this infamous Libeller, how irksome a thing were it to follow him
closely in all his foolish reasonings that are continually interlaced and
larded with foul revilings? How unsuitable were it for one, who desires to keep
the constant composure of a Christian spirit, to indulge a humor in
retaliating, according as the indignity of his abuses requires: verily, in
dealing with men of this stamp (outrageous in their opprobrious speeches)
defenders of the truth are at a great disadvantage, in regard of these who have
sober and grave adversaries to deal with. But it almost transcends humane
patience, to treat myldly with such an insolent one as this, who transgresses
so far the bounds of all humane modesty in dealing with all sorts of persons in
Authority, as will be seen anon,

Although then, a more then ordinary vehemence of a keen style should be used,
in beating down the fierceness of one so excessively insolent (whose
intemperate pride despises moderate remedies) good and wise men will not judge
it very criminal, but at least, somewhat excusable. Shall Masters of confusion,
indulging themselves in their proud morosity, unworthily demean themselves
toward the sober defenders of the truth? and will not this be sufficient
Apology for them, to put forth some sting, and use some measure of vehemence in
this case? Should such a person as this, who (as the Poets feign of Hecuba,
metamorphosed into a mad barking bitch, after the destruction of Troy) barks
and bawles, and dares with his furious petulant and pestilent pen overrun and
bespatter King, Parliament, Council, Nobles, Judges, Bishops, Ministers and all
ranks of people in the Land? should he be smoothed and stroaked with soft
words? might not possibly a too faint-like and toothless defense of the truth
tend to harden him and his accomplices, and breed suspicion of some signs of
diffidence, distrust and timorousness in owning the truth and rightousnesse of
the cause that is owned against him?

Sed motos praestat componere fluctus. It shall be fitter to consider what
becomes us to utter, then what becomes him to hear, or what he is worthy of.
There lies indeed a tentation in these nameless writings (which therefore, it
is to be wished were not in use) to exceed in passions and to utter words
(incognito) that will not be stood to; but remembering, that we have not so
learned Christ, as to render revilling for reviling, and that man's wrath works
not the rightousness of God; (though sometimes it is for peoples edification to
see the due characters of such as lead them out of the way) so far as humane
infirmity permitts, the truth shall be searched after, and spoken in love; all
bitterness, wrath, anger and clamor with all malice being put away: but if any
thing aculeat and pungent do escape, it not being used in any private cause or
quarrel, but in the public concerns of truth, of the Church of God and of the
State of the Commonwealth, nor proceeding from any private revenge (there
being room enough in our fraternal affection for any, who will leave their
unchristian, sanguinary and inhumane ways) it will at least be excused by the
judicious and wise. And if any such thing be, it is heartily wished, it may
prick the Libeller to repentance for these things, wherein he has already put
himself to shame.

But to prepare for consideration of the matter of this infamous Libel, it
shall be fit, to advert how palpably and closely this man treads in the
footsteps of the old Masters of confusion the Anabaptists: It shall not be
said, that his accomplices or he, are arrived to the owning of the highest
mysteries of that Sect, in the points of Enthusiasme and Libertinisme, nor that
they are so cruel, as to exclude Christian infants from their Birthright
privilege of Baptism; howbeit, it is worthy to be considered, how far the
common demand of express command or example in Scripture, for Episcopacy may
reach the Anabaptists conclusion concerning infants. And this man, does let
fall such tenets, as smell too rankly of the foul scum of the high flown
Anabaptistical and Enthusiastical way; while he tells us, ( page 21. etc.) That
mere private men may now a days, take their impulses of Zeal, as a sufficient
call, to pull down all Magistrates from their seats which they abuse, to
execute judgment on them, and to place themselves in their rooms; thinking,
that Phineas act may justify them, and while he tells us, page 105. that a
Ministers external call, is not in ordination by them, who have power upon
trial of gifts; but in having such a visible evidence of the call of Jesus
Christ, as in reason and charity does obliege all men, to receive the person so
called, as truly sent: These with several other points, tending to
Libertinisme; yea, and to the abolishing of the sense of grossest sins in
people, are vented here, as may be seen in the progress. But our maine work
shall be, to show the face of this man's way, and how Anabaptistical-like it
looks, in some particular practices, wherein the similitude will hold without
much halting, that if he will not be he healed, others may be warned.

1. The Sect of Anabaptists labored much, (as the learned men that knew them
and dealt with them declare) to overthrow Magistracy, in the places where they
lived; they represented the secular powers unto the people, as the ungodly of
the world, instigating and stirring them up, to pull them all down, as the
oppressors of their liberty in spirituals and civils: They denied all authority
to Magistrates in Church matters, averring, they ought not to meddle in matters
of Religion or Faith, nor use any compulsion on men, so much as to urge them to
the use of the external means of Gods worship. And upon the ground, ( Luke,
22. The Kings of the Nations, etc. it shall not be so amongst you, which is
pressed against Superiorities amongst Churchmen) They pleaded with no less
plausibleness against superiority of Magistrates, amongst and over Christians,
although when they came to some strength at Munster, they would have their own
King, John of Leyden the Tailor.

2. As they studied to overthrow the ordinance of Magistracy, so also the other
divine ordinance of Ministry; these being, as it were, the two great lights,
the Sun and the Moon, which God has appointed to guide the world: These masters
of confusion, would extinguish them both, that they might vent their wares in
the world, for destroying not only humane Societies, but the Souls of men. In
order to the ruin of the Ministry, they declaimed most bitterly against all
of that function, (that were not of their way) as Hirelings, Thieves and
Wolves, Ignorant-beasts, Priests of Baal, cursed Creatures, Servants of Satan,
and what ever else their invenomd hearts could prompt them to utter against
Christ's Ministers to work their disgrace amongst the people, and so to defame
them, that they might be useless in the service of God: Their great work was,
to exclude faithful Ministers from the esteem of Gods people, that they might
affect them only, and that they might have ready access to poison them with
their perverse Doctrines and Dictates of sublime, unconceivable nonsense, set
forth under the garb of a glancing novelty of words.

3. They bent themselves to work division in the Church of God, and to move
people to forsake the assembling of themselves together in Church-meetings, and
to follow them to seek Christ in private Conventicles, where they might with
freedom enough open their hearts, and debauch them into their way. The Church
meetings they reckoned no better of, then as of droves and herds of hoggs,
confused mixtures, unworthy the name of Churches and wherein no blessing was to
be expected to the Ordinances.

4. They were above all men arrogant and proud despisers of such as were not of
their way, as being men without God in the world, reprobate and wicked, denying
to them even common civilities.

5. When any of theirs were punished, either for their errors, or for felony,
murder or rebellion, they heavily lamented the removeal of the dear servants
of God; crying them up for Martyrs, and complaining tragically, that truth and
godliness was oppressed; and that men, who would have all things done according
to Gods word, were not suffered to live in a persecuting world.

How near this man (with his accomplices) does approach to the manners of that
odious Sect in these particulars, may some way appear from this Libell, and the
Apology. When the spirit, that stirs in these furious writings (especially
in Naphthali, wherein the evil man waxes worse and worse) is considered; how
much confusion may be seen to be portended to Church and State, if hearts be
infected with the Doctrines therein held forth. It is greatly to be wished and
prayed for, that the Lord may give his people such understanding, that they be
not ignorant of the wiles of Satan, who drives a deeper design against this
poor Church and Land, then the subversion of this or that exterior form of
Church Government. The controversy rests not in matters touching a Bishop, or
a Presbytery, which (if men's passions or prejudices might permit) may be for
the advantage of the Gospel well consolidated by their mutual paying of due
respects one to another, the episcopal inspection not abrogating, but
strengthening the due right of Presbyters, and Presbyters not despising that
lawful inspection, but all concurring together in a kindly mutual assistance,
and amicable conjunction, for carrying on the real interests of Christ's Kingdom
without imperiousness on the one side, and without froward disorderliness on
the other. But this polemical Presbyterian (as he would seem to be, though he
and his brethren in evil have ruined that way of Presbytery long ago) accounts
such matters too low to stand upon. The design his Libel runs upon, is to open
a gap to endless rebellions, under whatsoever constitution of
Church Government. And not only to bring all our Magistrates from the highest
to the lowest under disgrace (which is the next step to destruction, and to
make them a sacrifice to the fury of the wicked people) but to ruin Kingly
Authority and Magistracy, the Ordinance of God, and to dissolve humane
Societies and Kingdoms (as shall be seen) and especially to ruin this Kingdom.
There is a great noise made, (it may be, it is not causles, and it were to be
wished, Rulers looked to it) of the increase of Popery: but truly, when the
spirit of such writings as this, is considered, it will be found, there is
cause to fear, (unless the wisdom and goodness of God, and the prudence of the
King and Governors under him prevent) That as one way, the Roman Antichrist may
come in; So, some furious successor of John of Leyden, under pretense of a
Phineas-like spirit, come in another way, upon our Church and Land, to lay it
waste, and to make it a field of confusion and blood; the seeds of future
miseries, being too visibly sown by this man and his accomplices; whose mouths,
are full of Blasphemies, as their hearts and hands are full of blood. That this
Libell and the like, are not more quickly followed, with meet animadversions,
is not to be marvelled at by any, who knows they are like the Pestilence that
walks in darkness; and that hardly do they come to the hands of any, but such
as are willing to be deceived by them, being intended for the blinding of
these, not for the opening the eyes of others; Yet now, (that this piece is in
our hand) it (with its fellows) deserves some consideration, and what shall be
said, shall be reduced to these heads, viz. The Libellers endeavor to confound
humane Societies and to overthrow Magistracy; His injurious revilings of the
Kings Majesty, Parliament, Council, Commission, Judges, Town of Edinburgh, etc.
His reproaches against the Ministry of the Church and all ranks thereof, with
his unsound Doctrines anent their Callings and Stations; His endeavors to
dissipate the Church of Christ in this Land, and therein to state a perpetual
schism; His Damnable pride and contempt of all others; His tragical complaints
of persecution, and vain glorying in the Martyrs of his way. In touching upon
these, the most material things of his book shall be spoken to, in the
following part of this treatise; withal, for the Reader's edification, we
shall now and then turn aside to useful digressions. As, 1. Concerning his
Majesty's Supremacy in Church affairs, which this Libeller calls falsely an
usurpation of the Crown of Christ. 2. Concerning the Covenants and obligation
thereof, and the falsely alleged perjury in owning Episcopacy. 3. Concerning
the warrantableness of the Episcopal office, falsely called by the Libeller
Antichristian usurpation. 4. Concerning the lawfulness of the calling of the
present Ministry of Scotland, whom he calls Thieves, Wolves, etc. 5. The
sinfulness of stating a separation from our Church Assemblies, which he calls
Curats Conventicles. Those things being with any satisfaction spoken to, once
for all, (for, Who can endure that profusion of precious time, as to be always
drawing the rug-saw of contention about such matters?) will contribute to clear
our judgments and allay our animosities. The Lord give us understanding in all
things, and bless us with truth and peace.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Libeller his endeavors to confound and dissolve humane
Societies, and to overthrow Magistracy in this Land. Page. 1. CHAP. II. Of
violent resistance to the Powers ordained of God, by mere private persons their
Subjects Page 12. CHAP. III. That such as are invested with sacred and
inviolable Sovereignty, have divine exemption and privilege of impunity from
their own Subjects. Page 71. CHAP. IV. Anent the following of Phineas fact; of
heroic or extraordinary impulsions, and concerning some courses taken at our
first Reformation, and their exemplariness. Page 104.
PART I.
CHAP. I. The Libeller his endeavors to confound and dissolve humane
Societies, and to overthrow Magistracy in this Land.
GOD Almighty, having made Man a rational Creature and fit for society, ((...),
as the Philosopher speaks) has appointed (besides aeconomical Societies) the
coalition of people into greater Bodies, consisting of many Families under one
Political Government, for mutual help to be given by men (one to another) in
their necessities; for protection both of the whole Body, and of every Member
interessed in the Society, and for the procuring of the good and happiness of
all in this life, and in a better. That these Societies might be orderly
regulated in their acts, the God of order has appointed superior Powers and
Heads over the multitudes of men, in several bounds of the world where he has
disposed their habitations. Magistracy, God's Ordinance, is that golden clasp
and band, that holds together humane Societies in a consistent unity, that men's
corruptions may not dash them one upon another, as pot-sheards, to their mutual
ruin and general confusion. Magistracy is as the vital Spirits of humane
Societies, without which they were but as dead carcasses; it is as the Nerves
and Sinews in the Body, without which there could be no right motion. Hence
there are no Nations so barbarous, but by natural instinct and the dictates of
reason, are led together into politic associations for their subsistence in
general, for the mutual help one of another, and for the protection of the
weaker against the violence and wrongs of the stronger. And by a divine
instinct, great multitudes of men embodyed together, are brought to humble
themselves and submit to Magistracy of one sort or another; which is not a mere
device of wise men, but an holy Ordinance of the only wise God. Vocatio est
(says Calv. lib. 4. inst. cap. 20. S. 4.) non modo sancta and legittima coram
Deo, sed sacerrima and in tota mortalium vita long honestissima. Now, albeit
the Lord has not, by any precept, particularly determined the bounds of every
embodyed political Society (there being some greater, some lesser, acting under
their several Heads and Sovereign Magistrates) Yet when politic Bodies are
settled in voluntary associations, or what ever way in the course of Divine
Providence they have been reduced to live under the same Laws and Authorities,
and have continued long in the union of a common interest, under the protection
of Magistracy, to break off from the body in seditious secessions, cannot but
be displeasing to God. And they are no other then Firebrands, confounders of
humane Society, fighters against God and his Ordinance, who (working upon the
advantages they have from peoples discontentments upon whatever pretense) do
instigate them either to cut off themselves from the body of the Commonwealth,
whereof they are Members, or to fall with violence upon the whole body, (though
they be the far lesser part thereof) or to invade the inviolable (by Subjects)
Majesty of the supreme Authority, which bears the sacred impress of God. How
far this Libeller goes this way, shall appear by his Tenets.

This Libeller's mind is plainly this, That when the ends of Government are
manifestly perverted, the injured persons (one or more) obligation thereunto
cease, the band thereof is dissolved, they are liberate from it, and do
relapse into their primaeve liberty and privilege; and as the similitude of
their case and exigence of cause does require, may upon the very same
principles again associate and join for their better defense and preservation,
as they did at first enter into Societies. Thus he, Page 16. Page 150. And
further he avows, That not only no obedience, but no alleagiance (n. b.) is to
be given to any created Power on earth, but with this restriction, in defense
of Religion and Liberty, according to the Covenants, Page 177. And what
Religion he means, in application to the hypothesis of the Times, he explains
plainly, Page 54. where he says, The extirpation of Prelacy is the main
covenanted Religious Duty, in the endeavor whereof, all the zeal of the
faithful should be concentred. And as to the liberty of the Subjects, the
determining of what it is, must not be referred to the Subjects Representatives
in Parliament: For, says he, Page 102. The Parliament, under pretense of
vindicating and declaring the Kings just Right and Prerogative, have wholly
corrupted and innovated the well-tempered and firm constitution of our ancient
Government, and utterly subverted the liberty of the Subject, Page 95. So that
what this liberty is, must be referred to the private discretive judgment of
every man, and this must determine him to his Acts of violent resistance, and
vindication of liberty according to the Covenant. And in reference to the case
of the Nation in these Times, the man is so far transported as to teach the
people, That their liberty is so far lost, that they are reduced to the
condition of a most insupportable and unnatural conquest, which should be a
most just cause and provocation to all ingenuous Spirits and good Patriots, to
undertake the asserting of their own liberty upon the greatest peril, Page 116.
And that the pressures and grievances of the Nation, by reason only of that
Court of Commission for executing the Laws anent Church matters, do far exceed
all the pressures and injuries of that Spanish inquisition, whereupon the
United Provinces have justified and approved their revolt from the King of
Spain, Page 126. So that this man's design is clear from his words, to dissolve
and confound this Kingdom, to move them who will be taken in his snare, to
renounce Allegiance to the King; to revolt from him, as having better cause
then the United Provinces had to revolt from the King of Spain; to combine
themselves in new Societies to their own mind (they being now relapsed into
their primaeve liberty, and the obligation to the Government being loosed) and
that every man and every Party, as they find themselves strong enough, should
upon their own discretive judgment of what is their due civil Liberty, as well
as what is right Religion; and upon their greatest peril undertake not only
violent resistance of all powers above them, but valiant vindication of
Religion and Liberties, and reforming what they think amiss vi and armis, even
to the punishing all and whatsoever person that will oppose them in their way.

The particulars shall be after spoken to, but now more generally we consider
his fundamental Doctrines of confusion. That the true ends of instituting civil
Government, are the true happiness of People here and hereafter, and the glory
of God: and that Magistrates and Governors are obliged to prosecute these
ends, no judicious Christian will question. All the question is, anent the Duty
of the fearers of God, in the case of the perversion of the ends of Government
by these in whose hand it is, whether, when this perversion is manifest, the
band and tie to the Government cease, as to the persons injured thereby; and
whither this be the case, as matters are now stated, that private persons, or
any number of them, are for the present (supposed) perversions of the ends of
Government, disoblieged from all ties to the same, and relapsed into their
primaeve liberty and privilege, to combine in Societies which are to their
mind (as at first they did associate themselves in the political bodies whereof
now they are members) for their own good and preservation.

As for the general position, or affirmative resolution to the former question,
it is undoubtedly both unchristian and unreasonable. When was there at any time
greater perversion and straying from the ends of Government, then was in the
times of many of the holy Prophets of God, and in the times of Christ, his holy
Apostles and the primitive Christians, who were both replenished with much
light to know their duties, and much zeal to act for the honor of God against
all perils and dangers whatsoever lying in their way? Government was perverted
by manifest Idolatry and horrid Tyranny, many monsters of men possessing the
thrones of Sovereignty: yet, look over all the sacred Writings of the holy
Prophets, look to the history of the life and actions of Christ and his
Apostles, or to the history of the great Lights of the primitive Church for
many hundreds of years, and see if any of the teachers taught such doctrine,
that in case of the manifest perversion of the ends of Government, people did
relapse into their primaeve liberty and privilege, to combine with whom they
pleased, to forsake the union with these political bodies with which they were
conjoined, or that they were liberated from the obligation and band to the
civil order and Government under which they were; or if that was the sense of
any of the godly, zealous Christians, and fearers of God in these times, who
always kept themselves pure from sinning against God, refusing obedience
unto men's unlawful Commandments, but the Doctrine of these new Christians never
came in their hearts, that they should make secessions from the civil Societies
wherein they lived, so long as they keep'd within the bounds over which such or
such Government was, and account all their obligation to abused Government
dissolved: Yea upon the contrary, as there are never to be found amongst the
people fearing God, any such rentings of the States and Commonwealths they
lived in, approven of God, or enjoined by his Prophets in his name; So, in
reproving sins and menacing judgments against these in Authority, (albeit they
grievously abused their places) yet the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ also,
studied to preserve respects to the Sovereignty and Powers set over People; and
while they warned all from the highest to the lowest to amend their ways, they
guarded against seditious dissolutions of the Commonwealth on any pretext,
never prescribing rebellion and revolting (the greater sin) as the cure of
Tyranny or irreligiousness in the Actings of Powers. What abusers of
Government, and perverters of the ends thereof, were Tiberius Claudius, Nero,
Domitian? etc. yet Christ will have Caesar's due given him; and his Apostles
press subjection to them, Honor to be given them, Tribute to be paid to them,
Prayers to be made for them; not for destroying them and their Government, but
for preserving their Persons and sanctifying their hearts, that they might
govern rightly and peaceably, (a Prayer Point Blank contrary to endeavors to
disturb their Kingdoms by seditious courses, to dissolve and dissipate them,
and to take vengeance on their persons.) So that they must needs be the
disciples (not of Christ, or Paul, or Peter) but of Judas of Galilee, and of
Theudas, Acts 5.36, 37. who upon account of perversion of Government, teach any
part of the people to dissolve and confound the Societies whereof they are
members, and that the obligation being loosed from the Government, they may
break off from it, and erect themselves in new Combinations and Societies with
whom they think best. If this may pass for good divinity, the grand enemy
shall never want opportunity of casting Fireballs in humane Societies, and
working confusion and every evil work.

But as this position is very dissonant from Religion, so it is no less to
sound reason, for it has a clear tendency, to the breaking and crumbling in
pieces of all humane political Societies, all Commonwealths and Kingdoms of the
World, which no wit of Man can preserve from dissolution, if once this
Principle be drunk into the hearts of People and sink there: For by this man's
opinion, the judgment of the perversion of the ends of Government in tyranny,
oppression, etc. is always put over to the discretion of the sufferers of
prejudice by it, (were they never so few, in comparison of the whole body of
the people) they may pronounce upon the same, and according to their discretive
judgment, of the injurious perverting of Government, determine their actions,
for renouncing or revolting from the society in which, and Government under
which, they are, and nothing should hinder them from this, but want of probable
capacity to through their work, (as he often speaks) So wise and cautious must
his followers be, (though not conscientious) that in working a mischief, they
light not upon a mischief.

Good God! to what times are we reserved, wherein the unmeasurable
audaciousness of men, dare present such poison to a Christian People; and to
attempt the breaking them in pieces by such Doctrines, which both Religion and
sound Reason abhorres? Dare this Libeller say, that this is a fundamental
constitution of political Societies, that at the arbitrament and lust of any
minor part of private persons, pretending a perversion of the ends of
Government, (a pretense that will never be wanting, to malcontents and
malapert wicked ones even katherines and highlandish thieves, and it is real to
them, if they themselves be admitted Judges) they may make secession from the
Society in which they are embodied, and renounce their obligation to the
Government thereof? Is not such a principle, rather contra-fundamental to all
humane combined Societies? and were it at first entering of the Society,
expressly proposed, that when ever any minor party should account the ends of
Government perverted, they should be at their primaeve liberty again, to break
off from all the magistratical Order, and from society with the major party of
these, with whom they are combined: Would not the overture of such a condition
be rejected with indignation and upon just reason? for that were to open a gap
to continual seditions, divisions and fractions. And all rational men would
judge* it were better not to join in society with such men, then to join in
such terms.

Again, suppose there be a breaking off from a magistratical Power, and major
part of a society, upon pretension (which will never be wanting to cover
sedition and confusion, such is the corruption of men) of a perversion of the
ends of Government; the party making secession, may happily meet with that same
measure they gave to the Community, wherewith they were formerly joined. For,
when they have combined and embodied themselves in a Society, if a minor party
arise amongst themselves, with the same accusations against them, which they
had against the body they did separate from; Must not that same party, have the
same privilege of Primaeve liberty, to combine and erect a corporation by
themselves, which they claimed before? will not they plead, that the obligation
to the Government and Society cease, and they are free to erect a new one?
And where shall there be a stand, till humane Societies be miserably broken in
pieces, which seems to be Satan's design, by this Man's Doctrine?

Further, can this assertion subsist, that neither alledgiance or fidelity, nor
obedience, is to be given unto any created power, but in defense of Religion
and Liberty? That obedience is not to be given unto any Creature on earth,
against Religion, or the Revealed Will of God, shall be easily granted; we
abhor the very thought of so doing. Again, it shall not be said, that
obedience is to be given to Powers, against the Liberty competent to us, as
Subjects, and consistent with Sovereignty; yet so, that the measure of that
Liberty, must not be made by every private man's will; but by the Declarature of
the Parliament, representative of the Subjects, which best knows what thereunto
belongs: But to say, that all (not only obedience, but) alledgiance and
fidelity, due to any created power, is indispensibly restricted to this
qualification, in Defense of Religion and Liberty, viz. of the subject, is a
most false assertion. It is known, that a restriction excludes all other cases,
which are not in the restrictve proposition included; now it is certain, there
may be cases, wherein we ought to obey the Magistrate, and yet the act of
obedience cannot be properly and directly said, to be either in defense of
Religion, or the Liberty of the Subject; there may be some causes that properly
concern his own honor; wherein defense of Religion is not concerned, (the
Magistrate perhaps not being of our Religion) and far less defense of the
Liberty of the Subject, (unless by a very remote and unnecessary consequence)
yet am I bound to him in causes concerning his honor; this made the Ministers
that disputed with the Doctors of Aberdeen, decline to acknowledge that clause
of the first Covenant, in defense of Religion etc. to be limitative or
restrictive of duty to the King, affirming it only to be specificativen, aming
duties to him in some respects, or in respect to some things, not excluding
others: Yea, the General Assembly, 1639. will not have that clause in the
Covenant restrictive; for in their supplication to the Commissioner and
Council, they speak thus: We have solemly sworn and do swear, not only our
mutual concurrence and assistance, for the cause of Religion, and to the utmost
of our power, with our Means and Lives, to stand to the defense of our Dread
Sovereign, His Person and Authority, in the preservation of true Religion,
Liberties and Laws of this Kirk and Kingdom; but also (n. b.) in every cause
that may concern His Majesty's Honor, shall concur with our friends and
followers, as we shall be required, etc. So Duty and Obedience to the King is
there extended, beyond what is expressly mentioned in the Covenant, (in defense
of Religion and Liberties.) But further, as to the point of Alledgiance or
Fidelity, that is another matter then Obedience: Alledgiance to a King imports,
owning him as Lawful and Rightful King, and that none others have power over
him; together with fidelity to his Person, Crown and Dignity, against all
conspiracies and treason. Obedience is the result of this acknowledged
Sovereignty, (where commands appear lawful.) A man may keep Alledgiance and
Fidelity to the King, albeit sometimes there may be commands given, which
cannot be obeyed, because of Gods countermand; many learned Priests and Papists
in England, took the Oath of Alledgiance, when first it was emitted and
enjoined, albeit they thought they could not give obedience to the King, as to
matters of Religion. But this man is plain in his assertion, that no
Alledgiance is due to the King, except with this restriction, in defense of
Religion: And (as he said) a main part of his Religion is to erect Presbytery,
and root out Prelacy; So that if Presbytery be not defended, people are taught
to renounce Alledgiance to the King. How contrary is this to the Confession of
Faith, cap. 23. S. 4. Difference in Religion does not (says the Confession)
make void the Magistrates just and legal Authority, nor free the people from
their due obedience to him: But this man will have no Alledgiance due to him,
nor Obedience, but in defense of Religion; which it is like he will not defend,
if he be of a different persuasion in matters of Religion, and so must his
Authority be made void.

The contrary Thesis we must rest upon, that although a supreme Magistrate
defend not Religion, yet Alledgiance and Fidelity is always due to him, and
Obedience also in all things lawful. It is the Lords way for keeping humane
Societies from gross disorders, to allow to such as are in supreme Power by
lawful calling, the honor due unto their place, even although in the main
things they pervert the ends of Government; not glorifying God by advancing
true Religion, but dishonouring him by false Religion, or seducing others to
their evil way, and persecuting them who follow not their unlawful
commandments. Yet, where administrations of Justice in civil things are
tolerably managed, and civil Societies by Magistratical Authority kept in
tolerable order, (that there be no general out-breakings in outrageous
oppressions) God will have due respects paid to the places of Authority and
persons therein installed, and will reckon dreadfully with them for any
perversions of the ends of Government, in his own time. Though Caesar give not
God his due, yet it is Christ's mind that we give Caesar his due, and his
Apostles mind that he should be honored; not for his personal faults or abuse
of his power, but because he is invested with power from God; which though he
abuses, yet it remains the Ordinance of God. And hereunto Mr. Calvin fully
agrees, lib. 4. instit. cap. 20. S. 24, 25. etc. where at length he asserts,
That Alledgiance and Obedience (in things lawful) is due even to the worst of
Princes, and who do most manifestly pervert the ends of Government, by private
Subjects, (of which our question is now) S* 25. Si Dei verbum respicimus
longius nos deducet (viz. then to give alledgiance to good Princes) ut non
eorum modo principum imperio subditi simus qui probe and qua debent fide,
munere suo erga nos defunguntur sed omnium qui quoquo modo rerum potiuntur,
etiamsi nihil minus praestent quam quod ex officio erat principum. Again, Omnes
(says he, speaking of evil Princes) illa sancta Majestate sunt praediti, qua
legittimam potestatem instruxit Deus. Again, In homine deterrimo, honoreque
omni indignissimo, penes quem modo sit publica potestas, praeclara illa and
divina potestas residet, quam Dominus justitiae and judicii sui ministris verbo
suo detulit, proinde a subditis eadem reverentia and dignatione habendus est,
quantum ad publicam obedientiam attinet qua optimum Regem, si daretur, habituri
essent. Again, S. 27. he says of an evil King, Assumptus est in Regiam
Majestatem, quam violare, nefas est. Again, Nunquam in animum nobis seditiosae
illae cogitationes veniant tractandum esse pro meritis Regem, nec aequum esse,
ut subditos nos ei praestemus, qui vicissim Regem nobis se non praestet.

Any may see, that in the matter of Civil Government, Mr. Calvin was of another
and a better spirit than these men, who inflame the people with their seditious
Doctrine; and tells them, if the King do not his duty, their alledgiance to him
and obligation to his Government cease; and no alledgiance nor obedience due
to him, when he does not (or does contrary to) his duty.

But, 2. As the Position in it self is most unchristian and irrational, so the
application of it to the case in these Times, made by this Master of confusion,
is most unjust; for (not to speak of the first times of Reformation, wherein he
says, that there was such perversion of the ends of Government, as made the
obligation of the injured Subjects thereto to cease, Page 16.) he repeats the
same more fully, Page 150. to justify the late Insurrection against the King;
as if now there were such manifest and notorious perversion of the ends of
Government, that the band thereof is loosed, and people are relapsed into their
primaeve liberty, to join in new Societies and Combinations as they see fit,
rejecting the old. Now, may not any see the desperate design of this Libeller
and his like, to dissipate and dissolve the immemorially settled frame of this
Nation and Kingdom, which through divine Providence, has in many generations
subsisted under our lawful Sovereigns, for the common benefit of the Subjects
at home, and to the honor and renown of the Nation abroad; yea, and to the
glory of divine Providence, which has through many storms, in several ages,
preserved us in this comfortable constitution. But behold, a foul gap is now
opened to let in all confusion upon us, and to dissipate and break us in pieces
miserably, (if such wicked Doctrine take upon people, God guard their hearts,
we hope sanctiores sunt aures and corda auditorum quam linguae Doctorum, as to
this) Now it is left to the arbitrament and lust of every party, even lesser
party of the people, to break off the old union with the Nation, to erect
themselves into new Societies and Combinations, as being now as free as if they
had not been members of this Nation; they are relapsed into their primaeve
liberty, and now every Paroch in Galloway is allowed to cantonize themselves
into a free Re-publick, or to become a little Kingdom of Ivetot, or make
Combinations, and Heads of these Combinations, as they see fit; for they are
liberate and loosed from the old Society and Government, because the ends
thereof are so manifestly perverted: And wherein, forsooth? Does not the true
Protestant Religion, as it is held forth in Scripture, and was publicly
confessed by our first Reformers, (which Confession is registered, Parl. 1. K.
James 6.) through Gods mercy, continue with us, without variation from it in
the least? Does not the Kings Majesty protect and advance this blessed Truth of
the Saving Gospel, and encourage and invite all according to his power to
embrace it? Is he not willing and desirous that the Laws be vigorously executed
against Papists, and all perverters of this sound Doctrine? If there be
deficiency in execution, the blame lies elsewhere then upon him. Are Gods
people, or any people in the Land, spoiled of their lawful civil Liberties?
What one thing has he done without consent of the peoples Representatives in
Parliament, at which any may except as a grievance? What burden has he laid
upon their Estates, but by Law, of by their own consent in a necessary
exigence? What should be the great ground then of so horrid a dismembring of
the body of this Commonwealth and secession from the civil Society, and from
subjection to the lawful Government thereof, as this man teaches and would
persuade? What is that so fundamental perversion of the ends of Government,
that may, to any minor party that pleases, bear the Weight of a rational
license to reject the Government and the Society of the Commonwealth, to erect
themselves into new separate and politic Bodies? Or, that may persuade them,
as the case stands, they are relapsed into their primaeve liberty, like the
Fishes of the Sea that have no Ruler? Or that now being liberate, they are free
(as they were at first) to combine themselves in new Societies as they see fit?
It must surely be some great thing that should warrant such great actions. It
were too much to question their judgment, to assert, that they indeed think,
that because the moderate Episcopacy, and inspection of some Ministers over
others in several parts of the Land to hold them to their duties, (established
by former Laws) is now re-established by the King, with consent of his people
in Parliament, (the lawfulness of which shall be afterward spoken to) That
therefore this, and legal courses for carrying on of this, is sufficient ground
for so unnatural a rupture, although the King should not, for the pleasure of
an inconsiderable party, recede from owning and prosecuting his just Laws
concerning this; experience having abundantly taught, that giving way to evil
humors and unreasonable demands, is but a mean to provoke to greater
insolences. But under such pretensions against a lawful way, surely something
lurketh that does not yet appear: For, supposing a change of the established
way, it is folly to think the matter should there rest; this man and his party
are of another spirit then to be satisfied with such low matters, (were they
according to his mind) for all, alongs in his Naphtali and Apology Prerogative
is the mark that is shot at as well as Prelacy, (as we shall see) the one is as
great an eyesore as the other. And were all other quarrels that seemed to
touch upon Religion laid aside, yet is not the battle done without retrenchment
of Royal Prerogative (even in civil things) which as well as in Ecclesiastical,
is disputed down in the Apology, but most weakly and foolishly. And still also,
the liberty of the Subject should be a subject of controversy; wherein this
high-flown man, his Party and accomplices, will not have the Parliament to be
Judge, what is the true Liberty of the People (consistent with Sovereignty) or
what not, (for this man sets forth the late Parliament, as the great betrayers
of the Liberty of the People) but every Covenanter must make his discretive
judgment his rule, to determine his actings for the Liberty of the People. And
if there be any Party in sufficient capacity to take the fields, they will, and
must, according to their discretion, carve out the measure of the Subjects
Liberties, (which it is like will be large enough, at least, toward themselves,
if not toward others) and will account themselves bound by Covenant, (according
to their own interpretation) to fight to death for what they count Liberty; and
to forsake the Government and Society of others in the Land, (though they be
the far less part) and erect new Combinations of their own under new Heads,
that they may enjoy their Covenanted Liberty, which the perverted Government
deprives them of, and from which therefore they are loosed and liberated for
ever, and reduced to their primaeve liberty to choose Government and Societies
as best likes them. Oh miserable confusion! that men of perverse spirits
strive to drive this poor Nation into! Were Episcopacy out of ^he Nation and
out of the World, there have been and are in this Time, such pestilent
Principles, vented by perverse Teachers, tending to the perpetual disquietness
of the State of the Kingdom; that if People be possessed with the same, there
is no security for the most just and justly acting Authority, nor any rest nor
peace amongst people, but continual stirrings are to be looked for, as there
are occasions of Firebrarnds to inflame them. But it is to be hoped, that the
wise and godly management of the present Government continued, will in time
wear out that irreverence to Sovereign Authority, and unquietness of a
seditious humor, that has too much prevailed by the principles and practices
of many in these Times.

CHAP. II. Of violent resistance to the Powers ordained of God, by mere private
persons their Subjects.
THe point of violent resistance to the Supreme Magistrate by Subjects, has
been hotly and violently debated both elsewhere and in those Lands upon sad
occasions. The more moderate Asserters of it, do not give the liberty of so
doing unto mere private persons, nor against Princes integrae Majestatis, or
who have come to their Kingdoms without pactions of restraint put on them by
the people: nor do they at all grant the liberty of this resistance, but in the
case of immanest Tyranny and extremest Cruelty, against the Body or most
considerable part of the Body of the Commonwealth or such like, or in case of
sudden personal extra-judicial, illegal invasions, importing irreparable loss
of life, etc. (wherein judicious Royalists will not much differ from others)
nor do they grant a liberty to proceed beyond the bounds of inculpata tutela,
innocent and harmless self-defence; for if either there be a preventive
invasion of the Magistrate, or a succeeding revenge if he be brought under, all
agree that this exceeds moderamen inculpatae tutelae, so men are not properly
self-defenders, but Magistrate-invaders. And whatever power of defense is
allowed to inferior Magistrates with the People, yet, that mere Subjects, or
private persons, should take on them power of judging or punishing the Supreme
Magistrate, or punishing him, it is abhorrent from the common sense of
Christian and Learned men.

But this Libeller goes a great length: for, not only does he allow the body of
the People, with inferior Magistrates, to make violent resistance to the King,
whenever they think he wrongs them; but allows any part of the People (only
requiring that they make sure that they are in probable capacity to carry
through their matters) to rise in Arms and make violent resistance to all the
Magistrates supreme and subordinate; yea, and against all the major part of the
people. And albeit Magistrates act according to Laws agreed upon by the
representatives of the people; yet this man allows any part of the People
(though no Magistrate be amongst them) to take Arms against all Magistrates,
and violently resist them, when they think their Laws either unjust, or the
punishments executed unjust; and he maintains, that passive subjection to
unjust Laws and Punishments, where there is power to make active violent
resistance, is a greater sin then active obedience to unlawful Commands of
Magistrates. This seems strange Doctrine, but more and worse will be seen in
the following Chapter But that he may get no wrong, look upon his own words,
(referring what he speaks of punishing Magistrates to the following Chapter.)

There is (says he, Page 8.) a necessity of Convocations and Combinations, not
only without, but even against Authority; and it is sufficiently warranded
before God and all men for necessary and just ends. Again, the power of
self-defence, Page 14. (as he calls violent resisting the Magistrate) is
competent to all men by the instinct of pure nature, and is the principal rule
of righteousness, and a privilege competent to all men separately and jointly,
not needing any other prerequisite, but intolerable injury, and is completed
in exercise, by a probable capacity to encourage to it. And to suffer injury
under ptetext of the good of the Commonwealth, is for the delusion of an empty
name and for the lusts of others, really to deprive a man's self of all share
and benefit in it. Page 15. propelling by force injuries done in the cause of
Religion, is the justest quarrel, that men in their primaeve liberty could be
engaged into. And, Page 16, 17. Combinations for assistance in violent
opposition of the Magistrate, when the ends of Government are perverted (which
must be referred to the discretion of them, who minds insurrection) are
necessary by the Law of Nature, of Charity, and in order to Gods glory; and for
violation of this duty, of delivering the oppressed from Magistrates,
judgments comes upon people. And, Page 18, 19. not only power of self-defence,
but vindicative and reforming power is in any part of the people against the
whole and against all Magistrates, and if they use it not, judgment comes on
(supposing their capacity probable to bear them forth) and they shall be
punished for their connivance, and not acting in way of vindication of crimes
and reforming abuses. And, Page 28. they are but Flatterers, and Men that have
renounced Conscience, who say, that absolute subjection in suffering may be
given to Authority abusing their power, and not absolute obedience to their
Commands; and whatsoever reason (says he) pleads for absolute subjection in
suffering, will far more rationally and plausibly infer unlimited and absolute
obedience. Absolute obedience may be more rationally yielded, then absolute
subjection to suffering. Page 157. to resist and rise up against persons
abusing Authority, is to adhere to God; and Page 155. The late rising was
altogether lawful, righteous and necessary. But, what needs insisting on his
justifying of any number of private persons, rising up and resisting the whole
Magistrates and Body of the People, when ever they think they have cause? seeing
this is the main scope of his Book, and more too, even to state them in a
punitive power of all who are against them, and a power to pull down all
Authorities that are in their way, as after shall more clearly appear.

But upon this point of resistance, (which he lispeth out as innocent, harmless
self-defence) it is fit we should now (abstracting from the other questions of
private persons vindicative and punitive power, till the next Chapter) speak
somewhat. It is the subtilty of Satan and of man's corruption, that most horrid
sins and crimes, are covered under very smooth terms, and cloaked with some
Vizard of Virtue, or with something so plausible and sweet to self-nature, that
few there are who will not own it.

Innocent self-defence and a man's preservation of his own being, is so
plausible a Plea, that every one in any vexation that comes upon them, from any
(justly or unjustly) are much inclined to take hold of it. It is true, the God
of nature, who has given a being to all creatures, has also given them
inclinations and propensions, to preserve themselves against opposition,
destroying nature, the very inanimate creatures have this: Fire preserves and
defends it self against water when it is cast upon it; there is a fight between
the two contrary qualities of these creatures, the fire with a noise resisting
the water, that it be not quenched with the contrary qualities of that
creature. So also are the sensitive creatures, the beasts are carried ( impetu
naturae) to oppose every thing that tends to their destruction, and to preserve
their own being, until they be overpowered: And all this self-defence, is
without sin; for they being only under natures Law, and not under any Legal
restraints of the exercise of their self-defending power, by Gods word, nor
under any rule of reason in the exercise thereof, do and may to the uttermost
(in all cases) endeavor their self-preservation, and nothing can hinder them
from it, but major vis, and a Physical force greater then theirs is: And this
self-defending or preserving power and propension, God has given also unto
Men, yet otherwise then to inanimate creatures, or unto beasts; for these being
under no other Law or Order, but that of mere Nature, that only seeks its own
preservation, and labors in self-defence always, against all things
afflicting nature caec^ impetu, that self-defence is always sinless. But Man's
natural propension to defend himself, is subordinated unto, and limited by, the
higher Laws of Reason and Grace, and regulated by respects to the eternal good
of the Soul, in following duties to God, (albeit with vexation and trouble upon
the outward man) a rational and gracious man, will advert lest in
self-preservation, as to his body or outward state, he bring not on
self-destruction, as to his Soul: It was wisely said by Thomas, 2^.2^. quest.
70. art. 4. ad 1. Ideo Homini data est Ratio, (and I may add Gratia) ut ea ad
quae natura inclinat, non passim, sed secundum rationis, vel gratia ordinem
exequatur, and ideo non quaelibet defensio sui est licita sed quae fit cum
debito moderamine.

It is too gross Divinity, Lex Rex, p. 344. Apol. p. 162.
to bring arguments from Beasts, (who being under no Law of Reason nor Grace,
to limite their propensions, may always in all imaginable cases, defend
themselves with force) to persuade men that they may do the like, and that
their propension for their external preservation, is no more under any
restraining rule, to stop the exercise of it, then that of Beasts is. There are
many cases of Rational and Gracious restraint, of the exercise of that natural
propension for self-preservation, upon Men, which are not upon Beasts.

For, 1. the Libeller, (it is hoped) will not allow self-defence, (of violent
and forcible defense, not of moral, we do here always speak) or violent
resistance of the Magistrate, when Men are not in probable Capacity to mend
themselves, or when it is seen to be to no purpose; In this case, he will say
it is no fault, for a Man not to use violent resistance, because Reason tells
him, it is to no purpose; self-defence of a rational creature, should not be
merely natural, but rational; it is natural to a Man to defend himself, as it
is to a Beast, but not in the same way, not always when a Beast (upon which,
there is no restraint of reason) may do it. It will not be denied, that the
obligation of violent self-preservation cease, when a Man is put out (by a
Physical-force,) of all probable Capacity to help himself.

2. A Man who is justly condemned to death, both according to a just Law, and
by a just process according to the Law; though he were in probable capacity to
defend himself, with using Force and Violence upon the Magistrate: Yet were it
utterly unlawful for him, to use violent self-defence against the Magistrate,
with re-offending him; (what ever may be said of Flying, in such a case, when a
door is opened, which is no violent resisting) For, as it is a sinful resisting
of the Ordinance of God, to refuse Obedience to the Magistrates Lawful
Commands; So it is no less sinful resistance of the Ordinance of God, to
resist and re-offend the Magistrate lawfuly punishing, or to use force against
him for self-preservation, when we are by Providence, brought under the hand of
Justice; if the violence used by the Magistrate, on the Person legally
sentenced, be just, the violence of the party against the Magistrate, cannot
but be unjust and sinful; for, the violence cannot be matterially just upon
both sides. Here is a clear case, where natures Law of self-preservation, (at
least in a way of violence) must cease and be silent, before the Law of Reason
and the Will of God, revealed to Men: They are too bold, and come too near to
Blaspheme God, (Lex Rex) who say, That it were a mighty defect in Divine
Providence, that Men should not have at large a liberty to defend themselves
violently, as Beasts have; And that Men were in a worse condition then Beasts,
if as Beasts have always power to defend themselves violently, with their
Horns, Heels, Teeth, etc. So Men should not have as large a liberty in every
case, to use violence upon Magistrates, putting them to vexation, or perhaps
troubling them, in life, state, etc. Men have nobler Prerogatives above Beasts,
albeit, they be restrained of that brutish liberty, which Beasts have always
and against all.

3. May not the exercise of this privilege, of self-defence and violent
resistance, be restrained by the Grace of God, and the power of His Command for
submission, abiding upon a Man's spirit? How easily could Isaac, have defended
himself, against the violence of his aged Father, in binding him, to be laid on
the Altar, to have his throat cut, and his body burnt? Yet, conscience of the
pleasure and command of the Sovereign Lord of life and death, makes him, to
forbear self-defence, or violent resistance; neither was this forbearance, the
sin of self-murder, or against the sixth Command; but a highly Gracious act
and eminent Obedience, to the first and greatest Commandment. Forbearance of
self-defence and violent resistance, was there a virtue; an act of obedience
and absolute subjection to God, the Lord of his life, not much beneath Abraham's
obedience, that is so highly commended from Heaven.

4. Are there not also some cases, not of this extraordinary sort, wherein
self-defence, which this Libeller foolishly calls the supreme Law of
Righteousness, and principal Rule of it, Page 14. (of which we shall hear a
little anon) must cease: As, may not the defense of our temporal life in some
case cease, for the preservation of the eternal life of our neighbor, when it
comes to that, that the defense of the one should be the certain loss of the
other? 1 John 3.16. Temporalem vitam suam pro aeterna vita proximi non
dubitabit Christianus amittere, August. ad Consent. lib. 6. which the
Schoolmen have driven so far on, that they have thought, that a man in the
state of Grace, being invaded by another in the state of sin, ought rather to
be content to be slain by the private aggressor, then to slay him being in such
a state of sin and damnation: to which we shall hardly subscribe, lest it
should strike against the lawfulness of the wars of godly men against wicked
invaders; justice may, and must be done, in wars and otherwise, whatever be
the souls estate of the sufferer; that is to be referred to God, and is sealed
amongst his secrets: yet, that there may be such cases, that (when need is) the
preservation of our own temporal life may be forborne, for the certain
preservation of the soul of another, seems agreeable to the cited Scripture.

5. Does not the obligation to self-defence cease, (speaking of self-defence as
to the temporal life) for the public good and preservation of the
Commonwealth, or of the Head of the Commonwealth, the King? I know this
Libeller jeers at a man's suffering, (under pretext of the good of the
Commonwealth) intolerable and inevitable injuries) and says, It is but for
the delusion of an empty name, only for the lusts of others, really to deprive
a man's self of his whole share and interest in the Commonwealth, Page 15. Yet,
better Divines then he a great deal, have concluded it as most rational, that a
man is bound to suffer the greatest extremity of death, rather then that for
sparing of his suffering, the Commonwealth, or Head of the Commonwealth, or
main public Person, should suffer. Dr. Ames. Cas. Consc. lib. 5. cap. 31. q.
3. puts the case of a Tyrants invading a City, and thr^atning vastation to it
unless one innocent person (whom he should name) might be delivered to him; he
resolves, That the innocent person tenetur jure naturali pro totius Reipublicae
salute se morti offerre, and Respublica potest ^um neque retinere neque
defendere, sed urgere cum ut officium suum hac in part praestet. He accounts
it the duty of the innocent person in that case, to offer himself to death for
the safety of the whole Commonwealth; and by natural Right and Law he is bound
to this, and the Commonwealth is not in this case bound to defend him.
Certainly, this is far contrair to this man's Divinity; who will have none to
suffer under pretext of the good of the Commonwealth, if they be innocent,
(whether really or in their own eyes) For why, (says he) that is for an empty
name and lusts of others, to deprive a man's self of his share in the
Commonwealth. What then? if a man do lose his share in the Commonwealth and
be found in the way of his duty, he is no loser, he gets a better share then
that is. If a General command a Soldier, for the certain good of the Army,
(upon the well-being whereof, the good of the Commonwealth depends) to go to
such a part or post, where, in his own mind, he saw certain death tristing with
him; would this Author teach the Soldier to say, Shall I expose my self to
certain death for an empty name of the good of Army and Commonwealth, and at
the lust of the General, lose all my share and interest both in Army and
Commonwealth? I will not do it; he offers me intolerable injury and inevitable
in this injunction: it is a case like inflicting death upon me.

6. It is agreed amongst the Learned, that self-preservation (as to temporal
life) when it comes in competition with the preservation of the King or Head of
the Commonwealth, or a public Person most necessary to the Commonwealth,
must cease and cede thereunto; as the Hand in the natural Body will be cast up
(though it should be cut off) to hold off a deadly stroke from the Head, Ames.
Cas. Consc. lib. 5. cap. 7. These. 14. In bonis temporalibus tenetur quisque
personam publicam sibi ipsi praeferre, bonum enim totius pluris faciendum est,
quam bonum alicujus partis. And, Lex Rex, amongst many things wrong, has this
which is right, Page 335. I think (says he) that a private man should rather
suffer the King to kill him, then that he should kill the King; because he is
not to prefer the life of a private man to the life of a public man. Thus he
rightly, (however inconsonantly to his other Doctrines.) If the case come to
be, that the King is in manifest hazard of his life, and that I a private man
must either lose my life, or he his life; my self-preservation must cease for
the public good, and I am to prefer his preservation to mine own. But this man
says, Self-defence (the question now is about violent self-defence, as to the
temporal life) is a principal rule of righteousness, whereunto the great
command of love to our neighbor, by Gods Law, is resolved, and whereby it is
interpreted, P. 14. therefore it is to be preferred to all duties to men,
according to this man's mind. True it is, there is a due order of our charity
and love to men and our neighbors; and true love to our selves, is indeed the
rule and measure of love to our neighbor: we are first to love our selves, and
then our neighbor as our selves, (not as much, but as truly and sincerely; for
it is not the quantity, but the quality of love, not equality but sisimilitude
of love to our neighbor, in proportion of that to our selves, that is
required.) But it is untrue, that in the exercise of this love of our selves,
in self-defence or preservation of our bodies, stands the principal rule of
righteousness: For, there may be cases, (whereof some are pointed at) wherein a
man is bound to prefer the preservation of others, to the preservation or
defense of his own natural life; and yet in so doing, a man does truly love
himself more then others, in doing his duty to others, although with the loss
of his own life and surceasing the defense of it, ( se magis diligit ad finem
suum ultimum, as the School speaks.) In following his duty toward others, and
therein not defending his own life, he loves himself best, in regard of keeping
the way to the enjoying of the universal and eternal good. Ames. lib. 5. Consc.
cap. 7. says well, Quamvis vita mea sit mihi magis conservanda quam alterius
vita per se non tamen quam alterius vita and mea virtus. A man is rather bound
to preserve another man's life in doing his own duty, then his own life simply,
and in following his duty, he preserves his best life, though he lose the
worst. But too many are so much upon self-defence and preservation of the
natural life by any means, that in preserving their bodies, they destroy their
souls; and so do not indeed love themselves so much and so orderly as they
ought to do.

But the great knot of the question anent self- defense is this, whether mere
private persons, one or more, separatly or jointly, when they are or think
themselves unjustly afflicted, and extremly injuriously handled by the
Magistrate, or Supreme Power, proceeding according to Laws agreed to, betwixt
himself and the body of the Community? whither or not (upon supposition that
these Laws are not just and right) may private persons defend themselves
against the violence of the Magistrate thus proceeding, even by violent
re-offending; yea, in order to their own defense, cut off the Prince or
Magistrate whatsoever, or their Ministers and Officers standing in their way,
or when they are punishing them and afflicting them according to Law? This is
the true state of the Controversy, at this time: and needless it were to run
out upon what the two Martyrs (as Napth. calls them, Page 27.) Lex Rex, the
Book might have been better termed Exlex Exrex) and the Apology has set down
tediously, touching Scotlands defensive Arms, as they call them. What sense the
people of Scotland (when they have come to liberty) have of these arms, their
late representative has declared; and it were to be wished, that the memory of
such ways might be so buried, that the poster^ty might never look upon them as
exemplary; their progenitors have so deeply drunk of the bitter fruits of the
same, the result of them having been so much sin, shame and sorrow, vastation,
confusion and destruction to Princes and People. This only shall be said, that
these Disputes of defensive Arms (in both these Martyrs) proceed (as upon their
main foundation) upon most untrue and malicious misrepresentations of matters
of fact; all or most of the Arguments run upon false Hypotheses and bitter,
untrue refl^ctions on the late King. As if, 1. he had been the first invader of
the Nation, whereas it is known, his Authority was first invaded, his Laws
trodden upon, his Proclamations openly despised, his Castles violently seized,
illegal Tables and Courts set up, his Subjects, walking according to his Laws,
persecuted; his Arms he took, were not invasive against the Nation, but
defensive of his own Authority, of his Laws and the persons of orderly walking
Subjects; and for reducing these who had strayed from their duty. 2. They
represent him in their virulent writings, as Nerone ipso neronior, a great
persecutor of Religion, intending the total ruin and destruction of the
Protestant Profession, and the total ruin and destruction of the whole people
of the Land; In a word, as the immanest and most consummate Tyrant in the World
(upon such suggestions does the plea for defensive Arms go.) But the World
knows, that that King lived and died a Protestant, and not one, either ignorant
or formal, or profane (as too many alas are) but having great knowledge of the
truth, ardent zeal for it, and being exemplarly devote, and to the great
confusion of his enemies, he laid down his life as a glorious Martyr for the
true Religion of God, and laws and Liberties of the people. If there was any
thing that could not have a favorable Interpretation in that unhappy Book that
gave the rise to the troubles, how timely was it retired, and great
satisfaction and security given for Religion? If through default of Ministers
of State, any thing had creeped in, that could not abide the test of Law, how
willingly was it reformed? Yet, all could not sist the begun course of
violence, till, through Gods dreadful indignation against sinful people, his
fatal end might be brought on, not because he had been a Tyrant, but because he
had not been such.

But I am sensible of a digression. The case now to be noticed is much
different from what then was. Then the Primores Regn^ (upon mistakes which
since they have had opportunity to resent) were unhappily engaged in opposition
to the Sovereign: but now a Proclamation is made by this Libeller to all mere
private persons, (not having any Nobles and Magistrates amongst them) to make
insurrections against all Magistrates from the highest to the lowest, and
against the plurality of the people (if they think themselves in probable
capacity) and what confidence will not desperate men designing confusion have?
and not only so, but a liberty is given them by this man to pull all
Magistrates out of their seats, to install themselves, and to punish
Magistrates, who (as he says) have forfeited their right by the abuse thereof.
If this Doctrine has not a native tendency to the ruin and destruction of
this Nation, and of all Nations where this evil seed shall take root, let them
who are judicious declare.

That Magistrates have no power nor warrant from God to abuse their Authority,
or to oppress and deal injustly, is a thing out of all question, (they who do
so, will make a sad reckoning for it to the great Judge of all, here and
hereafter.) But when the corruption of these who are in power, leads them to
abuse their Authority, either in making unjust Laws, or punishing according to
these, the question is, what is (in this case) the duty of mere private
Subjects, whither they should with violence oppose all Magistrates (under whom
they are) from the highest to the lowest, (together with the plurality of the
Body of that Community whereof they are Members) yea; and in their own defense,
destroy them all (if they be in probable capacity for such work, and if they
cannot eschew this and preserve themselves) yea farther, if after they have
subdued (Providence so permitting or ordering) all the Magistratical power and
major part of the people, they may use a vindicative, avenging and punishing
Power upon all? (being only persons of private capacity) This (as will appear
by this and the next Chapter) is the true state of the question at this time,
as the Libeller in his Book has stated it.

Upon the resolution of this question, this Advocate of the seditious Party
shakes hands with many Papists (albeit some of the more Orthodox, are of a
contrary opinion) asserting, That any person that is unjustly condemned or
pursued, (or that thinks himself so dealt with, by the Magistrate or Judge,
(whatever he be, Supreme or Subordinate) may defend himself by Arms against the
Judge or Magistrate, and his Officers and Ministers; even by slaying them, if
he cannot otherwise escape: because, in that case, the Magistrate is an unjust
Invader. And, it is lawful in that case, for a private man to kill the
Magistrate, in order to his own defense, as it is to kill a Robber, or a
Cutthroat invading a man, while he is going on in his Journey: Thus Becan,
Tom. 2. Controv. tractat. 3. quest 8. and Swarez, contra Regem Augliae, Lib. 6.
Cap. 4. S. 6. where he asserts, a man unjustly invaded by the King, may kill
him, if otherwise he cannot defend his own life; And Thomas in this went before
them, 2a 2^ quest. 70. Art. 4. C. but adds a caution, licet resistere malis
Principibus, nisi forte propter scandalum vitandum, cum ex hoc, aliqua gravis
turbatio sequeretur. But our Protestant Divines (who are deserted by this man
and his accomplices) are of another spirit. Mr Calvin is plain, Institut. Lib. 4.
Cap. 20. S. 31. privatit hominibus nullum aliud, quam parendi and patiendi
datum est mandatum, (he supposes where there is not opportunity of flying or
withdrawing, which is also a sort of suffering) and speaking of the tyrannies
and oppressions of wicked Princes, 298. Non nostrum est (meaning of private
men) hujusmodi malis mederi, hoc tantum reliquum est, ut Domini opem
imploremus. Again, S. 26. speaking of 1 Samuel 8.11. he expones it thus, that
albeit Kings have no jus, or right to do Acts of Tyranny, yet, vocatur jus in
populum, cui parere ipsi necesse esset, nec obsistere liceret, eo se proripiet
licentiae Regum libido, quam cohibere vestrum non erit, etc. And, Art. 31.
nobis summopere cavendum, ne illam plenam venerandae majestatis magistratuum
authoritatem, etiamsi apud indignissimos ^esideat, and qui eam sua nequitia
quantum in se est polluunt, spernemus aut violemus.

Accordingly, Peter Martyr, one of the most learned of our Protestants, Loci
com. clas. 4. cap. 20. p. 680. Illi subjecti, qui tantum subjiciuntur, and
omnino privati sunt adversus Principes and Dominos suos non debent incitari, ut
eos e dignitate seu gradu suo deturbent, and quamvis probe noverim ab aethnicis
praemia olim constituta (...), attamen id respondi, quod pietas and sacrae
literae persuadent. Certe si populo sit fas Regno de^icere injuste Imperantes,
nulli Principes and Reges usquam tuti erunt, quamvis enim probe and sancte
regnant, non tamen populo satisfaciunt. And, Page 684. Improbum Principem pii
homines, quando privati sunt and super illo jus non habent, ferant oportet,
neque illorum est, seditiose adversus eum arma movere. Again, speaking to
private men, Adversus Tyrannum non habes quod agas (except Prayers to God and
Petitions to them in power) nisi seditionem aut tumultum conspirationemve
contra illum excites, aut ipse privata Authoritate interficias, quae aliena
sunt a sacrarum literarum sententia. Again, Colum. 2. ibid. quia potestas est a
Deo, Tyrannis est ferenda. Again, solummodo ad Tribunal Dei est appellandum,
cum non detur alia superior aut major potestas cui tuus Tyrannus pareat. Again,
omnes pii hoc sibi persuasum habeant, exauthoratas esse eorum vires ad movendas
in republica turbas, eo nomine quod vi aliquod facere veliut adversus publicum
Magistratum cujusvis formae fuerit; Thus, famous Martyr. So also Andreas Rivet,
in De^alog. Page 233. non est vera legis naturalis notitia sed depravatio ab
humano and corrupto affectu movere seditionem contra injustam magistratus
violentiam: And, Page 235. approving their opinion, who say, a man should
rather suffer death, then defend his own life, by destroying the Princes life,
or bringing it in danger, (albeit he allow laboring to ward off our own
destruction against unjust invasion,) yet if a man cannot deliver himself
without destroying the Prince, he says, si tamen evitari non possit malum
quodlibet, quod hujus vitae termin^ concluditur, praestat mortem oppetere quam
fieri reum parricidii, id nos absolute sentimus de Parente and Principe; add
Dr. Ames. Lib. 5. Conscien. Cap. 20.4. potestas and authoritas superioris, non
magis potest consistere actu sine hac subjectione, quam relatum unum sine suo
correlato; huic autem subjectioni omnis violenta insurrectio adversatur. And,
6. he will have this subjection (contrary to violent insurrection, all sorts of
which he holds out as unlawful) given even where obedience cannot be given:
and, Page 319. persona invadens potest esse talis, and aliae etiam
circumstantiae ut magis invasum deceat mortem ipsam pati, quam tali desensione
propulsare. To these may be joined moderate Papists; Aestius, Lib. 2. in
Sententias, cap. ult. privato n^mini licet superiori etiam tyrannice imperanti
resistere, multo minus e medio tollere. Tollet. Lib. 5. de instruct.
sacerdotis, cap. 6. non licet cuiquam se defendere a Judice, vulnere vel pugna
licet sit innocens. Many more might be cited: But it may be evident, that this
Libellers doctrine of the lawfulness of private persons, one or more resisting
the Magistrate violently, with destroying him in self-defence, far more taking
on them a vindicative and punishing power (of which in the following Chapter)
is against the common sense of Protestant Divines, and of the founder Papists
also.

Whatever may be said, of moral or legal self-defence, against the Sovereign,
by way of petition, or plea in Court, for safety of a man's person or Estate;
And whatever may be said of warding off and defensively putting back personal
injurious assaults, to the manifest and immediate peril of life; without any
color of deserving, of Reason, of Law or judicial proceeding; or of a Woman's
violent resisting attempts, against the honor of her chastity, (dearer to her
then life) and tending to ensnare her also in sin against God (whereof her
non-resistance, makes her formaly guilty) And whatever may be done, in the case
of most habited, not our and complete tyranny, against all appearance of Law,
manifestly tending to the destruction of the body of a people, or greater part
thereof, by hostile furious actions, or in the case of violent attempts, of
destruction of all known legal liberties, and the being of Religion, according
to Law; or in the case of vendition, alienation of, and giving a whole Kingdom
to forrainers or strangers, or some such like; What ever I say in such horrid
cases, (which for most part, cannot befall a Prince, in his natural and right
wits (a case wherein provision may be made, that he hurt not himself, nor his
Dominions) may be done, comes not at all within the compass of our question;
although most disingenuously, the discontented and seditious, do strive on all
occasions, to aggravate matters so, that the case concerning them, may seem
co-incident with these or the like; that so they may justify their violence
against the powers. But the question is, (as has been said) whether, when the
Magistrate proceeds according to Law, agreed unto by himself and the body of
the Community, (suppose upon the matter, it be Lex male posita, or no right or
just Law) may any part of the people, or mere private persons, (who think
themselves in capacity so to do) offer violence to the Magistrate, or to his
Ministers and Officers, proceeding according to Law, or if they ought to submit
to punishment, (or else flee) if they cannot obey the praeceptive part of the
Law; being bound up, (as they say) in conscience. As for private persons, going
out further to revenge wrongs done them on the Magistrate, or punishing them,
that is to be spoken to hereafter: But this now is the true state of the
business, at this time, anent violent resistance of the Magistrates; (all of
them, from the highest to the lowest, and of the whole body of the Nation) by
any minor part of private persons, who apprehend themselves in capacity for
that work.

It ought to be well considered, and it may be easily perceived, how Satan in
these last and worst of times, is mainly laboring to bring in confusion into
humane Societies; to raise scandals upon Religion, and to tempt and provoke the
Princes of the World, to dislodge the Church of God, out of their Dominions;
because of the seditious Principles and unquiet Practices of some Professors
thereof; (though Religion, is innocent as to these) which tend to the
dissolution of the State-government; yea, and also, of all Church Government.

It is to be marked, that when Lex Rex had in several places (See Page 463.
and, Page 313.) vented that Principle, in reference to the Civil Government:
That no Man is bound in Conscience to subjection passive, under unjust
punishments, inflicted by the Magistrate, more then to active obedience unto
unlawful Comands; and that passive obedience, under unjust Sentences, comes
under no Command of God: Yea, that it is a sin against Gods Command, to be
passively subject to an unjust Sentence; And that it is an act of Grace and
Virtue, for a Man to resist the Magistrate violently, when he does him wrong,
and a self-murder against the sixth Command, not to resist, when he offers to
take the life without cause, though, not without Law, page 314.322. When, I
say, these Doctrines were broached, in reference to the Commonwealth; they
were very quickly translated, and applied to the Church, by this man and his
party; who pleaded some years ago, very strongly (as they thought) for
non-submission unto, and counteracting of, all the Judicatories of the
Presbyterial Government, whenever the persons injured, thought the Sentence
wrong and unlawful; so that no excommunicate private person, ought to submit to
the Sentence of any, or all the Judicatories, if he thought the Sentence wrong
and unlawful; and no Minister should leave his Minstery, but continue acting in
it, if he thought the Sentence of deposition, given against him by any, or all
the Judicatories of the Church, unjust: And they cried out, (if this might not
be admitted for sound Doctrine) that Presbytery was turned into Papacy and
absolute Tyranny; yea, they proceeded further then the point of counteracting,
for the Agitators of the schimatical Party, would take upon them to possess
the power of the most eminent Church-judicatories, (they being the far minor
Part) and did in that self-created capacity of Government, over all others, in
this Church, act, (excluding others, who were the greater Part) thinking, that
though they were the far lesser Part, yet being the founder, (in their own
judgment) the Government and managing of it, belonged unto them; and not unto
the corrupt plurality of Ministers, who behoved all to bow before them: And how
well their Practices in the Church do homologate with their Practices as to the
State (proceeding from one and the same Principle) we may now see. For it is
the way which they clearly own, that every private person, (when and so long as
they are able, or are in probable capacity, to act violently against the
Magistrate) ought to counter-act him violently, when he thinks the Magistrate
wrongs him; (for this must be referred to every Man's private discretive
judgment, as Naphtali tells us, page 148.) and nothing excuses from this
violent resisting, but quando desunt vires temporales. No submission is to be
expected from them, by Magistrates, (when they Govern not according to their
mind) but when they cannot otherwise do; nor any submission Pi^u^, or out of
any Principle of Conscience, but prudential and politic, because they are not
in probable capacity to give him Battle; if they had the tempting opportunity
and capacity, the case would be altered: Then not only violent resistance
should come to be duty, but pulling of the Magistrate out of his chair of
Government, (as we will hear) punishing him, and placing themselves, though but
private Men, in his room.

How contrary such principles and practices, of private Men's non-submission to,
and counter-acting of, Church-judicatories, (supposed to do wrong) are unto the
Word of God, how subversive of Church Government, how introductory of Schism,
Heresies and all Mischiefs into the Church, is well discovered by the learned
Reviewer of the Pamphlet, entitled, Presbytery no Papacy, Protesters no
Subverters: And with equal reason, may the same grounds be made use of, against
this Man's inciting all private persons to counter-act the Magistrate violently;
when they think he does them wrong, or when they account their Sentences
unjust. As certain confusion comes on the Church, if the Principles of that
Party, be entertained; so, let People once drink in this Man's Doctrine, in
reference to the State, there shall be no end of sedition, no security for the
powers ordained by God; for, any private persons are made judges of the justice
of the Magistrates Sentences and Punishments; (and what Man will readily
condemn himself, if he may be admitted to be judge in his own cause?) And upon
their own private judgment, of the injustice of the Magistrates dealing with
them, are allowed, without any further prerequisite, to use violence against
him; pull the sword out of his hand, and pull himself out of his seat; only,
there must be probable capacity for this, and nothing excuses from not doing
so, but want of that capacity: If that be wanting, there must be submission to
unjust Sentences; not out of any conscientious respect to the Power, but ad
redimendam majorem vexationem. This is the Libellers mind.

Such Doctrine surely is neither consonant to Gods Word, to the practices of
his dear and approven People, to the mind of his soundest Servants, nor to
sound Reason. Who ever will consult the holy Oracles of God, will find, that
not only is obedience commanded to be given to Magistrates in their lawful
injunctions, and submission, not only for wraths-sake, but also for
conscience sake, to their just punishments of sin and wickedness, (who ever
re-offends or violently resists the Magistrate in either of these, no doubt
resists the Ordinance of God, and receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13.2.)
but also, that there is a submission required to be yielded them, even when
they put us to suffer wrongfully and unjustly, may be evidently gathered from
Scripture grounds; in the case of unjust suffering, God has not left his
people without direction what to do, in reference to Magistrates abusing their
power.

It is true (as has been said) the Lord has not given a moral power or
warrant to any invested with Authority, to do evil or unjustly; concerning that
the question is not: But the question is, what duty is owed, by the Subject,
unto the Magistrate, (especially the Supreme; for, there may be remedies had
against the injuries of the inferior by appellation) in case of his
maladministration and unjust Laws, or Sentences according to these Laws, or
Executions according to Sentence; whether they may violate or violent the
person invested with Authority, and not submit to him, but counter-act him by
force in self-defence against his violence: or, if they be bound in conscience,
or by any Law of God, to submit humbly to what he inflicts, (although unjustly)
if they can neither move him by their humble petitions to forbear them, nor can
flee from his wrath, or go out of his Dominions. This man and his Accomplices
maintain, that if the Magistrate abuse his power in making unjust Laws, or
punishing according to these; any private man or company of men, that think
themselves strong enough for the Magistrate, ought never to suffer, but use
forcible resistance against the Magistrate abusing his power; and that all the
patience that is required of Christians, toward oppressing Magistrates, is only
to bear suffering patiently when they are out of capacity of acting, and may
not better do; and to suffer patiently, when they see they cannot repress the
violence of the unjustly-dealing Magistrate with a sufficient contrary
violence. This Doctrine, favoring so strongly of carnal selfie-nature, and
being too suitable to the way of beasts, who know no other thing but to be
carried with a natural impetus to repay violence with violence till they be
overpowered, we utterly dislike, and do assert, according to the Holy
Scriptures, That even when Magistrates deal unjustly, or put any to suffering
wrongfully, (albeit they are for this to give a dreadful account, and albeit
Subjects are to judge of their actions as they deserve, and not approve their
malversation, but modestly witness against it, as there is opportunity) yet,
suffering persons are bound to a passive submission or obedience, enduring
wrongs done to them not only with respect to Gods providential Ordinance, (by
which their suffering comes to pass) but with respect to his institutive
Ordinance of Magistracy, wherewith the persons afflicting them are invested,
(albeit in the particular acts concerning them, abusing their power) For,
albeit the abuse of the power be not of God, yet the abused power is of God;
and the person invested therewith must have respect from the sufferer, (other
respect then is to be given to a private invader) intuitu officii, not intuitu
abusus officii; and this respect is patient submission under the affliction,
though unjustly inflicted; and not daring to re-violent the person invested
with Magistratical power (although in a particular toward us he abuse his
power) to commit our persons and our cause to him that judges righteously, not
offering to move sedition, albeit we were able for it. If we shall only look to
these three things in the Scripture, we shall see ground for what is said.

1. Consider what is required of Children toward their Parents unjustly
afflicting them, and likewise from Servants toward their Masters; and by
analogy we may learn somewhat of the mind of God, of the duty of Subjects to
their Princes, who are their political Fathers, and have a despotical and
lordly power over them. For Children, Heb. 12.9, 10. We had Fathers of our
flesh, who corrected and chastned us after their own pleasure, and we gave them
reverence; which in the apodosis of the similitude, is expon'd subjection, v.
9. This is not only spoken of narrative but approbative (if it were not so, the
argument taken from our carriage to Parents to enforce reverent subjection to
God, were not good.) The Apostle approves the reverend subjection of Children
to their Parents, though unreasonably and with mixtures of unjust passion
correcting them: he allows not the deed of the Parent for his own pleasure
afflicting the Child, but allows the reverend subjection of the Child under
such unreasonable and unjust dealing. So, 1 Pet. 2.18. Servants, be subject to
your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure
grief, suffering wrongfully, etc. v. 20. If when ye do well and suffer for it,
ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God: For even hereunto were ye
called. No Master had a moral power or warrant from God to afflict his servant
wrongfully, (that was not acceptable to God, but displeasing to him) yet, that
Servants should endure a suffering lot in, and for, following their duty to
God, with subjection to their Masters afflicting them, and that from a
principle of conscience toward God, was a thing acceptable to God. And hereunto
were Servants then called; it is not only subjection to patient suffering for
their faults they were called to, nor only subjection to endure suffering in
well-doing, merely out of prudence, or because they could not help it, not
being in probable capacity to violent their Masters though they would; but a
subjection to endure wrongful sufferings from their hands, from a principle of
conscience toward God moving them to regard their authority, albeit abused by
putting them to grievous trouble wrongfully.

And though, perhaps, they will say, there is great difference between respects
due by Children to their Parents, and Servants to their Lords and Masters, and
that which is due by Subjects to Kings, (the King neither having properly
paternal, nor yet despotick nor lordly power over his Subjects.) And they will
say also, there is great difference between the evils spoken of in these Texts,
to be endured by Children or Servants, corrections, bufferings, etc. and that
irreparable loss of life, wherein (should it come to that) subjection without
resistance is pressed to the wrongful Sentences and Proceedings of the
Magistrate or Prince. Though, I say, they will, and do assert this, to show the
disparity of the cases; yet, 1. There is a full parity and agreement of these
relative Powers, Paternal, Masterly and Magistratical or Royal, in this, that
in the inflicting of evils upon those who are under them, (such as are
competent to them to inflict within their sphere) a patient, reverend
subjection is due from their inferiors, (without violent insurrection against
them) even when they abuse their power in some particulars, not in way of
justification or respect to the abuse, but in a humble conscientious regard of
their being invested with that power they do abuse. 2. Kings are not Fathers of
our flesh, or by generation, nor can they be truly called so, (political and
parental power are different things, although they may be co-incident in one
and the same subject, as most probably they were in the first political
Governments that were in the world) Yet, as Kings and Magistrates should have
fatherly hearts to their Subjects, (they being a sort of official Fathers to
them to procure their good, and to defend them from evil, every King should be
Abimelech, i. e. my Father King) So Subjects ought to have such hearts to their
King, as Children have to their Father, giving them special reverence,
subjection and obedience from their very soul and inward affections; and
although sometimes they are not such as they should be, yet they ought to
account their persons (sealed with Gods Ordinance and the Image of his
Sovereignty) sacred and inviolable, resolving to suffer any thing of them,
rather then to be guilty of parricide, (although under the color of
self-defence.) Gods Law, in the fifth Command, has enjoined reverence and
subjection to Princes, under the title of Parents; Calvin, lib. 4. inst. cap.
8. shows, the end of that Command is (under the name and title of Parents,
Father and Mother) to show us, that all the degrees of eminency God has
ordered to be over us, should be inviolable; Oportere nobis esse inviolabiles,
quia omnium est eadem ratio. God (says he) under the name of the most amiable
relations of Father and Mother, leads us to subjection to all Superiors: Hoc
(says he) de subjectione praeceptum cum humani ingenii pravitate valde pugnat
(quod ut est celsitudinis appetentia turgidum aegre se subjici sustinet.)
Therefore (he adds) to commend this subjection, he has communicate his own
name to them who are in eminency, In unum ipsum (says he) ita convenient,
patris Dei ac Domini tituli, ut quoties unum aliquem ex istis audimus,
Majestatis illius sensu animum nostrum feriri oporteat, quos ergo istorum facit
participes, etc. S. 35. These whom God makes sharers in these styles, he
illustrates them with some sparkle of his own glory, that they may all appear
in their places conspicuous and reverend: We ought to think, that he that is a
Father to us, habet aliquid divini; for, he carries not a divine title without
cause; he that is a Prince or a Lord, habet nonnullam cum Deo communionem: Thus
he. And, as he adds further, we are not to doubt but God is in this Command
setting down an universal rule, touching Superior^, nec interest (says he) it
is not concerning to consider whether they who are to be thus honored by us,
be worthy or unworthy; for whatsoever they be, they have not attained to such
eminency without Divine Providence, Cujus ratione ipse Legislator illos
honorari voluit. So that whatsoever reverence and subjection a man is to give
to to this natural Father, (when he inflicts punishments that are within his
sphere) that same subjection and reverence is to be yielded to the Magistrate
that bears the Sword, punishing in his capacity, albeit, perhaps, he err in
his procedure, as Parents may do. 3. It shall not be asserted, that there is no
difference, between a Royal or Magistratical power, and that which is called
dominative and masterly; seeing, (besides other differences) they do mainly
differ in this, that the Master or Lord of Slaves, has his own profit mainly
before his eyes, (which he may under Gods glory lawfully have) but the profit
of his Slaves only secondarily; and also in order to his own good, which is
maintained, by their well doing. But a King or Magistrate, should think, that
his power is primarily ordinated to the public good of the community it self,
and only secondarily and consequently to the good of himself; it being
profitable for him, that the Commonwealth should flourish. 2. In this, that a
dominative and masterly power (such as was of old in use, and under which,
people were made Slaves, either having their lives spared in a just War, and
quitting their liberty to spare their lives; (serva and serviam) or being sold
and bought, by the possessors money, (which was no way, like the condition of
our hired servants, free to go off when they will) did interest these, who were
invested with it, with a greater power over the bodies and goods of these, who
were either sold Slaves, or saved in War, (and parting with their liberty, for
saving their lives) then a Magistratical or Kingly power, ought to claim over
subjects, not of such a condition, (albeit cruelty should be, according to
Divine Law, avoided by any invested with any of these powers.) 3. In that the
person that has domination or Masterly-power, (as was ordinarily of old
(albeit we have scarce a shadow of that power, which Masters then had over
Slaves absolutely, surrendering their liberty to them) has the Slaves in
subjection to him, more out of fear and constraint, then love or delight; but a
King or Magistrate has his inferiors under him, in a civil, free, liberal,
voluntary and loving subjection; knowing, that in the Government, their good is
aimed at by the Ruler, more then his own; and his subjects will not, (or ought
not) for his good and honor, which is inseparably connexed with their own
good, spare to expend Life and Fortunes, or what they are or have, as public
necessity requires. Yet, though there be these differences, betwixt the
Dominative or Masterly, and the Royal or Magistratical Power, the inferiors
subjection in suffering, (even wrongfully, if God permit in his Providence the
power to be so abused) is no less under the one Power, then under the other,
by virtue of Divine Law. Subjects are Sons to the Sovereign, (their Father, and
Nurse-father to the Church of God) but they are also Sons, that do under God
serve him, (though they be not Slaves) It is ordinary in Scripture, not only to
find conquered People called Servants to the Conqueror, as, 2 Samuel 8.14. they
of Edom, became David's servants, but also, ordinary Subjects to Kings were
called Servants to them (not only their menial Servants, nor only their Guard,
nor their Officers only; but generally their Subjects were called Servants,
and the King their Lord, as David's Subjects, warring against the Ammonites, 2 Samuel 11.24. are called his Servants, 1 Kings 12.4. We will serve thee, says
Israel to Rehoboam, i. e. we will be Subjects to thee; Subjects, for the
public good, the Honor of the Prince, (whom they term, their Sovereign Lord)
and for every ones private good, are Servants to the Prince in a free,
voluntary, ingenuous, loving way; they are his Servants, as willingly and
cheerfully subordinate to him, as their Sovereign, although he also be in a
sense, their Servant, (not in relation of an inferior to his superior, for so
the Magistrate is only the Minister of God for the Peoples good, and never
called their Minister) but in relation of the means to the end, he is their
Servant, as Angels are ministering Spirits, for the heirs of Salvation: And
Ministers of Christ, are Ministers and Servants to the People, though in regard
of their official power, they are not subject to the People; but rules over
them, according to Christ's Gospel.

Thus we see subjection, without violent resistance, in case of wrongful
suffering, is the duty of all inferiors toward their several correlatives;
Neither has it any weight to make disparity of the cases, the sufferings to
which Children or Servants are to submit without violent resistance, as but
corrections or buffetings, not tending to death or mutilation; but the
subjection required to the Magistrate who bears the Sword, (when he abuses the
same) imports suffering death, (if he proceed so far) which is the greatest
evil of punishment, and which is not eligible where lawful self defense is at
hand. For, Lex Rex, p. 322.
1. the grounds that such men go upon for private persons violent resisting the
Magistrate, ( viz. the abuse of his power) if they hold good, will as
effectually evince a non-subjection and violent resistance to Parents, Masters,
etc. abusing their power, (which is contrary to the Scripture) and if the abuse
of power by Fathers or Masters, warrands not violent resistance against them;
how should it warrant the same against the Magistrates unjust violence? 2. A^
death is not, so no punishment unjustly inflicted is eligible, where lawfully
it can be warded off: But this is the state of the question, if private persons
may lawfully violent the Magistrate abusing his power? If in greater evils
unjustly inflicted, there is always a liberty for inferiors violently to
re-offend the Powers above them; why not in less evils too, these gradual
differences of inflicted evils cannot make such variation in the point of duty,
seeing the ground holds equally strong; if a man may resist the Magistrate for
abuse of his Power, he may do so also against his Father or Master on the same
ground, and if he may not so deal with them, he may not deal so with the
Magistrate neither.

Again, our Lord and Savior did foresee and foretell his Disciples, that they
were to meet with persecution from the Powers of the world for truth and
righteousness sake. And, Mat. 5.10. pronounces them blessed, who are
persecuted for righteousness sake, and who are persecuted and reviled falsely
for his sake, asserting, that their reward is great in Heaven, So, 1 Pet. 4.14.
If ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye, etc. v. 17. It is better ye
suffer for well doing, then for evil doing, etc. In such Texts, there is a
commended suffering for Christ and righteousness sake, having the encouragement
of a promise of reward (consequently it must be a sort of commanded suffering,
seeing God commends, and rewards nothing but what he commands) it is a suffering
contradistinct from suffering for evil doing: submission to suffering for evil
doing, is out of all question a duty, because in that case, the resistance is a
sinful resisting of the Ordinance of God, and of these who are invested with
that Ordinance of Magistracy while they lawfully use it. But there is a further
matter commended or enjoined in these Scriptures, even a cleanly submission to
suffering in, and for well doing, (when God in his Providence permits Rulers so
to abuse their power) which passive subjection or submission, is not grounded
on the Rulers abuse of his Power through his corrupt will, but upon the
peculiar command of God enjoining submission in such cases, to prevent sedition
and confusion.

The Author of Lex Rex, quaest. 30. jeers at passive obedience, as a chimaera,
as a dream, and as involving a contradiction: And he thinks he speaks acutely
in saying, God never gave to any a command to suffer for well-doing, nor at all
to suffer, (suffering depending on the free will of another without us, and not
on our own free will, and so not falling under any command of God to us) but he
reasons very sophistically, inferring, that because mere suffering, which
necessarily depends on the action of another, is not commended to us, therefore
subjection to suffering or passive obedience is not commanded when the
Magistrate inflicts suffering. It is impossible indeed, that mere passion (as
to be whipped, to be hanged or headed) should be the object of an affirmative
or preceptive command of God (though the Magistrate may have a command to
inflict these) but subjection to the passion, may fall under a command, and
this is called passive obedience, which implies more then mere passion or
suffering; even a disposition and motion of the heart to lie under that lot
with an eye to God, whose ordinance is used upon the sufferer. Only it is
called passive obedience, because as to the precise suffering the punishment,
there is no external action done, enjoined by the Law or Command of the
Magistrate (as there is in active obedience) although there be some dispositive
or preparatory actions in order to suffering (not inferring a direct
cooperation to a man's own suffering) which he may and ought to do, as going to
a Gallows on his own feet, or up a Ladder, or laying down his head on a Block
that it may be stricken off. It is an error to say, that such passive obedience
is not commanded of God, but only the modus rei, that it be done patiently and
christianly, when it cannot be by force avoided. For it is clear, that passive
obedience, or submission and subjection to suffering (where the Magistrate has
just cause to inflict the punishment) falls under a command of God (that same
command that forbids resisting the Magistrate in doing his duty, enjoins
submission and passive obedience to him, although we were able by force to
deliver our selves out of his hand.) In conscience we are bound not to offer
him violence in doing his duty, though there were power in our hand so to do,
so that it is not only modus rei that in this case is commanded, ( viz. that we
suffer patiently in a christian way, when it cannot be avoided) but res ipsa,
that we submit to the suffering, if there be no occasion of flying, without
using force against him. Besides, that in this case, Christian patience and
violent resistance are incompatible, there can be no Christian patience
opposite to Christian submission and subjection to the Powers ordained by God
doing their duty. But, if it might stand with violent resistance, it should be
opposite to this Christian submission. Therefore, it appears to be a
groundless assertion, that no passive obedience or submission to suffering is
under a command. For, it is clear there is a command for this subjection we
have spoken of.

But then the difficulty is, if passive obedience to unjustly punishing Powers
fall under any commandment of God, or if there be any command of submission to
cleanly suffering; it is this man's mind, so long as there is any power of
violent and forcible resisting, a man is guilty of self-murder, who will not
(in this case as well as in the former, and the former as well as this)
endeavor the preservation of his own life, by fighting and resisting, and
re-offending, and all that is required is, (when he is overpowered) then to use
Christian patience in bearing affliction. But we assert, that a private person,
though wrongfully afflicted by the lawful Magistrate, proceeding according to
Law (let it be so that it is Lex male posita, or an evil Law) is bound not only
to Christian patience in suffering (to this he is obliged in suffering from any
private wicked hand, or from the hand of a manifest Usurper or Intruder in
Magistracy, whose violence he may repel by violence, so long as he can) but
unto a submission without repelling of violence by violence, and that in
conscientious respect to the Ordinance of God, wherewith the lawful Magistrate
is invested (although abusing it in this particular) and with a tender regard
to the prevention of seditions and confusions in humane Societies, which are
unavoidable; if every one, as he thinks himself wronged, shall be allowed to
use force upon the lawful Magistrat's proceeding by Law, the greatest
Malefactors being ready to justify themselves, and to violate the justest
Magistrates in their just proceedings; if once this repelling the Magistrat's
force be allowed as a duty. And, no tenderhearted Christian is there, who will
not rather submit without resistance to his own private suffering, commending
his soul and cause to God, then by such evil and scandalous doctrines, open a
wide gap for all wicked seditious persons to work confusion in the
Commonwealth, and to overthrow the best and justest Magistrates. Mr.
Buroughs, an Independent, writing on the 1. of Hos. 10. v. has said well to
this purpose: When (says he) things are brought into a Law, suppose the
Authority be abused, and there be an evil Law made; then I confess, if the Law
be in force, we must either quite our selves of the Country, or else submit
and suffer; when it comes to be a Power or a Law, it is Authority, though
abused, and we must yield obedience to it, either actively or passively. This
is sound and Orthodox; and it were well, others would homologate this Doctrine,
to prevent the scandals of sedition and rebellion, which this tenderhearted
Libeller speaks of very slightingly, striving to introduce Libertinisme, and to
abolish the sense of these sins: For (says he) Napth. Page 39. Treason,
sedition and disorder are but formalities and notions, pretended to palliate
and color the Kings usurpation.

But to add no more from the Scripture, that known passage. Romans 13.1, 2. etc.
with 1. Pet. 2.11. makes for this submission and subjection, which is pleaded
for, by us; For, such subjection is there commanded to the powers then
existing, or in being (...) (such as were Caligula, Nero, Domitian, monstrous
tyrants, enemies and persecutors of Gods people) as is opposed to (...), to
stand in order against them (the word is from (...), a military term) every
Soul is commanded to be subject, or to stand in order under them, (...), and
forbidden to be (...), to stand in military order against them, either
defensive or offensive; by powers which are not to be resisted, are clearly
m^ant, the persons i^ power, as the Apostle after expones himself, 3. and 4.
verse. calling them Rulers, and the Ministers of God, he means undoubtedly
certain supposita, and persons invested with power; And cannot mean the
abstract Ordinance of God, Magistracy or Power in the abstract; for, it can
neither be said to exist (separate from persons) nor to be the subject and
recipient of duties enjoined to be paid to the Power, nor of the offenses
forbidden; nor can it be an Agent or Administrator of these Acts attributed to
the Power, as to bear the Sword, to be the Minister of God, to praise the good
or terrify the evil. So that of necessity, by Power is meant Power in the
Concrete, or the person invested with the Power, who is not to be violently
resisted, by private persons under him, (when he is acting according to Law,
suppose the Law be judged by private men, not just) which is the present case
of private persons resistance to Authority. The person of the King, because
invested with power, official power, (though in a particular act abused) is not
to be violated, nor violence offered to it by private men; a subjection,
excluding violent resistance is commanded, and no such exception is put in,
that if he abuse his power, or if we be strong enough for him, we are loosed
from that subjection, and are at liberty for resisting him, and no submission
is required under his abuse of his power, so long, as we can violently act
against him. It is said, by those of the other judgment, that even by this
same text, Romans 13. subjection, or submission to unjust suffering by these
invested with power, is not commanded, nor resistance in that case forbidden;
for, all the subjection commanded to be given to persons in power, is only, so
far as they manage their power lawfully, according to Gods Ordinance, and as
the Ministers of God, for our good, who are for the praise of well-doers, and
the terror of evildoers: And all the resistance forbidden, is only, that they
be not resisted while they do their duties; but, when they do not their duties,
or do contrary to duty, in afflicting the innocent; they are not powers
ordained of God, pro tanto, nor his Ministers for good to people; nor, is
resistance to them in such acts unlawful resistance to the ordinance of God,
nor to them as the Ministers God; but, only resistance to them is sinful men,
serving their own lusts and Satan; their evil-doing, is no ordinance of God,
but of Satan. So that in effect, they think subjection here commanded and
resistance forbidden, does only relate to Magistrates, quatenus and quamdiu
been se gesserint, when and so far as they carry themselves rightly in
Government; but that from this Text no submission is due to them, no resistance
to them is forbidden in their inflicting unjust punishments; but that for any
thing said here, Subjects may make insurrections against them whenever they
think they do wrong, even any part of private Subjects against all Magistrates
of all degrees, the Supreme as well as the Subordinate: So Naphtali teaches,
and borrows this out of his poisoned Fountain, Lex Rex.

But as to this, 1^ It has been often granted, and still is, that no man nor
Magistrate on earth has a moral power, commission or command from God to do
evil, or to afflict any unjustly. 2. The question is not concerning the
Magistrat's duty, but anent the Subjects duty, in case, through the permission
of Divine Providence, the Magistrate abuse his place and power in unjust
^fflicting the innocent; whether the private Subject may use violence against,
or upon, the Magistrate; or should rather then so do, submit to suffering
(though unjustly) not for reverence to the abuse of the power, but in reverence
to God, whose Ordinance the power (which is abused) is. It may be easily seen,
that subjection to the power (opposite to resistance) is all alongs enjoined,
whether the power be rightly used or otherwise: if it be rightly used,
subjection without refusing active ob^dience is required; if it be not rightly
used, subjection without resistance, violent or forcible repelling of the power
is required, upon this formal reason and ground: Because, even when the power
is abused, it remains a power ordained by God, (although the abuse of it be not
ordained) even as a man's eye remains his eye, although sometimes it is not
rightly used. The formal reason of the subjection and non-resistance pressed,
is not the right use of the power, but because it is a power ordained of God
(however perverted in the use by man.) And although the spirit of God, in
describing the Magistrate, says, He is the minister of God for thy good, A
praiser of the good, and a terror to the evil; it is not meant, that that is
the formal reason of subjection to him (in the full latitude of subjection) nor
that the Magistrates then existing and in being* to whom the people are
commanded to be subject, and forbidden to resist them, were such de facto in
all their actings (or that all others, in reference to whom the direction may
be after extended, should in time coming be such in all their actings) but only
it is told, what the Magistrate is ex officio, and what he should be de jure,
as it is ordinary in Scripture, that qualifications of Kings spoken of, do not
de facto agree to them all, though they seem to be spoken assertively of all;
only it is showed what they should do de jure, as, Prove. 14.35. Pro.
16.10.12.13.15. Pro. 22.11. So here, the Apostle speaking of the power, or
person invested with power, calling him the minister of God for thy good; no
terror to good works, but evil; A praiser of the good, etc. shows only what a
Magistrate should be ex officio, and what he is de jure; but lays not this as
the ground of subjection and non-resistance to him, but this, that he is a
Superior Power ordained of God: If he abuse his place, he is to answer to God
for it; but the abuse of the power in a particular, does not nullify the
power, or make it no power; if he do evil, he does it not as invested with
authority from God, yet he abides invested with authority: it cannot be said he
has no authority, when he abuses authority; subjection of one sort or another
is due to him, because he is in officio, not because he abuses his Office. To
this purpose, amongst many things wrong, Lex Rex has that true word, Page 325.
We are (says he) to suffer evil of punishment of Tyrants, some other way and
in some other notion, then we are to suffer evil of equals: for, we are to
suffer evil of equals, not for any paternal authority they have over us, as
certainly we are to suffer evil of Superiors: Thus he. And this is all we
require, to suffer evil of the Magistrate or Superior, without violating his
person upon the account of his paternal authority, which (though in a
particular abused hic and nunc) remains the Ordinance of God: And in a
respective reverence to that Ordinance wherewith they are invested, we are
humbly to suffer wrong from them (if we cannot by petitions move their
forbearance) neither justifying in our consciences the wrong which they do to
us, nor judging them to have a commission from God, as to this wrong doing, but
regarding both Gods Providence and Gods Ordinance in their persons, which
cease not to be his, although abused in a particular act toward us.

This has been the common sense of the generation of Gods children, before
this fiery iron age, whose sober examples, tenderly respecting Gods Ordinance
and the standing of humane Societies, are with us of a great deal more weight
and more worthy imitation, then the furious practices of any of late, whereunto
they have been inflamed by the Doctrines of popular Parasites and fierce
Demagogues, such as this Libeller and his Accomplices are. The ancient
Christians, who lived nearest the light of the Apostolic times, and had hearts
fuller of zeal (through the recent warmth of the shed blood of Christ, and of
his glorious extraordinary Ambassadors) then we in this frozen age have, knew
not, owned not, any such Doctrines of violent resistance to Magistrates, as the
new sort of Christians have made a main Article of their Faith. In Tertullians
time, they wanted not abundant power and might to raise arms, and manage war
against their persecuting enemies, as he very plainly shows, Apolog. cap. 37.
and, chapter 1. chapter 33. They were certainly in a probable capacity to have combined
in arms against their persecuting Emperors; and to have carried their will by
force, and taken order with these who were over them and did oppress them, (as
this Libeller allows all persons of the most private place, if they be strong
enough to deal with the powers above them) yet they would never entertain a
thought of any such matter, let be to attempt it; they were never (although
defamed as enemies to Severus, Emperor at that time) found amongst the
seditious, Nunquam tamen Albiniani, vel Nigriani, vel Cassiani; never were they
followers of seditious Leaders, Apol. c. 33. Although they had filled all their
Cities, their Camps, their Courts, and the Empire every where full of
Christians; yet, they made conscience of making insurrection, they knew not
such a thing that the Word of God, and laws of Humanity and Christian Charity,
obliged them (as now it is pleaded) to take arms against their Emperors, and
to combine against them for mutual defense against their persecutions, and for
violent taking order with them. Were the ancient Christians so utterly
ignorant, or so void of humanity and of Christian love and zeal, that having
more then probable capacity, they would suffer their Brethren be put to suffer,
and not offer violence to the Magistrate in such courses, and rescue the
oppressed out of their hands? (either they were not knowing and loving
Christians, or else we have catched an error in our heads that is not
Christian, and a fire in our hearts that is not from above.) If we look forward
to Cyprians time (long after Tertullian, though in that same age) he is free to
tell us, in Epistola ad Demetrianum, when Christians were grown very numerous,
beyond what Tertullian saw them to have been; Nemo nostrum, etc. not one of us
offers to resist your violence (speaking of, and to, Pagans) or to revenge it,
Etiam si nimius and copiosus sit populus noster.

Yea, after that the great Constantine had owned Christian Religion, and by his
Authority (so far as it could reach) legally established it; so that now
Religion became to be a legal right by Caesarean Edicts and Laws, and
multitudes embracing it, (as uses to be when examples of religious Princes go
before) so there is no doubt, Christians were both for number and power able to
hold their own Religion by force against all contrary Powers, and that upon the
ground of legal humane right, as well as divine. Yet, when the Arian Emperors
Constantius, Valent. etc. and Julian the Apostate persecuted them for Religion,
they never attempted such a thing, as to make head against them, and to combine
for a resistance, albeit they wanted neither the legal right of humane Imperial
Law for it, nor physical Power sufficient against the Apostate and Arian
Emperors, nec d^erat jus humanum, nec deerant vires temporales, yet there was
never the least attempt made by Christians in these times against their
Emperors apostatizing, turning heretical and cruel Persecutors. No other remedy
did Christians then know against persecuting Powers, but prayers and tears to
God and Man, with patience in suffering for Christ; albeit they had arms in
their hands, they knew not how to use the same against the Powers above them.
When that vile Persecutor Maximian was raging against Christian Professors,
Anno 297. He had under him a whole Legion of Christian Soldiers (called the
Theban Legion) consisting of six thousand six hundred and sixty six armed men,
who had strength a^^ power enough to sell their lives dear to any that would
seek the s^^^e. Yet, rather then they would offer violence to the wicked
Emperor or his Officers, they did lay aside their weapons, and suffered
themselves, for Christ's sake, to be slain by the executors of the Commands of
that cruel Tyrant. And it is known by the History, that the plurality of the
Army under Julian the Apostate were Christians, (as appeared by their joint
Proclamation and Declaration, at the entry of Jovinian his Successor ( Nos
Christiani sumus) yet never did they make head against the Apostate, nor
violent him in his courses against Religion, and their Brethren the Professors
thereof. Oh silly, foolish and feminine Christians then! who neither knew to
use the privilege of selfdefence against Magistrates for themselves, nor how
to combine for the aid of others, and were so destitute of reason for
themselves, and humanity and religious charity toward others; that neither the
Paganism, Apostasy, Arianisme of the Emperors, nor Persecution of Brethren by
them, could move them to such ways of violent and bloody resistance of Powers
(though they did indeed resist to blood, striving against sin, as Heb. 12.4.)
But, O! how illuminated masculous and martial are the spirits of Christians now
a days, and how full of charity one to another, as well as of zeal to God,
that any number of private persons are allowed (if they can carry on the
business without a seen mischief to themselves) to take the Sword against all
Magistrates whom they account oppressors of them (though falsely) to combine in
bands against them, to pull them out of their seats, to revenge upon them the
injuries done to themselves or their Brethren, and to punish them condignly;
yea, it is counted high impiety against God, and want of Christian charity, to
omit this. This is the clear doctrine of this Libeller and his Accomplices (as
has in part, and will further appear.) And what shall we say to it? (I will
say, anima mea sit cum animabus veterum Christianorum) shall we think, that
they were generally so ignorant, senseless and stupid, that they knew not what
belonged to their duty toward God, themselves or their Brethren? Wanted they
the light to know their duty, the zeal to Gods glory, the Christian love to
brethren, which we have so abundantly, that moves us to resisting of Powers,
and did not them? Credat Judaeus Apella, non ego. But the truth is this, as in
the fear of God they refused to give active obedience to any evil command of
Powers above them, so when they could neither mitigate the fury of persecuting
powers by Petitions, nor in Gods Providence find a way of escaping out of their
Dominions and flying (which is no resistance, albeit the pair of Pseudomartyrs
have brought forth this Monster of a stoical Paradox, that flying from the
Magistrate, is resistance to him, whereas it is only a withdrawing from under
his Dominion, and putting ones self under another Dominion, where his Power
reaches not: and so by flight and withdrawing from the Kingdoms, the man
cease to be a Subject to him, whose Subject he was, and comes to be under
other Lords and Laws.) But, I say, when Christians could neither by Petitions
nor Apologies allay the fury of Persecutors, nor escape from them, in the fear
of God commanding submission to his Ordinance (although in the use perverted as
to them) they (having light enough to know their duty, great zeal for Christ,
great love to their brethren, sufficient power to have overpowered their
enemies) did notwithstanding, without violent resistance or combinations to
that end against Powers, meekly lay down their lives for Christ; and choosed
rather to suffer then resist. Herein their practice is a better Commentary of
Romans 13. and, 1 of Pet. 2. then all seditious glosses: And, is preferable for
imitation to all the contrary actings of men, in these dregs of time.

Some go about to question the truth of Tertullians narration, concerning the
number and power of Christians in his time; asserting, that only their
weakness excused them from the sin of non-resistance to their Magistrates. But,
it is strange to think, that Tertullian in an Apology made to the Gentiles for
Christians, should assert so gross an untruth in matter of fact, concerning
these of his Religion, whereof his enemies (if they could) would no doubt take
advantage. And as strange it is, that any now living, should after thirteen or
fourteen hundred years, take on them to know the number and power of Christians
in Tertullians time, better then he did; also to say, that in Julians Army, the
Christians were not the prevailing and greater part, is contrary to the truth
of the story, as appears by their cry, at the reception of Jovinian (whereof
before) yet it is well said ( Lex Rex. page 372.) that they had scruples of
Conscience, and doubts of the lawfulness of resisting the Emperor, being sworn
to him, which may make it the more strange, that there is so little doubting
now, when our engagement to Magistrates over us, is no less. True it is,
Constantine, did make War upon Licinius, whom he had assumed to be an assistant
in governing the Empire, for his breach of Faith and of Trust given him in that
society of the Empire, and for first denouncing War against him; (the help of
the distressed Christians, cruelly persecuted by him, concurring also as a
motive) Eusebius. lib. 9. Hist. Eccl. cap. 10 but that they sought help from
Constantine the Great, against Licinius, is not said in the history; and
although they had so done, it only shows, hat the help of the chief Emperor
may be sought against him, who was assumed as an Adjutant in the Empire, who in
effect was little more then a Deputy. It is also true, that the Christians
oppressed by Barabanes King of Persia, in the time of Theodosius, as it is,
Hist. Tripart. Lib. 11 cap. 15. did flee to the Romans seeking their help; but
then, it is also ev^dent in the story, that remaining in the Country of that
King, they made no insurrection against him, albeit the persecution was very
cruel; they did flee and withdraw from that Kingdom, to the bounds of the
Roman Empire: And the Romans refusing, upon demand of that King, to send back
these who had run away, was one ground of the war, that arose between them and
the Persian: Again, it is only said, the Christians fleeing to the Romans,
sought their help; which will not necessarily import, that they stirred them
up, to invade their King in their behalf; but, that having come to them, they
might have the help and benefit of their protection, and not be delivered up to
the fury of the Tyrant, upon his demand. And further, the Persian Kings had
once submitted themselves to the Roman Emperors, as their Lords; two or three
of their Kings being given them, at the appointment of the Senate and Emperor
of Rome: Augustus, getting both King and Kingdom, submitted to him in his time;
and although after that time, there were many changes and revolutions in that
Kingdom, the Romans did never quit their claim thereto, but kept close to
their right, and to the possession they had of most of it, till Constantin's
time, and even long also after the time of Theodosius. Now, if the Christians
presuming upon the Roman right to that Kingdom, as being held of the Emperor,
implored this help against a persecutor, whom they thought he had legal power
to chastise, what makes this for private subjects (without concurrence of any
Magistrate) rising in violence against their own Sovereigns, who have none
superior to them but God?

But, not to insist too much on this, we only add, that excellent Calvin, in
the last chap. of the 4. book of his Institutions, has (like a primitive
Christian and Divine) written so fully and learnedly against private persons
resisting the Magistrates by violence, (though they abuse their power) that
whoever will read the same, (as it is most worthy to be read throughout) will
find a strong confutation of all seditious Doctrines, stirring up private
persons to do violence to the Magistrate in any case; and his spirit, will be
seen to be another, then theirs is, who teach such things.

We come now to consider, how far contrary to the light of sound reason this
position, giving liberty to any private persons, (when they are able, and when
they think themselves wronged) to use violence upon all Magistrates, is:
Surely, that doctrine cannot be of God, which to the eye of sound reason does
remedilesly and unavoidably, (if it be admitted and reduced into practice)
overthrow Gods Order, for settling Humane Societies, and which opens a wide gap
to perpetual seditions, against all Magistrates; not leaving any (even the best
of them and most justly governing) in any security from violence. For, in the
way of this Libeller, every private person, is not only made judge of his own
actings, and what he is to do, or not to do, in obedience to the Magistrate;
but, he is made judge of his own sufferings, he must suffer no more from the
Magistrate, then he thinks meet, (if he can help himself by force.) And it is
held forth as a sin (equal at least to the obeying unlawful commands) to suffer
unjust punishments, inflicted by Powers, if men be in capacity to do violence
to the Powers, or if they can conspire and combine with others for this end.
This is a Doctrine, that will please all wicked malefactors, wondrous well;
and, is a fair proclamation to them, whenever they are attached, or arraigned,
or condemned, or punished, to bestir themselves to make a party, to do violence
to the Magistrate; for, they will never want the color of this plea of
self-defence: And, how few of them will not (if they may be their own judges)
say they are innocent and deserve no punishment, or not so great? The judge
says, he is guilty, and that he must be so and so punished; make the man his
own judge, he will say, the sentence is unjust, he is not bound to submit to
it: And therefore, if he be in probale capacity, he will think it his duty to
fall upon the Magistrate, pull the Sword out of his hand, call in to his
assistance whom he may, raise violent seditions against the Magistrate; and,
what may he not do for his own deliverance? Thus, under this color, all
evildoers are encouraged, to use violence against the Magistrate; and, let
this Libeller consider, how he will stop the gap which he has opened to
confusion; the matter (according to his mind) being referred to each particular
person, to judge of the justice of his own suffering; and his discretive
judgment anent this, must determine him to resist, (as he is able) when he
thinks himself wronged; shall not this be a source of continual seditions, and
violent insurrections against the Magistrate, even when he proceeds most justly?

Again, how can Magistrates, in doing their duty, be secured from violence
(according to this man's way) or from continual insurrections of persons
pretending their innocence? It is in vain to say, Let Magistrates rule rightly
and not oppress, and then Subjects will do their duty: for, albeit be true,
faithful and just Magistrates may in the way of their duty expect from God,
that he will incline the hearts of their Subjects to repay duty to them; yet,
in the holy permissive providence of God, it comes often to pass, that the best
Princes are not best used by their Subjects, (God thus teaching good Princes to
rule in his fear and righteousness, with an eye to his will, and with respect
to that crown of Life, whatever hard measure they have from seditious people.)
How often is it found, that Subjects are unruly and seditious even against good
Magistrates? Some crossing of the will of a froward and furious party, may move
them to fancy their Prince a Tyrant, and as one that is an injurious and
intolerable Oppressor: whereupon they account themselves free to offer
violence to him, (under the cloak of self-defence) and goes on from resistance
to revenge, if they can have the upper-hand over him, and will not cease (the
fury of evil consciences instigating them) till they ruin the Prince whom they
have greatly provoked, in order to self-preservation from what they ^e^^ from
him; and they will be ready even to mock Justice in destroying him for saving
of themselves (as they call it) but the end is, the destruction of their souls
and bodies for such wickedness. Let Histories be looked into, it will be found,
that hardly did ever people resist a Prince with violence, but in end the
matter came to revenge, (if they had power) neither could they rest but in his
ruin. And also it will be found, that oft-times the best Princes have been
worst used, or at least as evil as the naughtiest Princes. Look to the Roman
Emperors while they were Pagans, how many amongst them who were good, (as
Heathens might be) came under the same, or worse fate, by the unjust violence
of their Subjects, with these who were the worst Princes? Look to Christian
Emperors and Kings, how many of them who were truly good, were oppressed and
destroyed by their Subjects; sometimes inflammed with superstition (which they
called Religion) and superstitious respect to the Roman See, (the Sentences
whereof were accounted as Oracles in these dark times) and sometimes wrought
upon by seditious Ringleaders, buzzing into their ears great abuses done to
them in the matter of their Liberties? Yea, amongst our own Kings, some of the
best have been as evil used by prevailing parties amongst the people, as some
of the worst. When once that gap is opened, and people taught, that any party
of them (strong enough) may get up against the King and all Magistrates, when
they judge them to deal wrongously and injuriously with them, the reverence of
Sovereignty is lost, the evil wit of a seditious Party can soon paint the best
King, as a black and ugly Tyrant, and under that form, waken up others to
conspire to his destruction; which should make all the fearers of God, rather
to endure some acts of real Tyranny, then by their Doctrines or Practices of
resistance, open a door to the destruction of good Kings, (by a party not of
their spirit, but lurking under their pretenses) and to the continual
dissolution, concussion and desolation of humane Societies. It is good for us
to hold close to that necessary distinction which all sound Divines have held,
of obedience or subjection active and subjection passive, where the former
cannot be given for fear of sinning against God, (the Magistrat's superior, and
who should be obeyed rather than any man in the world) the latter, (if we stay
within his Dominions, and withdraw not from under his Sovereignty, putting our
selves under the protection of another sovereign Power) is necessary. And so
the Apology, p. 376, 377. acknowledged this to be necessary when active
obedience could not be given: but Naphtali, Page 28. repents of this
moderation, and contradicts the Apology, calling this submission brutal (though
it be upon rational grounds, and the fierce violence against Magistrates is
rather brutal) ^ver^ing, That none pleads for this submission, who have not
prostituted their conscience to absolute obedience to Princes arbitrements; and
avowing, that illimited obedience is more rational, then illimited subjection;
and that they are but flatterers that have renounced conscience, who plead
against obedience in all things to the Powers, and yet will plead for passive
submission. In this Category must all they stand, who have owned the sound
Doctrine of this Distinction, and these are the soundest Divines that ever we
had in the Church of God; yea, the Apologist himself (if he be worthy to be
named with these) escapes not this blow. Good God! To what times are we
reserved, to see so certain truths, that may be reckoned among the immovables
of Religion, and the ancient landmarks removed by an up-start furious Crew,
who by their new Principles (as false as new) seek to confound both Church and
State? The lawfulness of private men's counter-acting, and violent resistance to
a whole Church and a whole State, is a main Article of their new Faith; and to
do so, is one of their new Commandments, added to God's.

But the Libeller is all alongs much in pressing violent resistance to all
powers, from the highest to the lowest, and of the whole body of the people by
any party thereof (though the far minor and lesser part) in the cause of
Religion, (his Religion, in the hypothesis debated in the times, is the
external form of Church Government, about which, he says, all the zeal of the
godly should be concentred, a low zeal, God knows, that has no higher
objects.) And laying down grounds (some true, some false) concerning Religion,
he labors to animate any party that think themselves able to violent all
Magistrates, and the body of the people about this, and to strengthen
themselves by combinations, threatening Gods judgments against them who do not
combine for violent resistance of all above them, (which he calls Self-defence)
and abusing some Scriptures to that purpose.

As for Religion, that it is the chief interest that Men and Christians should
look after, shall not be doubted; and where it becomes a legal right, and the
Magistrate who bears the Sword leads the way, no doubt private persons may
follow in the violent defense of it, against all opposing the Magistrate, the
Law and themselves in owning it. Neither can it enter into a Christian heart,
that it is to be surrendered unto the arbitrament or pleasure of any power in
the world, nor of any Magistrate over us, as this man wickedly suggests is
done. All the question is (in relation to these Times) anent private men's
falling upon the Magistrates over them by violence and force of arms, when
they are (by Laws agreed to by the Commu^ity) urging an outward attendance on
the means and ordinances of Religion; where people needs not fear to be defiled
with heresy or idolatry, or false worship, or any thing contrary to Christ's
Ordinance; whatever may be said concerning private men's resisting the powers
that urge them to idolatry or false worship, or invading their lives if they
will not so do, comes not home to the present case. Yet, Lactantius word, lib.
5. cap. 20. is to be well remembered by all private persons; Defendenda est
Religio a privatis omnibus non occidendo sed moriendo, etc. But, we shall come
off from this matter with a few notes; 1. That the Libeller seems to disallow
all violenting of men in the matter of Religion; To be violented in Religion,
is the most wicked and insupportable of all injuries, (says he) Page 15. It is
true, to use violence upon any in their persons or goods, to bring them to an
external false Religion or Worship, or to drive them from the true, (otherwise
Religion cannot be violented) is the greatest of injuries.

But, should not such a word be guarded well, least all co-active power of the
Magistrate in matters of Religion, might seem to be disowned, and a fair plea
put in their mouths, who are for absolute toleration? It will not suffice to
say, that it is only violences done to persons, to avert them from true
Religion, and bring them to a false, that are counted injurious and condemned;
for, albeit upon the matter it is certain, there is difference between true and
false Religion; yet, what Sectary is there in the World, but will pretend he is
violented by the Magistrate for true Religion, when he is put to trouble for
his way; for, every one of them thinks, and will avow, that in his Conscience
his way is right, and according to the Word of God; (be it so or not) and
therefore, if he he be put to trouble for his way, will account himself
violented in the matter of Religion, and highly injured; it is this man's
principle, that every man in his discretive judgment, is judge of the justice
or injustice of his own sufferings, and accordingly, must determine anent his
resistance to the violence. If every errant be admitted judge of the justice of
his own suffering, accounting his own Religion best; he cannot but think, the
violenting him in it, is a sufficient injury, to engage him in violent
resistance to the Magistrate. And then, what a world of sedition and confusion
shall we have, or else the Magistrate must surcease the use of his co-active
power in these matters? Again, does not this man, plainly profess to stir up
all, with whom he can prevail, to violent others, (Magistrates, Churchmen,
People and all* in the matter of their profession? For even private men are
stirred by bloody exhortations, to be revenged on and punish all Magistrates
and others, whose blood they thirst for; because of their not being of their
way, which they call Religion: Nor avails it them to say, their way is the true
Religion, the way of others in points of Church Government, it is false; and
therefore, though they being private men, may violent and punish others, even
Magistrates and all Rulers; yet, other Magistrates or any other, may not
violent them. But, whether truth lies on their side or not, is the question;
and, if they will not admit public Powers and Authorities to be Judges in that
matter; far less have these reason, to admit of private persons to be their
Judges: But so selfie are such men, that they think they have a right to
violent all men, in that they call Religion, to force them to it; but, that no
man has right to violent them in their way: Shall their private judgment
capacitate them sufficiently, if they have Power to violent others; and yet, no
public Power can violent them, or turn them off, from their persuaded way;
which, upon trial, will not be found the safe way? 2. The Libeller appears all
along, very cautious of the probable capacity that private persons must have,
before they attempt resistance to powers; And thinks, that this, together with
the intolerable injury in matter of Religion or Liberty, gives (without need of
further) sufficient call; and that such as are injured, and in capacity
probable to through their work, sin, if they obey not that calling to rise; and
nothing can excuse from not rising, but want of this capacity. This brings to
mind Cardinal Bellarmin's excuse he has, why the ancient Christians took not
Arms against Nero, Julian, Valens, etc. because they wanted temporal strength,
(wherein he is soundly refuted by our Divines) and brings to mind also what
Creswel the Jesuit, has against the Edict of the Queen of England Elizabeth,
that Subjects having sufficient power, not only lawfully may, but ought, by
virtue of divine Precept, and as they would avoid the damnation, or extreme
peril of their souls, to depose and throw down heretical Kings: This Libeller
fully consents, with the Jesuits, not only as to the matter of violent
resistance to Princes, but even as to the deposing and throwing down of them,
and all Magistrates, and punishing them, by private hands; and is more
injurious to Princes, then they are, as shall be cleared in the following
Chapter. But, in this matter, he has borrowed the caution from the Jesuits;
that, any private persons ( si modo vires ad id idoneas habeant, as the
Jesuits speak) are bound to resist Powers, and to be revenged on them, and
punish them. 3. The Libeller, would bind the necessity of combinations, (as he
calls them) or conspiracies against Princes, and seditious insurrections (
Naphtali, Page 17.) upon all private persons, not only upon the grounds of
humanity, but upon the ground of religious love and fraternal affection;
whereby we are bound to relieve the distressed, especially for Religion, and
upon the ground of Religious respect to the concernments of Gods glory, to
which the interests of all Powers and Commonwealths must cede. As to this
latter of Gods glory, and its concernments; there is no doubt, that is above
all humane interests, and they ought to cede to the same. All the question is,
whether such violent courses against Magistrates, (though miscarrying in some
part of their duty) be for Gods glory? God is not glorified by men's sins, but
when his own Will is done; it is an ordinary thing, that men in their deep
deceitfulness, pretend God's glory, when they are dishonouring him, by
disobeying his W^ll, Is. 66.5. Your Brethren that cast you out, for my Names
sake, said, let God be glorified, etc. But for the former, anent Christian
love, and the obligation thereof, to relieve the distressed, that is surely a
duty to love, and relieve the distressed Brethren; but that love, in the
external acts of it, must be regulated by sound reason, and by the Word of God:
Christian charity binds me, not to relieve and assist a distressed brother, in
every manner of assistance; but in that which is within the bounds of my
calling, and that which is agreeable to justice. A man is not bound to forsake
his own station, or run beyond the limits of his calling, to relieve a
distressed brother; No man is bound to steal, that he may give alms; or to
defraud others of what he is indebted to them, to exercise his charity to the
indigent.

And does not this man himself confess, that prudence should measure and
regulate the exercise of love, in assisting a distressed brother, and that no
man should put his own life in certain peril of losing, in saving the life of
another; nor attempt for that end to use force, where there is no probable
capacity to carry the matter through. If brethren be distressed by the
Magistrate, (suppose unjustly) we are bound to assist them in love, by our
Prayers to God for them, by consolatory words, if we may have access to them,
by giving counsel to them, supplying their need as far as we may; yea, by
entreaties and humble petitions to the Magistrate, (as we have opportunity)
with all dutiful respects to them: But, if nothing can avail for their relief,
private persons have discharged their duty, in the point of the exercise of
Christian love, and are not obliged, to offer violence to the Public
Magistrate, or violently to resist him, in assisting others; but, in the case
of their brethrens unjust suffering, commit the matter to him who judges
righteously, possessing their Souls in patience, as they ought also to do, in
the case of their own wrongful suffering. But, it opens a gap to all confusion,
to allow private persons (if they think they have power enough) to use violence
upon the Magistrate, for relieving their brethren, whom they think oppressed:
Such pretenses, will not be wanting to the worst of men; and the best
Magistrate, proceeding most Legally, shall never have security from seditious
parties, (unless they have visible power to crush them) but they shall be
resisted, when any party thinks meet; and from resistance, there shall be a
proceeding to revenge, (if might and power be sufficient) as seldom, or never
is it seen, that resistance of the Magistrate and revenge upon him, (when a
party can have the upper-hand) are separated in exercise and practice,
(whatever be men's notions of the separableness of the same) And the Principles
of this man lead to both, as has appeared, and will yet more. 4. The Libeller
holds out from Scripture, one ground which he thinks should engage all to
combine to relieve him and his party, when they count themselves oppressed, and
that is, Because of the ommission of this duty of relieving the oppressed, or
violation of it; Naph. page 17, 18, 19.
whole Kingdoms and Cities have been involved in the guilt of the oppression,
committed by one or few, and fearful judgments have therefore overtaken them,
to their utter ruin and subversion. And, page 18. he asserts, That for simple
connivance and tolerance, (without active compliance with transgressors) God
avengeth the sins of Rulers only, or People only, or of any part of the
People only, upon the whole body of Rulers and People; and he cites, Jer.
25.15. Deuteronomy. 13.12.13, 14, 15. Josh. 22.17, 18, 19. and Achans case, Josh. 7.
building also his tenet upon the Covenants express or implicit, betwixt God
and the whole People, Rulers and Subjects, etc. And, so is confident, that if
the violation of duty, in not relieving the oppressed, (especially for
Religion) involve all failers in it, in sin and destruction; all and every
private person, is obliged to this duty, to relieve and recover, by violence,
oppressed ones out of the hand of the Magistrate; as they would keep themselves
pure from sin, and hold off Wrath from themselves, and from the place they live
in.

Hence a question considerable comes to be resolved, whether God imputes the
sin of one man to another, whereunto he is no way acccessory; but that he
tolerates what he cannot amend by any means* within the bounds of his calling?
or, whether he executes judgment upon any for the sins of others, which they
are not accessory to, and cannot amend, abiding in the bounds of their calling?
And particularly, whether God imputes the sins of Rulers to People, and
punishes them for the same? or, imputes the sins of any part of a People, to
the whole, or of the major part, to the lesser, and punishes them therefore,
when they cannot (abiding within the bounds of their calling) amend the same,
but are no otherwise accessory? Not to dip into that question, in the full
latitude of it, we do only now enquire, if in Divine justice, a Prince is any
time punished for the sins of the People, (at which he does not connive, and
whereto he is not accessory in any degree) or, if a body of a People be
punished for one man's sin, whereunto they are not accessory; or, if private
persons be punished for the sins of Rulers, or of the body of the People,
whereunto they are not accessory; but only with grief tolerates what they
cannot amend, abiding within the bounds of their calling; this last, is the
point we must fix upon: And herein against this Author, it is asserted; that,
first, no man is involved in Divine judgments and punishments for the sins of
others, (as the deserving cause of his punishment) if he be no way accessory to
these sins of others. 2. That no private subject is accessory to the sins of
Rulers, nor involved in the punishments of the same, merely upon the account of
his tolerating the sins, or not violent resisting the Magistrate in his sinful
courses. A certain thing it is, that (setting aside the satisfactory suffering
of Christ, when he put himself under the stroke of Divine justice for the sins
of others, having no sin of his own) God does not properly punish any man, but
in reference to his own personal sin, (as the deserving cause of the
punishment) albeit he may, and often does take occasion, in his Wise
Providence, to punish men for their own sins, from the sins of others, (and in
that only sense, they may be said to be punished for the sins of others) But
every Soul suffers for his own sin, Divine justice finding deserving causes of
punishment in every one that is punished, either their personal accession to
the sins of others, (which is their own sin) or else some other sins; for
which, he may in justice inflict the punishment upon them, albeit the impulsive
cause or occasion rather for punishing in such a manner or time, etc. be from
the sins of others. Every man shall bear his own burden: As no man goes to
hell, for the sin of another, without his own deserving; so, no man is
afflicted by God on earth, but must say, there are deserving causes of that in
himself; howbeit, the lord may have other and higher designs in the affliction,
then punishment of sin.

It is also no less certain to us, that if the Magistrate do not connive at
sins of Subjects, nor neglect to curb and punish them, the sins of the people
shall no way be imputed to him (he not being thereunto accessory in any way)
nor shall he be punished for their sins, which in his place and calling he is
wrestling against, and using his power against them. Also, it is alike certain,
that private persons shall not have the sins of Magistrates, or of the body of
the people, imputed to them; nor be punished for the same, if so be they
honestly endeavor to do all things against these sins, which in their private
calling they are bound to do: If they keep themselves pure without any degree
of acting these sins, or any way of accession to them; if they mourn and sigh
for evils that are done; if they be earnest in prayer, that God may convert
others from their evil way; if they (as they can have opportunity) faithfully
admonish, and study to reclaim, these who are out of the way, and do such like
Christian duties, God will never enter in judgment with them, for not doing
violence to the Authorities that are above them, or for not wakening up
confusions in the Societies they live in, to the destruction of many. That
God's people of old were punished, upon occasion of sins of their Magistrates,
Jerem. 15.4. and the like places, was, because they were sharers in the
guiltiness themselves, (not by not violent resisting, which they were never
exhorted to) but by direct or indirect accession, otherwise, Ephraim (says
Hosea, chapter 5 11.) is oppressed and broken in judgment; because he willingly
walked after the commandment. And, Jerem. 5.31. when the corruption of Rulers
is spoken of, it is added, My people love to have it so. It was not the sin of
the Rulers that involved the people in guiltiness, or rendered them obnoxious
unto judgment, but their own accessions to the Rulers sin by consent or
otherwise. Let Mr. Calvin be read upon Jer. 15.4. he speaks most judiciously,
discoursing of the sins of Manasseh that brought on judgment: Non solus Rex
fuit author hujus saevitiae, sed consensu populi very Dei cultores tracti
fuerunt ad necem: hinc patet fuisse commune totius populi scelus; sp^nte
assensi sunt Regi. And there he shows, they continued in the same sins that
broke forth in Manasseh his time, and they were punished for their own sins,
albeit occasion is taken to remember that dreadful time of Manasseh, when the
wickedness began that was after continued in with obstinacy. And that same
excellent Divine, writing on the second and third Verse of Jerem. 22. (a place
abused by Lex Rex and others, to stir up the people to take the sword in their
hand to relieve the oppressed, and execute judgment against Magistrates)
speaks most judiciously; Hoc maxim ad Regem and Judices ac praefectos spectat,
nam scimus privatos homines non esse armatos ad defensionem bonorum. And upon
the end of the third Verse, Haec proprie ad Judices spectant, ejus doctrina non
nisi ad Regem and Judices publicos dirigitur, neque enim pertinet ad vulgus
ipsum aut privatos homines. And he adds, that the reason why that word, execute
judgment, etc. is uttered in the hearing of the people, is not that the
executing thereof belonged to them, but that, when they heard the house of
David, which was Sacrosancta, cited before Gods Tribunal, and threatened for
omission of these things, (the Kings being quodammodo Legibus soluti, as he
speaks) people might be moved to examine their own lives, and to repent of
their private injustices in their places. And it is to be noted, that the
prophetical preachings (reproving the not relieving the oppressed, and not
executing judgment, and exhorting to these duties omitted) uttered to the body
of Rulers and People, are to be understood as reproving what was amiss in every
one in their respective callings, and as injoining such duties as might be done
by every one: Salva justitia, salvo ordine and pro modulo vocationis; people
are warned against private oppressions, Rulers against public, and every one
in their station exhorted to deal righteously. But to say, that whenever the
Prophets, in their Sermons, reproved positive oppression, or commanded
executing of righteousness, they minded to condemn in the people, the grand sin
of non-resistance to the oppressing Magistrate, or to cry out against it, or to
incite private persons or people to pull the Sword out of the Magistrates hand,
and relieve the oppressed, and execute judgment on the oppressors, even
Magistrates, (as Lex Rex does say, P. 367.) is not only a most fearful
perverting of the holy Scripture, to make it a cloak wherewith to cover
seditious Practices, but a Doctrine that tends directly to horrid confusion and
utter subversion of humane Societies. And verily, let this Principle be once
admitted, that the sins of Rulers and Governors involves the people in sin, and
makes them obnoxious to judgment (albeit they be not accessory thereunto,
directly nor indirectly, only they tolerate what they cannot amend, abiding
within the bounds of their calling.) Neither can the consciences of people, nor
the State of the Commonwealth, have any true peace or quietness: For, 1. once
grant this, then what a continual puzzle should tenderhearted Christians be
in, anent the actions of their Rulers and Magistrates, and they behoved to
meddle with, and examine all their proceedings, lest they should involve them
in sin and judgment, (and to do so, were indeed work enough, and above, to
private Christians) and they might be put into this fear to be guilty, or
involved in judgment for matters of Government, not probably or morally
possible for them to know: What a ground of great disquietness should this be?
2. Would not this be a perpetual Seminary of unavoidable sedition in the
Commonwealth, and of exposing the Magistrate to violence, no less when he is
acting justly, then when unjustly? Such is the ignorance and corruption of most
of people, who will never want this ready pretense, If we suffer the
Magistrates to do such a thing, and not oppose them by force, we shall with
them be involved in sin and judgment. But, as to the Scriptures he abuses, to
prove that people are involved in guiltiness, or made obnoxious to the
judgments of God, by the sins of their Rulers, (albeit they have no accession
thereunto, but only not violent resisting them) and that one part of people may
be so involved in sin and wrath, by the sins of another part: and that
therefore they ought to use violent resistance against the sinning Rulers or
People: The first place is, Jer. 26.15. where the Prophet Jeremiah, 8. ver. is
apprehended by the Priests, the Prophets and all the people, for his faithful
preaching, 9. ver. All the people were gathered together in the house of the
Lord against him, and said, thou shall surely die: whereupon the Princes come
and sit in the entry of the new gate of the Lords house, and the Priests accuse
him before them, ver. 10, 11. The Prophet Jeremiah delivered his message to
them all, avows his commission to the Princes and to all the people, closing
his speech submissively, 14, 15. Behold, I am in your hand, do unto me as
seems good and meet unto you. But know ye for certain, if ye put me to death,
ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon your selves, and upon this City, and
upon the inhabitants thereof. Where two things are to be marked; 1. That
Jeremiah is speaking to the Princes and all the people, or the great confluence
of the body of the people at that time, warning them not to meddle with his
blood, the Princes that they should not unjustly condemn him, the people that
they should not consent to, nor cooperate with, an unjust sentence, as to the
execution thereof, (as the manner of execution was amongst that people,
stoning, etc.) And, 2. he certifies both, that if they consented and
co-operated to his death, they should bring innocent blood upon themselves, and
upon the city and inhabitants thereof: he does not at all incite the people to
rise up and rescue him by violence out of the hands of Rulers, if they should
give sentence of death against him, (neither did ever any of the holy Prophets
instigate people to use violent resistance against their perverse Magistrates,
nor did they ever reprove, directly or indirectly, that sin of non-violent
resistance to Magistrates, as some excessively bold do averr) But only warns
Princes and people both, that they be not by consent or concurrence accessory
to his death, lest it should bring vengeance upon them all, because of their
consent and concurrence; a deep accession to the same. It will perhaps be said,
that the Prophet not only intimates, that they who heard him, Princes and
people, should be guilty of his innocent blood, and obnoxious to judgment; but
even the rest of the people, who (although the confluence then was great) could
not be all present; yea, Children and Infants, and all the dwellers in the
City, and the City it self, should be involved in the sin and wrath following
it.

I answer, that none could be defiled with the sin, but such as one way, or
another, made themselves guilty by accession to it; either in action, or in
omission of that, which they were in their calling and station, capacitated to
do for hindering it; (such as violent resistance of Magistrates, by private
persons, was not) neither does the Prophet mean, that all the absents, all the
infants, of that great City, (who knew nothing of the matter) should be guilty
of the shedding his innocent blood, (if it were shed) or should properly upon
that account, deserve the wrath of God; only he means, that the consentors,
actors, and such as were omitting their duty, public or private, in reference
to the preventing of that sin, should be involved in the guiltiness of it, and
incur the wrath of God for it: But as for other Inhabitants of the City,
absents, Children, etc. though for that sin, (they not knowing of it) they
could not be judged properly guilty of it, or deserving wrath for it; yet, he
intimates, that the Lord by occasion of it, (should it be committed) would
bring wrath even upon these, (although for other sins, as the meritorious cause
upon their part) And the judgment and wrath, that for the sin of shedding
innocent blood, should come upon all the people and inhabitants of that City,
might be indeed properly a punishment to the Rulers, for that particular sin,
and to the people accessory thereto in any way; but could not be a punishment,
(for that sin particularly) upon them who were no way accessory to it, but
only a punishment for their own demerits; albeit the execution, hic and nunc
occasioned by the sin of others. This is a sure truth, that God may justly
punish the Princes or Fathers, in the punishment of subjects or children,
Castigantur parents in siliis, tanquam in sua carne charissima, Zanch. 4. pr.
(they being as it were, parts of themselves) may, (I say) punish them, with
temporal judgments at least; this is agreeable to his justice, who visits the
sins of the fathers upon the children, 2d Command: But yet, when he is
punishing Princes or Parents, in their children or subjects, there is also in
these who are punished an internal demeriting cause of the strokes laid on,
that they shall have no reason to quarrel with God, or to say, The Fathers have
eaten sour Grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on edge, Ezekiel. 18.2.
Sometimes persons may be punished in the affliction or punishment that falls on
other persons near to them, but yet the affliction of these other persons, is
always deserved by their own sins; albeit, God in his wise providence, makes
these very same afflictions to be punishments also of the sins of others, to
whom they they are nearly related. But as to this place, it is not the Prophets
mind to intimate, (as this man says) that for violation of this duty, of not
offering violence to the Magistrate, proceeding unjustly, wrath should come on
them all of that City, there is not the least evidence of any such intention he
had, to stir up the people to do such a thing; only, he gives faithful warning
to all ranks, not to consent or cooperate to such a wickedness, which might
bring wrath upon them, as Diodat has it; ye will make your selves guilty
before God of this fact, and burden your selves with it.

Napht. p. 19.
Then for that place, Deuteronomy. 13.12, 13, 14, 15. If thou shall hear, etc. he
asserts, that it makes much for his position of the lawfulness of peoples
rising against all Magistrates, supreme and subordinate, or of any part of the
people, their rising against the greater part, wickedly back-slidden. And he is
bold to say, that astricting this place or the like, to the Hypothesis
contained in the letter of the word, etc. is to elude Scripture, and to mock
the Holy Ghost, by whom it is given. To which, 1. certainly this Libeller
speaks like a Divine, calling a conscientious cleaving to the literal meaning
of the Holy Ghost in Scripture, an eluding all Scripture, or mocking the Holy
Ghost, by whom it was given; are not they rather deluders of the Scripture, and
of the Spirit of God, who labor to make a nose of wax of the Holy Scriptures,
wringing and wresting them where they will, introducing their own fancies upon
the Word, and not embracing the clear sense of the Spirit of God, directly held
forth in the Word? In this art of wyre-drawing the Scripture-words, without any
wa^rand or good reason; and of covering crooked courses with Gods cloak, (as is
said of these, Mal. 2.16. who cover violence with his garment) this man and his
accomplices (men of blood and violence) are singularly experienced. 2. This is a
sure rule, That no exposition of a Text can subsist, that is either contrary to
other Texts of Scripture, or to found reason: but so it is, that the exposition
given by this man of this Text, as if it favored his position for mere private
persons, or any part of a peoples taking not only the defensive Sword in hand,
but the vindicative and punishing Sword against all Magistrates, higher and
lower, and against the body of the Society, whereof they are Members, and the
lesser part also, is contrary both to plain Scripture and to reason. The
Scripture commits the vindicative and punishing Sword only to the Magistrate,
Romans 13. He only is Gods Sword Bearer that way. And amongst Magistrates there
is a supreme power, 1 Pet. 2. on whom all others have dependence, as to their
call and the exercise thereof. And it is a Doctrine point blank contrary to
reason, remedilesly tending to dissolve humane Societies, and all Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, and opening a door to all seditious confusions; to teach, that
any mere private persons, or any part of a people (who think themselves strong
enough) should take on them to sit and act as punishing Judges over all
Magistrates, supreme and subordinate, constituted by the body of a people; yea,
and upon the major part of the people themselves. Oh, horrid confusion, to be
detested by all rational and Christian hearts! that the minor mere private part
of a people, should set themselves down as Judges upon the whole body of a
people, and the generality of the Magistrates; and upon their own fancies, led
with their own lusts, draw the magistratical Sword, which God never committed
to them, and strike both the Magistrates of all sorts and degrees, and their
neighbors therewith. This sure is not the work of God, (however it be faced or
varnished) but of Satan. 3. The man fancies an adversary to himself, while he
brings-in some, saying, That in the case of equal division of Cities, faithful
and unfaithful, matters should come to accommodation anent serving or not
serving other gods, (the case, Deuteronomy. 13.) or that if the major part went wrong,
the minor should rest in a sinful acquiescence, and be thereto obliged by the
major part. Who ever said so? or, (if there be any spark of Gods fear in the
heart) will say so? There is no coming to accommodation in such matters,
whither the true God, or other gods, should be served and followed, (and yet
this man would be very severe, if no Nation in the world might (having before
been embodied in a Kingdom or State) continue and abide in their peaceable
communion in civil interests, upon supposition of such an equal division
arising amongst them.) As for the obligation that the major part of a people
might put upon the minor, to a sinful acquiescence, who will allow that? There
should be no sinful acquiescence, nor any acquiescence at all to any party,
were they never so many, who run away from God after other gods or idols. But
(supposing a Government democratick) though the lesser part is not to acqulesce
in the way of the greater, running into rebellion against God; but by all means
competent to them, bear witness against that way, and study to keep themselves
pure, when they cannot prevail to have matters rectified, as to the whole body:
yet, cannot people keep their conscience and practice undefiled, unless they
overthrow by violence (which is the thing all alongs aimed at by this man) Gods
order in the Societies whereof they are members, and instate themselves in the
power God has not given them? 4. This Libeller is a very confident person,
pronouncing Oracles ex scrin^o pectoris, while he affirms, that the
constitution of Civil Government amongst Gods people, to which the Texts, Deuteronomy.
13. Judge 22. etc. do relate, was democratick. Upon the contrary we affirm, that
from Moses time (who is called King in Jesurun, Deuteronomy. 33.5.) the Lord never
appointed, nor allowed, a democratical Government amongst his people, (although
the principles of this man and his consorts do lead to the worst sort of
Democracy, as the only lawful Government; yea, to an Oligarchick Democracy (if
so we may speak) wherein the lesser part of mere private persons may tread down
the greater, and all Magistrates also from the highest to the lowest, if they
can have strength enough.) The Government of that people until Saul's time, was
properly Theocratical, The Lord was their King, 1 Samuel 12.12. in another way
and more special, then he is King over all the earth. From him they had their
judicial Laws particularly set down to them; He appointed in his Word their
high Senate or Sanhedrim, (wherein the high Priest was a chief Member, and
other Priests Members also, not eligible by the people, as neither were the
heads of the Tribes of Israel) to rule them under himself: He did now and then
send out his extraordinary Vice-royes (the Judges) till Samuels time, who not
only were Saviors to deliver them from their enemies, but Judges to rule them
in times of peace, for many years together: and when these were not sent, they
had their settled Sanhedrim or Senate of Gods appointment, to govern them.
Again, that command, Deuteronomy. 13. did reach all times of that Israelitish estate,
even when they came to be under Kings and visible Monarchs, who unquestionably
had the supreme power of the Sword: nor was it free for private persons, upon
any pretense, to take hold of it, for revenging or punishing without them, (as
this man would have private persons now to do.) And further, though the word,
Deuteronomy. 13.12. be spoken to the people, If thou shall hear say, etc. yet, it is
always to be understood, that the peoples concurrence in the punishing of an
apostate City, was to be within the bounds of their calling, and under the
conduct of the Magistratical power set over them. As when inticers to idolatry
are in the former part of the Chapter injoined to be taken order with (however
nearly they were related to people) and to be stoned; it is not to be supposed,
that the charge is given to every private person brevi manu to do this, but
judgment was to be execute on them after judicial conviction and sentence
given by the Magistrate, as Diodat notes well, ver. 8. Procure (says he)
vengeance on him, in way of justice accusing him to the Magistrate by
information or sufficient proof. So also, in the case of apostasy of a City, a
judicial process is required, 14. ver. Thou shall enquire and make search, and
ask diligently and behold if it be truth, and the thing certain, etc. Pelargus
notes on the place, Ne indicta causa quispiam temere a nimium fervidis
condemnetur, actio a Magistratu est instituenda post famam publicam, defensio
reo est concedenda. But this man will have mere private persons, without any
judicial proceeding by the Magistrate, to execute vengeance against all
apostate Magistrates, and Ministers, and People. This he furiously instigates
people to do, and by him and his party, all are held Apostates who differ in a
point of external Church Government from them albeit they hold fast the true
Protestant Religion (according to Gods Word and our good Laws) in the integrity
of their souls.

The other place abused by him, is Josh. 22.17, 18, 19. ( Naph. p. 19) which he
thinks gives warrant for private persons to use the revenging Sword upon
Apostates, for turning away Gods wrath. But, how absurdly abuses he the holy
Scripture? It is most clear, they were no private persons that transacted that
business with the children of Reuben, Gad and Manasseh, nor the minor part of
that people of God. The Congregation of the Judges and Princes of the people,
conveened under the conduct of Joshua, their Judge then living. Phineas, the
high Priests son, with the rest of the Princes of the Tribes, are sent to treat
with the Reubenites, anent the altar they had set up, and they return a
satisfying answer. Now, let any judge what makes all this for the encroachment
of mere private persons upon the use of the Magistrates avenging Sword on
Apostates. Besides the body of the peoples concurring, we have the Magistrates,
supreme and subordinate, acting their parts in their station, who, had they not
used their Authority (had that supposed defection been indeed real) had been
truly guilty of sinful connivance.

As to the third place cited, Judge. 22. in the case of Israel and Benjamin,
that time was indeed the time thrice spoken of, Judges, 17.6.18.1.21.25. When
there was no King in Israel, every man did what is right in his own eyes; (if
this be aimed at by this man, his heart and ways can tell.) It is hard to show
what the Government about that time was. Martyr, on 18. of the Judges, tells
us, the People of God in these times were under the power of the Philistines,
Collapsa erant omnia (says he) quod Rege ac Magistratu Respublica
destitueretur. Yet shall we not think it likely, but they retained somewhat of
their Sanhedrim appointed, Deuteronomy. 17. which in such a horrid case might draw
together in an extraordinary meeting: but let it be so, that the Government was
democratick then (which cannot be proven) yet seeing it is the body or major
part of the People that uses the Sword against the lesser, it makes nothing for
this Libeller, who will have the minor part to use the Sword, to punish
Magistrates of all degrees, and the major part of the people also (if they have
strength enough.)

As to Achans case, Jos. 7. There is nothing in it to justify private persons
rising against the Magistrates, and plurality of the people to avert the
judgments of God, nor for using violence upon them, in case of their sinning
against God, (which is the Libellers position) what was done to Achan was done
by the Supreme Magistrate Joshuah, and not by mere private persons usurping his
power. Achans sin being so secret and unknown, could not involve the whole
multitude into sin, and render them obnoxious to divine wrath (they not knowing
it, far less being accessory to it.) And albeit it be said, Israel has sinned,
11. v. yet as Diodate and others say well, the meaning is, one of Israel has
sinned, not the whole collective body: and although by occasion of that sin of
one member of the body, other members are smitten; yet in the justice of God,
these smitten members had their own guiltiness drawing on strokes upon them,
the out-letting whereof was in divine wisdom ordered upon occasion of Achans
sin. These two things we are peremptory in. 1. That God in his holy justice
does not punish any part of a people for the sins of another part, to which
they are no ways accessory, only they tolerate what they cannot amend,
keeping within compass of their calling, albeit in his holy Providence and
Wisdom, he may, and does often, take occasion of punishing one part of a People
for their own sins, from the sinning of another part of that same Body and
Corporation. Every man that is punished, has in himself the meritorious cause
of the punishment; albeit the rise of the execution of the punishment hic and
nunc be occasioned by the sins of neighbors, or members of that same body. 2.
In this we are peremptory, that whatever opportunities, the Lord in his holy
Wisdom does take of punishing one part of a people, upon the breaking out of
the sins of another part of a people, yet private persons have no warrant
thereupon to usurp the Magistrates Sword, nor to use it against himself, if he
be the offender, or against other offenders; and the pretense of turning away
Gods judgments from our selves, will not justify such disorder and intrusion
beyond the lines of our Calling. This is the (...), the true question betwixt
us, and this man with his accomplices; in every case where he apprehends
defection, he will have private men, usurping the Magistrates punishing and
revenging Sword against all, for averting Gods wrath (albeit to violent him or
his, in matter of Religion, he affirms is the greatest oppression.) He thinks,
he and his accomplices may force all by the Sword to their way, but must not be
forced by any. Who can endure such Turkish Tyrranny, such Doctrines and
Practices, so subversive of humane Societies? If he (or his consorts) can
produce either Scripture, Command or allowed Example, warranding any party of
mere private persons, to take and use not only the defensive Sword, but the
avenging and punishing Sword, against Magistrates of all degrees, and against
the Body of a people, upon pretense of Religion or any other, we shall kiss his
hands, and humbly yield to Gods truth (accounting this our greatest victory)
otherwise we must say, he is a very word^e Thraso to tell us, that any thing he
says (perverting the sense of Scripture) may stop the mouth of all
contradiction; and we must look upon him as Satan's instrument, to introduce
confusion in the world. And though he pleads for private persons falling upon
Magistrates, and others of the Commonwealth for their sins, that Gods wrath
may be turned away in their punishment, it has no weight with us: for, albeit
the Lord may, in his holy wise Providence, take the rise of the out-letting of
his judgments on some from the sins of others related to them, yet has he not
made his Providence the Rule of our actions to warrant us (being private
Persons) to punish them; but we must go to the Law and Testimony to seek the
Rules of our actions. And whatever action is not according to this, there is no
light in it, it is but a work of darkness, for all the fair colors men can set
upon it: albeit God visit the sins of Parents upon Children; yet that gives no
warrant to Children to offer violence to their Parents for their sins.

But yet the Libeller cannot so leave the matter, but after many ranting and
rambling words (which it were a pain to ripe up, nor is it our purpose, minding
only to notice his abuses of Scripture, and impertinent reasonings) he comes
at length to his great reserve, page 30. and says, If all these things do not
satisfy (as indeed they are soon pleased, who will be satisfied by him) he has
yet, four or five particulars that will make all sure for his position, which
he has been laboring to underprop, (viz.) That any private persons, may
against all Magistrates, and the great body of the Commonwealth, take and use
not only the self defending, but vindicative, punishing and reforming Sword.)
And, 1. he says, That the reason of delivering the Kingdom to the People, and
not to the King, with the Law it self, (Deuteronomy. 17.14. no way contradicted or
repealed, by the manner of the Kingdom, and in effect of Tyranny fore told, by
way of disswasive, 1 Samuel 8.10.) does make much for his position. But, 1. the
man utters here, a gross untruth; For, God does not in the Text, deliver the
Kingdom to the People, and not to the King, (as he says) he does only before
hand, instruct the People anent the right way of setting of a King over them,
(when it should come to pass, that they should do so) and leaves in his Word,
instructions for the King that should be set over them, how to behave himself:
That the Kingdom is here delivered to the People, to be managed by them, as
well as to the King, or with reserve of Power to them, to use violence upon and
against the King, (if he should deviate from the rules there set down) as this
man contends, is most false: the People had not so much Power, as to choose the
person that was to be King; God reserved this for himself, 15. ver. Thou shall
in any wise set him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose, neither
ever did they choose a King, but only accepted of the Kings, chosen and given
them by God, and designed to them by his extraordinary Ambassadors; as is
clear, first in Saul, and after in David and his Family, the chosen Royal
Family. Neither were the People to look on their Kings, as their servants or
vassals, or creatures, (as such men use to write) but as set over them, Thou
shall set him over thee, (not under thee) whom the Lord thy God shall choose)
neither had they power over the King, but the King by Gods Ordinance had Power
over them. 2. Were it so, that the Kingdom or the Power of managing it, were
delivered to the People, (which is most false) yet this makes nothing to this
Libellers position; giving Power to any party of private Persons amongst
People, to punish all Magistrates, and the major part of the people too, (if
they be strong enough) whatever was granted to the People here, was granted to
the body; not to this, or that party of private persons. 3. It is very true,
the place, 1 Samuel 8.10. (and not, 1 Samuel 10.10. as he mis-cites both this and
the former Scripture) neither contradicts, nor repeales that Law, Deuteronomy. 17.14.
but agrees notably with it. But it is false, that only the Tyranny of a King
is there spoken of, by way of merely disswasive: Moses and Samuel do very well
agree together, the one shows what a King should do ex officio and de jure, the
other what a King may do, by the power he has, and yet not be obnoxious to
punishment, from Subjects; The one shows what a good King should do, the other,
what a People should suffer of an evil King, without attempt of violence upon
him: The one sets forth Gods approbative Law, and instructs Kings in their
kingly duties; the other sets down the permissive Law of the King, showing the
reach of his Power, (if he should abuse it) without punishment from man. The
doing of such things, 1 Samuel 8.10. was in effect tyrannical, not approven by
God; but if the King came to abuse his Power so far, he had a permissive Law
for him, that it was not free to his Subjects to punish him: As, albeit the
Lord approves not Divorce, or a man's putting away of his wife, yet by a
permissive Law, husbands amongst Gods People, had liberty, Deuteronomy. 24.1. to put
away their wives, without being obnoxious to humane punishment for that cause;
(albeit God reserved the punishment of the hard-hearted husbands to himself)
So, the Lord gives no approbation to over-imperious or tyrannical facts of
Princes; yet, if they abuse their Power, he will reserve them unto dreadful
punishments by his own hand, but will not have the hands of their Subjects to
be upon, or against them. As parents do evil in correcting their children, for
their pleasure, Heb. 12.9, 10. and have no moral approven power from God so to
do; yet, it is a sort of right of parents, that if they so do, their children
may not use violence upon them, or rise to destroy them, but be in a reverent
subjection to them.

But this great Theologue tells us, That it is only the manner of Tyranny, that
is here set down by Samuel; And that merely by way of disswasive, to dissuade
them from seeking a King. Ans. 1. It is true, the fact is the manner of
Tyranny, but the permissive power without punishment from Subjects, is the just
right of all Lawful Kings, of whom, as it may be said, Nil paenas metuunt,
nulla quia lege tenentur: So to them (if they deboard and abuse their power) it
may be said, Si genus humanum and mortalia temnitis a^ma: At sperate deos
memores fandi atque nefandi. 2. Let it be so, that Samuel in setting forth the
manner or Law of the King, intended to dissuade the people, from insisting in
their petition for a King; yet, that was not his only, nor his main intention:
his main intention is, to show the People their duty, under a Kings oppression,
(though it was not his duty to oppress them) to show them, (I say) what they
behoved to suffer under a King, beyond measure imperious, without resistance,
(for he is not now teaching the King his duty.) This is clear, for otherwise,
to what purpose should he have written the manner of the King in a Book, and
laid it up before the Lord, after the King is set over them? 1 Samuel 10.25. when
there was no place for repentance, no remedy, no use of terrifying or
dissuading them; the only use of recording it, was, to teach the people their
behavior toward the King, and patience under him, and that it should not be
free for them, to shake off the yoke of his Government, or to offer violence to
him, albeit he should over-stretch his Power too far. This that he recorded,
was not the Law of the King, Deuteronomy. 17. that was already kept in the Ark with
the rest of the Law, and needed not to be written again in a Book, to lay it up
before the Lord. Nor is there any ground for their fancy, who think, that
Samuel did write certain fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, to withstand the
abuse of absolute Power, and to temper Monarchy, with a liberty befitting the
People: This is but a guess without ground; had there been any such special
fundamental Laws, the ten Tribes had a fair ground of pleading upon the same,
before their revolt; but no such thing is heard of, and it is as easy to deny
it,, as it is to affirm, that there was any such thing as these imagined
fundamental Laws. Besides, that the People claim no vote in such fundamental
Laws or Pactions; and had there been any such thing, it was their interest to
be consulted with in the matter; and had they thought of any such Covenants or
Laws fundamental, wherein liberty might be left them to resist their Kings, or
take order with them, how easily could they have showed the weakness of Samuels
disswasion, and said, If the King become evil, we will resist him, and be
revenged upon him; for, we take him to reign, but only on such terms, that he
reign well; But no such thoughts had they.

I shall only add two or three testimonies concerning this place, 1 Samuel 8.10.
Mr Calvin, Instit. lib. 4. c. 20. S. 26. speaking of this Jus Regis, 1 Samuel 8.
says well, Certe non id jure facturi erant Reges, quos optime ad omnem
continentiam lex instituebat, sed jus in populum vocabatur, cui parere ipsi
necesse esset, nec obsistere liceret (n. b.) ac si dixisset Samuel, eo se
proripiet licentiae regum libido quam cohibere vestrum non erit (n. b.) quibus
hoc restabit unum, jussa excipere and dicto audientes esse. So, Brentius, Hom.
27. 1 Samuel Etiamsi velletis jugum Regis excutere, tamen ut semel susceperitis,
nequaquam id vobis licebit. Add Diodat on the place, that this jus Regis was,
by consent of Nations and Gods toleration, become as it were a right in
absolute Kingdoms; God prescribing to Subjects the Law of patience and
obedience, and the Prince being no way subject to punishment, albeit Gods
express Command, Deuteronomy. 17. moderates his actions otherwise.

The next thing the Libeller adds in his reserve, to satisfy men's judgments
anent his seditious position of private men's using the punishing Sword against
all Magistrates, etc. is, the contract and covenant betwixt King and people,
etc. Better occasion shall be given to speak of this in the next Chap. Only now
we say, it is impertinently alleged to the satisfying of men anent his
foresaid position: for, whatever interest the body of a people have to oppose
powers above them by that supposed contract and covenant, will not justify
mere private persons, and the far fewer and lesser part, in their insurrections
against all Magistrates and the Body of the community; for, it is not with
them, as separate from the Body, that such a contract (if any be) is made; but
it is between the King and the People, nor can it enstate them in a Power of
punishing all Magistrates over them and all their neighbors, (being the
Plurality) which this man aims at. But he proceeds to seek further protection
for sedition in sacred Scripture, out of which he would produce three
instances: First, the peoples opposing Saul in the case of Jonathan, 1 Samuel
14.45. To which we say, though Saul had made a rash oath, and had rashly and
sinfully adjured the people, that they should eat no food till the evening, v.
24. (which L. R. untruly calls a standing Law, which the People had agreed to,
P. 349.) yet the people use no violence against Saul, when he goes about to put
to death innocent Jonathan (who tasted of the honey, not having heard of the
adjuration) But in the heat of a souldierly boldness, (after so great a victory
obtained specially by Jonathans valor, who in that day of Battle wrought with
God, and wrought great salvation in Jsrael) do effectually interpose with Saul,
and mediate for the life of Jonathan, moving Saul to wave respect to his rash
oath, and to regard what was just and right. The people (as Junius says)
adjurat Saulem and appellat ipsius conscientiam coram vivente Deo, ut
posthabita juramenti ratione, juris habeat rationem, etc. and se interponentes,
Saulem impediverunt, ne eum morti traderet. They interposed by mediation for so
worthy a person, and their mediation was willingly welcomed, and not a word is
there more of that matter, Saul not counting himself crossed in such mediation
for so noble and dear a Son, whom he in his rashness had devoted to death.
Neither do the people oppose an oath against Saul's oath, for saving Jonathan:
Junius exposition may pass well, that they speak not by way of swearing, but
by way of reasoning, abhorring the destruction of such a person. Ab sit, ut
vivit Jehova, an cadere debet ullus ex capillis capitis ejus, quandoquidem,
etc. As the Lord lives, should any hair of Jonathans head fall to the ground,
etc. It is a wonder to see understanding men argue from this place, for violent
and forcible resistance to Kings, especially when acting according to Laws
consented to by private persons; here the King is not acting according to Law,
but prosecuting the observation of a foolish and rash oath; Here, the
opposition made to the King, is by way of intercession and earnest reasoning,
that he ought to regard what was right, more then his rash oath; here, the
opposition made by way of intercession, was acceptable and welcome, acquiesced
in, and yielded to; Here, the opposition made, is not only by one part of the
people, but the Princes of the Land and Captains of thousands, as L. R. says,
p, 348. Now what makes all this for a party of mere private persons making
insurrection, and using force and violence upon all Magistrates, acting
according to established Laws, and affronting, grieving, dishonouring them,
yes, professedly aiming at their destruction? Let Peter Martyr be looked upon
this place, and he speaks notably well, his own words will discover, how
notourly he is falsified by L. R. p. 349. But yet again, the Libeller produces
the example of the ten tribes rejecting Rehoboam, 1 Kings 12. as a laudable
example to justify his position. Be-like now the matter goes farther on, then
private men's innocent self-defence against violence, for the defection of the
ten tribes is held forth as imitable (we see what is the tendency of this man's
Principles.) But no sound man will think, the sudden and furious Rebellion of
the ten tribes from David's house, upon the rash and furious answer of a young
King, was justifiable, (although the Lord in his Providence ordered it so.) And
upon the revelation hereof, it was acquiesced in, and arms were not used
against the dividing party; and it would be considered also, that they who made
the secession, were the major part of the body of the people. But, what is all
this to justify the insurrections of any lesser party of private people,
against the Magistrate, and all Magistrates supreme and subordinate, as this
man would have them to do? Every example recorded in Scripture is not imitable.

As to the revolt of Libnah, 2 Chronicles. 21.10. this is reported in Scripture as a
fact, but is not justified and approven, although it be said, they revolted,
because Jehoram had forsaken the Lord God of his fathers. This imports not the
impulsive cause of the revolt, or motive which they had before their eyes,
(for, in that same verse and period, it is said, The Edomites also revolted
from him, because he had forsaken the Lord God of his fathers: and the Edomites
loved not the true Religion) But the meritorious cause on Jehorams part of that
piece of judgment coming on him, is pointed at; as oft-times God punishes
men's sins by the sinful actions of other men against them; the instruments are
sinful, but his justice is holy. But let the Libeller tell us in good earnest,
if he thinks that the laying aside of the Presbyterian frame, is the forsaking
of the Lord God of our fathers, and a sufficient cause for any one Town in the
Kingdom to revolt from the King, (though he do not persecute them nor force
them to his way, as there is no evidence that Libnah was thus used) shall a
Kings swerving in that one point, or if there be greater infidelity, be
sufficient ground of defection from him? Cave dixeris. Libnah was a City of the
Priests, Josh. 10. (perhaps much of the temper of this sort of men) but their
revolt was sinful, because with the secession from the Commonwealth, they fell
off from the Church of God, from Jerusalem, the Temple, and public Worship and
place of it, which was (as yet) owned by God, notwithstanding many corruptions:
the revolt is only recorded as done, not as well done. As to what he adds, of
the Practices, Prophesies, and manner of the late blessed Reformations, and the
Right and Constitution of this Kingdom, afterward it shall be considered. But
it is a wonder, that upon this point of resistance and taking arms against
Kings, he has omitted David's taking Goliaths Sword, and gathering bands of men
for his own defense against Saul's violence; which because he medleth not with,
neither shall we, further then to note what Beza in his answer to Castellio, P.
20. says, Davidis unctio ita eum a privatis distinguebat, ut jure posset armis
vim injustam repellere. And it were to be wished, that this Libeller, who mocks
at the exemption of Kings from punishment by Subjects (as we will hear) may let
David's word sink in his heart, Who shall stretch forth his hand against the
Lords anointed, and be innocent?

Now to draw to a close of this matter, let these few things be observed, 1.
That whatever may be said of the lawfulness of defensive arms, against the
illegal violences and extreme oppression of a Prince, who is not integrae
Majestatis, by other Magistrates to whom with him the protection of Laws and
Liberties is jointly committed, by certain pactions and conditions expressed;
that will say nothing to warrant the insurrection of any party of private
persons against all their Magistrates, acting according to Laws agreed upon by
the Magistrates of all degrees, and the body of the Community.

2. That the late rising against, and resisting the King and all Authorities in
the Land, was utterly unwarrantable, not only upon the account of their being
mere private persons who did take arms, but because there was neither
sufficient ground for that deed, (had it in its nature been lawful) nor did
they abide within due limits of an innocent defense. The Author of L. R. tells
us, P. 329. When there is no actual invasion made by a man seeking our life, we
are not to use violent re-offending.

Again, he says, P. 327, 328. Private men must not presently use violence to
the Kings servants, till they supplicate; nor may use re-offending, if flight
may save; and must not use violent re-offending against the servants of the
King, but in the exigence of last and most inexorable necessity. And, P. 321.
Any mean not used for preventing death, must be an act of revenge, not of
self-defence. And adds there, That in paying tribute, or suffering a buffet of
a rough Master, we are not to use any act of re-offending, etc. Now the world
knows, the life or blood of these people was not sought upon any terms, there
was no forcing them to idolatry, to false worship, nor frighting them to any
thing of that kind upon pain of their lives; only for their contempt of the
outward Ordinances of God, purely administered in an Orthodox Church, they were
put to pay such moderate fines, as the public Laws had appointed; without any
actual invasion of them or their persons, they were the first aggressors and
invaders, wounding and murdering the Kings Servants and Ministers, and seizing
on his chief Officer. Napht. p. 137. confesses they shed the first blood, and
first murdered the Kings Servants. They had never before that essayed
supplicating these in power, for mitigation of their fines (which was not
forbidden them to do, if so be they would have done it without tumults and
combinations) but being inflamed by furious Agitators, they would flee to the
Sword, and provoke others to combinations with them: And so, (spoiling loyal
persons who would not concur with them, and their hearts being full of much
more mischief) they marched on to mock Authority with armed Petitions, as they
had mocked God by sinful prayers to prosper their evil course, (as if he had
been altogether such a one as themselves) But not only have others, but
themselves also, cause to praise God that they had no success in sin, which
might have been a snare and a stumbling block to them and others also. It is
Gods great mercy not to thrive in an evil way.

3. All the people of God are to advert carefully, to the dangerous principle
of this Libeller, and his adherents, which is this, (all alongs his Book) That
it is as (or more) irrational and unlawful, to suffer unjustly from the
Magistrate, (so long as there is strength enough to act against him) as it is
to obey actively, his unlawful commandments: This doctrine cannot but be a
source and spring of perpetual seditions, under every kind of Government, Civil
and Ecclesiastical: For thus, every man is made judge of his own suffering and
passion, as well as of his own practice, and no man must suffer, more then he
thinks he deserves; (but counteract all Authority, if he be strong enough to
do it.) And no man is to submit to unjust sufferings, by abused Authority, but
ad redimendam majorem vexationem, and when he cannot otherwise mend himself by
the use of violence against the Magistrate: Thus no malefactor ought to submit
to punishment if he think it unjustly inflicted by the Magistrate, but do
violence to him if he can; and, no Minister is to forbear preaching, if he
judge himself unjustly deposed; and no Christian forbear intruding himself on
the Communion, if he judge himself unjustly dealt with by Church-Judicatories:
This is a subversion of all order in humane and Christian Societies, for all is
made dependent upon the fancies and thoughts of private sufferers; who are like
enough, to be very favorable judges to themselves, in prejudice of public
Order, which (notwithstanding) any tenderhearted Christian will regard more
then his own private will or well-being; however, Naphtali mocks at Gods order,
page 152. asserting, the observance thereof, to be but a dispensable formality,
when he and his party takes it in their heads, that it is conducible to break
the observance of Gods order, for Gods glory: What woeful confusion shall we be
reduced to, if such fancies possess the heads of heady people? These great
teachers, would assure us, it is an act of Grace and Virtue to resist the
Magistrate, unjustly afflicting us: And that it is both well consistent with
the honor due to the Magistrate, by the fifth Commandment, to knock him down
by violent force of Arms, when we think he wrongs us; and also, a necessary
commanded duty, (by virtue of the sixth Command) so to do, when he offers
violence to our life, (although he proceed by Law, which we count an unjust
Law.) This is the doctrine of L. R. and of his fellow witnesses, whom Napht.
calls Martyrs: It is true, L. R. page 322. strives to allay and mollify the
matter, (wherein he is not so far wrong as Naphtali) asserting, That in lesser
injuries, (beneath mutilation, or loss of life) as bearing tributes, or losses
in estate, etc. a man has given him of God a greater comparative dominion,
then over his life: And that he may as to these matters, suffer unjustly from
the Magistrate, without resistance, and ought to do so; (and this was the only
case of the western Sufferers, if they may at all be looked on, as unjustly
suffering) although he ought not to suffer death unjustly, if he can help
himself, because God has not made this eligible by any man. But certainly, his
writing involves gross contradictions, for the ground of resisting the
Magistrate pursuing a man's life unjustly, which he does lay down, ( viz. That
there is no more obligation lying on us, to suffer unjustly from an abused
power, (if we can violently resist him) then to do unjustly upon the unlawful
command of the Power) does reach not only to the case of taking away the life,
but taking away the goods unjustly; for if it be true, (as he says) that by
virtue of the sixth Command, we are obliged to resist the Magistrate, when we
think he takes our life unjustly; certainly by virtue of the eight Command, we
are obliged to resist him, when he takes our goods unjustly, or lays on
oppressive tributes; and by virtue of the ninth Command, are obliged to resist
him violently, if reproach or infamy be rubbed on our name and reputation,
(which to men, uses to be dearer then life or state) by him. And seeing this
Witness and his fellows, do speak of submission to sentences of Judges, which
they reckon unjust, as a matter at least of equal guiltiness, (where there is
Power to resist violently) unto the guiltiness of active obedience given to
unlawful Commands; no degree of such unjust suffering, is eligible, more then
any degree of wicked obedience, to unjust commands: God has not given to us a
comparative dominion over our actions, that we should do a less sin rather
then a greater; (seeing all sin is to be abhorred) So, if by divine precept, we
be bound to resist Powers, inflicting on us greater punishments unjustly; we
are also obliged to resist them, in inflicting the lesser punishments, (if
they do unjustly.) And non-defense, even against lesser injuries, (being sin)
it is not eligible, and if non-defense against greater injuries be sin, against
the lesser it must be sin also. So by this doctrine, nothing at all is to be
suffered at the hand of the Magistrate, (if we think, he deals unjustly with
us, and if we have power enough to master him) but a continual repugnancy there
must be in all Subjects against all Magistrates (when they apprehend wrong is
done to them) and violence upon violence must be offered them, where there is
force and strength enough in the persons accused as guilty: yea, no man is to
suffer any thing from Powers above them, without a physical necessity of force
upon him; nor must in submission do any thing that may be dispositive or
preparatory to his own suffering. No man, if he think himself injured, (though
sentenced to banishment) is to go on his own feet, till he be by force ejected;
no man, fined in pecuniary Mulcts, is to pay them till he be under force, and
his money plucked from him; no man is to go the place of execution (when
sentenced by the Judge) till he be trailed by force, if he think himself
innocent; nor lay down his head on a block, till he be violented: For, albeit
he be not in probable capacity to deliver himself from death, or from these
other punishments; yet, every man is in capacity probable enough to command his
own loco-motive faculty not to stir toward the accomplishment of the execution
of the unjust sentence, till there be a force upon him. And it is Naphtali's
Principle, that so far as probable capacity is to resist violently, there
should be no submission; and then there must be patience per-force. Can such
Doctrines, or the tendencies thereof, relish to the people of God, or to any
rational people?

CHAP. III. That such as are invested with sacred and inviolable Sovereignty,
have divine exemption and privilege of impunity from their own Subjects.
THe matter in dealing with Magistrates (according to Naphtali's mind) rests
not in a mere resistance of them by mere private persons, but goes on to
retaliating and revenging upon them, wrongs supposed to be done, not only upon
all inferior Magistrates, but upon the Supreme, who is invested with Majesty
and Sovereignty over all under God. For this man, again and again, jeers at the
Sovereign Powers privilege and Impunity of divine exemption; (See Napht. Page
28, 29.) and (reflecting not obscurely upon the horrid murder of our late
Sovereign, insinuated as the memorable instance of the times whereof he now
speaks, no other instance being producible at any time he now speaks of)
asserts, That according to Gods Word, the approbation of Gods providence, and
of his people animated by himself, the pretended exemption and impunity of
Princes is made void, their Carcases removed, and their Scepters broken, P. 29.
And, P. 151. he allows any private persons to step forward, and remove them who
abuse their Authority and occupy their places, and assert the interests which
these wicked persons (Magistrates) have so traitorously forfeited and deserted.
And when they do so, (though but private persons) he avows, they are acting in
their places and callings, according to the Covenant.

Most of the venom this man has against the Powers ordained of God, he has
sucked out of the breasts of Lex Rex. It were not right to dig up all the
pestilent untruths of that Piece, set forth in most impertinent and sophistical
reasonings, mixed with infinite inhumane bitterness against the late King: only,
as it were to be wished, that such errors might be buried in eternal oblivion;
So it is to be regrated, that too too many of the Ministry and others in
Scotland, have been poisoned with such Principles; and the same not being very
like to be suddenly extirpate, the more need have the Powers above us to be
watchful.

To come to the matter then. 1. It would be observed, that in all political
Societies, there is according to Gods Ordinance, a supreme Subject of Majesty;
in all these Societies, the chief Power is either subjected in one person, or
in more persons in an united way. The God of order has, in all humane political
Societies, appointed under himself a supreme Power, whither subjected in a
single person, or in a complex company, which is as one by political union.
This supreme Power (or they who are vested with it) orders the whole body, and
has nothing before or above it, in the nature and order of civil Power and
Authority. And this first and supreme Power governs all in the Society, and is
governed by none therein. In all order, there is a necessity to arrive at
something that is first, before which, or above which, there is nothing in that
order; In ordine, impossible est abire in infinitum. To say that in civil
Societies, a person is first and chief, and has the Majesty of the Society
resident in him, and withal, that that same person has a Superior or equal,
is to speak contradictions; for then the Power, or Person endowed with power
should be both Supreme and not Supreme, in the same kind of civil order. Wise
men have said, that the multitude of gods is the nullity of gods; a multitude
of infinites so called, makes none of them infinite. The Gentiles, who had many
gods, were indeed Atheists and without God in the World. So a multitude of
Supreme Powers in one humane civil Society, destroys the divine order set by
God himself, and allowed by the light of reason in humane Societies; a chimaera
of idle distinctions is whelped by the late masters of confusion, of
coordinate and collateral Sovereigns in one Kingdom, the fountality of
Royalty in the people (resumable at their pleasure) is talked of, also Kings
and People, their being mutual Magistrates to punish one another. And besides,
ordinary Courts of Justice (where the Magistrate, Gods Sword Bearer bears sway)
Courts of necessity and Tribunals of Nature, where People are Judges, Accusers,
and all, are bigly talked of, but these are only cloaks of fig leaves to cover
horrid Rebellion and Disorder.

It is certain supreme Power is indivisible and incommunicable to distinct
Subjects in any one political Society. There is no political Society, but the
Sovereign Power must rest either in one single person, who has no Peer, let be
Superior, or in the plurality either of the best or chiefest, or of the most
and greatest number, and which are in a manner one by aggregation. And there is
no part of the Society or persons equal to, or above these in whom the
Supremacy is. In a democratick constitution, the supreme Majesty is in the body
or plurality of the People, So we often hear in Tullie of majestas populi
Romani; In an Aristocratick constitution, the Majesty and right of Majesty is
in the body or plurality of the Nobles, or Lords, or Patritii, or however they
be named in several such states. And in a Monarchy, the Sovereign Majesty is
indivisibly and incommunicably resident in the person of the King, who has
none coordinate with him in the politic body, nor superior to him, he is solo
Deo minor, which was the loyal faith of the primitive Christians concerning
their Emperors, as Tertullian tells us, and was the ancient Language of our
Parliaments concerning the King, (as may be seen in regiam majest. lib. 1. c.
1.) the loyal simplicity of the ancient Christians, and of our ancient
forebeers in this Land, would have accounted the distinctions of the
needle-headed seditious which we hear for levelling Royalty, very monsters.

But why should we doubt, that where there is a King, (one truly so) his
Sovereignty is matchless on earth, when the Scriptures calls him Supreme? 1
Pet. 2.13. Is there any equal to the Supreme in order of civil Government, by
whom he is judgeable or punishable? if there be any, he is not Supreme, nor the
Government Royal, Monogamy admitts no Rival, so neither does Monarchy, truly
and properly so called.

2. It is certain, no man can be judged or punished but by his own Judge who is
above him, and has Authority over him by lawful commission from God, or from
men authorized by God, to give such commission: Now, who shall be judge to the
person or persons invested with Sovereign Majesty, seeing every Soul under them,
is Commanded to be subject to them, Romans 13.1. and seeing the supreme Power of
the Sword, is committed unto them, and not to others, but by deputation and in
dependence upon them? In an aristocratical constitution of Government, (as is
at Venice) who shall be judges to the Patritii or Senators, if they, or the
major part deviate or do wrong? In a democracy, (such as sometimes was at Rome,
Athens, and other places) where the people are the supreme receptacle of
Majesty, or the plurality of them, who shall judge, them, wen they do wrong,
either to particular persons, or to considerable parts of the people; as at
Athens, Socrates was put to death, for avowing the only true and one God; just
Aristides, was billetted into banishment, for no cause; valiant Themistocles
had that same lot, and many more? and how often in such a constitution, has the
corrupt majority or plurality, extremely wronged considerable parts of the
people? yet, who had power to punish them? who could be Judges between the
doers and sufferers of the wrong? Is there not in both these Governments, a
necessity of impunity and exemption, for these invested with the Soveraginty,
(as to their subjects) unless a door be opened to most horrid confusions and
dissolutions of States? So also, in a true Monarchy, there must be an exemption
and impunity (as to subjects) of the person invested with Soveraignity and
Majesty: Gods law, natures light and sound reason, are all for this, that the
person (or persons) invested with sovereign Majesty, having the
Legislative-power, the Jurisdictional-power, the Coerecive and Punitive-power
originally in himself; must enjoy exemption and impunity, (as to subjects
actings against them.) The contrary tenet overthrows the order of God and
nature, and precipitates humane Societies in a gulf of endless confusions.

3. This has been the constant sense of the generation of the righteous, and
the ancient Christians, and great lights of Gods Church, whom none will call
flatterers of Princes, but such as have lost their foreheads: Tertul. apol.
contra gentes, imperatores sunt, in solius Dei potestate, a quo sunt secundi,
post quem primi, ante omnes Deos, and super omnes homines: And a little after,
Majestatem Caesaris soli Deo subjicio: So, ad Scapulam, Imperator omnibus major
est, dum solo deo est minor: So, Optat. contra Parmenian, super imperatorem,
non est nisi solus Deus qui fecit imperatorem. And, Jerome. epist. ad Rusticum,
speaking of David's words, Ps. 51. Against thee, against thee only have I
sinned; says he spoke so, quia Rex erat, and alium non timebat. And Ambrose,
in Apol. Davidis, cap. 4. and 10. speaking of the same words, says, Rex utique
erat, nullis ipse legibus tenebatur, (he means, as to fear punishment from man)
quia liberi sunt Reges a vinculis delictorum; neque enim, ullis ad paenam
vocantur Legibus tuti Imperii potestate, homini ergo non peccavit, qui non
tenebatur obnoxious. There is no doubt, but David was sensible both of the
horrid injury he had done to Vriah, (the occasion of that Psalm) and of the
scandal he had given to Gods people, in which sense, he might be well said to
sin against both: But in this word, against thee, thee only have I sinned; As
he minds to acknowledge, that God only was conscious to his sin in committing
it: So also, he shows, that this above all touched his conscience, that he had
violated Gods Law; and shows, that he is touched with his terrors, as his only
Judge, though (as Diodat on the place says well) as he was a King, he was
exempted from the punishment of man, and not obnoxious to humane Tribunals: And
excellent Mr. Calvin, in that 20. Chapter of the 4. Book of his institut. S. 2 7.
Assumptum in Regiam Majestatem, violare nefas est, nunquam nobis seditiosae
istae cogitationes in mentem veniant, tractandum esse pro meritis Regem. S. 29,
Personam sustinent voluntate Domini, cui inviolabilem Majestatem ipse impressit
and insculpsit. And if Princes be tyrannous, nostrum non est hujusmodi malis
mederi, etc. and so, S. 31. fully to our purpose, it is a wonder how many who
pretend respect to Calvin, (as he is indeed most worthy of respect) should dare
to violate the Sacrosanct Majesty of Kings, if they will but read over that
Chapter, wherein he speaks most notably against the seditious Doctrines of our
times, as if he had been living in them.

4. It is not denied, that the King is bound before God, to rule his people
according to the Law of God, of reason and nature; yea, and to take his
direction in Government, from the rational Laws of the Kingdom, (which are
deductions from, or determinations of, the Law of God, reason and nature, to
particular circumstances) agreed to, by the consent and with the good liking of
his people. It is too gross a saying, Regi quicquid libet, licet; a good King
will turn the word, and say, Regi quod licet (supposing it expedient) libet, he
will make use of good Laws, as his instruments, in governing the people, and
account it his honor and a thing greatly becoming his Majesty, to do nothing
contrary to Law, in the ordinary course of his Government, and not at all stray
therefrom, but when great reason urges an equitable interpretation of the Law,
and respect to the end and aim of it, when precise cleaving to the rigidity of
the letter thereof, might make summum jus, summa injuria: It is a royal thing
for a King, to live by the same good Laws which are given by him to the people;
and it is of efficicious influence upon them, to move them to walk in their
duties orderly; Rex tenetur servare Leges, si non ut Leges, tamen ut rations.
But, if the supreme Power should deviat, we maintain that as a sure truth,
which this man proudly and traitorously jeers at; That impunity (as from
Subjects) necessarily attends Soveraignity and supreme Majesty; which has this
inseparable privilege of exemption from violence by Subjects, by the Law of
God, Reason and Nature, whatever sort the Government be, Monarchical or
Polyarchical: For, no man can be judged or punished, but by a Judge above him,
and the Supreme has none such, otherwise he were not Supreme. To teach
contrary to this, is but to confound Gods Order, and dissipate humane
Societies, by continual rebellions.

Yet, this inviolableness of the sacred persons of Kings, and supreme ^owers
invested with Sovereign Authority from God, thus asserted, should be so far
from licensing or encouraging them to do what they list, that they have the
greater cause to walk with holy fear within the boundaries of Gods Law, and
their own just Laws; for the more immunity they have from men's violence, (which
must be granted, unless all things be turned into confusion) the sadder
punishments they shall have from God, if they debord. The sixth Chapter of the
Book of Wisdom (though it be Apocrypha) is well worthy to be read by Kings and
Potentates, and to be trembled at; for the matter is very agreeable to Gods
Word. The heaviest vengeances that are recorded in History, sacred and profane,
have come upon flagitious and tyrannous Kings: their exemption from men's hands
reserves them to fall into the hands of the living God, which is a fearful
thing; who (besides the wrath that is to come) sometimes calls for foreign
scourges upon them; sometimes suffers an evil spirit of rebellion to go out
amongst their own Subjects, who though they do wickedly, in stretching forth
their hands against the sacred head of the Lords Anointed, yet it is ordinary
for the great God, to do the work of his holy Justice by wicked hands, and when
men are serving their own lusts, and crossing his revealed will, (for which
vengeance attends them) yet they may be in these actions serving his
Providence, and his Justice against wicked Powers, albeit they think not so,
nor comes it into their minds or hearts: But Potentates should remember the
word, Potentes pa^ce debent uti potestate sua, ut semper eam retinere possint.

But, the Libeller will have the memorable instance of the times, whereof he
now speaks, ( Naph. P. 30.) of casting away the Carcases, and breaking the
Scepters of Kings, to be remembered; and says, such a thing had the approbation
of divine Providence, of his Word, and of his People animated thereto by
himself. Albeit his speech be subdolous and double-faced, leaving it doubtful
of what times he speaks, wherein this memorable instance of murdering Kings
and dethroning them is to be found, (at the time of Reformation, whereat he
seems to hint, no such thing was there) yet, it is too palpable he points at
the horrid instance of the murder committed upon the sacred Person of our late
King, by the vile and desperate Sectaries, ( the instance (says he) of the
times we now speak of, is worthily recorded) another instance, in the times of
first Reformation, of such murder, we know not. But, it is most falsely and
wickedly said, (whether that particular be meant or not) that Gods Providence
or Gods Word approves the murdering or deposing of Princes; or that he
thereunto animates his people. Gods Word never warranded any Subjects to take
the Sword to destroy their Sovereigns, or to adjudge them to death under any
pretense, (they not being their Judges above them, but under them) and what
Gods Word approves not, his Providence does not approve, (although he may, and
does in his holy Providence, permit many things to be, which he approves not in
his Word, which is our rule, and not his Providence.) And to say, God animates
his people to such horrid actions, is blasphemy, making God the author of sin:
he animates none to any thing that is against his Word (the ordinary rule of
our walking) albeit extraordinarily he may stir up the spirits of some to
actions, not according to the ordinary rule (as in the times of the Judges) but
they were sure of their warrant from him, the like whereof none have ground to
wait for now. But, God save the King from such people so animated, (as this man
would have them) he may call them the people of God, that carry such
murthering-hearts toward Princes; but it is to be feared, God will say to
them, Depart from me, I know you not.

One of Naphtali's commended Pseudomartyrs, the Apology, labors to produce
many instances of the Parliaments of Scotland, punishing Princes for their
enormities; all which he sets forth as laudable and imitable presidents and
examples: Yet, the most that all of them amounts to, is nothing but the
insurrection of Nobles ( Proceres, as Buchannan calls them) against the Kings,
and violent oppressions of such of them as have been flagitious and tyrannous,
(such were several of them, as it happens every where, and was so in Judah,
where were more evil Kings then good, by far.) But neither Buchannan nor this
Apolog. can produce any one instance of our lawful Parliaments or Peoples
taking on them, in a judicial way, in cold blood, and under forms of process,
to punish or destroy their Kings, howsoever evil. Whatever insurrections have
been wherein Kings have perished, and not a few people also, (as oft-times the
cure of Tyranny is worse to the people, then Tyranny it self, Minori cum
periculo tyrannus toleratur quam ejicitur) yet God has, since the foundation
of our Kingdom to this day, preserved our Parliaments and People from such a
way against their Kings, even when they were under Paganism (for some ages)
even when Popery did over-grow the Land, choking and darkening the light of
the Gospel, after it was come amongst us; and when the Land was in many ages
under much barbarity, it never came in the hearts of Parliaments or People, to
sit as Judges on their Sovereigns in cold blood, and advisedly with forms of
Process, to attempt their destruction, (however evil they were.) The more shame
do they cast upon these, who in the fair daylight of the Gospel, endeavor to
poison souls with such a Doctrine of devils; or who instigate to, or approve of
such ways against the Powers ordained by God.

But to pull out this Libeller and his Accomplices from the Sanctuary of the Word
of God, which (he says) does approve the destroying of Princes, and makes void
their exemption and impunity as to men, (their Subjects.) Let it be considered,
what color there is for this horrid Tenet from the Word of God. A little we
must reflect upon his Magazine, whence he borrowes all his stuff, printing
that precious matter that is there over and over again under different shapes.
L. R. quest. 26. is bold to say, That the Sanhedrim might and should have put
David to death for the matter of Vriah. For (says he) he sees no exception God
makes in the Law, of great or small, but the murderer should be put to death,
according to Genesis 9.6. Numb. 35.30, 31. and if men make difference, be craves
leave to say, a facto ad jus non sequitur; and though it be an humane politic
constitution, that the King be free of all coaction of Law, because it
conduces for the peace of the Commonwealth: Yet, if we make it a matter of
conscience, I see no exception that God makes, the persons of the Great must
not be excepted, Deuteronomy. 1.17. 1 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. Levit. 19.15. So also, P. 348.
and 428. and 238. And often elsewhere, he will have the estates executing the
moral Law (as he calls it) on the King, and punishing him, not only resisting
him. And why? because he says most Thrasonically, P. 460. I have unanswerably
proved, that the Kingdom is superior to the King, and the people may be their
own Judge in the Tribunal of necessity. To which, we say, 1. What should he
mean to make it conducible to the Peace of the Commonwealth, that the King be
free of the coaction of Law, and yet not so, if it be made a matter of
Conscience? Is the preservation of the Peace of the Commonwealth, no matter of
Conscience to him? or, Is not the constitution, freeing the King from coaction
of Law (for that end) warrandable? 2. It is good that this Metaphysical
Statist, was no chief Priest or Levite, or such a member of the Sanhedrim in
David's time, for he would certainly have afforded a corrupt exposition of the
Law, in reference to the King, that he might be cut off; What sots, or
cold-rife senseless men were the Priests and the Prophets of that time, who
did not instigate the Sanhedrim, to execute the moral Law on David, that wrath
might be turned away from the Land? this man could (in his sublime
speculations) have instructed the Sanhedrim better in their duty, and could
have told them, that albeit David was not bound to draw his Sword against
himself, yet the Judges under him should not accept his person, because he was
a great man; he could have told them the Sanhedrim is above the King, to punish
him as well as another man for his sin, and in point of Conscience, and by Gods
Law, they were bound to do it. 3. He utterly mistakes the meaning of the Word
of God, Genesis 9.6. (as for the other Texts, they clearly concern Magistrates
only toward such, over whom they have power, but do^s neither instigate the
inferior Magistrates against the superior, nor the People against any of them)
where it is said, He that sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed;
concluding hence, that there is here a Precept, that the blood of every man
(though he be in the supreme Power) should be shed by his Inferiors, if he shed
blood innocently and without cause; for, supposing this word, not only to be
predictional or interminative, foretelling and threatening, what should come
upon shedders of innocent blood (as some expone it) but also diatactick and
preceptive; there must be meet limitations of the sentence, both in the subject
and the attribute, that it may agree with other sentences of holy Scripture.
The subject is, ( he that sheds man's blood) which is not to be understood of
every one that sheds man's blood, but only of such as have no authority, and do
it out of private revenge (for we must not own the fancies of Photinians and
Anabaptists, that condemn lawful wars, or capital punishments by the hand or
Authority of Magistrates, albeit they argue from this place.) Again, the
attribute, or that which is affirmed or commanded, concerning the shedder of
man's blood ( by man shall his blood be shed) is to be considered. Certainly,
taking the words as a Precept, it is not meant, that it is the duty of every
man, or any man indifferently, to shed the blood of the person, who sheds
innocent blood; but the man who is to shed the Blood of that person, is the
Magistrate, who is his Judge above him. All interpreters are agreed, that here
is (if not the institution, yet) the approbation of the office of the civil
Magistrate, and his capital punishing of murderers. Pareus says, Sancitur hic
lex civilis, ut homicidae plectantur capitaliter per hominem, non quemvis, sed
gladio divinitus armatum; h. e. per Magistratum. Peter Martyr, loci com. p.
634. non temere nec per quemvis est effundendu^ homicidae sanguis (id enim
esset valde absurdum) quare colligendum est ex illis verbis, Magistratum non
obscure esse a Deo institutum, qui animadvertat in homicidas. So, Musculus,
Bezelius, Diodat, and every one almost, will have the man empowered here to
shed the blood of the murderer, to be the Magistrate and the Judge. And the
Chaldee Paraphrast has well expon'd it, qui effuderit sanguinem hominis, per
testes juxta sententiam Judicum, sanguis ejus fundetur. And Bezelius says well
on the place, that here God is communicating his right and power to the
Magistrate, giving him jus vitae and necis, and power to kill murderers.
Certum hominem intelligit (says he) qui ad eam executionem constitutus est. So
the man, that in this Text, has power to shed the blood of the homicide or
murderer, is the Magistrate or Judge that is above him, constitute by God in
politic power, over the Society whereof he is a member. But if the persons
invested with supreme Power of the Sword, abusing their power, become guilty of
shedding innocent blood; who (in that Society, whereof they are heads) shall
judge or punish them? Who is superior over the Supreme to punish him? It is
true, God will take the matter in his own hand in his time, (and so taking the
words as a prediction or threatening, they may be comprehensive of the supreme
Power it self, and of men in that power abusing the same.) But it is
inexplicable, how that any, in whom the Sovereign Majesty and magistratical
Power resides, or who is therewith invested, should according to order be
punished by Subjects, who are not appointed to be his Judges nor to be Gods
Sword-bearers, for executing Justice. The Text always supposes, that he who is
the avenger of bloodshed, must be Judge above him that shed it, being in one
body of one Society civil.

When the Apostle, Romans 13. says, let every Soul be subject to superior
Powers, that (every Soul) does not comprehend the supreme Power it self, (for
how can the man invested with it, be subject to a superior Power?) but it is
meant, that every Soul under the superior Power or Supreme, should be subject
to it: And let men (as they will) indulge themselves in their seditious
notions, they must at last ^ist in some supreme Power on earth, which is not
judgeable nor punishable by any: if sovereign Majesty be placed in Parliament
or people, (who may be guilty of shedding innocent blood, as well as a King)
who shall shed their blood, (I pray you) when they transgress? where shall we
have Judges to sit upon them, and to punish them, unless this be referred to
the sounder and smaller part of the people? (as this man says, p. 240.) And
then, there is ground enough laid for eternal confusion; any lesser part when
they have, or think they have wit and strength enough to through their
business, will undoubtedly call themselves the sounder part, and labor to bear
down the corrupt plurality, (as we did see not many years ago, in our
Church-business) God pity us, if these Principles be embraced and put in
practcie. But the christian Reader may easily see, how hard this Author is put
to it, and for all his saying, that according to Gods law, Kings must be
punished as well as others; yet, is he forced to acknowledge, a supremacy of
Power in some, not punishable by any but by God: For, L. R. p. 389. when he
has given all power to the Parliament over the King, he objects to himself,
who shall punish and coerce the Parliament, in case of exorbitance? he answers,
posterior Parliaments, and p. 211. he says, by the people and conscience of
the people, are they to be judged, (let all our Nobles and Parliaments hearken
to this.) Now, who ever heard of this, that one Parliament posterior, should
punish the prior? Their acts they may retract indeed, but to punish them for
their acts, it is most absurd; because, the prior Parliament, in the capacity
of that Judicatory, had as much power as the posterior; Statesmen will wonder
at such Doctrine, that members of a Parliament should be punished for their
free votes, by a succeeding Parliament; and far more at the subjecting them to
the conscience of the people, (as he speaks.) But then another objection he
makes, posterior Parliaments, and people both may err; he answers, all that is
true, God only must remeed that: Well then, if Parliament or people, destroy
and murder persons innocently, God only must remeed that, there is no Power on
earth to call them to an account. Who sees not, that at last this Author is
driven to acknowledge a Power (which if it deviate) cannot be judged by any on
earth, and there is no remedy but in God, against its unjust violence? although
he will not acknowledge this Power to be in the King; yet, in the people, as
contradistinct from Parliaments, he acknowledges it; whereby also, it may be
seen, that his Principles lead him to own a mere democracy, (which is the worst
of Governments) as the only lawful Government; he places and fixes the
unpun^shable Sovereignty there. Kings and Parliaments may be, (according to
him) punished by the people; but, they have a Power attended with impunity from
men, if they err, God must amend that only: we see where we are, and that the
resolution of all supreme Power is upon the people under God, (according to
these men's tenets) the rabble of the multitude, against King and all Nobles and
Rulers, are instated in the Sovereignty under God; yea, Napht. goes further,
giving to any part of mere private persons, power over King and all Magistrates
and Nobles, to judge, depose and punish them, or the major part of the people,
(if there be strength enough) and that uncontrollably upon their own judgment
of discretion, as we have heard, and will hear further.

But now, ventum est ad triarios, we come to the great Guns, whereby Napht. and
his witnesses, L. R. and the Apol. strives to batter down Gods order, and to
make sovereign Powers, (in the case of abuse of Power) punishable by their
inferiors and subjects, (a thing which all the Lords and Superiors in Scotland,
had need to look to; for, with as good reason may their tennents and vassals,
be exhorted to rise against them, and take order with them, when they think
they do them wrong, as subjects may be exhorted to rise against their King.)
Lex Rex harps much upon the Covenant, betwixt the King and the people, and
betwixt both together with God, quest. 14. and 40. asserting, That the King is
only a King conditionally and Covenant-wise; that this Covenant, gives the
people a coactive Power over the King to punish him, if he fail in his duty,
and that if it be not performed on his part, (although it be but a tacit and
implicit Covenant) the people for their part are loosed from the Covenant:
These, and many such Doctrines consequent on these, he has in these questions.
But, Naph. out-stripes his leader, for albeit he also harpes upon that supposed
Covenant, p. 19. p. 30. and elsewhere, laying much of the stresse of resistance
against, and revenge upon the King abusing his power, upon that rotten
foundation; Yet, he goes a greater length then L. R. does; for, L. R. takes the
Covenant as the warrant for the body of the people, with their Rulers of
inferior degree, to resist and punish the King; but Napth. pleads the Covenant
for any party of mere private persons, to rise against, resist, throw down King
and all Magistrates, Supreme and Subordinate, and in their Phineas-like
motions, to use the vindicative, punishing, reforming Power of the Sword,
especially in case of defection in matter of Religion; (such as he thinks the
cause now to be.) And the great stresse of the business, is still laid upon
these Covenants, tacit and virtual, or express; and, it is pleaded, the
people or any part of the people, have by that Covenant, a joint obligation
with the King and all Magistrates, lying upon them, to use a vindicative and
reforming Power, in case of defection in Religion; yea, even against all
back-slidden Rulers and the plurality of an apostate Nation.

There is a twofold Covenant they talk of, as the foundation of all humane
Societies, 1. the religious joint Covenant between the King or Sovereign and
people with God. 2. The civil Covenant betwixt the King and the people.
Concerning the former, it is Naph. mind, p. 18. That albeit the care of
Religion toward God, in a vindicative and punishing way, and reforming it, etc.
lies upon the King or Magistrates mainly, (he should have said only, for none
can produce a commission, but the Powers ordained of God, for using the
vindicative, punitive and reforming Sword, about which the question is now but
only the Magistrate) Yet, there is a joint obligation lying upon the people,
and every party thereof, to vindicate and reform Religion, in a public
punitive way, even against all Magistrates and Nobles, (if they be the
principal perverters and patrons of abominations, and against the plurality of
the people; for, says he, 18. p. Idolatry, perjury, etc. ought by all means
(n. b.) to be suppressed, restrained and severly punished: So that if any part
of the people, do think the Magistrates, (all of them) or the plurality of the
people, Patrons of abominations, (as in the present case he challenges them to
be) any private party that think they have power enough, may slay to the
vindicative, punishing and reforming Sword; and fall upon all Rulers and
others, whom they think to be in a defection, and will boldly say, that in
truth they are so.

This is the man's fine Doctrine: he conceals not his own intentions and his
parties, upon the account of the Apostasy which they now fancy, to fall with
bloody cruelty on all Magistrates and people too, who stand in their way: he
shows his bloody teeth, but God will knock out the teeth of this sanguinary
Faction, as he has done. Yea, Naph. runs yet higher; for, upon the conceit of
setting up Government for Truth and Religion and Gods Worship, as the main
ends, P. 16. he asserts, The cessation of the obligation to the Government,
when there is a perversion in that great design of it, and a returning of
people to their primaeve liberty (as he often speaks) to erect Governments to
their mind, and to combine with whom they will, (as before we heard.)

Concerning these things, we say, 1. That albeit it be Gods holy will, that in
erections of Civil Government, his Truth, sincere Worship and Glory in these,
should be mainly minded and intended by men, and it is men's duty so to do: yet,
it is clear, that in many places de facto it is not so; although men profess in
the general, aiming at Truth and right Worship, yet there are aberrations in
the particular. 2. Albeit there be, in the point of Truth and the Worship of
God, (which de jure should be principally cared for in Government) a notable
perversion and swerving; that does not at all invalidate the Authority or
Government, nor break the obligation thereunto, although it be injurious to
favorers of Truth and right Worship: For, God so far regards the keeping of
humane Societies in tolerable order, that albeit the great duties of
advancement of his Truth and Worship be not minded by Rulers; yet, he will not
have the Commonwealths, where justice between man and man is maintained for
his Glory, (although Religion not minded as it ought to be) casten loose; nor
will have men think themselves loosed from obligation to the Government, albeit
there be perversion in the managing thereof, as to Religion: for, neither must
they be heard, who hold, That civil Dominion is grounded on Grace; nor they who
say, That infidel, heretical or excommunicate Magistrates fall from their
power, or that the Subjects obligation to them cease. 3. It shall be easily
granted, that the people, and every one of the people, ought to reform
themselves from all real corruptions in the Worship of God, and keep themselves
pure from abominable things, every one is bound to amend one, and so all will
be more easily amended: yea, no man should say, Am I my Brothers keeper, but by
faithful instruction, warning, reproof, strive to save others from the evils of
the times and places wherein they live. But, 4. That there lies upon the
people, with the Magistrate, a joint obligation of public reforming, and using
the avenging or punitive Sword in amending things amiss against the will of all
Magistrates, or even turning that Sword in a violent way against him; or that
such obligation lies upon one part of the people, against all Magistrates and
their fellow Subjects, as to violent them in matters of Religion (or which they
account Religion) it is utterly denied, acting in a public co-active way, or
by the use of the vindicative and punitive Sword. For, Reformation in a
co-active way is so fully and only the Magistrates duty, that whoever will
intrude into it (being persons of mere private capacity) they stain Religion,
and brings scandal on it by their Rebellion. Though the result of the work be
good, the manner is evil; God needs no man's sin to help him in his work; nor
will he ever impute it as sin to private persons, that they did tolerate (with
grief) what they could not amend, nor that they did forbear violent forcing the
Magistrate to their mind (supposing them in the right.) If in a way God has
set me in, I cannot without manifest schism and sedition, and leaping beyond
the limits of my calling, do a good work, I am to leave it to God to do it in
his own cleanly way; it is well if I keep my self pure, mourning for
abominations done, and praying to God against them, and using all charitable
and fraternal means becoming a private Christian; and thus my tolerating of
what I cannot amend, shall not be my sin, albeit it is sin in them who have a
public Power, and do not reform, but connive at abuses. As no part of a people
or private persons, have power to usurp the Office of a Minister, to preach,
minister Sacraments, etc. So, no private persons can lawfully, under whatsoever
pretense of good intentions, meddle with the Magistrates work, or intrude in
the public actings only competent to his place who is the Minister of God,
invested with Authority by him. Far less can they, in case of his deficiency or
opposition, use the vindicative or punishing Sword against him, for not being
of their Religion (supposing ^t to be true) nor against their fellow subjects:
but all this is according to this man's mind.

The great mistake in all this matter, is, that the Magistrate and People are,
as to Covenant with God, or engagements to him for advancing his Truth, looked
upon as two debitors bound in a Band, conjunctly and severally, for one sum; so
that in the deficiency of the one, the other must pay all, and has power to
stresse the deficient: So they think, there is a joint and equal obligation
betwixt Princes and People, as touching the public promoting of Religion. If
the Magistrate be deficient, they must do it, yea and fall on him for his
deficiency. But there is no such joint obligation: it is true, the Magistrate
in his place is bound in a public way to advance Religion; the people are also
bound in their private capacities and callings, to advance Religion, and to
serve the Magistrate therein, as he employes and calls them. But there is no
such joint obligation of King and People unto God, that either of them should
be so bound for the other, that if the one be deficient, the other party
contracting becomes therefore obliged to the duty to which the deficient party
is obliged, or becomes guilty, if he intrude not in the part of their duty. Nor
is there a mutual tie on both to force one another to their duty. Qui
diversimode obligantur ad diversa non sunt correi in promittendo. The case
betwixt the King and People in the religious Covenant with God, is like the
case of two men binding in one band for their several moieties of a sum; if the
one be deficient, the other is not stressed for it, nor is the payer bound to
force the deficient by virtue of the band. If the People reform themselves, and
keep themselves pure from abominations, the Magistrates deficiency (which they
tolerate with grief) shall not be imputed to them, because God gives them not a
calling to intrude into the Magistrates office, or to use the reforming Sword,
or vindicative and puniing acts of it (which only are committed to the
Magistrate.) The King indeed is bound, both as a Christian, to own Religion for
his own souls good, and as a King, to use his magistratical Power to force his
Subjects to the use of external means of Religion (which is all he can do) and
if he do this, and meet with the insuperable stubbornness of an evil people,
the guiltiness lies not on him, but on them. But upon the people, there lies
no obligation to force the King, or their fellow subjects to external means of
Worship and Religion, because that is not within the verge of their calling,
only they are to keep themselves pure, and to use all moral means usable by
persons in their station, to move others to embrace true Religion. And having
done this, they discharge themselves sufficiently, and may commit the rest to
God. The late Covenant it self does only bind private persons in their places
and callings (which certainly are private, and to be managed by private means)
to endeavor reformation, and does not bind any number of mere private persons,
to pull the Sword out of the Magistrates hands, when they think he uses it
otherwise then he should, and then they would have him use it. It is not, can
never be the place and calling of mere private persons, and the minor or far
minor part of the People, to use the vindicative, punishing and reforming Sword
against all Magistrates (reckoned by them as Apostates) and against all the
body of the Land. If the Covenant be passive of such Commentaries as this man
puts upon it, that whatever any private party accounts Reformation, they may
use the vindictive punishing Sword against all of all degrees that stand in
their way to advance the same, we have little reason to be in love with it; and
just cause to cast it by, till it be cleared of such corrupt gloss^^.

But, let us now consider the civil Covenant betwixt the King and the People,
Napht. touches on it on the forecited places, and the Author of L. R. puts
forth his strength (such as it is) upon this matter, avowing, that the King is
not King, but Covenant-wise and conditionally, and that by Covenant; the people
have a civil claim against him, may punish him, and have a right to a coactive
power over him in Courts set up by themselves. And may as they see fit, resume
what power he has, for he is but their Servant and Vassal (as he says.) What
can Protestant Princes expect, but destructive doctrine from this hand and pen,
that has written up, (Page 178.) John Marian the Jesuit, lib. 1. de Rege, for
one of his approved Authors (as he calls them) a reprobate Author, (amongst all
good men) is the man, and his book commending regicide by any means, is
infamous in all Christendom; however this man count of him as an approved
Author: and his spirit may be no less seen in that, while he approves this
man, he has set this mark on famous Bishop Andrews, known in his time to be
most adverse to Papists, P. 423. Bishop Andrews (says he) his name is a curse
on the earth, his writings prove him to be a popish Apostate. What of his
writings this man has seen, who can tell? but all that the world has seen of
his writings, prove him a great Antipopist and sound Protestant. But to our
purpose: This civil Covenant 'twixt King and People, is pleaded as that which
is essential and fundamental to the constitution of all politic Societies; and
whereupon, peoples both resisting the Prince, and revenging themselves upon
him, is mainly grounded. Yea, Naph. will have it to be a sufficient ground, not
only for the Proceres or Body of the people, to proceed vindicatively against
the King, but (in application to the Rebellion, he intends to justify) for any
private persons whatsoever, if they be in probable capacity to do mischief,
without drawing mischief upon themselves; and so out-stripes his master, (who
gives not much to any private persons upon this account, but to the States of
the Land and inferior Magistrates with the Body of the people.)

But as to the Covenant betwixt King and People, both L. R. and Naph. urge it
as the ground for not only resisting, but punishing Kings and all Magistrates,
(when they account them Tyrants.) and will have a tacit virtual Covenant as
valid for their ends, as where it is express; avowing it to be essentially
fundamental in the constitution of all political Societies. This brings to mind
the folly of the man, that would have all to be tied in a Band that he had
made, as well these who subscribed not, as these who subscribed it. But to be
serious, as to this matter; we say, 1. it is easily conceded, that there is a
mutual obligation betwixt Magistrates and Subjects to mutual duties, which is
indeed essential to the constitution of the politic Body; but this obligation
arises not from any tacit or express Covenant betwixt them, but from the
Ordinance and Will of God, enjoining them these duties in such relations, in
that Society wherein they are combined. 2. That obligation, though it be mutual
in the relations they are in; yet, it is not conditional: there is a mutual
obligation to mutual duties betwixt Parents and Children, but it is not
conditional; nor is there such a Contract or Covenant, that if Parents be
undutiful, Children should be loosed from their duty, or upon the contrary: but
Children are bound to be subject to their Parents, without any condition or
p^ction on their part, (only in point of obedience active, Gods will is to be
preferred to theirs, and nothing is to be done contrary to Gods Will for their
pleasure) otherwise the subjection is not conditional, but absolute. So also,
peoples obedience to Kings (properly and truly so called) is not conditional, (
si meruerint) nor is the duty of the King to them conditional, ( si meruerint)
but each of them is absolutely bound to do duty in their own relations, wherein
they are one to another, the obligation is absolute, ( salva Deo obedientia.)
Reverend Mr. Calvin speaks home to this purpose, lib. 4. inst. cap. 20. S. 29.
preventing an objection against obeying wicked and tyrrannous Magistrates; At
mutuas (inquies) subditis suis vices debent praefecti. Id jam confessus sum,
verum si ex eo statuis non nisi justis imperiis rependenda esse obsequia,
insulsus es rationator; nam and Viri Vxoribus and Liberi Parentibus mutuis
officiis astringuntur, etc. He says, that albeit Parents discedant ab officio,
etc. depart from their duty, and exceedingly provoke their Children to wrath,
and Husbands use their Wives reproachfully, whom they ought to entertain
kindly; yet, improbis and inofficiosis subjiciuntur Vxores and Liberi. And he
adds there gravely, that inferiors should not so much inquire into the duties
of their superiors, as every one should search what is their own duty; and no
think themselves disoblieged from their duty, because the other bound to do
duty to them, is therein deficient: this is Christian divinity indeed. As the
Magistrate is not to think the performance of his duty is dependent upon the
condition of the Subjects doing their duty; So, neither are the Subjects of a
lawful King, to account themselves bound only conditionally to him, if he do
his duty. 3. The fancy of a tacit, virtual, natural Covenant, betwixt King and
People, (as they use to call it) equivalent to all ends that an explicit and
express Covenant can have; overthrows the distinction that all sound Protestant
Divines and Politicians make, betwixt a limited or pactional Prince, and an
absolute Prince, or one who is integrae Majestatis, who takes not his Kingdom
upon conditions prescribed to him, so as in case of failing he be subject to
their censure or punishment; Est alius principatus absolutus, says Rivet. Ps.
68. p. 420. Est etiam alius sub condition pacti conventi temperatus, to that
same purpose Gerhard, de Magistrate. p. 935. wherein they agree with Calvin,
lib. 4, inst. cap. 20. art. 31. But now, this man is bold to say, There is no
absolute King, that such a King is contrary to the Word of God, (L. R. p. 107.)
and herein he (deserting our Protestant Divines) sides with Bellarm. recognit.
lib. de laicis, where he says, Inter principem and subditos est reciproca
obligatio, si non expressa tamen tacita, ut Magistratus potest subditos ad
obedientiam vi illius obligationis cogere, ita subditi possunt a Magistratu
deficere, si capita illius foederis transgrediatur. Whereupon and the like
speeches, Gerhard in the foresaid place speaking, asserts, Totam horum and
similium argumentorum structuram uno impetu dejicit Apostolus; Omnis anima,
Romans 13. etc. and says, that Barclay, Cunerus, Albericus, Gentilis, Arnisaeus,
solid refutarunt, have refuted solidly the arguments of the Antimonarchists,
as they have done indeed. But, as to an absolute Prince, albeit this Statist
says, he is contrary to the word of God, it is most untrue. For, as our Laws
(which this man cares not to contradict) allows our Kings to be absolute in
express terms, Jam. 1. Par. 18. an* 1606. Act. 2. So the Scripture is not
against an absolute Prince, as our Laws and we understand him, ( qui non sumit
aut ponit secures, arbitrio popularis aurae) no King is so absolute to rule as
he lists, (we abhor quicquid libet licet) he is subordinate unto God and his
Will; and he ought also to walk according to the particular good Laws he has
made with consent of his people; Digna vox est Majestate regnantis se alligatum
legibus principem fateri; and we doubt not our King does, and will do so: but
he is so absolute, that if he deviate (which God avert) he is not under
co-active power of Subjects, that they should have Law-claim against him, and
in their Courts of Nature and Necessity (as this man loves to speak) pronounce
judgment upon him to destroy him. A Crown was never given him, never accepted
by him, on such horrid terms; far less, that by virtue of this supposed tacit
Covenant, any minor mere private party of the people might, without and against
the great body, have liberty to pull, not only the King, but all Magistrates
out of their seat, punishing them, and possessing themselves in their rooms,
which is the express doctrine of Naph. out-stripping his Master, Sequiturque
patrem non passibus aequis. 4. There are several ways of conveighances of
Kingdoms: Where there is freedom of election of the particular person to reign,
there may possibly be express limiting conditions, allowing a reserve of Power
to some not mere subjects, to coerce and reduce in order diviating Sovereignty:
As in the Empire of Germany and Kingdom of Poland, (or if there be any like)
whose Kings are not, very nominis Reges, but personated Kings and Monarchs, (as
a p^inted man is not a man) there is some likeness to a Kingship and Monarchy,
and some power over others, given for executing the Laws: But the Supreme
Majesty, does not wholly reside in these, more then in the mock Kings of
Sparta, when they were under the tutory of the Ephori: But in the conveighances
of many Kingdoms, and all (properly called Monarchies) there is neither tacit
nor expressed Covenants, impowering others to be Judges over the King, which is
the design these Covenants are pleaded for; how many Kingdoms are, and have
been attained to by conquest in a just War? (which is a sufficient title, and
no the right of robbers, as some call it) albeit there be direct opposition, so
long as there is power, and a tacit dissent, (when their power is gone) yet,
the conquest coming by a lawful and well grounded War; the dominion and the
authority, even over the unwilling and repining subjects is lawful, though it
may be made surer, by their after consent to submit. And if this purchased
power be hereditarily transmitted, the successors receives power from their
Parents, not from the people; nor is there any shadow of tacit or express
Covenant in this matter; if ye Rule well, we shall obey you; otherwise, not. 5.
If we look to our own Kingdom of Scotland from the beginning, there will be
found no such Covenant, on which the constitution of the same is founded: There
are four or five remarkable instances concerning this Kingdom, to clear the
matter. 1. Look to the foundation thereof in Fergus the first, 330. years
before Christ's birth; Buchannan himself cannot say, that he is admitted King
upon conditions: the subjects indeed by their oath, confirmed the Kingdom to
him and his posterity; but no oath was required of him, nor of any of his
successors, till King James the sixth his time, (of which we shall anon hear.)
Of this Fergus, the black Book of Pasley (as I have heard from credible
Reporters) says, Fergusius se Regem fecit. 2. Fergus the second, the 40. King,
the great restorer of our Nation, who began to Reign, Anno. Chr. 404. did by
his valor, (under the conduct of divine Providence, and by the help of
Strangers, Danes and others, with some small remainder of Scots, recover the
Kingdom, after that the whole Nation was banished, and no Scots-man might abide
in Scotland under pain of death; he was not beholden to the people for the
Kingdom, nor had it by paction with them. 3. Kenneth the first, the 50. King,
Anno Chr. 605. who destroyed the Picts, and enlarged his Kingdom, by the
accession of theirs, purchasing more and better Lands then he had before, which
he distributed to his subjects; he held not this purchased Kingdom of them, by
contract or paction to be subject to them, on whom, he bestowed the Lands
thereof. The 4. is Robert Bruce, the 97. King, Anno Chr. 1036. Whom our Laws
of Regiam Majestatem, etc. calls, Conquestor magnus: he re-conquered the
Kingdom, when it was almost wholly alienated and subdued by the English, and
but little reserved. The English held it for many years: And the Nobility of
Scotland first at Barwick, then at St. Andrews, in plain Parliament, swore
homage and obedience to the King of England; Yet, that Prince having a
prosperous gale of divine Providence assisting his Valor, recovered the Nation
out of bondage: And who will assert, there were pactions between him and the
people, to bring him under their coactive judicial Power? A fifth instance
there is, right memorable in our own times; It is known, our Nation was totally
subdued by the English, and continued so, for the space of ten years: The
representatives of Shires and Cities and Towns, combined into a
Common-wealth-government, and sent their Commissioners to the meeting thereof
at London, where the Kings interest was disclaimed; yet in a wonderful way, God
brought him in again, and finding us at his coming a fully conquered and
subdued Nation, restored us to our freedom from the bondage of Forraigners. If
any will say, that it was upon his account, the Nation was brought to the
suffering of that bondage, and that there did ly bands upon him as our sworn
King, to free us when he should be in capacity to do it; It may be answered, 1.
It is known, that when the fatal stroke that sunk us into bondage was given,
there was an express disowning of his right, by public Judicatories of the
Land, in the quarrel with the English Sectaries before Dumbar. 2. Whatever
engagements were upon him for the good of the Nation; Yet, if these men's
principles were to be followed, they could had no force on him, to move him to
labor our vindication into liberty; for, do not they teach, that in the mutual
Contract and Covenant betwixt King and People, the People are loosed from their
duty, if the King fail in his, frangenti fidem, fides frangatur eidem; And why
then is not the King loosed, if the people fail on their part? It is known,
that (although the Nobles, and Body of the People were well enough affected to
the King, and cordially loved him, when they were overpowered and could do
nothing) yet by their representatives he was disowned (which in Law would be
reckoned their own deed.) And if a sworn people, desert and disclaim their King
by their representatives, may not the King also have the benefit of the
conditional Covenant, and leave them as he found them, in bondage to
foreigners. But such was his Majesty's Graciousness and Wisdom, as well as
Conscience of duty, that although the Nation had failed much to him, he would
not walk after the counsels of these men. And we may, (all things considered)
assert, that the people of Scotland do rather owe their liberty to him, then he
does owe his Authority to them, or by virtue of any Covenant with them.

But not to dwell too much on this, as to any express Covenant enstating the
People, or any part thereof in a coactive judicial Power over our Princes, to
punish them in case of aberrations in Government; from the foundation of our
Kingdom of Scotland, there is no such thing to be found: Buchannan himself can
never show, that before King James the sixth his time, any of our Kings at
their installing did swear to, or covenant with the people, (albeit the people
have sworn homage to them) none of them all before that time did swear
covenant-wise at their reception of the Crown, nor can it be evidenced, that
Loyalty was engaged to the King, if they thought he ruled well and no
otherwise. Some of our Historians cited by Blackwood, make mention of one of
our Kings, Gregory the Great, who did reign Anno Chr. 876. who when he was
crowned, did (in his piety) swear to defend the liberties of Christian
Religion, of the Church, of all the Priests and Ministers of Religion; and
ordained, that all his Successors, Kings of Scotland, should swear that oath at
their entry to the Government. Yet this is not mentioned by Buchannan, least
perhaps our Kings might think, obligations do lie on them by that Law, to
maintain Popery, far advanced in Gregory's time. But no other oath is
mentioned, till James the sixth his time; when he was in the craddle, his
Regent Murray framed an oath to be sworn by him, and his Successors, recorded
Parliament 1. King James the 6. but that oath never any did swear for him,
(albeit at his Coronation in the month of July, before that Act, which was not
made till the 15. of December. after, Anno 1567. the Earls of Mortoun and Hume,
did promise some such thing for the King, as Buchannan says) nor did he
himself ever swear it, when he came to be Major and from under the Tutory of
Regents. When he entered actually to reign, and accepted the Regiment in his own
person, Anno 1577. being of the age of twelve years, no man durst ever offer
that oath to him, nor when he came to be of full and perfect age. Not, but that
it is in it self (and rightly understood) a good and godly oath, but in regard
of the evil Principles, with which some Subjects were in that time poisoned, as
if such an Oath and Covenant gave a coactive right and power to Subjects over
their Prince, in all their apprehensions of his failing (as now we are taught
by men of the seditious stamp) it was thought fit to wave the putting such an
oath unto him at his entry to the actual Government (he not having taken it
before) that the fancy of such a coactive Covenant, which might breed evil
humors in the Subjects, might be removed. Whither King Charles the first did
swear that same oath, recorded in the first Parliament of King James the sixth,
we cannot certainly say (there is nothing left upon public record of that
matter at his Coronation) but if he did so, he was the first King of this
Nation, that received the Crown in way of Covenant with the people, or swearing
to them yet had he reigned eight years over us before that time; and no man
durst, or in reason could say, as now is printed, that he was no King till he
took the Coronation oath. How this came to pass we know not, but it is to be
believed on good ground, could that King once have thought, that his taking of
that oath (although it be in it self godly and good) should have been so far
mistaken by his Subjects, as that he should have been thought thereby to have
submitted himself to their coactive and punitive power in every case, wherein
they, or any party of them (being mere private persons) might think him
deficient, he would rather have endured any death, then so to cast himself
away, at the pleasure of malecontented parties amongst the people, taking
advantage against him by that oath. But it shall be avowed, that that King of
glorious memory, did never shrink from the observance of that godly oath,
whatever the malice of his clamorous and embitter'd enemies represents to the
contrary. Neither has his Majesty that now reigns, swerved from the
observation of that oath hitherto, and we are hopeful, Gods grace shall
preserve him hereafter from any such thing.

But the matter concerning this civil Covenant, is not yet at an end; for, the
Author of L. R. bends his wit to wrest the holy Scriptures to make this
Covenant necessary, (yea, for such ends as he designs, viz. the coaction and
punishing of the Prince) and backs his wrested Scriptures with some sophistical
reasonings. Did we indeed find sufficient ground for such a Covenant, or for
such ends in holy Scriptures, we should strike sail, and no wait for ragged
reasonings to cast dust in our eyes. But when we look to Gods directions, about
setting up of Kings amongst his people, and upon the doing of the thing
suitably to these directions: We profess in sincerity, that we find nothing,
but that it was Gods mind, that both King and People should do their mutual
duties (the one to the other) but that there is any such Covenant impowering
people to use force upon the King, to throw him down, punish or destroy him,
when they or any particular party of mere private persons apprehend the ends of
Government to be perverted. There is no mention of any such Covenant, Deuteronomy. 17.
where the manner of setting a King over them is prescribed; there is no such
thing done, when Samuel by Gods appointment, anoints and sets a King over the
people: nor is there any such thing found at the entry of any of the Kings of
Gods people to their Government: only there are two instances (upon special and
extraordinary occasions) of such Covenants betwixt the King and People, the
import of neither of which, is to state the people in coactive judicial Power
over these Kings, and which cannot by any Logic be drawn to be Patterns of
necessary doing such a thing in all Kingdoms.

The first instance is of David, 2 Samuel 5.3. 1 Chr. 11.3. where (though he had
reigned seven years and a half in Hebron, over the men of Judah, without any
such Covenant, 2 Samuel 2.4.) Israel and the rest of the Tribes, having all that
time resisted David and cleaved to Ishbosheth, Readiness Son, as their King, 2 Samuel 2.10. The King being killed, and Abner the General, they come to a
submission to David; and he being willing to entertain them, enters in covenant
with them, in a piece of holy policy meet for that time, to gather together the
scattered people of God, who might be tempted otherwise to other courses; they
were now coming to be his Subjects, who were not so before, but were under
another King; and fit it was to give them security, touching his good mind
toward them, they having so long stood it out in arms against him. But the
question is, what was the nature, the matter and import of that Covenant: The
Scripture says not, it was such a Covenant, (as these men would have) I shall
rule you rightly, if you obey me dutifully, otherwise not, (upon the Kings
part) And upon the peoples part, We shall obey you and be subject to you, if ye
rule us rightly; otherwise, we will not, but use our co-active power upon you,
to dethrone and destroy you and punish you. That there was any such conditional
Covenant expressed or meant, is far from the truth: David neither minds to
admit them to be his Subjects conditionally, or to subject himself to their
co-active power; nor mind they to offer themselves to be his Subjects in such
terms. On the contrary it appears clearly in the Text, that they recognosce
his right of reigning over them is from God, and that he was not subject to be
removed by them; see 2 Samuel 5.2. 1 Chr. 11.2, 3. They say, The Lord said to
thee, thou shall feed my people Israel, and shall be Captain or Ruler over
them. And it is added, Therefore they came, etc. and anointed him King over
Israel, according to the Word of the Lord by Samuel. They humbly declare him
King whom God had constituted, whom they could not lawfully reject: and it is
impious to think, that they recognoscing Gods constitution of him, yet should
fancy a Paction or Covenant, giving them co-active superiority over him, to
remove him when they thought meet, though God had set him on the Throne by a
special appointment. All the Covenant that can be supposed here, is upon the
peoples part, an engagement to humble subjection and homage: And upon the Kings
part, a Covenant of indemnity for former oppositions to him (wherein they had
need to be comfortably secured) or at most, we shall not repugne, if it be
called a Covenant both of protection and right ruling of them; yet so, as not
subjecting himself to their censures or co-action, or that they should be his
Subjects only upon that condition, being otherwise free to fall upon him. The
Covenant may be to mutual duties, and yet on neither side conditional, but
absolute; each party oblieging themselves to their own duty absolutely, but not
on condition that the other party do their duty. As if a man bind himself by
oath to give me one hundred pounds; and I bind my self again by oath to him, to
give him one hundred pounds, without conditional provision that he pay me the
money he promised me: Albeit he should fail in his oath and not pay me, yet
must not I fail in mine, but must pay him; because my oath is separate from
his, and independent upon it, and has a separate obligation absolute, which no
failing of the other party to me can loose. Indeed the case is otherwise, when
there is a reciprocal contract of things to be done by one party, upon
condition of some things to be done by the other, (as in Covenants of Peace
between Nations) there the breach of condition by one party, looses the promise
of the other, which was only conditionally made. But, subjection is not engaged
to Kings conditionally, but absolutely, albeit obedience to God be reserved,
when any active obedience contrary to him is called for.

Again, for the other instance of the Covenant, which Jehoiadah, made between
King Joash and the people, 2 Chr. 13.2, 3. 2 Kings 11.17. this was also made
upon an extraordinary occasion, (for ordinarily, we never hear of any such
Covenants amongst Gods people and their Kings; and extraordinaries cannot Found
ordinary Rules.) Athaliah had murdered all the royal Seed, 2 King. 11. 2 Chr.
23. except Joash, who was kept secret six years in the house of the Lord, while
the usurper possessed the Kingdom: Now when the godly Priest Jehoiadah, the
Kings Tutor, saw a fit time, he engaged the principal men in Covenant of
fidelity to the King, 2 King. 11.4. and showed them the Kings Son; This was a
necessary piece of holy Policy, when the Usurper and her faction, had so long
strengthened themselves, to engage the chief men to special fidelity to him. And
after that, 12.17. He brought forth the Kings Son, and put the Crown upon him,
and gave him the Testimony, and they made him King and anointed him, and they
clapped their hands and said, God save the King; and Jehoiadah, made a Covenant
betwixt the Lord and the King and the people, and that they should be the Lords
people, between the King also and the people. Joash was then but seven years
old, and not in capacity to make a Covenant with the people; but, his godly
Tutor did preside in that business: But two things to our purpose are
remarkable; 1. That he is Crowned and made King before the Covenant is made,
(as is clear in the Text) which crosses our Antimonarchists, who assert, the
King cannot be made King, until he make the Covenant with the people, and that
he gets the Crown and royal Authority, Covenant-wise and conditionally;
whereas, here he is made King antecedently to any Covenant, as the Text clears
it. 2. That albeit the matter of King and peoples Covenant with God be
expressed, viz. That they should be the Lords people; yet, it is not told us,
what the tenor of the Covenant betwixt King and people was, nor what the King
or Jehoiadah Covenanted in his name, the young King of seven years old, what
could he say in Covenanting? Jehoiadah was only President in the matter. Diodat
seems to say well, that in this place, Jehoiadah made the people swear
alledgiance and fidelity to the King, (as before he had made the Rulers do,
verse. 4.) and no more, he took an oath of fidelity of them: But, how shall it
be cleared, that it was conditional, and with a reserve of coactive and
punitive Power over him? (as these men will have it.) But passing from this,
let it be so, (which cannot be asserted with warrant) that all the Kings of
Judah, made such conditional Covenants with the people, (as is supposed) yet,
will any judicious man force the particular customs of that Nation on all
Nations, that might be best for that Nation that was not simply best, their
customs without a Law of God bearing a standing reason, cannot be obligatory on
others, least we judaize too much. But the constant practice of all the
Prophets and people of God in that Kingdom, when their Kings were very wicked,
idolatrous and tyrannous, speaks clearly, that they never had such thoughts of
a liberty by virtue of covenant, to fall with violence on their Kings: The
Prophets of God, never taught them insurrections against Kings, (as false
Prophets do now) albeit they had as great cause as ever people had (under some
of their Kings) and were in capacity probable enough to crush them, they never
suggested to them that their obligations to subjection unto their Kings, being
but conditional, they were set free, when they became so extremely wicked,
idolatrous, etc. nor did ever Godly people, (although they strived to keep
themselves pure, and to gain-stand in their private capacities the evils of the
times) think themselves free, to use violence against Powers above them; had
this been their duty, no doubt Gods Prophets would plainly and downright have
told them of it, without circumlocutions, but this they never did; either that
was no duty, or the Prophets were not faithful in not admonishing them of their
duty: When at first, that people sought a King from Samuel, they resolved not
to take him conditionally, si been regnaverit, but with all the faults that
might follow him; neither reserved they Power to coerce him, (which had it been
in their thoughts, would easily have answered and weakened Samuels terrifying
disswasive; for they could have said, we take him only as King, on condition of
his good behavior; otherwise, we will take order with him) but would have one,
as other Nations had Kings about them, (of whom Buchanan says, they were not
legitimi Reges, but tyranni in his language, because not under Law coaction)
And so also, they behaved themselves toward them, not using them as they
deserved; but forbearing violence against them, although they were very evil
Princes many of them.

But yet further it is pressed, that such an Oath and Covenant betwixt King and
People was in use then, because, Eccles. 8.2. It is said I counsel thee to keep
the Kings commandment, and that in regard of the oath of God. Therefore, there
was (say they) an Oath or Covenant betwixt King and People. Ans. 1. The most
that can be made of this place, is (as Diodat in his note thereupon affirms)
that the subjects swore the oath of Allegiance and Obedience to the King, upon
the ground whereof, they were to obey him; it was at most foedus unilaterum (as
they call it in the Schools) but it imports not mutual engagement of the King
to them, or that he swore to them, much less that the Oath they made to him was
conditional, with a reserve of Power to punish him for his deviations (which in
this same King that writes this were very great) albeit we grant all such oaths
to Kings to be understood, salvo jure Dei, and salva Deo obedientia. 2. We do
not see ground to assert, that ordinarily amongst that people, there were oaths
of fidelity and obedience given to their Kings (whatever was done in the
extraordinary cases above mentioned) far less, that Kings engaged to them by
oath ordinarily; both the King ruled without such an oath, and the people
obeyed without such an oath or engagement. Neither is there in Deuteronomy. 17. or
Sam. 8. or any where else, such a rule set in the institution or constitution
of the King, that any such matter should be done. Nor hear we in the History of
this same King Solomon, who writes this, that when he entered to the Throne,
either he swore to the people, or they to him, unless perhaps, 2 Samuel 29.24.
may import this as to Solomon. Junius translation of this Text (wherein he is
followed by Cartwright) may well pass, praestitutum Regis observa, sed pro
ratione juramenti Dei, i. e. Keep the Kings Commandment so far as it may be
kept, retaining fidelity to God, to whom absolute and illimited obedience is
sworn; So not the motive of obedience to the King (because of the oath sworn to
him) is here imported, but only the measure and moderation of our obedience due
to him, so as it may consist with the duty sworn to God: our obedience to the
King is here cautionated (says Cartwright) dummodo non pugnet cum juramento
quo divino imperio obstricti sumus, we are to obey him. 3. We may hold close to
our own translation, and yet not be necessitate to grant, so much to be spoken
of here as an oath of the people to the King; let be a mutual Oath and Covenant
betwixt King and People, (neither of which was in ordinary use amongst that
people, nor mentioned in sacred Scripture as ordinary. For, they were all bound
by oath to obey all Gods Commandments (this was the oath of God) and amongst
his Commandments, this was one, that they should obey the King in the Lord, and
obey all the Kings lawful Commandments, in regard of their general oath and
engagement to God, to obey all his commandments: they were bound to obey the
Kings Command under God, and in subordination to him, albeit they never took
any particular oath to obey the King, and dealt not covenant-wise with him. And
thus the sense runs fairly, I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment, and
that in regard of, (or, propter) the oath of God: because thou have sworn to
obey God, obey the King in all lawful things, for this is the will of God. The
motive of obedience is taken not from any particular oath made to the King, but
from the general oath made to God, engaging in all things to obey him.

But yet this business of the civil Covenant is not at an end; for, it is urged
( L. R. P. 97.) that this Covenant ties the King (be it tacit or express) not
to God only, but to the people, and brings him by reciprocation of bands, to be
under a Law-obligation; to be subject to the peoples censure and punishment in
case of failing, as well as they are subject to to him in case of failing; and
that all covenants and contracts betwixt man and man, bring the covenanters
under a law and claim before men, if the contract be broken. And that the King
becoming bound to the people, he comes under action and claim by them if he
fail, and is punishable as they are, if they fail. And that the King and they,
have a mutual coactive power one over another, and are mutually Magistrates one
to another; and the people, if the King fail, may judge him in their tribunal
of necessity; and that there needs no judge on earth between them, more then
between two Nations independent one upon another, when they war together. And
that in reformations of things amiss, (especially in Religion) people may
extraordinarily intrude in the Magistrates office, and not only reform
themselves actibus elicitis, but reform others actibus imperatis. And that
people, by virtue of this supposed covenant, may (when they see cause) formally
and effectively exercise upon their Kings that royalty which they have in
themselves virtually and fountally. Much of that sort of stuff is to be found,
quest. 14.40. and every where in that Book. And it is lamentable, that while
they who labor to preserve Gods order in the world, should be branded as
flatterers and Parasits of Princes, such flatterers of People to their own
confusion and destruction, should (with their writings) have such entertainment
and countenance. But yet it must be said, that L. R. is far more tolerable then
Naph. for, what he grants only to the body of the people or the inferior Rulers
and Nobles with the people, in acting against the King, Napht. extends in
favors of any party of mere private persons amongst the people against all
Magistrates, supreme and subordinate; and affirms, what the whole body with
inferior Magistrates may do against a King (deviating from his duty) any small
part of mere private persons (if they have strength enough) may by virtue of
the Covenant, do the same against all Magistrates supreme and subordinate, not
only as to resistance, but as to revenge and punishing them.

A few notes shall be sufficient upon the former Doctrine, and then the matter
shall be at an end. 1. Where a Covenant is made between a King and a People, (a
King I say, that is truly such a one) its granted that the Covenant on the
Kings part binds him not only to God, in relation to the people, as the object
of his duty, but does bind him to the people formally, yet not so as if he be
deficient in his duties, they are enstated in a power above him, to sit as his
Judges, or that they are loosed from all duty to him, and free to do him
violence. If a Father swear to do his fatherly duty to his Child, that makes
not the Child his Superior to punish him if he fail; when a Minister is
admitted to teach a people, he swears to them to be dutiful, but they are not
therefore made his Superiors to punish him if he fail. It is a most false
assertion that goes alongs that whole Book, that a right is given (by the
covenant sworn) to the inferiors and subjects in the politic Society, to judge
and punish their superiors in case of failing. No man can lawfully be judged
and punished (whatever contract be) by another then his lawful Judge that is
above him in that Society, whereof he is a part, L R. Page 100.101.

2. There is a very great difference between these who are in different
political Societies, when they break their Contracts or Covenants one with
another; and betwixt the head and body, or members of one and that same civil
Society. God having allowed lawful Wars, allows seeking of reparation or
repelling of wrongs done by one Nation to another, by force of the Sword, when
no rational means can bring the doers of the wrong to do right; and there being
no other remedy, he himself, the Lord of hosts and God of armies, sits Judge
and Moderator in that great business, and in the use of War is appealed to as
Judge, there being no common Judge on earth to sit on the causes of these
independent Nations. But God, having set and established in one particular and
political Society or Nation, his own Ordinance of Magistracy, to which every
soul must be subject, and all subject to the Supreme; he has not put the
punishing Sword in any hand, but in the hand of the Magistrate his
Sword Bearer, Romans 13. Nor has allowed liberty to mere private persons to
manage it against the supreme Magistrate, no nor to inferior Magistrates (as to
him) who in respect of the supreme Majesty, are but private persons, whatever
they be toward their inferiors. The Magistrates (chiefly the Supreme) are by
their official power above the whole Nation; and as absurd it is to say, they
are above the powers which God has set over them, (as L* R. p. 460. says
Thrasonically, he has proved unanswerably) as to say, that every Parish is
above the Minister, in an Ecclesiastical way, though he have official power
over them all; or that every Lord in Scotland have their Tennents and Vassals
above them, a thing which the Nobles of Scotland had need to look to: For
certainly, the Principles which lead to subject Kings to people, lead clearly,
and by undoubted consequence, to subject them to their Vassals, and to all
under them; yea, and all Masters to Servants, and Parents to Children, and to
confound and invert the order of all humane Societies. This truth we must
cleave to, that in one and that same civil Society where God has appointed
Rulers and ruled, Subjects cannot without sacrilegious intrusion and contempt
of God, snatch the Sword out of the Magistrates hand to punish him with it,
(though in some particulars he abuse it) Neither can a War, intended for this
end by mere private persons, be lawful against their head or heads; nor can any
foreign War be managed, without a lawful Authority on the Part of the
undertakers.

3. It is a very false assertion, That the people gave the Kingdom to David
only conditionally, if he did such and such duties to them; and if not,
reserving power to dethrone him, L. R. p. 97. God having set David upon his
holy hill as his King, and not only made him King by his Providence, but
express designment, special command and word, none on earth were left at
liberty to undo what God would have done and appointed to be.

4. It is very weakly reasoned, ( L. R. p. 97.) That because Gods people may
humbly plead with himself, upon the account of his own fidelity in promising,
or (as this man says) have action of Law and jus quoddam (a bold enough
expression) against God to plead with him; that therefore the Kings Covenant
gives the people ground of civil action against him, to coerce or punish him.
It had been better said, that upon this ground they might humbly plead with
him, supplicat and reason with him as Gods Deputy, bearing the impress of his
Majesty and Sovereignty on earth. But, as God cannot otherwise be pleaded with,
upon account of his promise, (wherein he is bound not so much to us, as to his
own fidelity to evidence it, reddit ille debita nulli debens) and cannot be
pleaded with by force or violence: So his Deputies on earth, on whom, under
himself, he has stamped inviolable Majesty, whatever they be (as Calvin
writes, in the place often cited) are not to be pleaded with by strong hand and
force (howsoever in somethings they miscarry, a thing not competent to the
Majesty of God) For, he has not in his Word given any commission to any of
their Subjects to rise violently against them, or use the punishing Sword upon
them. If this commission can be produced, we have no more to say, but Good is
the Word of the Lord: but till this be seen, we shall cleave to Romans 13. that
makes the Magistrate the only Sword Bearer of God to avenge or punish, however
perhaps he has his aberrations in using it. If this man can show a Superior on
earth to use the Sword upon the Sovereign Magistrate, people shall have fair
liberty to plead their claim or lawsuit as he calls it before him. But who
will judge it more reason, that these who are Plaintifes shall be judges of the
Party they complain of, more then the party (or Prince) Judge to them? Is not
this a perversion of all judgment that in one and the same body politic, the
accuser and Judge shall be coincident in the same persons or person? And they
shall use the punishing Sword over all Rulers, to whom God never committed it,
the notions of original, fountain, virtual royalty in the people, which they
may render formal, effectual and actual, when they see fit, are but high flown
unregardable fancies of the masters of confusion. All magistratical Authority
is originally and fountally in God alone, whose Minister the Magistrate is (and
not the peoples, although for the peoples good) whatever interests people may
have in instrumental application of the power to such or such persons
sometimes; Government is not in the people virtually (though wrongously
sometimes they usurp it.) No man has the Power of the Sword over his own life,
nor over the life of his neighbors, (as he is a private man, not invested with
magistratical Authority) and so cannot transmit that to another, which he has
not himself. None have this avenging Power of the Sword over men's lives, but
the Magistrate alone, whom people by Gods law are bound to choose, if they want
one in their Societies and Combinations, but whomever they design they do not
empower him; it is God by his Ordinance that does this, the Power is from God,
not from them, albeit the application of the person to the Power, or of it to
him, be instrumentally and dispositively by the peoples act, where they have
liberty for such acts.

5. Though it be true, that all Covenants and Contracts amongst men, embodied
in a Society, brings each of the contracters under a Law-claim, in case of
failing, ( coram Judice proprio) before his own and competent Judge; yet, it is
not true, that any Contracts betwixt man and man in one and the same Society,
gives the party keeping contract, coactive Power over the party breaking; it is
true, the Judge has a coactive Power, to lay forth in behalf of the keeper
against the breaker, but that is not the keeper his coactive Power, but the
Judges employed for his good; the one party is not Judge of the other, but the
Magistrate is Judge over both: Now, there is no Judge over all Magistrates, nor
the supreme Magistrate, before whom a complaining people can plead wrong done
to them: This complaint lies before God only to take order with it. And it must
needs be a strange assertion to say, (as some do) that it leads Kings to
Atheism, to tell them, They are countable to God only; whereas this leads them
genuinly, to stand in awe of God, and the less fear they have from men, to be
in greater dreador of more terrible strokes from God, if if they do wrong:
ordinarily where there is much fear of man's punishments, there is less fear of
Gods; but when it is told Princes, the more exemption they have from man, the
more terribly will God handle them, if they do wrong, this may make the highest
and stoutest hearts, to tremble at the dreadful vengeance, by the hands of the
living God, which will strike a deeper stroke then creatures can.

6. To provoke people to go about the meddling with the advancing Religion,
actibus Imperatis, which is the Magistrates part; and not only actibus
elicitis, is but a ruining of all order God has set; the imperate acts for
advancing Religion, are not to be done, but by these to whom God has given the
Empire: It is not his will, that people run out of their rank and calling to
serve him; more then it was his will, that Saul or Vzziah offered sacrifice or
incense; the works were good in themselves, but the workers were not warranded
to do the same; extraordinary necessities, are more easily pleaded then
justified, as ground sufficient for actions, whereto there is no extraordinary
call. If Magistrates be deficient, as to their imperat acts in advancing
Religion; private persons are sufficiently discharged, if they keep themselves
pure, and do what possibly they can, for advancing Religion in their private
capacities, and by their elicit acts: Nor shall they be involved in guiltiness,
for not intruding in the Magistrates office, or doing his duty, (wherein he
has failed) If a man's eyes be put out, his ears or other senses, will go as
far to supply that defect, for the good of the body as may be, yet, cannot help
the body by elicit acts of seeing; So, whatever length private persons may go,
for the good of the body, they must not go to exercise and exert formally acts
Magistratical, upon whatever pretense of extraordinary need, (which will never
be wanting to a people, enflamed with a seditious spirit) August. Lib. 2.
contra literas Petiliani, Auferenda idola non potest quispiam jubere privatis.
Lact. instit. S. 20. Defendenda est Religio, a privatis omnibus non occidendo,
sed moriendo, etc. It is a dangerous and destructive tenent, to be held forth
to be believed by people, That in all cases, whither concerning Religion or
Liberty, when they account the Magistrate to pervert the Government, that they
are eatenus, and so far even as they had no King, and that the royalty has
recurred to themselves, and they may act and exercise it formally as if they
had no King at all; which is the express Doctrine of L. R. p 99.100. And more
intolerable is Naphtali, who grants this not only to the body of the people and
inferior Magistrates, but to any the least mere private part of the people,
against the whole body, and against all Magistrates supreme and subordinate.
Where, or when shall confusions end, if these Doctrines have faith or free
passage?

CHAP. IV. Anent the following of Phineas fact; of heroic or extraordinary
impulsions, and concerning some courses taken at our first Reformation, and
their exemplariness.
THat every man should walk in his own calling with God, 1 Cor. 7.20. and
(...), love the honor to be quiet, and do his own business, 1 These. 4.11. yea,
ambitiously contend (as the word bears it) so to do, is agreeable to the mind
and will of the God of Order; it is a godly ambition to act within the
precincts of our own calling: but Satan striving to make men (...) and (...),
disorderly and unsubject to these whom God has set over them, under several
colors, of extreme necessity, the lawfulness of the matter of actions in
themselves, the goodness of ends and intentions, the want or deficiency of
others to do the work, men's own probable capacity to do it, does often drive
men out of their ranks and stations, to act such things whereof God will say, I
never required them at your hands; in your hands they are evil, quia ego non
jussi: and because sometimes God has given extraordinary callings, or incited
men by his Spirit with heroical motions, to such acts as were not according to
ordinary rules of procedure, thence they would bring warrant for their
irregularities, and for going out of their line. This vain Orator Naph. (p. 21,
22, 23, 24, 25.) catches hold on the instance of Phineas, Numb. 25.7, 8.
executing justice upon an Israelitish Prince, and will have that a precedent
for any private persons (such as lately did rise) under color of high pitches
of zeal and fortitude, whereto they are incited (as he says by Gods Spirit) to
execute justice upon all the powers and people of the Land, they being fallen
in such a fearful apostatic as (keeping the true protestant Religion) to vary
from them in the external ordering of the Ministry of the Church, and embracing
that way and order, against which there is no command of Christ; yea, for the
consonancy whereof to his word, much and very much, may be said and has been.
And although he cannot but see the dreadful consequences of extracting a
general rule for these times out of such an example, yet, though he turns
himself Proteus-like into many shapes, distinguishing about heroic and
extraordinary motions, denying Phineas act to be extraordinary, but only
heroical, talking much of good intentions, warrandableness of the work in it
self, deficiency of others in doing it, and of Gods power to give rare heroic
incitations, etc. he cannot by any thing he says, put a sufficient bar against
confusions under such pretexts, but he opens a door he cannot close again. And
the result of all is, to fasten the last insurrection upon the holy spirit of
God, to justify their attempts against all Authorities in the Land; and to
assert, they were no more to be condemned as Traitors, then Phineas should be
for his executing judgment, seeing they were led with the same spirit, and had
as good warrant as he. And the design further is, to inflame people again to
the like courses, under the like pretenses, for justifying the same.

When this man's discourse concerning Phineas fact, and the exemplariness
thereof, and concerning pretended extraordinary or heroic incitations he
talks of, was first looked upon; men of any judgment considered, that as the
former bloody insurrections were endeavored to be justified by him, so he was
laying down grounds for some merciless massacre, or horrid assassinations on
persons in power, and others (if any people might be found so deserted of God,
as to be serviceable to him in that wickedness) for now no man can have
security of his life, if any private persons be allowed under Phineas cloak to
come and cut the throats of all, whom this man will point forth as black
Apostats, Such deeds must be fatherd upon the holy Spirit of God, and his
excitations to zeal; which are held a sufficient calling, though that so called
zeal, will prove no other but a corrupt lust, proceeding from another spirit.
And we must forsooth (when these men will have us so do) own these
irregularities as being from God, and say, He is employing the weak things and
foolish of the world to confound the mighty and wise, and must not condemn them
as Usurpers, or Intruders (although they be but mere private men) more then we
would have done Phineas in his fact. Thus he.

What great Villainies have been under such pretenses carried on in the world,
by persons taking their heroical motions and excitations of zeal, for a
sufficient calling to their irregular actions (which is the direct Doctrine of
this man) the World knows well. How the Munster madness was carried on under
extraordinary shows of zeal, is known, and how also God confounded that way.
The murders of the two Kings Henry's of France, (the third and fourth) have
been famous or infamous in this last age, by the cruel hands of two Zelots,
inflamed by seditious Predicants and Jesuits, they fell. The assassinates
actions were cried up by such as set them on against these Neroes of the time
(as these Kings were called by them) as actions most heroically zealous, most
Phineas like, proceeding not from common virtue or grace, sed a dono speciali
Spiritus Sancti, (proh nefas!) And they taught, that it was of God to excite
these miscreants to cut the Basilick vein (as they spoke) to prevent the State
and Churches falling into a burning fever. And to come nearer home, the
remembrance of the Gunpowder Traitors, who attempted at one blow to destroy
King James and all his Family and Parliament, is yet recent: a deed which
wanted nothing of the high commendation of an heroical and Phineas-like fact
(amongst the Zelots of the antichristian party) but that it wanted success,
which marred all. Further, in the time of Queen Elizabeth of England, Anno
1591. Some male-contented Presbyterians, being taken in the head with the same
fancy of Heroical motions of zeal, as a sufficient calling to attempt something
beyond rule, in the desolate and colapsed estate of the Church (as they called
it) began first to question and propose it as a case of conscience, If in such
a case, God might not give such high measures of zeal, fortitude, courage and
rare excitations of his Spirit to mere private persons against oppressing
powers, which might be a sufficient call to attempt somewhat against
Magistrates, not suiting ordinarily rules, and committing the event to God. The
men were, Arthington, Coppinger, and Hacket the chief of the three, as they
were all marvelous zealous for the discipline; So this third having debauched
his estate, surpassed in zeal this way (perhaps looking for some reparation by
it) and was, (as the History tells us) a man of highest pretenses of the
internal unction of spirituality and of pure zeal, and one who could ex tempore
pray to admiration. The godly Ministers, who were of their persuasion in
matters of discipline, for the most part disliked, and dissuaded them from
their course (albeit some too furious entertained and encouraged them.) After
this, they went to action; Hackets two accomplices went to the most open and
public streets of the City of London, declaring to them, that Hacket (who was
to be found at his lodging, in one Mr. Walkers in Cripple-gate) was sent of
God, to represent Jesus Christ on earth, with his fan in his hand, to separate
the precious from the vile and to erect the holy discipline in all Europe; they
having a great concourse of people flocking about them, declared themselves to
be his extraordinary Prophets, the one to preach vengeance to them, who would
not obey them; the other to preach mercy to all, who would obey them. And in
the great concourse of people, they ceased not to cry, repent, repent, O
England! and embrace the Gospel, and opportunity of Reformation. As for the
Queen, they cried she had fallen from her right to the Kingdom; And that most
of her Councillors, were but betrayers of the Kingdom. And all their doctrines
they set forth, with terrible imprecations against themselves, if they spoke
not truth.

The Queen being at Greenwich, and hearing of the uproar at London, sent two of
her Counselors to see what the matter was; the deceivers all three were
apprehended and arraigned, as stirring up sedition against the Queen, and
designing to destroy her, to murder her Counselors and Bishops, to bring in
their new King, and trans-form all things in Church and State, to their own
fancies. Hacket the King was executed, and dyed blaspheming. Coppinger in a
fury pining himself with hunger, at last beat his own brains against the wall
and dyed. Arthington, upon his repentance, obtained mercy of the Queen.

Such abominable courses carried on, under pretext of Heroic motions, and rare
excitations of the Spirit, should make the fearers of God, very cautelous
against the Principles of this man, which lead this way; For he asserts, There
needs no standing upon an external call, if men think they have this internal
call, to use the Sword for vengeance against Apostate Magistrates (all and
sundry) such as he reckons they are in this time, (Napht. p. 24.) Any party of
private men, may (according to his mind) rise up in a Phineas like fortitude
against not only Princes, but all the Primores Regni, becoming Patrons of
abominations, to execute Judgment upon them, (Napht. p. 22.) and to reform an
Apostate Church, their zeal, etc. is a sufficient call without further. If such
Doctrines pass for current and good coin, and if our people be so principled,
it were better living under the great Turk, where no man is to loss his life
but by Law, then in Scotland; where all Magistrates and others, shall be
proclaimed liable to the fury of any private persons, who can pretend rare and
Heroic excitations of the Spirit, to zealous executing justice upon men,
whenever they, thus animated, think there is cause: For, this man proclaims
these inward excitations, as a sufficient call, without any other external call.

But this man, seeing the mischief of his evil Doctrine, (though he is loath to
part with it) would gladly add some Salvo, if he could: for says he, p. 24. We
held not such instances, (viz. as that of Phineas) as regular Precedents for
all times and persons universally. That is well said, but where is the caution
that is put in against any, that will pretend Heroical excitations by the
Spirit, as a sufficient call: He has opened a door, but how will he close it
again. It is easy to raise the Devil, but not so easy to lay him again; the
man would say something to satisfaction, if he could set down certain rules, to
bar a heady people, under a pretense of Phineas-like motions and excitations,
to arise upon every occasion to confound all: But, as he cannot do this, so
does he not attempt it; he cannot give any remedy against confusion in all
cases, having proclaimed this libertinisme to private persons, upon pretense of
Heroic excitations of zeal, etc. to rise up against all Powers above them; for
they are made Judges (in their own private discretion) when it is fit to fall
in hand with such irregular practices: And when it is, that such Heroic
excitations are upon their Spirits; and when it is, that matters are so far out
of order, that they cannot be amended, without their violent interposing and
pulling down of Powers: all this, is referred to private persons private
discretion; and if this man's party were posessed in Power, upon their
principles, another party, perhaps of Quakers, Ranters, etc. could easily start
up, and plead their impulses from above, to rectify the corrupted and
collapsed estate of affairs, and to reform and punish offenders; So, there
shall be no end of confusion, when these are got into the saddle, others shall
met to them in that same measure, erranti nullus terminus, there shall be a
progress to confusion in infinitum. And never shall people, (when they mind
changes) want the pretexts of corruption in Rulers, and in all besides
themselves, and will lay hold on any probable capacity, which qualifies them
for exercise of Justice against all, not of their way. And although they be not
in probable capacity, to take the fields, or leavy Armies; yet, they will go so
far in executing justice upon all Magistrates, ( Phineas-like) as upon
patronisers (p. 24.) of abominations, (as he says, all our Magistrates of all
degrees are now) for he tells us (p. 18.) They ought without doubt, be
suppressed by all means, (n. b. by all means) if there be no probable
capacity for armies, a dag or a dagger, a pistol or poisoned poinard, a
Spanish-fig, or some secret applications may do the business, with some great
ones: And any Heroic Saint, may be in probable capacity for such matters,
(these are amongst the generality of any means usable, for suppressing Powers)
it is all one matter, if Justice be execute and the evil removed, whatever way,
it is all one as Phineas did it with his Javelin, and God should be praised,
when justice is executed on adversaries, an apostat Church (such as now is)
reformed. Of this no more shall be said; But we are to pray, that the life of
our dread Sovereign may be bound up with the Lord his God in the bundle of
Life; and also, that the same great and good God, may be a shield and buckler
to his servants, (who desire in honoring the King, to fear him, the King of
Kings above all) against the generation of men of blood and violence, who
bewray their ungodliness too much, in daring to seek patrociny for villainous
assassinations from the holy Scriptures of God.

But behold, how the man wrings his wit, to work out ( Napht. page 21, 23, 24,
25.) an Apology for the seditions from Phineas example; he tells us, Phineas
was but a private man, that he had no extraordinary calling to execute
judgment, only he had heroical motions, and zealous excitations to it, and
that God who is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, and has the
residue and plenty of his Spirit, to pour out upon mere private persons, may by
giving them such or the same Spirit of zeal, magnaminity and courage,
sufficiently call them by his breathings upon them, to execute justice on
adversaries, and to reform an apostate Church, etc. and when it is so, we
should not condemn, but honor Gods instruments; for, if they did not step in
to act, impiety would quickly gain an universal empire to the extermination of
all goodness. To all which we say,

1. As to the person Phineas, (from whose actings Patrociny is ^ought, for
justifying the violence of private persons against the Magistrate and their
usurping over him as Judges, to punish him) it is much doubted, if he was a
mere private person he was the high Priests son, a chief Priest himself, and
afterward he became high Priest himself, he was a singular person and a Prince
in his tribe, employed with other Princes by Gods people, in great Embassages
both in Peace and in War, Numb. 31.6. Josh. 22.31.32. he was one of the great
Council of the people, of the heads or rulers, and famous men amongst them, (
called the congregation, or the renouned of the congregation, Numb. 1.16.16.2.)
who did, in that dismal time, wherein so much sin did break forth, and so much
wrath from the Lord attending sin, meet with Moses the chief Magistrate, Numb.
25.6. to lament the abominable idolatry and bodily filthiness, committed at
that time, and to consult and advise, about the authoritative restraining of
this wickedness: In the mean time, when the great Council are humbled before
the Lord, for the common wickedness, and for the wrath that was upon them,
Zimri, a Prince of Simeon, with his Midianitish woman, are in their very sight
going into the Prince of Isreal's tent; and Josephus tells us, that before Moses
and the Council he justified the fact, and pleaded frowardly to have and retain
her. In this case of so effronted wickedness, Phineas then one of the
congregation or great Council, 7. ver. Rose from amongst the congregation, (or
great Council, which shows, he was sitting amongst them) and under the eye and
knowledge and approbation of Moses, the supreme Magistrate, pursued them both
to the tent, executing judgment on them, and thrusting them through. The words
of Diodat on ver. 8. are, That this was an act of extraordinary zeal and motion
of Gods Spirit, in a cruel and fierce delict, which was approved in Phineas by
God, after the act was done: And (n. b.) by Moses the supreme Magistrate, the
execution being done under his eyes and known of him; Thus Diodat. To this
purpose Aquinas, 2^ 2ae. quest. 60. Art. 6. where he disputes, Vtrum Judicium
reddator perversum per usurpationem, Resolves, That judgment cannot be execute
upon any without public Authority, more then a Law can be made without public
Authority; and speaking of the fact of Phineas, he says, He did this by divine
inspiration, being moved with the zeal of God: and adds, Albeit he was not the
high Priest, yet he was the Son of the high Priest; and the executing of
judgment belonged to him as to other Judges, to whom that was commanded of
God. Gerhard, de Magistratu, P. 841. Phineas non fuit omnino privata persona,
he was one of the chief Priests, who as Aarons rod tells us, lib. 1. cap. 1.
had equal power with all other members, both in decrees and executions of
judgments. So that he (in all probability) being no mere private person, and
doing what he did, with approbation of the Sovereign Magistrate, it is a very
weak argument that is brought from him, to enstate any private persons in a
power of executing judgment.

2. Suppose Phineas to have been a mere private person; yet, seeing he did this
act under the eye and presence, with the approbation and good-liking of Moses
(as Diodat rationally says) and of the great Council there assembled, and he
is to be looked upon as the executor of their unaninimous sentence against
effronted villainy: As at another time, Exodus 32.27, 28. Moses, as Gods
Vicegerent, set the Levits and others on work to execute judgment by the sword
upon an idolatrous people; in which case they were satellites Magistratus, and
had his Commission: and why might not Phineas have here the like warrant from
Moses? If any say, it is not written; it may be answered, In rebus facti a non
scripto ad non factum non valet consequentia; all things done are not written.
We have heard famous Authors accouning him to have had warrant, whether as a
Judge or Executor of the will of the great Council and of Moses, who did well
approve his deed. But, how absurd is it to bring an argument from this
instance, to warrant any private man to do justice when he thinks there is
need, not only without the Magistrates consent, but even upon all Magistrates,
supreme and subordinate? which is the scope this man's writing drives at.

3. The case wherein Phineas executed judgment, was when horrible idolatry and
villainous whoredom was avowedly, and with an high hand, committed in the sight
of the Sun; and in way of open doing despite to God and to all Magistrates, and
the supreme Council then assembled to mourn before God, and to take course for
remedying by their Authority, the horrible looseness broken forth at that time.
But, dare this man say, that there is now such horrid wickedness? although he
is bold to call all the Magistrates, supreme and subordinate, Patrons of
abominations, and men acting in the mere spirit of wickedness: while the true
Protestant Religion, according to the Scriptures and the Laws at our first
Reformation, and Confession of Faith, recorded in Parliament, is sincerely and
constantly held. There is a change and regulation of the exterior form of
Church Government, anent which godly men differ, and the change that is made
will be maintained against this man, to contain nothing contrary to Gods Word.
Yet, forsooth, this is the great abomination and so gross, that it may license
every private person to rise up against all Magistrates, supreme and
subordinate, to depose them or cut their throats; and this must be called
executing judgment for the Lord, and a Phineas-like fact.

4. Let it be so, that Phineas was a mere private man, and had no warrant from
the supreme Magistrate to do what he did (which yet cannot be proved) his fact
can be no warrant for private men to attempt the doing of such acts; unless
they can show as good warrant and approbation from God, as he could. God, who
is the Lord of all Magistrates and of all men's lives, can (when it pleases
him) cross ordinary rules, and can appoint some to execute his judgments
extraordinarily; wherein they are not to be followed by such as have not the
same spirit, the same warrant and command, or commission. He may send Moses to
kill the Egyptian, Eglon to kill Ehud, Elias to destroy companies of men with
fire from Heaven, or to kill Baals Priests (an instance which it is strange the
Libeller omitted, seeing it is the ordinary dialect of the Faction, as may be
seen in the Apology and elsewhere, to call (most wickedly) all Churchmen
dissenting from their way, Baals Priests) God may command Abraham to kill his
Son Isaac, he may excite David to a bloody duel, and Samson to murder himself
with others: so also might he stir up Phineas (though a private man) to execute
judgment: but, 1. he had the motion and direction of Gods Spirit setting him
on to that work; such motions were loco specialis mandati, as Divines speak;
and Calvin, Ps. 106. speaking of this same fact, says, he had singularis and
extraordinarius motus qui ad communem regulam exigi non debet. And when he has
compared Moses killing the Egyptian with this fact of Phineas, he says, Talis
fuit impulsus in Phinea, nam et si nemo putabat gladio Dei esse armatum, ipse
tamen potestatis divinitus concessae probe sibi conscius fuit. Augustine,
speaking of Samson, lib. 2. de civit. Dei, c. 21. Nec Samson, says he, aliter
excusatur quod seipsum cum hostibus ruina domus oppressit, nisi quod latenter
Spiritus sanctus hoc jusserat. So he is accounted amongst heroic Believers,
Heb. 11.32. And of his fact, Bernard says, lib. de precept. and dispensatione*
Si defenditur non fuisse peccatum, privatum habuisse a Deo consilium
indubitanter credendum est. 2. Phineas had not only a large reward of his fact,
Numb. 25.12, 13. but an ample approbation of it, Ps. 106.31. It was accounted
to him for righteousness, i. e. as a righteous action, both as to the intention
of it (Gods honor) and as to the ground and warrant of it (Gods direction.)
God does not approve or remunerate any action, which one way or another he does
not command: there are none of these extraordinary actions mentioned in
Scripture, but either Gods stirring men up to the same, or his approbation of
the same, one way or another is noted; See Judge. 3.10. and, 5.7. and, ^0.23.
and, 3.9.15. and, 2.16.18. he raised up, stirred up men's spirits, or afterward
approved them expressly in these actions. As for the private persons, which this
man will have to take the punishing Sword in their hand against all
Magistrates, as they cannot pretend extraordinary special commands; So the real
rebukes of God given them, proclaims they have not his approbation.

5. Divines have given it as a good rule, Opera liberi spiritus non sunt
exigenda ad regulas communes, nec trahend^ in exemplum vitae. If once men come
to make rules of the actions specially warranded beyond the common rule of the
Word, where will they stand? As to instance this same example of Phineas. If
they will go on to press the imitation of it, 1. They must say, that even when
the Magistrate is godly and zealous and willing to execute judgment (as Moses,
and the great Council were) private persons may do it without them, and not
wait their warrant, as they think Phineas did not. 2. That any private person
may go to men's Tents or Chambers, and stab them without any legal Process
(which Phineas, they will say, used not.) 3. That if such things be done
inconsulto pro Magistratu (such as Moses was) yet the doer must not be
challenged, as Phineas was not challenged by Moses.

6. The Libeller, striving to parallel the Acts of his party, (which he
justifies and incites unto) with Phineas his act, as he dare not say the acts
which he justifies and instigates unto are extraordinary, but only heroical; so
he asserts Phineas act was not extraordinary, nor upon extraordinary warrant,
but heroical and imitable by others, who may have such measures of zeal as he
had. He should in order to this, labored to have set some distinction betwixt
heroical and extraordinary acts, but this he does not, only labors to jumble
the matter, and speaks so confusedly, that as others cannot understand him, so
he gives evience he did not understand himself in this matter; only something
he would gladly say to encourage men to irregular actions, under the pretense
of Phineas fact. But the man, if he would, might have known the distinction
betwixt extraordinary and heroical acts. Philosophers and Divines too,
distinguish betwixt heroical virtues with the acts suitably thereto, and common
virtues and their acts, (3^ pars Thomae, qu. 7 art. 2a ad 2m,^) and aggree in
this, that there is no difference between heroical virtues and virtutes
communiter dictae, nisi secundum perfectiorem modum. A heroic act does not
deviate from the rule of a common virtue, but only proceeds from a more intense
disposition to a high pitch of virtue, and of the acts thereof, but yet keeps
within the bounds of the ordinary rule of such or such a virtuous action. But,
an extraordinary action goes beyond any ordinary rule of common reason or
divine Word; as, that Abraham should kill Isaac without any hatred of him, or
cause in him, was an act of extraordinary obedience to a special mandate of
God. Albeit the love that is due to God above all, and the respect due to his
Sovereignty, should incline to obey whatever he enjoins: yet, the particular
act of slaying his harmless child, merely upon the declared will of God, was
an extraordinary act of obedience, not comprisable within the lists of common
virtues, that direct our actings toward men under God. Extraordinary actions
are such as are done upon special mandate of God, and are not within the
compass of ordinary acts of obedience according to the rule that is set. Men
may have heroic motions and actions within the bounds of an ordinary calling,
as sometimes, though they have extraordinary calling, they may want heroical
motions. Luther had no immediate nor extraordinary calling to reform the
Church; but within the bounds of ordinary calling, he had special excitations
of Gods Spirit, and was elevated unto heroic actings for Gods glory, in an
exceedingly corrupt and collapsed state of the Church. Peter had an
extraordinary calling and immediate, yet he wanted sometimes heroical motions
and actions, as when he dissembled, Gal. 2. Phineas had not only excitations of
zeal and heroical motions, but (supposing him a mere private Person) he is to
be looked upon, as having extraordinary calling from God, which is fully enough
insinuated, both by Gods approving and rewarding him, Numb. 25. (and he rewards
not our will-service, nor approves it, but what he has enjoined himself) and
also by Ps. 106. where it is said emphatically, it was imputed to him for
righteousness, though judging according to ordinary rules, it might be imputed
to him for sin (supposing him a mere private man.) Yet, having Gods warrant,
whose will is the rule of righteousness, the deed was imputed to him for
righteousness.

7. Great gifts, secret impulses, heroical motions, do not (as this man
suggests) give men sufficient call to go beyond the ordinary rules God has set
to men in their callings (though they dispose them to act eminently in their
callings) yet cannot give a new or another calling. Every calling a man has to
any work* God sets him about, must be either mediate or immediate (there is no
midst betwixt these two, as there is not between contradictories.) If men be
not called to a work by the intervention of men, and their allowance, they must
plead an immediate calling from God. And we would gladly hear, if this man will
allow the private persons, whom he instigates to insurrections against
Magistrates, an immediate calling (by virtue of their secret impulses and
excitations) for we are sure, they have no mediate ordinary calling. If he will
go on to say, that great gifts of zeal, etc. great excitations and impulses,
allows people to desert their own calling and state, (like these spirits, Jude
6. that kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation) and to
intrude upon the Magistrates office always, when they think there is cause,
without an external vocation from men. Where will he rest, till he confound all
within Church and State? If such gifts and impulses be sufficient call for
intruding in the office of the Magistrate to execute justice, why is it not
also sufficient for the office of the Ministry, without call from men
externally? And thus Anabaptists, Enthusiasts, Photinians and the like, denying
the necessity of external call to the Ministry; avowing gifts and excitations
to be a sufficient call, shall gain the day; a man may take the honor of a
Ministry to himself, without waiting man's call, as well as the honor of
Magistracy: a self-called-Magistrate, and a self-called Minister, are very sib
together. And how shall the Libeller refuse to admit women to baptize children
in case of necessity? (the thing it self being good and for a good end, and
there being none other to do it, and the exigence great) or how will he hold
back any private persons from preaching and ministering all Sacraments, though
they have no external call? It is easy to pretend as great need for this, as
for intruding into the Magistrates office.

8. It is in vain for this man to tell us, that Gods hand is not shortened, and
he has plenty of the Spirit to give, and is the same yesterday, and to day,
and for ever, and can give such gifts and excitations and such allowance in
acting, as Phineas had. For our question is not anent Gods power, or what he
may do; (we adore that glorious Majesty, who does what he will in heaven and in
earth, and can do above all we can think) But our question is, if now, after
that the Canon of holy Scripture is perfected, sealed and consigned, we have
warrant to look for any extraordinary persons, having Gods secret and special
mandates to do works, which any ordinary calling they have by allowance and
approbation of men, according to the rules of common reason and the word, does
not interest them in, such as Phineas act (supposing him a private man) is to
be esteemed.

The man falls out in wishing, that all Gods people were as Phineas, and had
the same Spirit of holy Zeal; that by removal of the cause, his fierce anger
against this poor Land might cease: We shall easily concur with him, in wishing
and praying that Gods people may be filled with zeal to his Glory, as Phineas
was; but not that they should have that same exercise of zeal that he had, nor
follow his fact, unless they could be certified of their warrant and calling
to do so, as he was. The Apostles of Christ, are to us examples of zeal for God
in their Ministry; but, who will say, that the acts which they zealously did,
by virtue of their extraordinary calling, are for our imitation, albeit their
zeal be? Peter in zeal to Gods honor, killed Ananias and Saphira, who lied to
the holy Ghost; Shall therefore Ministers slay men that deal deceitfully with
God, or shed their blood? the zeal was imitable, but not the fact; the fact is
not justified, merely by the zeal that puts on to it, but by the calling and
warrant. To follow all the facts of them, who have been truly zealous for God,
is indeed a (...), an evil zeal, like the zeal of the disciples, Luke 9.54. Who
knew not of what Spirit they were. Peter Martyrs word, speaking of imitation of
extraordinary examples of zeal and facts done that way, Loc. com^ Clas. 2. cap.
9. is good, Nobis cavendum est ne illa quae vehementer and extraordinario
cupimus aliquo exemplo Majorum velimus constabilire, cum inusitata volumus
aggredi contra ordinaria Dei praecepta, non est satis exempla produxisse
Majorum, sed excutiendus Spiritus quo ducimur, ne sp^cioso quodam praetextu
carnis affectum and prudentiam sequamur. And Perkins on the Creed, page 194.
says well. If a man be zealous for Christ, he must be zealous within the
compass of his Calling; and not be zealous first, and then look for a Calling;
but first look for a Calling, and then be zealous: Which thing, if Peter had
marked, he would not have dealt so rashly in drawing his sword and smitting;
for, being without compass of his Calling, he could not but do amiss: But, yet
this man urges ( Nap. p. 24) impiety shall quickly gain an universal Empire,
to the extermination of all goodness; if for fear of accidental hazards, virtue
and virtuous actions of private persons, shall be utterly neglected. Ans. None
offers to hinder virtue and virtuous actions of private persons, but only their
vicious usurpations upon the Magistrate; no evil should be done, either that
good may come of it, or a worse evil prevented; the exercise of the Magistrates
office in executing judgment is good, being done by him, but it is evil, being
done by a private person, that has no calling so to do; every man has not a
calling to do all good, but only that good which is competent to him in his
calling to do: when iniquity is like to prevail, it is my part, who am a
private person to mourn for it, to pray against it, to use fraternal loving
warnings to others as I have occasion, and to keep my self pure from
pollutions; in so doing, I may sit down with contentment, referring the remedy
of evils to God in his own way and time; but, to break Gods order, by intruding
into public places and the actions of Magistrates, for preventing or remedying
impiety, is but to cure one sin by another. And when we have invaded the
Magistrates place, being private persons, others will do the like to us, and
there shall be no end of confusion; Fearers of God, would not listen to the
charms of vain talkers; but, beware of removing the ancient limits God has
set of men's callings, were it, for prevention of greatest idolatry or
wickedness, nothing that is either evil in it self, or evil as circumstantiated
in our hands, from whom God has required no such thing, is to be done; Will ye
speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? Job. 13.7. But this
Libeller insists upon the matter of private men's usurping the Magistrates
place, not only in the first part of his Book, speaking in reference to our
first Reformation and Way of it, which he brings to justify present
insurrections; but in the latter part, p. 151.152. he will have private men
taking the punishing and reforming sword in their hands against all
Magistrates, and says expressly, people of inferior degree, may step forward to
occupy the places and assert the interests, which wicked Rulers have forfeited
and deserted; And this, he says, is according to the Covenant, where they
swear in their places and callings, to endeavor reformation, etc. which
clause, (he says) is to be taken, not restrictively, but (as he speaks) the
clause is exegetick and ampliative, and that the sense is, that if others in
their respective places, concur in advancing the work, every one shall confine
himself to his own place and calling; but if these in higher employment fail in
their oath, it is the place and calling of private persons to reform or remove
them, and step in and occupy their places. Thus the profane Juglar, (if he will
deservedly take the style, which he undeservedly gives his opposites, p. 54)
makes a Welch-mans hose of the words of the Covenant, to provoke people to
intrusion in the Magistrates office. Who ever heard of such a thing, that these
words ( in our places and callings) do not restrict private men's endeavors to
ways fit for their places and callings? What a strange exigesis or
explication, (as he calls it) is that of our endeavors in our places and
callings to reform, i. e. That we shall go out of our places and callings, to
reform? and being private men, shall occupy the Magistrates place and remove
him and punish him; or, that private men only did swear conditionally to act in
their places and callings, so long as they in eminency acted in their places
and callings for Religion, with a reserve, to run out of our places and
callings, when they deserted and abused theirs? What Jesuitical juggling, in the
matter of the Oath, is this? This is a new discovery this man has given us, of
the deceitful ambiguities of the Covenant, to help us out of love with it. The
words (says he) are exegetick, and ampliative; exegetick thus, I swear in my
calling and place, all days of my life to endeavor, etc. i. e. When I see
cause, I swear, I shall flee out of my place. and calling, to do so good a
work, and will not be restricted to it. But how are they ampliative, the vain
Orator would tell us? Are the words that bind to do in our places and callings
oblieging to a duty, more amply and extensively then they import? viz. That we
should stretch our selves beyond our line, and intrude in places God has not
called us unto. How intolerable is this abuse offered to the Covenant and Gods
people too, in such vain and senseless glosses?

O! But he builds much upon the practice of our first Reformers, and Phineas
fact must justify that, and that must justify all modern insurrections. As to
the work of Reformation of Religion, at first in this Land, it is our desire to
speak honorably of it, so far as we can with truth. Blessed be God for that
great work of bringing in his Truth amongst us, and delivering us from the dark
and miserable bondage of antichristian Tyranny; and he who delivered us, keep
us from returning to that house of Egyptian bondage: But we cannot (holding to
the truth) justify all courses that were used then for carrying on the work of
Reformation; neither are we much concerned so to do. If some instruments
thereof were guilty of sedition or sacrilege, or self-seeking, (while the work
of God was in hands) what is that to us, who own the result of the work as
good, great and glorious, through the Lords marvelous operation? If sinful
courses were then used by men, the mercy of God, in the result of the work, was
to us the more marvelous, and the fuller of glorious Grace, that God did not,
for the disorders of instruments, disappoint the work, and leave us destitute
of the Gospel Light. We may say, as the blind man in the Gospel who had his
eyes opened, said, Whether he was a sinner that opened his eyes or not, he knew
not: but this he knew, that whereas he was blind, now he did see, Joh. 9.25.
So, whither they who were instrumental in our Reformation, sinned in their way
or not, we are not much concerned to enquire: But we know, that through Gods
good guiding, a merciful work, in the result was wrought to them and to us,
which work we own and cleave to, and will (through grace) do so to the end; it
is an ordinary matter for the all-wise providence of God, to bring forth, out
of men's dark and disorderly actings, great works of light and order. The
Savior of the world was crucified by wicked hands; yet, the result was the
redemption of the world. How many Ministers go to hell, for their unsincere
handling of Gods Word, and miscarriages in their life; yet, God makes use of
his own Ordinance in their hands, to bring Souls to Heaven, notwithstanding of
their corrupt manner of dealing in his holy things. A leprous hand may sow good
seed, but he were a fool of the first magnitude, who would either make a
panegyric in praise of a leprous hand, or persuade all that sow good seed to
have such hands. Heirs of glory may be gotten in bastardy, or fornication and
adultery; and yet these are not good, but evil. Let God be glorified, who in
his wisdom brings order out of confusion, and light out of darkness. But, let
us not stand superstitiously upon the justifying of all their deeds that went
before us; nor endeavor to imitate and follow the same, further then they are
according to Gods mind. Be ye not as your fathers, is a good rule when fathers
fall off and deviate from the rule of God's will: we are not to live by
examples, but by precepts; and if we will look to examples, we want not these
of the primitive Christians to set before us, whose practices in bringing in
Religion into the world, (wherein they never used any undutiful resistance to,
or violence upon Magistrates) is more regardable by us, then any precedents in
these dregs of time, and in the end of this corrupt world. Some have said,
Religion would never have been reformed, if violence had not been used upon
Magistrates: but, why should men take on them to limite God? Has he not showed
his power in several parts of the world, in working on the hearts of supreme
Magistrates, and causing them to go before others in reformation of abuses? and
could he not so do also elsewhere, without the aid of popular tumults, which
are but evil examples to the posterity? But men are too apt to be bold in
ante-verting Gods way, and to follow their own carnal prudence and affections
in that which they are set upon, and thereupon (when they prosper) to fancy a
divine approbation of their way: so self-loving are men ordinarily. But, let it
be so, that much of the way of these who were at first instrumental in the
Reformation in this Land, were justifiable upon the account of purging the
Church from the horrid grossness of idolatry, corruption of doctrine, tyranny
and usurpation over poor Souls, wherewith the man of sin had for many ages,
defiled and burdened the poor Church; and upon the account of the open
hostility to the Truth, wherein Magistrates then stood, together with the
inbringing of foreign furious forces upon us, even to the heart of our Land.
How unlike was the case then to what it is now? And how unable is the case now
to bear the burden of a conclusion for such practices as then were used? Seeing
we can avow it, in the presence of God, that we contend for that same Faith and
Religion, that our Predecessors stood for against the powers of that time; and
will maintain the same against all Novators, who upon account of a piece of
Church Order, allowed by our Reformers) now re-established, instigate any
private, persons, who have power enough, to destroy all Magistracy and Order in
the Land, because of the owning thereof; and to occupy their rooms, (as N.
clearly does) And then, forsooth, this man and his complies shall be in their
places and callings, according to the Covenant, (as he expones it) when they
get in to the Chair of Government, and all our Nobles and Magistrates driven
into corners, or made to lacky these purely mortified Statesmen. In the
Pictland-hill business, an Essay for this was made, but the party magnis
excidit ausis. They had thoughts to repair their losses, and to make themselves
rich by a pure Reformation, getting all the interests of the Kingdom at one
clap into their hands, (though perhaps they would have forced us to believe,
that all their external gains had been but accidental consequences of their
heavenly designs.) But God rolled out of the way such a stumbling and snare to
many, which might have arisen from their success; it was infoelix scelus, and
so escaped the reputation of a Virtue, and of an heroical Exploit.

FINIS.

