AN ATTEMPT To prove the MOTION OF THE EARTH FROM Observations MADE BY ROBERT
HOOK Fellow of the Royal Society.

Senec. Not. Qu. lib. 1. cap. 30. Ne miremur tam tarde erui qua tam alte
jacent. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for John Martyn Printer to the Royal Society,
at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1674.

TO THE TRULY HONORABLE Sir John Cutler KNIGHT and BARONET, My Worthy PATRON.
SIR,
AMong several Eminent Marks of your Greatness of Mind for promoting the
Public Good, that of your Bounty for the Advancement of Experimental and Real
Knowledge, by the Founding a Physico-Mechanical Lecture, deserves to be
Recorded as One, and more especially by me whom you have honored by
establishing your first Lecturer. As an Earnest of others more considerable
shortly to follow, I here present you with one of my Discourses in that
Employment, which though short and plain, conteins somewhat of Information
which the Learned have hitherto desired, though almost with despair. As I hope
their kind Acceptance will produce their thanks to you to whom they are justly
due, so your Acceptance will encourage me in the further prosecution of these
Inquiries to approve my self,

Noble Sir, Your most obliged, and most humble Servant From Gresham College,
March 25. 1674. ROBERT HOOK.

READER,
I Have formerly in the Preface of my Micrographia given the World an account
of the founding a Physico-Mechanical Lecture in the Year 1665, by Sir John
Cutler, for the promoting the History of Nature and of Art. In prosecution
thereof, I have collected many Observations both of the one and the other kind,
and from time to time (as obliged) I have acquainted the Royal Society at their
Public Meetings, both at Gresham College and Arundel House therewith, by
Discourses and Lectures thereupon.

Now in order to the further promoting the End and Design of this Lecture, I
have complied, with the desire of several of my Friends (though otherwise not
thereunto obliged) to commit diverse of those Discourses to the Public, though
of themselves for the most part incomplete, and Essays or Attempts only upon
several Subjects which have no dependencie or coherencie one with another. In
the doing hereof, I design to avoid any kind of Method or Order that may
require Apologies, Prefaces, or needless Repetitions of what is already known,
or might have been said upon that Occasion, or may necessitate me to follow
this or that Subject, that does not some way or other offer it self as it were,
and prompt me to the consideration thereof. But because they may possibly admit
of some better order hereafter, I design to print them all of the same Volume,
that so they may be, when ranged, either stitched or bound together, and may,
as occasion requires, be referred to under the Title of their Number and Page.
This way I choose as the best for promoting the Design of this Lecture; for as
there is scarce one Subject of millions that may be pitched upon, but to write
an exact and complete History thereof, would require the whole time and
attention of a man's life, and some thousands of Inventions and Observations to
accomplish it: So on the other side no man is able to say that he will complete
this or that Inquiry, whatever it be, (The greatest part of Invention being but
a luckey hitt of chance, for the most part not in our own power, and like the
wind, the Spirit of Invention blows where and when it lists, and we scarce
know whence it came, or whether it is gone.) 'Twill be much better therefore to
embrace the influences of Providence, and to be diligent in the inquiry of
every thing we meet with. For we shall quickly find that the number of
considerable Observations and Inventions this way collected, will a hundred
fold outstrip those that are found by Design. No man but has some luckey
hitts and useful thoughts on this or that Subject he is conversant about, the
regarding and communicating of which, might be a means to other Persons highly
to improve them. Whence 'twere much to be wished, that others would take this
Method in their Publications, and not torment their Readers with such nauseous
Repetitions, and frivolous Apologies, as Method and Volumes do necessitate them
to; But would rather enrich the Storehouse of Art and Nature with choice and
excellent Seed, freed from the Chaff and Dross that do otherwise bury and
corrupt it.

The communicating such happy Thoughts and Occurrences need not much take up a
man's time to fit it for the Press; the Relation being so much the better the
plainer it is. And matter of Fact being the Kernel Readers generally desire (at
least in these Subjects) it will be so much the readier for use if it be freed
from the thick and hard shell of Impertinences. This way also is more grateful
both to the Writer and the Reader, who proceed with a fresh stomach upon
variety, but would be weary and dulled if necessitated to dwell too long upon
one Subject. There are other conveniences also in this Method of Communication
not less considerable then the former, amongst the rest the securing of
Inventions to their first Authors, which it is hardly possible to do by any
other means; for there are a sort of Persons that make it their business to
pump and spy out others Inventions, that they may vend them to Traders of that
kind, who think they do ingenuously to print them for their own, since they
have bought and paid for them. Of this there have lately been some Instances,
and more may be expected, if this way prevent not.

When things cannot be well explained by words only (which is frequent in
Mathematical and Mechanical Discourses) I add Schemes and delineatious
Descriptions of that kind being easier to be made and understood. As near as I
can I omit the repeating things already printed, and endeavor to deliver such
as are new and my own* being my self best pleased with such usage from other
Authors.

I have begun with a Discourse composed and read in Gresham College in the
Year 1670. when I designed to have printed it, but was diverted by the advice
of some Friends to stay the repeating the Observation, rather then publish it
upon the Experience of one Year only. But finding that Sickness has hitherto
hindered me from repeating the Trials, and that some Years Observations have
already been lost by the first delay: I do rather have it out now, though
imperfect, then detain it for a better completing, hoping it may be at least a
Hint to others to prosecute and complete the Observation, which I much long for.

This first Discourse is upon an Observation of Nature, and may therefore be
properly referred to that Head, though it contein also somewhat of the
Improvement of Art: The second speedily to follow, will more properly be
referrable to Artificial Improvements, though it will contein also many
Observations of Nature; and I design always to make them follow each other by
turns, and as 'twere to interweave them, being apart but like the Warp or Woof
before contexture, unfit either to Cloth, or adorn the Body of Philosophy.

















AN ATTEMPT To prove the Motion of the EARTH BY OBSERVATIONS.
WHether the Earth move or stand still has been a Problem, that since
Copernicus revived it, has much exercised the Wits of our best modern
Astronomers and Philosophers, amongst which notwithstanding there has not been
any one who has found out a certain manifestation either of the one or the
other Doctrine. The more knowing and judicious have for many plausible reasons
adhered to the Copernican Hypothesis: But the generality of others, either out
of ignorance or prejudice, have rejected it as a most extravagant opinion. To
those indeed who understand not the grounds and principles of Astronomy, the
prejudice of common converse does make it seem so absurd, that a man shall as
soon persuade them that the Sun does not shine, as that it does not move; and
as easily move the Earth as make them believe that it does so already. For such
Persons I cannot suppose that they should understand the cogency of the Reasons
here presented, drawn from the following observations of Parallax, much less
therefore can I expect their belief and assent thereunto; to them I have only
this to say, It Is not here my business to instruct them in the first principles
of Astronomy, there being already Introductions enough for that purpose: But
rather to furnish the Learned with an experimentum crucis to determine between
the Tychonick and Copernican Hypotheses. That which has hitherto continued the
dispute has been the plausibleness of some Arguments alleged by the one and
the other party, with such who have been by nature or education prejudiced to
this or that way. For to one that has been conversant only with illiterate
persons, or such as understand not the principles of Astronomy and Geometry,
and have had no true notion of the vastness of the Universe, and the exceeding
minuteness of the Globe of the Earth in comparison therewith, who have confined
their imaginations and fancies only within the compass and pale of their own
walk and prospect, who can scarce imagine that the Earth is globous, but rather
like some of old, imagine it to be a round plain covered with the Sky as with a
Hemisphere, and the Sun, Moon, and Stars to be holes through it by which the
Light of Heaven comes down; that suppose themselves in the center of this
plain, and that the Sky does touch that plain round the edges, supported in
part by the Mountains; that suppose the Sun as big as a Sieve, and the Moon as
a Chedder Cheese, and hardly a mile off. That wonder why the Sun, Moon, and
Stars do not fall down like Hailstones; and that will be martyred rather then
grant that there may be Antipodes, believing it absolutely impossible, since
they must necessarily fall down into the Abyss below them: For how can they go
with their feet toward ours, and their heads downwards, without making their
brains addle. To one I say, thus prejudiced with these and a thousand other
fancies and opinions more ridiculous and absurd to knowing men, who can ever
imagine that the uniformity and harmony of the Celestial bodies and motions,
should be an Argument prevalent to persuade that the Earth moves about the Sun:
Whereas that Hypothesis which shows how to salve the appearances by the rest of
the Earth and the motion of the Heavens, seems generally so plausible that none
of these can resist it.

Now though it may be said, It Is not only those but great Geometricians,
Astronomers and Philosophers have also adhered to that side, yet generally the
reason is the very same. For most of those, when young, have been imbued with
principles as gross and rude as those of the Vulgar, especially as to the frame
and fabric of the World, which leave so deep an impression upon the fancy,
that they are not without great pain and trouble obliterated: Others, as a
further confirmation in their childish opinion, have been instructed in the
Ptolomaick or Tichonick System, and by the Authority of their Tutors, overawed
into a belief, if not a veneration thereof: Whence for the most part such
persons will not endure to hear Arguments against it, and if they do, it is only
to find Answers to confute them.

On the other side, some out of a contradicting nature to their Tutors; others,
by as great a prejudice of institution; and some few others upon better
reasoned grounds, from the proportion and harmony of the World, cannot but
embrace the Copernican Arguments, as demonstrations that the Earth moves, and
that the Sun and Stars stand still.

I confess there is somewhat of reason on both sides, but there is also
something of prejudice even on that side that seems the most rational. For by
way of objection, what way of demonstration have we that the frame and
constitution of the World is so harmonious according to our notion of its
harmony, as we suppose? Is there not a possibility that the things may be
otherwise? nay, is there not something of probability? may not the Sun move as
Ticho supposes, and the Planets make their Revolutions about it whilst the
Earth stands still, and by its magnetism attracts the Sun, and so keeps him
moving about it, whilst at the same time and move about the Sun, after the same
manner as and move about the Sun whilst the Satellites move about them?
especially since it is not demonstrated without much art and difficulty, and
taking many things for granted which are hard to be proved, that there is any
body in the Universe more considerable then the Earth we tread on. Is there not
much reason for the Hypothesis of Ticho at least, when he with all the
accurateness that he arrived to with his vast Instruments, or Riccioli, who
pretends much to outstrip him, were not able to find any sensible Parallax of
the Earths Orb among the fixed Stars, especially if the observations upon which
they ground their assertions, were made to the accurateness of some few
Seconds? What then, though we have a Chimera or Idea of perfection and harmony
in that Hypothesis we pitch upon, may there not be a much greater harmony and
proportion in the constitution it self which we know not, though it be quite
differing from what we fancy? Probable Arguments might thus have been urged
both on the one and the other side to the Worlds end; but there never was nor
could have been any determination of the Controversy, without some positive
observation for determining whether there were a Parallax or no of the Orb of
the Earth; This Ticho and Riccioli affirm in the Negative, that there is none
at all: But I do affirm there is no one that can either prove that there is, or
that there is not any Parallax of that Orb amongst the fixed Stars from the
Suppellex of observations yet made either by Ticho, Riccioli, or any other
Writer that I have yet met with from the beginning of writing to this day. For
all Observators having hitherto made use of the naked eye for determining the
exact place of the object, and the eye being unable to distinguish any angle
less then a minute, and an observation requisite to determine this requiring a
much greater exactness then to a minute, it does necessarily follow that this
experimentum crucis was not in their power, whatever either Ticho or Riccioli
have said to the contrary, and would thence overthrow the Copernican System,
and establish their own. We are not therefore wholly to acquiess in their
determination, since if we examine more nicely into the observations made by
them, together with their Instruments and ways of using them, we shall find
that their performances thereby were far otherwise then what they would seem to
make us believe. The Controversy therefore notwithstanding all that has been
said either by the one or by the other Party, remains yet undetermined, Whether
the Earth move above the Sun, or the Sun about the Earth; and all the Arguments
alleged either on this or that side, are but probabilities at best, and admit
not of a necessary and positive conclusion. Nor is there indeed any other means
left for humane industry to determine it, save this one which I have
endeavored to make; and the unquestionable certainty thereof is a most
undeniable Argument of the truth of the Copernican Systeme; and the want
thereof has been the principal Argument that has hitherto somewhat detained
me from declaring absolutely for that Hypothesis, for though it does in every
particular almost seem to solve the appearances more naturally and easily, and
to afford an exceeding harmonious constitution of the great bodies of the World
compared one with another, as to their magnitudes, motions, and distances, yet
this objection was always very plausible to most men, that it is affirmed by
such as have written more particularly of this subject, that there never was
any sensible Parallax discovered by the best observations of this supposed
annual motion of the Earth about the Sun as its center, though moved in an Orb
whose Diameter is by the greatest number of Astronomers reckoned between 11 and
12 hundred Diameters of the Earth: Though some others make it between 3 and 4
thousand; others between 7 and 8; and others between 14 and 15 thousands; and I
am apt to believe it may be yet much more, each Diameter of the Earth being
supposed to be between 7 and 8 thousand English miles, and consequently the
whole being reduced into miles, if we reckon with the most, amounting to 120
millions of English miles. It cannot, I confess, but seem very uncouth and
strange to such as have been used to confine the World with less dimensions,
that this annual Orb of the Earth of so vast a magnitude, should have no
sensible Parallax amongst the fixed Stars, and therefore 'twas in vain to
endeavor to answer that objection. For it is unreasonable to expect that the
fancies of most men should be so far streined beyond their narrow dimensions,
as to make them believe the extent of the Universe so immensly great as they
must have granted it to be, supposing no Parallax could have been found.

The Inquisitive Jesuit Riccioli has taken great pains by 77 Arguments to
overthrow the Copernican Hypothesis, and is therein so earnest and zealous,
that though otherwise a very learned man and good Astronomer, he seems to
believe his own Arguments; but all his other 76 Arguments might have been
spared as to most men, if upon making observations as I have done, he could
have proved there had been no sensible Parallax this way discoverable, as I
believe this one Discovery will answer them, and 77 more, if so many can be
thought of and produced against it. Though yet I confess had I failed in
discovering a Parallax this way, as to my own thoughts and persuasion, the
almost infinite extension of the Universe had not to me seemed altogether so
great an absurdity to be believed as the Generality do esteem it; for since
it is confessedly granted on all hands the distance of the fixed Stars is merely
hypothetical, and not founded on any other ground or reason but fancy and
supposition, and that there never was hitherto any Parallax observed, nor any
other considerable Argument to prove the distances supposed by such as have
been most curious and inquisitive in that particular, I see no Argument drawn
from the nature of the thing that can have any necessary force in it to
determine that the said distance cannot be more then this or that, whatever it
be that is assigned. For the same God that did make this World that we would
thus limit and bound, could as easily make it millions of millions of times
bigger, as of that quantity we imagine; and all the other appearances except
this of Parallax would be the very same that now they are. To me indeed the
Universe seems to be vastly bigger then it is hitherto asserted by any Writer,
when I consider the many differing magnitudes of the fixed Stars, and the
continual increase of their number according as they are looked after with
better and longer Telescopes. And could we certainly determine and measure
their Diameters, and distinguish what part of their appearing magnitude were to
be attributed to their bulk, and what to their brightness, I am apt to believe
we should make another distribution of their magnitudes, then what is already
made by Ptolomy, Ticho, Kepler, Bayer, Clavius, Grienbergerus, Piff, Hevelius
and others.

For supposing all the fixed Stars as so many Suns, and each of them to have a
Sphere of activity or expansion proportionate to their solidity and activity,
and a bigger and brighter bodied Star to have a proportionate bigger space or
expansion belonging to it, we should from the knowledge of their Diameters and
brightnesses be better able to judge of their distances, and consequently
assign diverse of them other magnitudes then those already stated: Especially
since we now find by observations, that of those which are accounted single
Stars, diverse prove a congeries of many Stars, though from their near appearing
to each other, the naked eye cannot distinguish them; Such as those Stars which
are called Nebulous, and those in Orion Sword, and that in the head of Aries,
and a multitude of others the Telescope does now detect. And possibly we may
find that those twenty magnitudes of Stars now discovered by a fifteen foot
Glass, may be found to increase the magnitude of the Semidiameter of the
visible World, forty times bigger then the Copernicans now suppose it between
the Sun and the fixed Stars, and consequently sixty four thousand times in bulk.
And if a Telescope of double or treble the goodness of one of fifteen should
discover double or treble the said number of magnitudes, would it not be an
Argument of doubling or trebling the former Diameter, and of increasing the
bulk eight or twenty seven times. Especially if their apparent Diameters shall
be found reciprocal to their Distances (for the determination of which I did
make some observations, and design to complete with what speed I am able.) But
to digress no further, This grand objection of the Anticopernicans, which to
most men seemed so plausible, that it was in vain to oppose it, though, I say,
it kept me from declaring absolutely for the Copernican Hypothesis, yet I never
found any absurdity or impossibility that followed thereupon: And I always
suspected that though some great Astronomers had asserted that there was no
Parallax to be found by their observations, though made with great
accurateness, there might yet be a possibility that they might be mistaken;
which made me always look upon it as an inquiry well worth examining: first,
Whether the ways they had already attempted were not subject and liable to
great errors and uncertainties: and secondly, Whether there might not be some
other ways found out which should be free from all the exceptions the former
were encumbered with, and be so far advanced beyond the former in certainty and
accurateness, as that from the diligent and curious use thereof, not only all
the objections against the former might be removed, but all other whatsoever
that were material to prove the ineffectualness thereof for this purpose.

I began therefore first to examine into the matter as it had already been
performed by those who had asserted no sensible Parallax of the annual Orb of
the Earth, and quickly found that (whatever they asserted) they could never
determine whether there were any or no Parallax of this annual Orb; especially
if it were less then a minute, which Kepler and Riccioli hypothetically affirm
it to be: The former making it about twenty four Seconds, and the latter about
ten. For though Ticho, a man of unquestionable truth in his assertions, affirm
it possible to observe with large Instruments, conveniently mounted and
furnished with sights contrived by himself (and now the common ones for
Astronomical Instruments) to the accurateness of ten Seconds; and though
Riccioli and his ingenious and accurate Companion Grimaldi affirm it possible
to make observations by their way, with the naked edge to the accurateness of
five Seconds; Yet Kepler did affirm, and that justly, that 'twas impossible to
be sure to a less Angle then 12 Seconds: And I from my own experience do find
it exceeding difficult by any of the common sights yet used to be sure to a
minute. I quickly concluded therefore that all their endeavors must have
hitherto been ineffectual to this purpose, and that they had not been less
imposed on themselves, then they had deceived others by their mistaken
observations. And this mistake I found proceeded from diverse inconveniences
their ways of observations were liable to. As first from the shrinking and
stretching of the materials wherewith their Instruments were made, I conceive a
much greater angle then that of a minute may be mistaken in taking an altitude
of fifty Degrees. For if the Instruments be made of Wood, it is manifest that
movst weather will make the frame stretch, and dry weather will make it shrink
a much greater quantity then to vary a minute: and if it be Metal, unless it be
provided for in the fabric of the Instrument accordingly, the heat of Summer,
when the Summer observations are to be made, will make the Quadrant swell, and
the cold of Winter will make it shrink much more then to vary a minute: Both
which inconveniences ought to be removed. Next the bending and warping of an
Instrument by its own weight, will make a very considerable alteration. And
thirdly, the common way of Division is also liable to many inconveniences: And
it is hardly possible to ascertain all the subdivisions of Degrees into minutes
for the whole Quadrant, though that be not altogether impossible. But I will
suppose that they did foresee, and in some manner prevent all these
inconveniences, especially Ticho and Riccioli, who seem to have been aware
thereof. But there was one inconvenience which was worse then all the rest,
which they seem not to have been sufficiently sensible of, from whence
proceeded all their own mistakes, and their imposing upon others, and that was
from their opinion that the sight of the naked eye was able to distinguish the
parts of the object as minutely as the limb of the Quadrant (of what largeness
soever) was capable of Divisions; whereas it is hardly possible for any unarmed
eye well to distinguish any Angle much smaller then that of a minute: and where
two objects are not farther distant then a minute, if they are bright objects,
they coaless and appear one, though I confess, if they be dark objects, and a
light be interposed, the distance between them shall be visible, though really
much less then a Second; and yet notwithstanding, my first assertion stands
good; for though a bright object, as a candle or light at a distance, or a
Star, or the like, can be seen by the eye, though its body do really not
subtend an Angle of one third, yet it proceeds from a radiation (that is, from
reflection and refraction together) in the air and in the eye, whereby the body
thereof is represented to the naked eye some hundred times bigger then it
really is. That this is so, any one that will but carefully examine will find
it true.

It was, I doubt not, their extraordinary desire and care to be exact, that
caused them to make their Instruments so large, and to subdivide them to such
an exactness, as to distinguish, if possible, to Seconds; And I question not
but that they used their utmost endeavor in directing the sight to the object:
but since the naked eye cannot distinguish an Angle much smaller then a minute,
and very few to a whole minute, all their charge and trouble in making and
managing large Instruments, and in calculating and deducing from them, was as
to this use in vain. Hence I judged that whatever men's eyes were in the younger
age of the World, our eyes in this old age of it needed Spectacles; and
therefore I resolved to assist my eyes with a very large and good Telescope,
instead of the common sights, whereby I can with ease distinguish the parts of
an object to Seconds: and I question not but that this way may be yet made
capable of distinguishing much more curiously, possibly even to some few
Thirds. This invention removed that grand inconvenience which all former
observations were spoiled with: but there remained yet further this difficulty,
How to make an Instrument large enough for this purpose, that I might be
assured did not shrink, nor warp, nor stretch so much as to vary a Second; for
such is the nature of all Materials that can be made use of for Instruments of
the bigness I designed this, that it is almost impossible to make a moveable
Instrument that shall not be subject to a variation of diverse Seconds: It was
therefore my next inquiry where I might fix this Archimedean Engine that was to
move the Earth. For the doing of which, I knew 'twas in vain to consult with
any Writer or Astronomer, having never then heard of any person that had ever
before that time had any thoughts thereof: and when I first propounded it to
the Royal Society, 'twas looked upon as a new thought, and somewhat
extravagant, and hardly practicable, until upon hearing my explication, and the
various ways how it might be reduced into practice, it was at length judged
possible, and desirable to be tried. I propounded therefore to them the several
ways that it was possible to be performed, and what method was to be observed
in every one of them, and somewhat of the conveniences and inconveniences in
each of them; for having seriously meditated upon the Inquiry, I quickly
thought of many expedients for the doing thereof. As first, I had thoughts of
making use of some very great and massy Tower or Wall that were well settled, or
of some large Rock or Hill whereunto I might fix my Glasses, so as to take the
exact altitude of some eminent Star near the Pole of the Ecliptik, when at its
greatest height, at two differing times of the year; to wit, about the Summer
and Winter Solstice, to see if possibly I could discover any difference of
altitude between the first and second observation. But to accomplish this
(besides the vast difficulty there would have been to have measured such an
Angle to the accurateness requisite, if at least it were desired to have the
Angle of altitude to Minutes and Seconds, which ought also to have been
repeated as often as any observation had been made for fear of settling or
swelling, etc.) I was destitute of such a convenience near my habitation;
besides, had I had my wish, I found that 'twas liable to an inconvenience that
would wholly overthrow my whole design, which I knew not well how to avoid:
Namely, to that which has hitherto made even the very best observations of
Parallaxes ineffectual and uncertain, the refraction of the Air or Atmosphere,
which though it could have been but very little at the greatest altitude of the
Pole of the Ecliptic, yet it might have been enough plausibly to have spoiled
the whole observation, and to have given the Anticopernicans an opportunity of
evading the Arguments taken from it, especially upon the account of the
differing constitution of the Atmosphere in June and December, which might have
caused so much a greater refraction of the same altitude at one time then
another, as would have been sufficient to have made this observation
ineffectual for what it was designed. Add to this, that it would have been no
easy matter to have set the Glasses or Telescope exactly against the Meridian,
so as to see the highest altitude of any Star near the Pole of the Ecliptic
distinctly to a Second.

The like difficulties I found if observations were made of the greatest
altitude of the Pole of the Ecliptic in June and December, or the least
altitude of the same in December and June. For besides all the uncertainties
that the Instruments, be they what they will, are liable to, the grand
inconvenience of the refraction of the Air, which is enough to spoil all
observations if it be intermixed with uncertainty, in the former is
considerable, and in the later intolerable.

Having therefore examined the ways and Instruments for all manner of
Astronomical observations hitherto made use of, and considered of the
inconveniences and imperfections of them; and having also duly weighed the
great accurateness and certainty that this observation necessarily required: I
did next contrive a way of making observations that might be free from all the
former inconveniences and exceptions, and as near as might be, fortified
against any other that could be invented or raised against it. This way then
was to observe by the passing of some considerable Star near the Zenith of
Gresham College, whether it did not at one time of the year pass nearer to it,
and at another further from it: for if the Earth did move in an Orb about the
Sun, and that this Orb had any sensible Parallax amongst the fixed Stars; this
must necessarily happen, especially to those fixed Stars which were nearest the
Pole of the Ecliptic. And that this is so, any one may plainly perceive if he
consider the annexed Scheme, Fig. I. where let S represent the Sun placed as it
were in the center of the Planetary Orbs, ABCD an imaginary Orb of the fixed
Stars of the first magnitude, whose center for demonstration sake we will
suppose the Sun. Let represent the Orb in which the Earth is supposed to move
about the Sun, obliquely projected on the Paper. Let represent the Earth in
Capricorn, and the Earth in Cancer, let 12. 12. represent the imaginary Axis of
the Earth, keeping continually a parallelism to its self, and let ABCD
represent an imaginary Plain passing through the center of the Star at D in the
Solstitial Colure, and the two centers of the Earth in and, and C represent the
Zenith point of Gresham College at noon, when the Earth is in Cancer, and A
the Zenith point of the said College at midnight in the aforesaid Orb ABCD
when the Earth is in Capricorn, it is manifest therefore that since the Poles of
the Earth, the Poles of the Ecliptic, and the Zenith points of the Earth at
noon, when in Cancer, and at midnight, when in Capricorn, are all in the same
Plain; and that the Axis of the Earth keeps always its parallelism, and that
the Angles made by the Perpendiculars of Gresham College, with the Axes are
always the same, that the aforesaid Perpendiculars of the said College shall
be parallel also one to another, and consequently denote out two points in the
abovesaid Orb A and C as far distant from each other as the parallel Lines A
and C are, and consequently the point A shall be farther from the Star in D,
and the point C shall be nearer to it, when in the Meridian near the Zenith of
London, and consequently if the said Star be observed when in the Meridian of
the place abovesaid, if there be any such difference considerable, it may be
found if convenient Instruments and care be made use of for the observation
thereof: and the difference between the Angle A D, and the Angle C D, will give
the parallactical Angle D of the Orb of the Earth to the fixed Star D of the
first magnitude. The same demonstration will hold mutatis mutandis, supposing
the Star be not in the Meridian or Plain abovesaid, but in some other Meridian,
as any one upon well considering the nature of the thing it self may easily
prove, if the observation be made when the Zenith passes by the Star at
midnight, and at midday. But the nearer the Zenith of the place of observation
passes to the Pole point of the Ecliptic, the better; The Angle of Parallax
being still the more sensible. Therefore the best place to complete this
observation were in some place under the Polar Circles, as in Iseland, where
the Zenith of the place at the times abovesaid, must consequently pass at one
time to the North side of the Pole of the Ecliptic, and at the other on the
South side, and the Zenith of March and Sept. must pass through the very
Pole-point it self. Now it falling out so, that there is no considerable Star
in that part of the Heavens nearer the above said Plain, and nearer the Zenith
point of Gresham College in that Plain, then the Bright Star in the head of
the Dragon, I made choice of that Star for the object by which I designed to
make this observation, finding the Zenith point of Gresham College to pass
within some very few minutes of the Star it self; the declination thereof
according to Riccioli being 51. 36. 7. and the Plain the Star and Pole of the
World, making an Angle with the aforesaid Plain but of 2. 52. 36, the right
ascension thereof being according to Riccioli 267. 7. 24.

And that this may be made a little plainer, let us suppose in the third
Figure, the North part of the Heavens projected stereographical upon a Plain to
which the Axis is perpendicular. Let p represent the Pole, e the Pole of the
Ecliptic, l the bright Star in the head of Draco, and let accc represent an
imaginary Circle described by the Zenith of Gresham College among the fixed
Stars in June, and bddd a like Circle described by the said Zenith in December,
and efff a like Circle described as above in March, and ghhh in September. It
is very evident that the true distances of the Zeniths in that part of the
Meridian which is next the Pole of the Ecliptic, to wit, in the head of the
Constellation Draco, shall be to the true distances of the said Zeniths in that
part which is furthest from the said Pole, to wit, near the constellation of
Auriga in consequentia, as the sign of 75 degrees to the sign of 14. 54, and
the variation of the Zeniths, or the Angle of Parallax here at Gresham
College, to the Angle of Parallax in Iseland, or any other place under the
Pole of the Ecliptic, or Artick Circle is, as the sign of seventy five to the
sign of ninety or the Radius. This will be very evident if we consider in the
second Scheme; AB to represent the Diameter of the great Orb: AC and BD the
perpendiculars of Iseland, or some other place under the Polar Circle. GA, HB
the perpendiculars of Gresham College in Draco: and LA, MB the perpendiculars
of the same place to the Solstitial Colure near Auriga, the several distances
CD, GH, IK, LM, will be as the signs of 9075 66. 30 14. 54. to wit, as the
Lines or Cords AB. AO. PB. QB.

I might have made observations of the distances of the transits of our Zenith
from any other Star as well as from this of Draco, and the same Phenomena might
have been observed, taking care to make one of the observations when the Star
is in the Zenith at midnight, and the other when the same Star is in the Zenith
at noon or midday; and upon this account when I next observe, I design to
observe the transits of our Zenith by Benenaim, or the ultima caudae ursae
majoris, it being a Star of the second magnitude, and having almost as much
declination as Gresham College has latitude. The principal days of doing
which will be about the 4 of April, when our Zenith passes by the said Star at
midnight, and the 7 of October, when it passes by it at noon or midday: the
reason of all which will be sufficiently manifest to any one that shall well
consider the preceding explanation.

This Star I would the rather observe, because as it is placed so as that the
Parallax thereof will be almost as great as of the Pole of the Ecliptic in
Iseland, or under the Artick Circle, so it being a Star of the second
magnitude, and consequently perhaps as near again as one of the fourth, the
Angle of Parallax will be near about twice as big, and the Star it self much
more easy to be seen in the day time. This will be very easy to be
understood, if we consider in the first Scheme the differing distances of the
Orb ABCD, in which we may suppose the Stars of the second magnitude to be fixed,
and of the Orb (...), in which we may suppose the Stars of the fourth
magnitude, and abcd in which we may suppose those of the third magnitude, and
ABCD in which we may suppose those of the first; for if the Stars are further
and further removed from the Sun, according as they appear less and less to us,
the parallactical difference found by observation must necessarily be less and
less, according as the observation is made of less and less Stars.

The reasons then why I made choice of this way of observing will be easy to
any one that shall consider that hereby, first, I avoid that grand
inconvenience wherewith all ancient and modern observations have been perplexed,
and as to Parallax insignificant, and that is the refraction of the Air or
Atmosphere. How great an inconvenience that was is obvious, since it is
certainly much greater at one time then another, and never at any certainty;
and secondly, It Is not equally proportionable, for sometimes the refraction is
greater at some distance above the Horizon, then in or nearer to the Horizon it
self, and sometimes the quite contrary, which I have very often observed; and
this to so exorbitant a difference, as to confound all Hypothetical
Calculations of Tables for this purpose. This arises from the uncertain and
sudden variations of the Air or Atmosphere, either from heat and cold, from the
thickness and thinness of Vapors, from the differing gravity and levity, from
the winds, currents, and eddyes thereof, all which being not so well understood
by what way, and in what degree, and at what time they work and operate upon
the Air, must needs make the refraction thereof exceedingly perplexed, and the
reduction thereof to any certain theory fit for practice, a thing almost
impossible. Now if we are uncertain what part of the observed Angle is to be
ascribed to refraction, we are uncertain of the whole observation as far as the
possible uncertainty of refraction. Let me have but the liberty of supposing
the refraction what I please, and of fixing the proportional decrease thereof
according to the various elevation of the Rays above the Horizon; I will with
ease make out all the visible Phenomena of the Universe, Sun, Moon, and Stars,
and yet not suppose them above a Diameter of the Earth distant. Now in this
observation there is no refraction at all, and consequently be the Air thicker
or thinner, heavier or lighter, hotter or colder, be it in Summer or Winter, in
the night or the day, the ray continually passes directly, and is not at all
refracted and deflected from its straight passage. In the next place, by this
way of observing I avoid all the difficulties that attend the making, mounting,
and managing of great Instruments: For I have no need of Quadrant, Sextant, or
Octant, nor of any other part or Circle bigger then a Degree at most; nor have
I need to take care of the divisions and subdivisions thereof, nor of the
substance whether made of Iron, Brass, Copper, or Wood, nor whether the parts
thereof shrink or swell, or bend or warp, to all which the best Instruments
hitherto made use of, have been some ways or other liable. And notwithstanding
the vast care and expense of the noble Ticho about the making, fixing, and
using his great Instruments; yet I do not find them so well secured from diverse
of these inconveniences, but that they were still subject to some considerable
irregularities. Nay, notwithstanding the seemingly much greater curiosity and
expense of Hevelius, and his infinite labor and diligence in the completing
and using of his vast Apparatus of Astronomical Instruments, I do not find them
so well secured, but that some of the causes of errors that I have before
mentioned, may have had a considerable effect upon them also; especially if
they were supposed to measure an Angle to some few Seconds, as I shall
hereafter perhaps have more occasion to manifest. Now, if* the Instruments of
Ticho and Hevelius, (who had certainly two of the most curious and magnificent
Collections of Astronomical Instruments that were ever yet got together or made
use of) were subject to these uncertainties, What shall we say of all that
other farrage of trumpery that has been made use of by most others? We see
therefore the necessity of the conjunction of Physical and Philosophical with
Mechanical and Experimental Knowledge, how lame and imperfect the study of Art
does often prove without the conjunction of the study of Nature, and upon what
rational grounds it was that Sir John Cutler, the Patron and Founder of this
Lecture, proceeded in joining the contemplation of them both together.

The next thing was the Instrument for the making of this observation, such a
one as should not be liable to any of the former exceptions, nor any other new
ones that were considerable. To this purpose I pitched upon a Telescope, the
largest I could get and make use of, which I designed so to fix upright, as
that looking directly upwards, I could be able certainly to observe the
transits of any Stars over or near the Zenith, and furnishing it with
perpendiculars and a convenient dividing Instrument, I should be able not only
to know exactly when the Star came to cross the Meridian, but also how far it
crossed it from the Center or Zenith point of Gresham College, either toward
the North, or toward the South. All which Particulars, how I performed, I
shall now in order describe, and this somewhat the more distinctly, that such
as have a desire to do the like, may be the more ready and better enabled to
proceed with the same.

First then (finding a Tube would be very troublesome to the Rooms through
which it past, especially if it were placed pretty far in the Room, and that
one wanted so free an access as was necessary if it were planted nigh the wall,
and that there was no absolute necessity of such an intermediate Tube,
supposing there were a cell to direct the eye fixed to the Eye Glass, and that
there were some short cell to carry the Object Glass in at the top, so as to
keep it steady, when raised upward or let downwards, the light in the
intermediate Rooms not at all hindering, but rather proving of good use to this
purpose for seeing the Mensurator) I opened a passage of about a foot square
through the roof of my lodgings (see the Fourth Figure) and therein fixed a Tube
a a perpendicular and upright, of about ten or twelve foot in length, and a
foot square, so as that the lower end thereof came through the Ceiling, and was
open into the Chamber underneath: This Tube I covered with a lid at the top q,
housed so as to* throw off the rain, and so contrived, as I could easily open
or shut it by a small string ^op, which came down through the Tube to the place
where I observed. Within this perpendicular Tube a a, I made another small
square Tube b b, fit so as to slide upwards and downwards, as there was
occasion, and by the help of a skrew to be fixed in any place that was
necessary: Within this Tube in a convenient cell c, was fixed the Object Glass
of the Telescope (that which I made use of was thirty six foot in length,
having none longer by me, but one of sixty foot, and so too long to be made use
of in my Rooms) the manner of fixing which was this: The Glass it self was
fixed into a cell or frame of Brass, so exactly fitted to it, that it went in
stiff; and to fill up all the Interstitia's, there was melted in hard Cement;
this cell had a small bar that crossed under the center of the Glass, or the
aperture thereof; in which bar were drilled two small holes at equal distance
from the middle of the Glass, through which the upper ends of the two
perpendiculars d d were fastened; and in the fixing this brass cell or frame
into the square Tube that was to slide up and down, care was taken to make the
bar lie as exactly North and South as could be, though that were not
altogether so absolutely necessary to this observation. These perpendiculars d
d fastened to the bar hung 36 foot and better in length, and had at the lower
ends of them two balls of lead e e as big as the Silks could bear, by which the
lowest parts of this Instrument were adjusted, as I shall by and by explain.
But first, I must acquaint the Reader, that I opened a so perpendicularly under
this Tube a hole r r a foot square in the floor below, which with shutters
could be closed or opened upon occasion; by this means I had a perpendicular
Well-hole of about forty foot long, from the top of a to the lower floor s s.
Upon the second floor s s I fixed the frame that carried the Eyeglass and the
other Apparatus fit to make this observation. I made then a Stool or Table,
such as is described in the same Fourth Figure i h h i, having a hole through
the top or cover thereof h h, of about nine inches over; the middle of which I
placed as near as I could perpendicularly under the middle of the Object Glass
in the cell above, and then nailed the frame fast to the floor by the brackets
i i, that it could not stir; underneath the cover of this Table I made a slider
g g, in which was fixed in a cell an eye Glass f, so as that I could through
the eye Glass moved to and fro, see any part of the hole in the Table that I
desired, without stirring the stool from its fixtness. This was necessary,
because many Stars which were forerunners of this Star in Draco, and served as
warning to prepare for the approaching Star, went pretty wide from the parallel
that passed over our Zenith; by this means also I took notice of the Star it
self, at above half a degree distance from the Zenith to the East, and so
followed the motion of it with my eye Glass, and also with my measuring Clew,
and at the same time told the Seconds beat by a Pendulum Clock, and so was very
well prepared to take notice of all things necessary to complete the
observation, but might have been otherwise surprised by the sudden approach
and swift motion of the said Star. The measuring Instrument or Mensurator was a
round thin plate or circle of Brass, delineated in the Seventh Figure, the
aperture a b of which was about nine inches over, crossed in the middle by two
very small hairs a b and c d, which served to show the Zenith point at e, by
which the Star was to pass; there were also two other small hairs f g and i h
drawn parallel to that which was to represent the East and West line, that past
under our Zenith, these cut the Clue that represented the Meridian, or North
and South Line at the places k and l, where the perpendicular points were made
by the two long plumb lines: This Instrument was produced on the side a to n, n
e being made fifteen times the length of e m, so that e m being one inch and
two thirds, e n was twenty five inches: at n the line n e was crossed by a rule
of about 3 foot long o p, which from the point n was divided each way into
inches and parts, each inch being subdivided into thirty parts, which served to
determine, though not precisely, the Seconds on the line c d, for a minute of a
degree to a thirty six foot Glass, being very near one eighth part of an inch,
and this eighth part, by the help of the Diagonal, being extended to two whole
inches upon the three foot Rule o p, it became very easy to divide a part of c
d, which subtended a minute into sixty parts, and consequently to subdivide it
into Seconds. Now though the sixtieth part of an eighth of an inch be very
hardly distinguishable by the naked eye, yet by the help of looking through the
Eyeglass placed in the cell, and so magnifying the Objects at the Mensurator
more then sixteen times, it is easy enough to distinguish it. But to proceed, I
had one small arm m t in the Mensurator, to which the Diagonal thread was
fastened at the point m, which served for the more nice subdivisions into
Seconds; The other Diagonal thread which was fastened at u, served for such
observations where so great niceness was not so necessary, distinguishing only
every four Seconds. The points where these Diagonal threads were fastened, were
exactly over the line a b, and the distances e m and e u were an inch and two
thirds, and five inches.

There is somewhat of niceness requisite to the fixing these Diagonal threads
(which is very material) at m and u, and that is that there be a small
springing slit to pinch the hair fast exactly over the line a b, so that the
point of its motion may be precisely in the said East and West line, and not
sometimes in it, and sometimes out of it, which it is apt to be, if the
Diagonal line be fixed in a hole, and move round in it.

This was the Mensurator by which I measured the exact distance of the Stars
from our Zenith: it may be also made use of for the measuring the Diameters of
the Planets; for the examining the exact distances of them from any near
approaching fixed Stars; for measuring the distances of the Satellites of
Jupiter and Saturn from their discks, for taking the diameters and magnitudes
of the spots of the Moon, and for taking the distances of approaching Stars,
and for many other mensurations made by Telescopes or Microscopes, if it be so
placed as to be in the focus of the Object Glass and Eye Glass. I could here
describe at least thirty other sorts, some by the help of screws, others by the
help of wedges, some after the way of proportional Compasses, others by wheels,
others by the way of the Leaver, others by the way of Pullies, and the like;
any one of which is accurate enough to divide an inch into 100, 1000, 10000
parts if it be necessary; but I must here omit them, they being more proper in
another place, and shall only name one other, because I sometimes made use of
it in this observation, which is as simple and plain as this I have described,
and altogether as accurate; but for some accidental circumstances in the place
where I made my observation, was not altogether so convenient as the former.
This Mensurator then is made thus: take a Rule of what length it seems most
convenient for the present occasion, as two, three, or four foot long,
represented by ab in the Eighth Figure, divide this into 100, 1000, 10000 equal
parts, with what accurateness it is possible, between the points ab. On the top
of this Rule, at each end fix two cross pieces gh and of, then from the two
cross pieces of and gh, strain two very fine and even clues, as Silkworms
clues, curious small hairs, or the like, so as that they cross each other at n,
and be distant at o and p, an inch, or any other certain measure desired. Let
this Rule, bezelled on each side, slip in a frame between two cheeks q and r,
upon the top of which strein another small hair as st. This frame must be
fastened to the Telescope, so as st may lie in a due position to the Eye Glass
of it. Now in the time of observation the frame qr being fastened to the
Telescope as above, by sliding the Rule ab to and fro, you give upon the line
st any length desired, which is noted out by the line st upon the rule; for if
op be put one inch, then xy will be 494 / 1000 of an inch, and if op be the
subtense of 10 minutes, then xy will be the subtense of ^; this is so plain,
simple, and easy, that as any ordinary Workman will be able to make it, so I
doubt not but every Reader will, without more application, understand both the
description and use thereof. I shall return therefore to the description of the
former Mensurator.

The next thing then is the way of fixing this Mensurator, so as to set the
threads in their due posture, that is East and West, and North and South, and
that they cut each other under the middle of the Glass. This last was that
which had the most of difficulty in the whole Experiment. For the performing of
this* I removed the slider underneath the Table that carried the Eye Glass, and
also the Mensurator, and suffered the plumb lines to hang down through the
aperture of the Table, and that the Balls might come the sooner to their
perpendicularity, I suffered them to hang into a vessel of water, deep and wide
enough, that they might not touch either side or bottom.

This expedient of hanging the plumbets in water I mention, because without it
it is not to be imagined how much time is lost by expectation of the settlement
of the said perpendiculars, and how very apt they are to be made to vibrate by
the little imperceptible motion of the Air, and by any small hair or other
impediment how apt to be put out of their perpendicularity: which by the way
makes me very fearful that all common Instruments have hitherto been liable to
very great errors, by the unaccurate hanging of their plumb lines, being made
for the most part to hang and play against the side of the Instrument. By this
means they would soon come to hang perpendicularly, and be so detained when in
that posture; not being apt to be stirred by the motion of the Air, or their
own swing; and whilst thus steady, I fixed two small arms of Bras^* such as are
described in the Seventh Figure by z z, z z, which had small holes at the
extremes, with a small slit on the side to admit or em^t the plumb line as
there was occasion; one of these is more at large described in the Sixth
Figure. Now the plumb line being let into the middle of this, I did with all
the accurateness I could so fix the said arm, that the plumb line past exactly
through the middle of the hole y. When I was sufficiently satisfied that the
plumb line past exactly through the middle of the trying arms, I fixed those
arms zz, zz, and removed the plumb lines, then I laid the Mensurator l l in the
Fourth Figure, upon the surface of the Table, and took great care that the
crosses k and l in the Seventh Figure, lay exactly under the middle of the
holes in the arms, which having done by the help of certain screws, I fixed the
Mensurator fast to the Table, and prepared for the observations, putting in the
slider gg in the Fourth Figure, that carried the cell f, and lying down upon a
Couch (k of the Fourth Figure) made purposely for this observation, I could
look directly upward, and with my left* hand move the Cell and Eye Glass so as
to find any Star which passed within the hole of the Table, and at the same
time with my right hand I could move the Diagonal thread (rm of the Seventh
Figure) so as to find exactly how far distant from the Zenith e, either
Northwards or Southwards, the Stars past the Meridian dc, and giving notice to
my Assistant to prepare, he upon the sign given took notice exactly by a
Pendulum Clock to the parts of a Second when the said Stars past* and also took
notice what division the Diagonal thread mr cut upon the Rule op.

With all these difficulties I was forced to adjust the Instrument every
observation I made, both before and after it was made, which has often made me
wish that I were near some great and solid Tower, or some great Rock or deep
well, that so I might fix all things at once, and not be troubled continually
thus to adjust the parts of the said Instrument; for whoever has that
opportunity will, I question not, especially if the lines of his Mensurator be
made of the single clues of a Silkworm, with much ease discover plainly a
change of the distance of Stars of the greater magnitude from the Zenith, in a
much shorter time then six months. This variation also will be much more easy
to be discovered, if instead of a thirty six foot Glass, there be made use of
one of four times that length, to wit, one of one hundred forty four foot; and
if instead of a Tower some deep and dry Well be made use of, such as I have
seen at a Gentleman's house not far from Bansted Downs in Surry, which is dugg
through a body of chalk, and is near three hundred and sixty foot deep, and yet
dry almost to the very bottom: For such a one is much less subject to any kind
of alteration, either from the settling toward this or that side, which most
Towers and high Buildings, whether new or old, are liable to. This also is safe
from bending and shaking with the wind, which I find the strongest Houses,
Towers, and Walls, if of any considerable height, are apt to do, nor would the
wind have any power to swerve the perpendiculars, which it is almost impossible
to prevent in high Buildings above ground. But this I can only wish it were
performed, but cannot hope to have any opportunity of Doing it my self. But
certainly the discovery of the observation will abundantly recompense those
that have the curiosity to make it.

Having thus resolved upon the way, and prepared the Instruments fit for the
observation, I began to observe the Transits of the bright Star in the head of
Draco; and always both before and after the observation, I adjusted the
Mensurator by the Perpendiculars, that I might be the more certain of the
exactness of the Instrument; for I often found that when I came to examine the
Instrument, a day, or two, or three, or more, after a former observation, that
there had been wrought a considerable change in the Perpendiculars, in so much
as to vary above a minute from the place where I left them, which I ascribe
chiefly to the warping of the Tube that rose above the roof of the House,
finding sensibly that a warm day would bend it considerably toward the South,
and that a moist Air would make it bend from the quarter of the wind: But yet I
am apt to think there might be somewhat also of that variation ascribable to
the whole Fabric of the Roof, and possibly also to some variation of the
Floors; but yet I never found these variations so sudden, as to be perceptible
in the time of a single observation, finding always the preceding and
subsequent adjustings to answer.

The first observation I made was the Sixth of July, 1669. when I observed the
bright Star of Draco to pass the Meridian Northwards of the Zenith point of the
Mensurator, at about two Minutes and twelve Seconds.

The second observation I made was upon the Ninth of July following, when I
found it to pass to the Northwards of the said Zenith or cross of the
Mensurator, near about the same place, not sensibly differing.

The third observation I made upon the Sixth of August following; then I
observed its transitus North of the aforesaid Zenith, to be about two Minutes
and six Seconds.

The last observation I made upon the One and twentieth of October following,
when I observed it to pass to the North of the Zenith, at one Minute and about
48 or 50 Seconds.

Inconvenient weather and great indisposition in my health, hindered me from
proceeding any further with the observation that time, which has been no small
trouble to me, having an extraordinary desire to have made other observations
with much more accurateness then I was able to make these, having since found
several inconveniences in my Instruments, which I have now regulated.

Whether this Zenith so found out upon the Mensurator, be the true Zenith of
Gresham College, is not in this inquiry very material (though that also I
designed to examine, had not an unhappy accident broken my Object Glass before
I could complete the observation) for whether it were, or were not, it is
certain that it always had the same position to the true Zenith, the Object
Glass and Perpendiculars having not been in all that time removed out of the
Cell, whence if the said Object Glass were thicker upon one side then upon the
other (which is very common and very seldom otherwise) and consequently
deflected the ray toward the thicker side, and so made the Perpendicular of
the Mensurator to lie on that side of the true Perpendicular, that the thicker
side of the Object Glass respected, yet it being always so if the transitus of
the Star varied from this false Perpendicular, it must also vary from the true
one. The manner how I designed to examine and find out the true Perpendicular,
is this, which is the way also of adjusting of Telescopical sights, as I shall
afterward have occasion to show. Having marked the four sides of the Glass,
the North with N, the East with E, the South with S, and the West with W, about
the first of June I begin to observe and measure the true distance of some
remarkable fixed Star, as of this of Draco from the Zenith found one night when
the side N of the Glass stood North. Then I change the side of the Object
Glass, and put the North side Southwards, and the South, Northwards, and
observe the Transitus of the same Star the next night, and note down the same;
the third night following I put the East side or E North, and observe the
transit of the same Star over the Meridian; and the fourth night I put the West
side or W North, and observe the transit of the said Star. Now by comparing all
these together, it will be very easy to deduce what the false refraction of
the Object Glass is, and which way it lies, and consequently to regulate the
apparent Zenith by the true one. But this only by the by.

It Is manifest then by the observations of July the Sixth and Ninth: and that
of the One and twentieth of October, that there is a sensible parallax of the
Earths Orb to the fixed Star in the head of Draco, and consequently a
confirmation of the Copernican System against the Ptolomaick and Tichonick.

Before I leave this Discourse, I must not forget to take notice of some things
which are very remarkable in the last observation made upon the 21 of October.
And those were these. First, that about 17 minutes after three a-clock the same
day, the Sun being then a good way above the Horizon, and shining very clear
into the Room where I lay to observe, and having nothing to screen off the
rays of light, either in the Room where I was, or in the next Room through
which I looked, I observed the bright Star in the Dragons head to pass by the
Zenith as distinctly and clearly as if the Sun had been set, though I must
confess it had lost much of the glaring brightness and magnitude it was wont to
have in the night, and its concomitants were vanished: The like I found it
diverse other days before, when I observed it, the Sun shining very clear into
both the aforesaid Rooms, which by the way I suppose was the first time that
the fixed Stars were seen when the Sun shined very bright, without any obscuring
of its light by Eclipse or otherwise. And though we have a great tradition that
the Stars may be seen with the naked eye out of a very deep Well or Mine in the
day, yet I judge it impossible, and to have been a mere fiction, without any
ground: For the being placed at the bottom of a Well does not at all take away
the light of the Atmosphere from affecting the eye in and near the Axis of
vision, though indeed the sides thereof may much take off the lateral rays;
but unless the radiation of the false rays of the Star be brighter then that
of the Air, the true rays from the body are so very small, that it is
impossible the naked eye should ever be affected by them. For in the second
place, by this observation of the Star in the day time when the Sun shined,
with my 36 foot Glass I found the body of the Star so very small, that it was
but some few thirds in Diameter, all the spurious rays that do beard it in the
night being clearly shaved away, and the naked body thereof left a very small
white point.

The smalness of this body thus discovered does very fully answer a grand
objection alleged by diverse of the great Anti-copernicans with great vehemence
and insulting; amongst which we may reckon Ricciolus and Tacquet, who would
fain make the apparent Diameters of the Stars so big, as that the body of the
Star should contain the great Orb many times, which would indeed swell the
Stars to a magnitude vastly bigger then the Sun, thereby hoping to make it seem
so improbable, as to be rejected by all parties. But they that shall by this
means examine the Diameter of the fixed Stars, will find them so very small,
that according to these distances and Parallax they will not much differ in
magnitude from the body of the Sun, some of them proving bigger, but others
proving less; for the Diameter of the parallactical Circle among the fixed
Stars, seems to exceed the Diameter of the Star almost as much as the Diameter
of the annual Orb of the Earth does that of the Sun. And possibly longer and
better Telescopes will yet much diminish the apparent bulk of the Stars by
bringing fewer false rays to the eye that are the occasion of the glaring and
magnifying of the said bodies. It may for the present suffice to show that even
with this Glass we find the Diameter of this Star considerably smaller then a
Second, and the Parallax we judge may be about 27 or 30 Seconds. It will not
therefore be difficult to find many Stars whose Diameters shall be less then a
two hundredth part of this Parallax, as possibly upon more accurate observation
this very Star may be found to be. Now we find that the Diameter of the Orb of
the Earth is but two hundred times bigger then the Diameter of the Sun in the
Center thereof; and therefore if the parallactical difference be found to be
two hundred times more then the visible Diameter of the Star, the Star will
prove but of the same magnitude with the Sun.

This Discovery of the possibility and facility of seeing the fixed Stars in the
day time when the Sun shines, as I think it is the first instance that has
been given of this kind, so I judge it will be a discovery of great use for the
perfecting Astronomy; as first, for the rectifying the true place of the Sun in
the Ecliptic at any time of the year; for since by this means it is easy to
find any Star of the first, second, or third magnitude at any time of the day,
if it be above the Horizon, and not too near the body of the Sun: And since by
a way I shall shortly publish any Angle to a Semicircle in the Heavens, may be
taken to the exactness of a Second by one single observator: It will not be
difficult for future Observators to rectify the apparent place of the Sun
amongst the fixed Stars to a Second, or very near, which is one hundred times
greater accurateness, then has hitherto been attained by the best Astronomers.
The like use there may be made of it for observing any notable appulse of
the,,,, and, to any notable fixed Star that shall happen in the day time, which
may serve for discovering their true places and parallaxes. The Refractions
also of the Air in the day time may by this means be experimentally detected.

I should have here described some Clocks and Time-keepers of great use, nay
absolute necessity in these and many other Astronomical observations, but that
I reserve them for some attempts that are hereafter to follow, about the
various ways I have tried, not without good success of improving Clocks and
Watches, and adapting them for various uses, as for accurating Astronomy,
completing the Tables of the fixed Stars to Seconds, discovery of Longitude,
regulating Navigation and Geography, detecting the proprieties and effects of
motions for promoting secret and swift conveyance and correspondence, and many
other considerable scrutinies of nature: And shall only for the present hint
that I have in some of my foregoing observations discovered some new Motions
even in the Earth it self, which perhaps were not dreamt of before, which I
shall hereafter more at large describe, when further trials have more fully
confirmed and completed these beginings. At which time also I shall explain a
System of the World differing in many particulars from any yet known, answering
in all things to the common Rules of Mechanical Motions: This depends upon
three Suppositions. First, That all Celestial Bodies whatsoever, have an
attraction or gravitating power toward their own Centers, whereby they attract
not only their own parts, and keep them from flying from them, as we may
observe the Earth to do, but that they do also attract all the other Celestial
Bodies that are within the sphere of their activity; and consequently that not
only the Sun and Moon have an influence upon the body and motion of the Earth,
and the Earth upon them, but that also,,, and by their attractive powers, have
a considerable influence upon its motion as in the same manner the
corresponding attractive power of the Earth has a considerable influence upon
every one of their motions also. The second supposition is this, That all
bodies whatsoever that are put into a direct and simple motion, will so
continue to move forward in a straight line, till they are by some other
effectual powers deflected and bent into a Motion, describing a Circle,
Ellipsis, or some other more compounded Curve Line. The third supposition is,
That these attractive powers are so much the more powerful in operating, by how
much the nearer the body wrought upon is to their own Centers. Now what these
several degrees are I have not yet experimentally verified; but it is a notion,
which if fully prosecuted as it ought to be, will mightily assist the
Astronomer to reduce all the Celestial Motions to a certain rule, which I
doubt will never be done true without it. He that understands the nature of the
Circular Pendulum and Circular Motion, will easily understand the whole ground
of this Principle, and will know where to find direction in Nature for the true
stating thereof. This I only hint at present to such as have ability and
opportunity of prosecuting this Inquiry, and are not wanting of Industry for
observing and calculating, wishing heartily such may be found, having my self
many other things in hand which I would first complete, and therefore cannot so
well attend it. But this I durst promise the Undertaker, that he will find all
the great Motions of the World to be influenced by this Principle, and that the
true understanding thereof will be the true perfection of Astronomy.

LONDON, Printed for John Martyn, Printer to the Royal Society. 1674.


