Dr. HOOPER's SERMON BEFORE THE King and Queen, At Whitehall, Jan. xiv. 1693/4.

A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen, AT WHITE HALL, January xiv.
1693/4.

By GEO. HOOPER, Dean of Canterbury, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their
MAJESTY'S.

Published by Their Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCIV.

A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen.
JOHN vii. 17. If any one will do His will, he shall know of the Doctrine,
whether it be of God.


UPon our Blessed Savior's Appearance among men, there must have been much
Inquiry and Dispute concerning Him. His Miracles and his Doctrines were both of
them singular and extraordinary; they amazed and confounded the World: his
mighty Works making a change in the course of Nature, and his surprising
Discourses tending to as great an alteration in the Doctrines they had received
from their Fathers and Rabbis. Neither of them could be opposed; his Actions
not to be denied, and his Words not to be contradicted: and yet the People knew
not well what to think; were not come to a Resolution, whether he was to be
believed; whether he spoke from God, or Himself, or it may be from an evil
Spirit.

The People were astonished at his Doctrine, he spoke it with that supernatural
Authority. Never man spoke like this Man, was the Return, the Officers sent to
apprehend him, make, in this Chapter, to their Masters the High Priest and
Pharisees. Neither did any man ever do like him: for when Christ shall come,
will he do more miracles than this man? was the Challenge of those that did
believe. And that the rest believed not on him, who had done among them such
works as no man had done, was judged by our Lord, in this Gospel, to be the
great Aggravation of their Sin. For his Works were evident unexceptionable
Testimonies of his Mission, and to them he frequently remits the Unbelievers
for their full Conviction.

And yet, for all this, there were not many who believed on him; those not the
Rulers or the Learned: neither continued they long in that just and
well-grounded Persuasion. Those who had seen his late great Miracle of the
Loaves; had fed of it, had satisfied their Hunger and their Doubts, almost all
left him, in a very little while, for one hard Saying. Many of his Disciples
went back, and walked not with him, insomuch that the Twelve were asked,
Whether they would depart from him also? And when afterward he came up to
Jerusalem, there was great murmuring concerning him. Some say, he is a good
man; some say, nay, but he deceives the people. They knew not how he should
know Letters, who had never learned; and therefore in the best construction
they would make, Was not his Doctrine from himself, and of his own Devising?
Now from the Reflection of these Surmises, he here justifies himself in such a
manner, as retorts all the blame of those Doubts upon the Unbelievers
themselves: giving them a plain account of this their Ignorance, which thus
perplexes them. My Doctrine, says he, is not my own, but from him that sent me:
and so much you could not but have known, had you been rightly qualified for
it. But that after which you seem to be so curious and inquisitive, you are not
very likely to understand, in the Method you take, and the Disposition you are
of; if ye would discern the Will of God, ye must be willing to do it: He that
will, is desirous and ready to, do God's Will, he shall know it. This is the
Truth directly and primarily intended by the Text, relating to the Doctrine as
propounded to be known. There is too another Consequent to this, and to which
the Words may extend; regarding the same Doctrine as known already: If any one
will or shall do the will of God, which he now knows in part, he shall know it
better and further; be more confirmed and advanced in that his Knowledge, by
the Practice.

The first Proposition is this; If any one is willing to do the Will of God, as
soon as he may have the Favor to be acquainted with it; he, when it shall be
told him, shall not fail to know, and discern it. And this Willingness to do,
we are to understand to be such, as may answer in some measure to the Dignity,
Reasonableness, and Necessity of the Work; the Doing the Will of the great God:
a Will the most wise, the most holy, the most just, most worthy to take place;
to which it is our Honor, our Perfection and our Happiness to conform, and no
less our Duty and our Interest: we that have been created by the Power of his
Almighty Will, ever since sustained by its gracious Providence, still
dependant, and eternally obnoxious to the Favor or Displeasure of his final
Will to be hereafter declared, when he shall come to call us to account for
that part of his Will he has already enjoined.

The Will of this our great LORD, he that is thus willing to do, will first be
as earnest and zealous to know; diligent and heedful in his Attention; punctual
and exact in his Inquiries; lest he should be defective or mistaken, when he
comes to act, in an Affair of so high a Nature, and of such weighty Consequence.

And such a desire to know, it must be confessed, would certainly follow: But
this may not seem at first sight to have been meant here by our Savior; and
though he reflects upon his Auditors Unwillingness to do, yet their Eagerness
to know must we not suppose him to admit? For very great Multitudes followed
into Deserts to hear him: and much Discourse, and great Debates there were,
concerning him and his Doctrine.

But notwithstanding all this Appearance of Willingness to hear and to be
informed, there might have been no such great desire to know.

For Curiosity and Inquisitiveness is satisfied often with something short of
Knowledge. It is enough sometimes to have went to the Place, whither others
throng; to have made up one of the Assembly, and to have seen the famed
Preacher. Men too when they hear, do not always attend; their Eyes gaze, and
their Thoughts wander: Or if they do, it may be to the graceful Mien, the sweet
Voice, the elegant Style, the pathetick or the rational way of the Discourse,
and not to the merit of the Argument, and purpose of the Doctrine.

Though they went not out into the wilderness to see a Reed shaken with the
wind, yet they might go to see a Man that cured such a Neighbor; to be present
at some strange sight themselves; to be able to report a Miracle of their own
knowledge; or to be Guests at one of those wonderful Entertainments. Or else
they might have went to hear one, who spared not the Greatest, who rebuked the
Highpriests, and corrected the Scribes and Pharisees.

They might too have heard so much, as not to be ignorant, and yet not so much
as to know; as much as would let them understand something of the Dispute in
fashion, and enable them to maintain one side of the Argument; to hold up
Conversation, and to talk of Jesus: but not to make a judgment in good earnest;
a practical one, by which they would determine their Actions, and which they
would stand by with their Lives: such a real effectual one, as they would have
made, had they been willing to do.

But though in the general, they might be willing to know, and not only hear
him gladly, but do many things for his sake; yet many things still there might
be, which they might be either unfit or unwilling to understand: either their
former Prejudices might obstruct, or their Interests and Passions disturb and
oppose; if their will to do God's Will were not firm and resolute, strong
enough to set aside those Hindrances, and overruled all Contradictions.

The power of single Praepossession, and speculative Prejudice, is well known.
An Opinion once possessed of us claims a kind of Right, a legal Favor to be
shown it; and if the Possession be ancient, and time out of mind, the Title is
not easy to be evicted: But as a Prejudice, it is a Point already judged and
settled, hardly to be brought into question before the same Judge, much less to
be reversed by him. And for such Reasons only, it might have been hard for an
innocent Pharisee, to find the Ceremonies and Observations of his Sect
disparaged and discharged; those which the great Rabbis had encouraged, and
the Tradition of their Forefathers had recommended: but much less could he
ever admit, that the Ceremonial Law of Moses was to give way, and that a
Greater than Moses himself was now speaking unto them. He might be willing to
do the Divine Will, as he now apprehended it to be, conformable to his
Education and Practice: willing to do the Will of God, but as willing, at the
same time, to do the will of Moses and the Elders.

But if now we suppose this Pharisee to be some governing Master, whose
Authority is founded in his Knowledge of those Traditions; and whose high
satisfaction it is to fit in Moses his Seat, and to be called Rabbi: he is then
so much addicted to them, not only by Praepossession of Mind, but by the
Praeingagement of his Affections, that should Moses himself have come, he might
not have been willing to leave the Chair; much less to hear any of his old
oracular Learning upon the Law, which made him Great, but that of no effect,
censured and condemned by this Lawgiver. For he is not so willing to do God's
Will, as to preserve his own Place and Reputation; that we may not imagine he
would be controlled by our Savior, and descend to learn from the Galilean, and
one that never knew Letters.

But still if we go further, and understand some one of the avaritious,
malicious, lewd and hypocritical Pharisees; as unwilling then as he would be to
forego his Vices, so unwilling will he be to understand the Law against them;
much more to receive a New one, which shall oppose him with a more express, and
more peremptory Declaration. And on this account it was, that all our Savior's
Miracles were not of force enough to convince them of his Authority: His single
Sermon on the Mount, and the Holiness there prescribed, would never suffer them
to be persuaded by him. The Pharisees that were covetous, derided him for his
charitable Directions: and those who brought the Adulteress before him, and
were not guiltless enough from the same Crime to prosecute it far, as they left
the Accusation, so they fled from his Reproof. They all therefore sought
instead of being instructed by his Words to have something thence to inform
against him. As many Vices as there were, so many Adversaries there generally
were to his Doctrine; practical Prejudices, with which they were praepossess'd,
as with so many Demons; and which would not be persuaded, nor argued out: for
what had they to do with the Son of David? This is that Diabolical Race, which
paid him less respect than the Devils themselves; They would not come out at
his Command: but rather treated Him, as those impure Spirits did the Sons of
Sceva, fell upon him, and drove him out; not removed him out of a Country by
Entreaty, as the Gadarens, but out of the World, with all Despite and Cruelty;
as the greatest Malefactor of the Three; as guilty of Treason against Caesar,
and of Blasphemy against God, because guilty of Opposition to their Corruptions.

For he that has no mind to be denied any sinful Pleasure he indulges, or any
ungodly Advantage he values, will be very averse from hearing, that such an
Abstinence is the Will of God; will either cavil at the Message, and dispute
its Authority, or wrest and interpret it to his own Will. Nay so far, we know,
Men otherwise of good Understandings, may be brought by Adherence to their
Lusts, as to deny the natural Notions of common Justice, and to question the
being of their Maker: they will not comply with the Directions he has given;
and therefore they will neither know his Pleasure, nor his Person: who is the
Lord?

This is the great Impediment of Knowledge our Savior here means; a Dullness
of Understanding, not for want of Ability, but Will to apprehend; in those who
hear, and will not understand; and seeing see, but will not perceive; because
their Heart is waxed gross, and their Ears are dull of hearing, and their Eyes
have they closed; lest they should see with their Eyes, and hear with their
Ears, and understand with their Hearts, and be converted.

Whereas on the other side, if there were a Willingness to do God's Will, there
would be no need of any great Intellectual Abilities to perceive it. The Duties
of Justice and Mercy are easily discerned by the meanest Capacity; Judgment to
come, Man naturally forebodes; and the Being of a God, it is a Difficulty to
the Understanding not to allow: The Doubts and Obscurities arise not from the
Nature of the things to be considered, nor from the Weakness of the Faculty
that should consider, but from the Prevarication of our sensual Desires; we are
swayed by some indirect means, that appear not to have any Influence upon us;
some little favorite consideration, which we are loath to own; but by which we
are governed effectually.

Had the Auditors therefore of Christ come ready disposed to have obeyed God's
Will, without any Reserve for their own; with no Inclination nor Passion but
for his Service; they would have perceived the Almighty Power in the Miracles
our Savior did, and discerned the Divine Law in the Instructions he gave them:
had they first stripped themselves of their Prejudices, and their Lusts; they
would quickly have forsaken all the rest of the World, and followed him. If the
Revelation of Moses had prevailed upon them to do God's Will with their whole
Heart, and whole Soul, the Nation of the Jews would have owned their Messiah:
and had they been true Disciples of the Law, and followed that their
Schoolmaster; it would have led them to Christ.

This is the Assertion primarily intended by the Text, regarding those who were
then to receive the Gospel: there remains the other, respecting us who have
already received it; If any one will do the Will of God, which he does know, he
shall know it better.

Now what was but intimated before, is here more expressly to be observed; that
Knowledge is of two kinds, the one simple, and speculative; where the
Understanding conceives and assents by it self, our Will and Affections
standing by, and taking no part: the other mixed, and compounded by the
intervention of the Will, where that is interested in what is to be asserted,
or practiced, and must concur in the Allowance of it.

And the first of these, even the speculative, whether it consists in
apprehending what the Doctrine means, or in conceiving its Truth and
Reasonableness, is by Practice both ways very much facilitated and confirmed.
In Mathematical Sciences, the way of performing a Problem, however
demonstratively assigned, remains further to be verified by the Operation; and
in considerations of Nature, the Will of God wrought by his own hands, the best
method of Knowledge is that which is Experimental, and Works too; which puts
the Divine Materials into our hands, and looks not only upon their Surface in
some single View, but turns them, and surveys them on all sides; weighs and
examines, opens and searches their inmost Recesses. For this sort of Truth, as
Gold, is to be labored after, and dug for; and not to be judged only by the
Sight, but by the Touch and the Scale, or by the Hammer and the Fire. And if
this be true in the Speculation of what God himself has been pleased to make,
much more will it be in the Knowledge of that, which we, by his Command, are to
Do. For it can be no otherwise with the practical Doctrine of God, than it is
acknowledged to be in the Arts and practical Professions of Men: where the true
Insight is not so much from the Apprehensions we may have by Discourse and
Meditation, as by Dealing in them, and being actually exercised and conversant
about them: the knowledge of such things as are to be done, which arises from
our mental Conceptions, being but as the rough Draught or first Lines of a
Picture; and that when it is consummated by experience, as a finished Piece,
raised with all its Lineaments and Colors. Or rather the Notional Knowledge is
as the Picture, and the Active as the Thing it self: the one being but in
Imagination, and as a Dream; and the other Real, and Solid, and Sensible. For
whoever is our Instructor, and how plainly soever he may express himself; we
are yet to learn in things practical, from Exercise and Use, the last Master
and the best Interpreter.

This obtains in the Arts of Government, or War, or Merchandise, in any of the
Affairs of this World: and holds as true in Ethical Knowledge, and the Business
of Religion. For as the Natural Philosopher forbad the uninstructed in Geometry
to enter his School; so the Moralist has, it is known, discouraged his too
Youthful Auditors as unfit for his Lectures: not only because they might not
yet patiently hear of Moderation of their Passions and Pleasure; but because,
till they had begun to practice it, they could not rightly understand it, not
being yet, by reason of Use, exercised to discern such Good and Evil.
Temperance, for example, is in this, like to the Pleasures, from which it
orders us to abstain, that it cannot be conceived only from Words, must be
tasted too, if we would know its Nature and its Relish. Justice likewise and
Charity are best understood by their Practitioners: those in any case of
Difficulty would prove better Directors than the more studied Casuist; would
solve and remove the Doubts, which these would serve only to intricate and to
multiply. They would too by the Exercise of those Virtues, see more reason for
them; more of their Suitableness to the well-disposed Nature of Man, than Books
could speak, or Theory discover. In like manner; He that constantly and
devoutly prays to his Maker, best apprehends the Nature of the Duty, and best
perceives the Use and Comfort of it: better than those who have heard, or made
long Discourses about it. The Meaning of the Lord's Prayer, is more sensibly
understood by one that prays it over to God, earnestly and concernedly, with
Dependence on the Divine Greatness and Goodness, in reference to the daily
Occurrences of his Life; than it can be by the critical Consideration of the
best Commentator alone. And he that thus daily addresses to his Father which is
in Heaven, with a dutiful Resignation, and filial Trust, has more of
satisfactory Assurance and inward Peace, than the Children of this World can
imagine, or he himself express.

And thus, taking the Understanding by it self, and unaffected with our Will,
the Will of God is better known by being done. If done by others, it is more
conspicuous to us on their Lives, and better explained and illustrated by the
Example; but if by our selves, and made one of our own Actions, it is then
taken into us, habituated and incorporated in us, intimately and entirely
perceived. Whereas too all Humane Designs are generally fairer in the Idea,
than the Practice; on the contrary, the Divine Pleasure must be more liked and
approved, when it is reduced into Act, and really exhibited, who ever shall put
it in Execution: but much more will it delight us, if performed by our selves;
it will then become our Pleasure too, and we look back with the Satisfaction of
our Creator, and see that All is good, which we have done, according to his
Will.

But secondly, if we consider this Knowledge, not formed by the Understanding
only, but with the agreement of the Will; as it is in all the Affairs of this
and the other World: then Doing and Practice will be found still more necessary
for the advancing and completing it. For though in Matters of Knowledge the
Will has no direct proper Concurrence, nor is the Consent of it strictly
necessary to the Assent of the Understanding; yet it has such a tacit but
effectual Influence, such a domestic conjugal Authority, that the
Understanding is seldom firmly or long on that side, to which the other Faculty
is not inclined: and therefore as far as doing contributes to reconcile, keep
up, and fortify the Will; so much it prepares and disposes for the preserving,
as well as the receiving, of Knowledge.

Now the doing of God's Will, does operate on ours, with this threefold
Advantage.

1. The Practice of the Duty takes off from the strangeness of it, and removes
all the imaginary Difficulty we fansied to be in the Work, before we set upon
it. The Task was before represented to us, as some good Man may be to those who
have not practiced him; a rigid, morose, austere thing: whereas, after
Conversation, and some Familiarity, there is nothing whose Company less
offends, or which we better affect. While we keep off at a distance from the
Exercises of Religion; its Enemies, and ours, have a fair Opportunity to
mis-represent, and to raise up such Imaginations in us as shall agree with
their Interest: but if we would but approach, and make trial, we should
discover the Calumny; it would then appear, that there was no Lion in the way,
or at the end; and that the false Spies we had sent forth to discover the Holy
Land, had made to us a most unfaithful Description. And may I not say, that is
with Religion it self, as with those few edifying Orders in Use with us about
it? It is a burdensome Yoke, an intolerable Imposition, unnecessary, foolish,
any thing that Detraction shall think fit to say, to those who are ignorant of
it, and not well acquainted with it: whereas if we came a little nearer, and
experienced it our selves, we should then begin to wonder at the unjust
Surmises we were brought to entertain before; and take nothing to be more
unreasonable, and more vain, than such Representations as those.

For to give the Case of all Christian Duties in the Instance of one, the Holy
Communion; how many are they who are well enough informed, that it is a
necessary part of Divine Worship; a Sacrament to which we are as much obliged,
as we were to the other? And yet how are Men generally kept off from it by
strange Conceits, such as can have no place, but in idle Minds? It is a
Mystery, from which the profane and ungodly should absent: but to many, who are
to be encouraged to come, it is the more a Mystery, because they come not at
all. There is something in it, they know not what, they are afraid of: and the
Action, instead of being Reverend, is Frightful to them. Upon the thought of it
there is a Damp and Melancholy on their Minds; though the Subject of it be
Thanks and Praise, and the Invitation be to a Feast. Though there be no more
serious Confession of their Sins, than what they should make every day; no
other Renunciation of them, than what their Baptism presumes already; yet they
imagine some new terrible Work is to be undertaken, and that they shall come
under danger of Condemnation, if they go thither; from which too they shall
escape, if they stay away.

Upon the first Apprehensions of a God, no wonder if some natural fearfulness
seizes us; and when the spiritual World is mentioned, Specter may arise in
weaker Minds, and seem to stand in their way: but if they will but go on, these
empty Shadows will immediately disappear; and if we draw near to the Divine
Majesty, we shall not be amazed and dis-heartened, but assured and encouraged
by that Gracious Presence.

Many vain Fears there are in the Christian Warfare, before which often the Raw
and Unexperienced shamefully fly without a stroke struck, to be cured, as we
see, by Use and Action: and some groundless Aversion there may be to our Duty,
which the Practice of it will reconcile: but there is besides much real Danger,
and direct actual Opposition, to be considered in the second place.

2. For to confess the Truth; we are not only as Strangers to the Will of God,
but there is something within us, which is an Enemy to it, and wars against it:
Rebellious Lusts, that would be willing to make a Resistance; and watch all
Opportunities, to withdraw the Obedience of the Will, and to corrupt the
Integrity of the Judgment.

The Evidence of the Truth may have brought us to some Knowledge, and our
Carnal Affections were forced at present to suffer the Conviction of the Mind:
And had the well-inform'd Soul been active and diligent, setting the Will on
work, and employing it upon its acknowledged Duty, subduing and suppressing the
contrary Inclinations; it might then have gained an entire Consent, and
established for ever its just Dominion. But if, on the other side, it be idle,
and sees not to the Execution of its own and the Divine Pleasure; this is both
a sure Indication, that our sensual part remains too powerful; and a sad
Prognostic, that it will quickly recover its ground, and, finally prevail.
When the Convictions begin to cool, and the Impressions on our Mind grow
fainter, then it will regain its force; undermine, and at last ruin, the
Knowledge that had been raised: It will again captivate the Understanding, and,
like a barbarous Conqueror, put out its Eyes.

The very Omission of our Duty impairs its Knowledge. It is as a Sleep of the
Soul, and under its Truce our Carnal Desires refresh and gather strength: there
is too a cessation of Sense, as well as of Motion; a present Forgetfulness of
God, and temporary Ignorance of his Will. But if we are thence engaged into
Actual Transgression, we then avowedly contradict his Precepts, and make open
War against his Sacred Truths; destroying, as far as we can, all the Records of
them, and breaking not only the Commandments, but the Tables themselves. The
Knowledge of them is troublesome and opposing, and must be suppressed.

By Doing of any Wickedness a Blot is contracted; which not only blemishes the
Soul, but blackens and darkens it: And a contrary Course of Repentance
afterward, is not more necessary to atone for the Guilt, than it is to change
the Depravation of the Mind, and to recover and re-establish its former
Sentiments. For as there are some Vices, which naturally affect the Head,
rendering it unfit to think and recollect, and disabling it for any Science: so
have All of them something of that stupifying Nature, particularly indisposing
for Divine Knowledge; sending up such Fumes, as by a peculiar Malignancy
assault and poison all Notions of Goodness and Virtue, and mortify the
Spiritual Understanding.

The Knowledge of our Duty, is as a Light set up within us, to be maintained by
constant Supplies, and in perpetual Motion. It may be obscured by the shining
in of the World, through our Senses and Imagination: it may be suffocated, if
only by the Damp, arising from an earthy and yet not well purged Breast; grow
pale and dim, and then go out: but by the active Contrariety of wicked and
ungodly Practices, it is certainly extinguished, drowned as by many Waters.

So necessary is the Exercise of our Knowledge, to its Preservation. But then
further,

3. By Doing of the Will of God, at length we attain to the Habit of Doing it
willingly; and begin to have new Pleasure in the Discharge of our Duty.
According as our Carnal Affections are suppressed, our Spiritual Desires arise;
and upon the Mortification of the Old Man, the New Man grows up, and improves:
the Consent of the Sanctified Will, being at last utterly and absolutely given
to the Assent of the Understanding; and we not only allowing the Doctrine of
God, to be true and reasonable in the speculation, but embracing it with our
whole heart, and entirely affectionate to it: proceeding so to the Knowledge of
one farther Truth, delivered us by our Savior, and experimentally discovering,
that His Yoke is easy, and Burden light; that His Paths are Paths of Pleasure
and Peace. This is the Seraphick State of Holy Men, who now believe not only
what they have heard, but perceive and know what their Eyes have seen, and
their Hands have handled, and their Souls have enjoyed, of the Word of Life.
Then from the Heart, continuing its first Motion, and actuated with Devotion
and Zeal, fresh supplies of Spirits are sent back again to the Head; the Warmth
of the Breast is inkindled into a Flame; and New Light springing up from that
Holy Heat, the upper Sphaere of Man, like Heaven, is full of Brightness and Joy.

In this manner, the Knowledge of God's Will is to be improved by us; It comes
by Hearing, and may be imagined by Meditation; but it really increases,
strengthens, and is fixed, by Actions of Obedience, and reducing it into
Practice.

It is not therefore to be wondered, That such as do not those things which
are convenient, become of Reprobate Minds: and that they lose the Knowledge of
God, who like not to retain it. Neither shall we admire, if there are those who
are in appearance always learning, but never come to the Knowledge of Christ.
Their Ears itch, and they heap up to themselves Teachers; but their Hands are
idle, their Feet are straying, and their Souls have no Inclination to try, and
to obey. They have heard much, and some Fancy of their Duty they may have, or
may speak its Language; they have wrote it may be, and can repeat: but the
Repetition of all moral Discourses should be by Practice, and they transcribed
into our Conversation. They edify not, they say, by this Man's Sermon: and by
the Knowledge, from which they think they are edified, they may not be built,
but puffed up. But how should they edify, who sit still only and hear? Faith
being no more to be built up and finished by Preaching, than a House would be
erected by the Discourse of the best Architect. Much less should we expect a
Superstructure, if, as in the Confusion of a Babel, their Actions agreed not
with the Speech; and what was endeavored to be raised at the Ear, they, with
the foolish Woman, were still pulling down with their hands.

But this is to be the Consolation of the illiterate, if honest-hearted,
Christian; that although there be those that appear more knowing, are skilled
in the Notions and History of God's Will, can give an account of all the
Disputes of Christianity, and can determine them; yet that all this is but
smattering and learned Ignorance, without any true Sense, and sound Judgment;
that those only are in the right Method of Divine Knowledge, who are obeying
God, and observing his Will; they are the Profound and the Illuminate; and know
the Doctrine as it ought to be known: their Light now shines before men; and
they shall shine as Stars for ever and ever.

And may I further observe, that the Reflection of our Savior, which gives an
account of that contradiction which opposes his Doctrine, gives too a reason of
all the Differences and Debates that have been raised in it. For these would
infallibly be much less, if not quite cease, were those, who eagerly dispute
his Will, as zealous and earnest to perform it: were not Men more warmly
concerned for the Honor and Interest of their Party, or themselves; than they
are really desirous to understand the Mind of Christ. For if any one truly
gives himself up to do his Will; he will not be apt to enter into needless
Contests, about what is not practical; nor strive most to know, what is not to
be done: And then when he comes to the Question, so much of his Lord's Will he
will at first observe, as to be modest, and meek, and tractable; not suffer his
Passions and Animosities to join in the Enquiry: he will not bring so much as a
Wish on one part, much less shall any humane Pre-ingagements decide the
Controversy. And if so, one cannot but think, (and sure we are not in this
partial our selves) that the Papal Infallibility, for Example, and their
Transubstantiation would be no longer defended, nor their gross Falsehoods be
set up for Catholic Truths: Neither, on the other side, would ancient Laudable
Practices be any longer Idolatrous and Antichristian. Were we not carnal, and
walked we not as Men, favoring our selves, and doing our own Will; there might
be neither Heresy nor Schism; did we resign our selves up to the Truth, on
which side soever it should appear. And certainly the Sacredness and Moment of
the Cause, where God's Will is in question, would require such a Caution, as,
in lesser Matters, is enforced by an Oath; that we should judge without Favor
and Affection, Hatred and Malice; that those at least who take upon themselves
to judge of his Law, should judge righteous Judgment. For what is fit to be
said after any Accident that befalls us by the Providence of God, is as proper
to be premised before a Dispute concerning his Revelation: Thy will be done, O
Father, which art in Heaven. And were our part of it done on Earth as it is in
Heaven, it might almost be known in the same manner.

Happy it would be for the Arts, said an Ancient, if none but the Skilful and
the Artists judged of them: and no less happy would it be for Religion, if only
the truly religious, and the sincere Christian, were to determine the Points in
Difference. This Advantage would undoubtedly result, that the Disputers would
not be very many; as well as that the Disputes would be no more than necessary;
fairly debated, and soon composed. Whereas now all Religious Controversies are
managed like Wars for Religion; raised, and fought not always by the most
Religious Men. The Question is concerning some Point of Faith or Manners; and
should be argued by Godly Spirits: But the World and the Flesh, they come in
and intermeddle; and they are as Auxiliaries on either side, whose Interest it
is the Cause should never be decided. For were not Christianity divided, what
Enemy would it have but those its sworn Enemies, against whom it had declared
in Baptism? And against these it would then join its United Force in a Holy
League, and never cease until they were entirely subdued.

In these many Differences of thinking, concerning our Savior's Person, and
Pleasure, we piously hope, that he will mercifully consider the Infirmities and
Errors of Men, and accept the Services of the Well-meaning; pardoning their
Ignorance and want of Discernment, if not too careless and too wilful. But lest
we betray our selves and others into a further Mistake, we shall do well to
take along with us this his Observation; and remember that generally all our
Ignorance is wilful, for want of Will to do God's Will. And when Ignorance
shall come to be pleaded, in the day when He shall judge the secrets of men's
hearts, it may then amount to no better an Excuse, than if instead of saying,
we did not Know his Will; we should allege in our Justification, that we were
not willing to Do it. Through our humane Infirmity, we did mistake in the
Duties of our Religion: but our Infirmity was this, That we were unwilling to
obey. A much more absurd return, than the careless Servant made in the Parable
of the Talents: Lord, I knew that thou were a hard Master, and did expect
Obedience at my hands; and therefore I would not understand thee.

But it is not our Duty only, to inquire the Will of God; it is our Privilege
and Honor, to be able to understand it. Its Study is the noblest Exercise, and
its Attainment the highest Ambition of a Rational Mind: the Knowledge so great
a Favor, that we should have endeavored after it at any price; Should have
bought that Learning with the expense of our Liberty; And to be permitted to
Understand, should have offered to Obey. That way the generous Appetite of
Science, should have moved in an Intelligent Creature; nor has God, in his
ordinary method, vouchsafed to reveal himself to Man, on any other Condition.
His Disciples are to be his vowed Servants: to such only will he appear, and
certainly with no other will he dwell. Ever since the first ungrateful Attempt
to Know his Will, by Transgressing it; a Readiness to obey, has been made the
Preparative to that Knowledge; and Obedience, the Preservative: the very Nature
of his Doctrine requiring in us some Praedisposition, a probationary
Obsequiousness, without which it will not be imparted; and God having done it
that Honor, as that the Unworthy should of themselves be rendered Vnqualified
and Incapable, justly praecondemn'd to this Darkness now, to whom is reserved
the blackness of Darkness for ever. For to the Ungodly, says God, What have
thou to do with my Law, seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my
Words behind thee? Be thou ignorant as thou art, as thou pretendest, or
deservest to be; and await the Issue. For a Desire to Know, while we care not
to Do, is such an impertinent, saucy Curiosity, as can never be gratified by
our Lord: and not to Do, what we already Know, is so highly affronting, that
there remains no bolder a Presumption, but to pretend to further Information;
nor can a lesser Punishment, for the Abuse of this Knowledge, be expected, than
its Forfeiture.

The Doctrine of God, however it may be esteemed by Men, is valued by the
Author; a Talent, committed to the Hopeful only, and the Promising; nor to any,
but upon Account. If we put it to no Use, it will, of its own Nature, rust and
diminish; may be lost through Negligence, or stolen by our Enemy, or taken away
by the Great Owner. But, if we exercise and employ it, it will increase and
multiply, of it self and by the natural Effect of our Industry; and will
besides be wonderfully blessed and augmented by the Special Favor of our Lord:
who is gone indeed into a far Country, but so, as still to oversee, assist, and
direct, the honest Care and dutiful Labor of his Servants below.

For, to our assured Encouragement, the miraculous Power, that first openly
introduced the Christian Doctrine, still invisibly attends it; to cherish, as
heretofore, the willing Beginning of its Disciples, and to help on their
obedient Endeavors. And this Will, whoever will Do, not only will Know it in
orderly Consequence; but he shall Know it, supernaturally enabled by Divine
Grace: our Performance as certainly rewarded here, with a progressive
Knowledge; as it shall be hereafter, with the Joys of our Master, and his
Immediate Beatifick Vision.

FINIS.

