Animadversions ON Mr IOHNSON's Answer TO JOVIAN, IN Three LETTERS TO A
Country-Friend.

Quam multa sunt in isto tuo libro prorsus (...) -- quantum convitiorum, quam
multa manifestae vanitatis, quantum stropharum, quantum figurati morsus, quam
multa parum prudenter detorta, ac depravata, and ex depravatis tragicae
conclusiones, rursus ex his vociferationes in immerentem? Erasm. Hyperasp.
Diatribae lib. 1. operum tom. 9. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the
Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1691.

AN Advertisement FROM THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
WHen I first committed these three Letters of Animadversions to the Press, I
intended to write a Preface before them, to comply with the Custom of the Age,
wherein nothing almost is Printed without a Preface to the Reader, to Apologize
for the Work, or, it may be, for the unseasonable Publication of it, or to
premise an account of the design for which it was written, or to inform him of
the knowledge of something useful, or necessary to facilitate the understanding
of it, or to supply some defect or oversight in it, or (as it often happens in
Books of Controversy) to answer some other Preface, or perhaps to consider some
things in it, which could not be so properly handled in the body of the Book.
But the Gentleman to whom the Animadversions were written, having sent me a
Copy of a Letter, which he wrote to the Author about the Printing of them,
with his Answer thereunto; I altered my intention, thinking it much better to
print them, as he gave me leave to do, than to write any Preface before the
three Letters, to which these are a most proper and pertinent Introduction,
rendering any other needless; and will be, I believe, more acceptable to the
learned Reader, than any I can write. Perhaps some Persons will wonder why I
kept these Animadversions so long from the Press, after they were sent to me to
get them published. To which I answer, that I have been hindered by many
avocations, of which my Friends are not ignorant; and having obtained their
Pardon for the delay, I hope, Courteous Reader, to obtain thine. I have only
this to add, that the reason why the Second Letter appears abrupt and imperfect
toward the end is, that some passages are wanting, which however innocent in
themselves, and proper for the free and private correspondence of Friends, yet
the Author thought not fit to Print, partly because they may be maliciously
wrested by prejudiced Persons, and partly through an unwillingness to do any
thing that may seem to revive an unseasonable Question.

SIR,
IT is almost two Months since our Friend at London sent me word, that he had
put into your hands the History of the Reigns of Edward and Richard the Second,
written by the Honorable Sir Robert Howard. He says he presented that Book
unto you, not for the sake of the History, which you know better than the
Historian; but for the sake of the Preface, that finding in it how far that
Honorable Person had been misled by Mr. Johnson's Answer to Jovian, you might
be persuaded to publish those Animadversions upon that pretended Answer, which
you did me the favor to write for my sake, shortly after it came abroad.

I have formerly told you what success I have had in communicating of them to
several Gentlemen, both of the Laity and Clergy, and how happily thereby I have
prevented some from being misled, and reduced others, that were so, by the
confidence and fallacy of Mr. Johnson, and how urgent thereupon every one of
them were with me, to procure, your leave to have them made public: and had I
been so happy to obtain it, when I first desired it, I am confident the timely
publication of them had saved Sir Robert a great deal of needless pains in that
Preface to his History, and the trouble of a long Speech, which he made almost
in the words of it to a very full House of Commons, on that memorable day which
was appointed for the great debate of the disabling Clause. It was then that
Sir Robert chose to lay out his Eloquence in declaiming against Passive
Obedience, and the Author of Jovian, and Dr. Sherlock, and for the pleasant
Doctrine of Resistance, and its Champion Mr. Johnson, whose answer to Jovian,
^ur Friend formerly told you, Sir Robert and other Gentlemen of the party so
much admired, as to say, that he ought to have the Deanery of Worcester, to
which he had a right by Conquest.

I must also remind you of what he told you concerning a Churchman of note,
who renounced the Doctrine of Passive Obedience (upon which he most absurdly
laid the blame of his illegal active Obedience) as an error of his Education:
and if I am not since misinformed, he pretends to be Mr. Johnson's Proselyte.
Which is perhaps for his honor to have a Convert of that Character. But how
much it is for the honor of a Person of his Character to be Mr. Johnson's
Convert, your Animadversions, were they published, would show the learned World.

I add this to all the former stories I have told you of this nature, to
convince you how injurious you have already been to truth, and Men that are
inquisitive after it, in confining your Letters to my hands, and to prevail
with you at last (if it be possible) to give me leave to get them Printed, that
the public may reap the same advantage by them, that I and some few others
have done. If you will consent to my request, I will upon notice of it send
them up next Term, by a Neighboring Attorney, to a good Friend of yours and
mine, who will take care they shall be published without any further trouble to
you.

Dear Sir, do not longer resist our united importunity, nor the pressing
desires of those, who here importune you, by me, though they do not know you.
One of them bid me plainly tell you, That you ought to consent to the
publication of them: and another says, you have been very much to blame for
deferring of it so long. But we are willing to forgive you, if after the
continued importunity of fifteen months, you will at last grant the most
earnest request of

Your Faithful and obedient Servant.
July 23. 1690.
SIR,
I Have read Sir R. H's. Preface, which operates quite contrary to your
expectation, and instead of inducing my consent, rather confirms my former
resolution to suppress the Letters you urge me to make public. For if Persons
of his Birth, Education, Parts, and Figure in the World, are so easily imposed
on, and will not be at the trouble of reading on both sides, what fruit can be
expected from these Papers, what candor or justice are they like to meet with?
I am sorry to observe a Gentleman professing to have his sentiments altogether
free, and unprejudiced by other Men's Opinions, so absolutely resign his
Judgment to a fond Passion for Mr. Johnson, and pour out his F^ry on Jovian, a
Book he seems to have read nothing of, but in Julian's Answer. I see Implicit
Faith has large Dominions, lying without the Pale of the Roman Church; and
that Persons of the most refined Wits, and even Skeptical Curiosity, too
frequently submit to its Yoke.

I know it is not the particular infelicity of this Noble Person, but an
unhappiness incident to all great Men, that their circumstances and more^
weighty employments will not allow their Personal examination of many things
which come before them. They are forced to see with other Men's Eyes, and to
hear with other Men's Ears, and so long as they trust none but Persons of
Judgment and Integrity, they suffer little thereby. But it has been Sir R's.
ill Fortune to use the Observations and Collections of some Men, who either for
lack of sense or honesty, have shamefully abused his confidence in them.

I cannot, out of respect to him, believe, that if Sir R. had read Jovian
through, he would have failed to observe the vast difference between calling
the Laws which secure the Rights of the Crown, Imperial Laws, and ascribing to
our King's Imperial Power, or that he would have stained his Honor by that
unjust Charge on Dr. Hicks, saying, Pref. p. 22.
That Imperial Power may make a lawless attempt or prosecution lawful. But he
had that, and several other invidious reflections on the Doctor, out of the
excellent Mr. Johnson, who made Collections out of Jovian for him, and deserves
very ill of him, for doing it with so little fidelity.

His Collection of Protestant Writers, which favor the Doctrine of Resistance,
was made by a no less trusty hand. The Authorities of Zuinglius, Calvin, and
some others, are borrowed from Philanax Anglicus, a Jesuit, whom Dr. Du Moulin
excellently answered: where he met with the rest I know not. I cannot be so
injurious to the Honorable Author, as to believe, that he made the Collection
himself, since upon examining two or three of the Citations, I find such
errors, as I am persuaded it is impossible for him to commit.

What he cites from Calvin on Daniel 6. ver. 7. is not there, nor yet has the
place to which Philanax refers, either the words or sense of what we read p.
16. The passage which occasioned Sir Robert to say Peter Martyr on Iud. c. 3.
approves the proceedings against Richard the Second is this, Polydor^s
Virgilius tradit Anglos aliquando Reges suos compulisse ad. rationem reddendam
pecuniae male administratae.
Peter Martyr on Judges c. 3. has not a word of the Parliaments Proceedings
against King Richard the Second, and considering how he determines the Case of
Resistance there, I very much question whether he approved them. Again, he
calls the Author of the Book of Obedience Thomas Goodman, whom both the Title
Page of the Book, and Whittingam's Preface call Christopher. The mistake, I
confess, is of no moment, but it shows the negligence of the Person who made
the Collection. I wonder for what reason Sir R. brings afresh on the Stage such
passages as these, which our Romish Adversaries have for above a hundred years
cast in our Dish, See Bishop Bilson of Christian Subjection. Part 3. p. 270.
etc. Edit. 8. he says Goodman disliked his own Opinion, p. 274.
as Seditious, and our own Divines have vindicated the Reformed Churches,
partly by condemning some of them, and partly by showing, that others are
maliciously wrested, or impertinently alleged. But I know not how such
Collections make for their Majesty's Service, and the Honor of the
Reformation; it is possible this Noble Author does.

I think he is as little obliged, by a third Person, who eased him of the
drudgery of turning the Bible for Scripture Examples of an Original Contract.
For had Sir R. used his own Eyes in that search, he would have seen, that the
Instances of David and Jehoiada are no proofs, that there were pacta conventa,
between the Jewish Kings and their People, as there are in Poland; or that the
former were accountable to the latter. Cum Re^um Iudeorum ejuscem^di esset, u^
omnes a Rege penderent (non enim a Proceribus eligebatur, sed ex successione
posteri ejus familiae imperabant, quam Deus praescripserat) ideo, in legibus
Deuteronom. and 1 libro Samuelis, in quibus jus regium sancitur, nullis
facultus conceditur ut illos deturbent, etc. P. Mart. in Judic. 3. sub finem.
Peter Martyr on the third of Judges, teaches the quite contrary. And whoever
reads the two places in the Chronicles, cited to prove a Contract between David
and his People, and compares them with the parallel places in Samuel, and
Kings, will hardly think them satisfactory.

David's Covenant with the Elders of Israel, was a plain Treaty of Peace, and
Submission to David, after a long and unsuccessful defense of the Title of the
House of Saul. It was first concluded by Abner, and upon his Murder, renewed
and solemnly ratified by the Elders of Israel. See 2 Samuel Chapter II, III, IV, V.
But you read of no Covenant made with the Men of Judah, who Anointed him King
immediately on Readiness Death.

The Instance of Jehoiada making a Covenant, 2 Chronicles. XXIII. 16. signifies as
little. As it is related, 2 Kings XI. 17. it appears indeed, that a Covenant
was made between the King and People, as well as with the LORD. And as the
tenor of the latter was, That after their Apostasy to Idols, under Athaliah,
they should become the Lord's People; so probably the tenor of that with the
King was, That after Athaliah's Usurpation, they should become Subjects to
Joash, their rightful King. He was but seven years old, and at that age
incapable of contracting for himself, and it appears not that Jehoiada made any
conditions for him, the breaking of which should absolve them from their
Allegiance.

And now we are upon Scripture Collections, you shall see how unfortunate he
is, in an instance or two more. To prove, that all wrongs [done by wicked
Kings] are not unquestionable in this World, P. 36.
he alleges the case of Ahab, who forfeited his Succession for Tyranny; Now I
do not find, that after the Prophet Elijah pronounced the Sentence, the People
deposed him, or altered the Succession, but waited till God, by express
Revelation^ transferred the Crown to another Family, and sent the Prophet
Elisha to anoint Jehu. I believe neither Jovian, nor any other of our Passive
Doctors, ever said, That God may not call wicked Kings to an account in this
Life; but the contrary, and that he usually does it. And his other instance, if
it be possible, is less to the purpose. He says, Samuel meddled not till God
saw good to reckon with him: For God had given a special Commandment to Saul,
to destroy the Amalekites, and spare none, which Command Saul not executing,
the Prophet did it with his own hand. I ever thought Agag's losing both his
Kingdom and his Life, was part at least of his account with God.

You see, Sir, how dangerous it is to trust to other Men's Collections, unless
you are well assured of their Fidelity. Yet I must confess, Sir R. H. had as
much temptation as any man could have to trust. He formerly met with an honest
Sorbon Doctor, Io. Launoy de ^aria Aristot. in Acad. Paris. Fortuna.
who obliged him with a true Account of the various Decrees for and against
Aristotle, in the University of Paris, which makes as handsome an appearance as
any thing in this whole Book. He deserved his acknowledgements, and praise,
much better than Mr. Johnson, though I do not yet find that they are any where
paid him.

I believe Dr. Hicks is not ill pleased with this Noble Author, for suggesting
that Jovian was written by a Club, and takes it for a great Honor, that he
esteems him the most considerable of all the Learned Assertors of the Doctrine
of Non-resistance. Yet I have great reason to tell you, that he is mistaken,
that Jovian was as much the Doctors own Work, as any Book extant, was the
Authors whose name it bears; and I am confident he has no other ground for
this fancy, but only that he knows, (and who does not know?) that Julian and
its Defense were both made by a Club, and that as Mr. Hunt's Postscript
afforded the choicest materials of the former, so Mr. Atwood's Letter of
Remarks, furnished the most considerable Reflections upon Jovian, we meet with
in the latter.

I might observe to you, how little Reverence Sir R. discovers for Christian
Religion, and amidst all his zeal for it, takes the liberty to make sport with
the Baptismal Vow, p. 19. and calls the Dreadful Judgment, which must pass on
Kings, as well as their meanest Subjects, a pretended Account to be made up
only with God. Though I hope the latter was rather from an infelicity in
expressing himself, than any bad meaning. But I must remember that I am
answering your Letter, and not Sir R's Preface.

The Story your Friend told me of the great Churchman, was, I confess,
altogether News to me, and very surprising, and more than I can yet believe. If
he were not able to discern the difference between Passive Obedience, and Blind
Obedience, he had great reason to complain of an unhappy Education. Passive
Obedience is not inconsistent with the liberty of examining the commands of a
Superior; it freely exercises a Judgment of Discretion, and arms a Man with
Courage, to despise all the hazards he may run, for choosing to obey God rather
than Man. Passive Obedience tempers no Man into a soft and base compliance with
the Arbitrary and Illegal designs of a Prince; but on the contrary allows a
Man by all legal means to oppose them, and in case he falls into disgrace, or
any other suffering on that account, it fortifieth him with Patience to bear it
like a Christian. He who understands what Passive Obedience is, will live
happily and easily, so long as he keeps a good Conscience, though he puts
himself thereby out of his Prince's Favor.

I cannot forbear smiling at these pleasant Gentlemen, who have so extravagant
an opinion of Mr. J's. Performance and Merit; nor can I envy him such
Applauses, as show some little Wit, but no Judgment; those merry Gentlemen too
much despise the dark Subtilties of Aristotle, Reflect. p. 21.
to be competent Judges of the Merit of this Cause, their Heads lie readier to
take a Jest than an Argument.

Therefore, Sir, in yielding to the Desires of your self and other Friends,
that I would permit the Printing of my Letters, I have no consideration of any
of those Gentlemen; here is no Entertainment for such Readers, nor do I expect
that they will vouchsafe to read, but that they will condemn them, as they did
Jovian, unheard. There are too many ready to speak evil of things they know
not, and it were great vanity in me to hope, That I can influence the Opinions
of Patriots, that is, Men who carry on their Mischievous Designs, and Private
Interests, under the Specious Cloak of a Public Spirit. It Is for the sake of a
more Sincere and Sober sort of Men, who have patience to hear both sides, and
are ready, whatever their present Sentiments are, to yield to the clear
evidence of Truth, that I resign these Papers entirely to your disposal.

Since you assure me they have rectified the mistakes of some, I hope they may
do like service to others: and if so, I shall rejoice in being an Instrument of
lessening the unreasonable Esteem some have for Julian, which otherwise will
unavoidably be of very ill Consequence to their Majesty's and the Nation. For I
always was of that great Man's Opinion, the Learned Dean of Canterbury, now of
St. Paul's, in his Letter to the Lord Russel, That Resistance, if our Religion
and Rights should be invaded, is not allowable, because the Government and
Peace of humane Society could not well subsist on those Terms.

He thus closes his determination of this Case of Resistance. Id respondi quod
pietas and Sacrae literae s^adent, Certe si populo sit fas regno dejicere
injuste imperantes, nulli Principes aut Reges usquam tuti erunt. Quamvis enim
probe and sancte regnant, non tamen populo satisfaciunt.
This was Peter Martyr's Doctrine on the third of Judges, about 120 years
before. Turbulent and designing men will never want quarrels against the best
and most gracious Princes: they will cast off the most Just and Easy Yoke, A
Theocracy would not please them, they would pick quarrels with a Samuel, or
Moses; and they who set up for the Redress of Grievances, never want followers.
For Slanders are easily credited against a King.

I must desire you to advertise the Reader, that I do not professedly treat of
the Subject of Non-resistance, or any other subject handled by Jovian; All I
design is, to consider the Controversy between that Author and Mr. Johnson,
and how fairly the latter has treated his Adversary. And though the Reader
might expect a much better Vindication from the Learned Author, if he saw good
to write one; yet he will find so much said in these Letters, as will satisfy
him, that Jovian continues Master of the Field, notwithstanding the vain
Triumphs of the Republican Party, and that the Doctrine of Non-resistance
conduces as much to the security of the Subject as of the Prince.

July 31. 1690. Sir, I am, etc.

The First LETTER.
Honored Sir,
I Have at length gotten leisure to read over Mr. Iohnson's Celebrated Reply to
Iovian, of which some time since you were pleased to require my thoughts. And
though I find by your last, that my pains may very well be spared, in regard
your own Judicious Observation has furnished you with so many instances of his
disingenuous management of the Controversy; yet since you still insist upon it,
and have reason in your Complaint, that it is impossible for you in the Country
to get a sight of many Books necessary to be consulted, that you may be able to
judge of the pertinence and force of the Citations on both sides, which are
many, and of great moment in this dispute, I shall the more readily comply with
your desires.

If the Title Page had not born his Name, as well as the beginning of the Book
speaks him a Clergyman, my Charity would have carried me to believe, that such
a piece as this could not have proceeded from Mr. Johnson, or any other of his
Profession. I should rather have conjectured, that some Republican Bully had
espoused the Cause, and entered the Lists, as his Champion. For there is
nothing more difficult than to reconcile such a loose Discourse, with the
Character of a Divine, or indeed of a Christian. It is written in a strain
wholly unbecoming, either the gravity of his Function, or the weight of the
subject under Debate, with little Truth, and less Modesty. With what rudeness
and scorn does he all along treat his Learned Adversary, as though he were an
ignorant Pretender in all sorts of Literature, and understood nothing? With
what a particular kind of assurance does he ridicule his Arguments instead of
answering them? Preface, p. ix.
And how much soever he pretends to abhor it, he spares not profane allusions
to the Holy Scriptures, to abuse his Adversary. When I come to examine the
Authorities of Writers, both Ecclesiastical and profane, cited by him, it will
immediately appear, that they are for the most part either impertinently
alleged, or most unconscionably perverted. So that though he has very often
most foully misrepresented Iovian, his Antagonist has the less reason to take
it amiss, in regard he uses him no worse, than he has done most other
Authors, he had occasion to meddle with.

I am not at all surprised to hear with what general Applause this Reply is
entertained in your Neighborhood, no nor yet that many of the Gentry and
Clergy too, are carried away with his Drolls and Fallacies, and judge the
Victory clearly on his side. He wants not those also, who make it their
business, in the City, to cry him up in all Companies, and to magnify his
performance, as one of the most absolute Conquests that ever the Pen made. But
their Success is not answerable to their Zeal, especially among the Clergy, who
best understand the merits both of the Cause, and the two Persons who are
engaged in it on both sides. I dare say, as low as the credit of Passive
Obedience runs at this day, Mr. Dean's Reputation, both for Learning and
Integrity, is more than fifty per Cent. above Mr. Iohnson's. The great esteem
he justly acquired^ not only among us his Brethren of the Clergy, in the six
years he was a London Minister, but also with the most eminent Persons of all
Ranks and Conditions, is not to be blasted by the scurrillous and spiteful
Reflections, wherewith this Reply is fraught. And in the judgment of most sober
and discerning Men, Mr. Johnson has, by this frothy and rude Discourse,
lessened and exposed himself much more than his Adversary.

I confess he has many great advantages to recommend his Books among common
Readers above Iovian.

1. The Doctrine of Resistance is very grateful to corrupt nature, which
affects an absolute freedom from all subjection, or dependence, and abhors the
very thoughts of Suffering. This humor in the infancy of the World, engaged
our first Parents in a Rebellion against their Creator, and has derived it
self through all succeeding Generations down to ours. And it is very well known,
that many of Mr. Iohnson's Admirers, are leavened therewith to such a degree,
that they cannot bear God's own Government, as wise, just, and gracious as it
is, but quarrel at his holy Laws, which restrain their intemperance, their
Lusts and Revenge, as intolerable Usurpations upon the natural Rights and
Liberties of Mankind. And though their designs may sometimes oblige them to
make a great noise with their concern for Religion, it is notorious, that they
have as mean an Opinion of Christianity, as Julian the Apostate himself, being
avowed Enemies, not only to the Doctrine of the Cross, but also to the whole
Gospel besides. 2. His loose and comical way of writing is notably suited to
the frothy and malicious humor of the present Age, which is delighted in
nothing so much as drolling Invectives, nauseates every thing that is close and
serious, and must be entertained with somewhat more light and diverting. This
scoffing humor has contributed much to the credit of Julian, and its defense.
Mr. Iohnson's scurrillous Satyrs relish with too many more than his
Adversaries solid and useful Discourse; his spiteful Reflections pass with them
as Arguments, and his grossest fallacies go smoothly down in an abusive Jest.
3. It is another of his Felicities, that of the multitudes who admire him, very
few are competent Judges of the point in dispute, which is a subject quite
above ordinary Readers, and of which no true Judgment can be made, without more
Learning and Patience than the generality are Masters of. There are many points
of moment to be seriously weighed, many Books to be turned, Historians and
Fathers, both Greek and Latin, besides modern Writers. Now they who most
applaud him have never been at this pains, and indeed look upon it as wholly
unnecessary; they have no mind to have a Case, which (as he has put it)
appears plain to them, perplexed by hearing what is said against it, and so
without examining the Testimonies, or considering the Arguments on both sides,
pronounce in his favor. Some, who are not altogether so much biassed, want
abilities to comprehend an Argument, to discern a fallacy, or to judge of the
pertinence and force of his Authorities. Others who have abilities and
inclination to examine them, either want leisure, or are under your
Circumstances, not having the Books at Command, and presuming further upon his
Fidelity and Modesty than is safe, take several things from him upon trust,
which they would see to be much otherwise, had they the Authors to consult. So
that either through want of Abilities, or Books, or Patience to examine his
plausible Fallacies, and perverted Citations, most who read him are too easily
imposed upon. 4. Another great advantage he has in the propitious Juncture of
time, in which his Reply comes forth. The heady and illegal methods taken to
introduce Popery, and Oppression, which ( Solomon says) makes a wise Man mad,
Eccles. 7. 7.
having driven great numbers of the Nobility and Gentry into Arms against the
King, his Party is much increased. For they all stand obliged in defense of
what they have done to side with him, and their successful practice of
Resistance has silenced all Arguments against it.
To these I might add Mr. Iohnson's particular Confidence, which goes a great
way with ordinary Readers, and inables him to outface the clearest Convictions,
and impose the grossest falsehoods and absurdities upon his willing and easy
Proselytes. So that his advantages over Iovian lie not in the extraordinary
strength of his reasonings, and clearness of his Authorities, but in the
weakness and partiality of his Admirers; and the Applauses he meets with must
be entirely ascribed to want of judgment, or worse defects in those who cry him
up.

His first care is to salve his Credit by an Apology for the late Publication
of his Book, which was Printed in 1683. though he durst not let it appear till
1689, and truly it had been more for his honor to have eternally suppressed
it. It will hardly increase his esteem with wise and good Men, to see him fond
of such a piece of gross abuse and sophistry, after five years consideration;
and to observe, that his bitter Sufferings (which I mention not to reproach
him, for I abhor all Cruelty) have not been able to mortify his insolent
scoffing humor. How unjust and unmerciful soever his punishment might be, as
it proceeded from humane revenge, yet Mr. Johnson had great reason to consider
God's hand in it, and to believe it a necessary piece of Discipline graciously
intended to reduce him to a more serious, meek, and charitable temper of mind.
I am sorry to find Afflictions have had a contrary effect upon him; but since
it is so, I shall make two or three Observations from his Advertisement, and
proceed to consider the Book it self.

And first I cannot but take notice, that during the Interval between the
Printing and Publishing of this Book, Mr. Johnson had seen his scandalous and
malicious suggestions against the Assertors of the Succession, and Passive
Obedience abundantly confuted. It is manifest to all the World, that those
worthy Persons were not more mistaken in the good hopes they had of a Popish
Successor, that he would be moderate, just, and religiously observe his
Promises to maintain our Religion and Liberties, than he was mistaken in the
ill Opinion he had entertained, and the Calumnies he had published of them.

He had traduced them as Persons weary of their Religion, Betrayers of their
English Liberties, and had particularly accused Dr. Hicks of fitting the notion
of Passive Obedience, on purpose for the use of a Popish Successor, to render
us an easier prey to the bloody Papists. It is evident, the Papists themselves
had no such opinion of his kindness, since he has been baited for Iovian by
all their Pamphleteers, and by their procurement, was in his own Cathedral, in
an Assize-Sermon, Kendrick's Sermon Printed in 1688.
levelled at the Test and Penal Laws, most rudely and impudently reviled. It is
well known how early and zealously the Doctor appeared, both in the Pulpit and
in Print, for the defense of the Protestant Religion; that he was one of the
first Divines (I believe the very first) whom King. James Closeted for
Preaching against Popery, and animadverting on the Royal Papers. Mr. I. is not
ignorant that Dr. H. and his Friends, who durst not by force of Arms, resist a
Popish Prince, defended their Religion, and civil Rights against him with an
invincible Courage, and repulsed all his attempts upon both, as a brave strong
Wall would the Batteries of a sorry Engine. That neither Bribes nor Menaces
could induce them to afford him those assistances in undermining the
foundations both of Church and State, which many violent Excluders offered him,
in their Addresses made public in our Gazettes. If Mr. I. had either ingenuity
or shame, he would not have published this Reply, without acknowledging his
Error, and retracting his slanderous Insinuations; as also he would have made
some reparation to the Clergy and Universities, whose unsteadiness he sli^y
forebodes from the Example of Queen Mary's Reign. All this might have been done
without either much trouble to himself, or expense to Mr. Chiswell. The reverse
of the Title Page, or the back side of the Lord Russell's Monument, would have
afforded him room enough, and such a piece of Ingenuity and plain dealing,
would have gotten him more reputation with good Men, than all his Book besides.

Secondly, It is also observable, that during the same ^nterval, was Published
Sir George Mackenzie's Ius Regium, in which he vindicates the Scotch
Succession, and confutes the story of Robert the Second, and Elizabeth More, as
it is related from Hector Boethius, and Buchanan, by Mr. Hunt, Mr. Atwood, and
Mr. Johnson. He proves against them, that from Robert the Second, the Crown
descended on the next Lineal Heir, viz. Robert the Third, Eldest Son of the
said Elizabeth More, who was his first an^ lawful Wife, Married to him
solemnly, A. D. 1349. and died before his Marriage with Eupheme Daughter of the
Earl of Rosse. This he supports by Authorities more credible than those which
garnish Mr. I's Margin, so that till the story be better supported, and what
Sir George has said against it be disproved, it must pass for a Fiction. Now I
blame neither him nor his Friends for reporting it after such Authors, but
since he would not let a mistake in History, which he says is not material,
escape him without advertising the Reader, Preface, p. 15.
I understand not the ingenuity of letting so gross a mistake in story, and so
very material, pass, without adding one line more to warn him of it, or
offering better proof to maintain it.

Thirdly, Mr. I's reason for suppressing his Book five years together, may
serve for an answer to your clamorous Neighbors, who expect Mr. Dean should
reply to this Book, and conclude him baffled, because he has not answered it,
almost before he can have read it. But if he never answer it, let them know,
that Victory does not always attend him, who has the last word, and if the
times, which would not bear it, salved Mr. I's honor, whilst his Book lay
dormant, why may not Mr. Dean be allowed to use the same discretion. I doubt
not but he will consider this Reply, and be ready to defend himself against the
most formidable Arguments in it, if he find it expedient: but I conceive he
stands no way obliged to take notice of this thing called an Answer to Iovian,
having declared in the close of his Preface to that Book, that if instead of a
fair, close, and substantial Answer, he should only nibble, shuffle, and
prevaricate and take Sanctuary in cavil, satyr, and scurrillity, he would pass
over such kind of replies with silence and con^empt. This you will find the
exact Character of this celebrated performance of Mr. I's, and therefore he
deserves not to be considered by his Learned Adversary.

That Man must have an unreasonable partiality for the cause of Exclusion and
Resistance, who will allow this to be a full Answer to Iovian, wherein nothing
is said to a great part of that Book, neither is there any notice taken of many
Arguments levelled against his two darling notions, viz. That nothing is more
plain than that the Empire was Hereditary, and that it is lawful to resist a
Prince, by force of Arms, if he persecute against Law, as Julian did.

To disprove the former of these, Mr. Dean has shown, that the Succession to
the Roman Empire was Elective, Casual, and Arbitrary; and to make it out, has
been at the pains to give a succinct account from all the Writers of the
Imperial History, both Greek and Latin, how every Emperor, from Julius to
Julian, came to the Throne; from which account it appears, that although many
Princes endeavored to secure the Succession in their own Families, yet none
esteemed the Empire to be their Inheritance, or made claim to it by a right
founded in proximity of blood, but on the contrary, pretended upon the
nomination of their Predecessors, or the choice sometimes of the Army,
sometimes of the Senate, and sometimes of both, and that when it continued some
while in the same Family, no regard was had to the next lineal Heir, but
adopted Sons have been preferred before the natural, the more remote Kindred
before those who were nearer, and the Empire has been divided between two or
three Augustus's at once. All which, and a great deal more, which may be true
for ought he knows (by his own Confession) is utterly inconsistent with an
Hereditary Succession, as that of England is, whose Laws do not allow our Kings
to disinherit a Son, or prefer the Issue of a younger before the elder Son's
Posterity, much less to adopt Strangers, nor yet to divide their three Kingdoms
among three Sons, or to set them up all together joint Sovereigns and Kings of
the whole British Empire. Now to all this what says Mr. I.? Truly nothing in
effect; but thinks to sham it all with a piece of Republican Cant, Alluding to
a Pamphlet so Entitled, being an Account of English Succession.
he calls it the History of the broken Succession in the Empire (which is as
good as he and his Friends will allow the English Succession to have been) and
then he tells us, that it is of so small concernment in the Controversy, that
he has never examined it. Whether he has examined it or no, I cannot tell. I
am sure it is much his interest, that no body else should examine it. There is a
Cloud of Witnesses against him, and they all speak home to the point, and I
think if any Man will have Patience to examine them, he must have Mr. I's own
Forehead, if he dare say their Testimony is of small concernment in the
Controversy. He once believed it a matter of such moment to prove the Empire
Hereditary, that he thought he could not Julian, p. 18.
proceed faithfully without doing it, and therefore unless some great
Revolution has since happened in his Mind, he cannot esteem so full and clear
a proof of the contrary of little or no concernment in the dispute. Perhaps it
was prudently done to slight and overlook what he could not Answer, but Mr. I.
has in all appearance, undertaken to answer some other passages in Iovian,
without examining them.

Again, it was by no means fairly done, to represent the account of the Roman
Succession as a mere History, and slight it when he had done, as containing
nothing that he was obliged to take notice of. There are many, and (till he
show the contrary, I shall think) concluding proofs drawn from the History,
that nothing is more plain than that the Roman Empire was not Hereditary;
which, if he meant in earnest to defend his first Book, it concerned him to
Answer. I am sure they were such as have in my presence, made some of the most
considerable of his Friends acknowledge, that he was mistaken in asserting the
Empire to have been Hereditary. And if he were mistaken in that, all his
Discourse from Iulian's Case (which is founded on that supposition) falls to
the ground with it. For an Argument from one case to another concludes not, if
the two Cases prove to be very different. Now all that he says for exclusion
in his first Book (abating some things in his Preface which are considered in
the Preface to Iovian) is wholly deduced from Iulian's Case, and the sense of
the Ancient Fathers and Christians thereupon. And therefore if he have a stock
of new Arguments to produce for Exclusion in this Book, it is nothing to the
state of the Controversy, as it stood between him and his Adversary, who
undertook only to answer what he had written, and not to divine what he might
say hereafter.

But if the Author of Iovian had not given us an History of the Roman
Succession, and by an Induction (which is one of the strongest sorts of proof,
as an Example or Case is the weakest) made it out to be Elective, and not
Hereditary: He has without that sufficiently evinced the disparity of the
Cases of Julian, and the D. of Y. by showing, that there were no entailed
Estates, nor any such thing as Heir in Tail, or Hereditary Succession to
Entailed Estates in the Empire, but that every Man might dispose of his
Patrimony by his last Will and Testament, or sell or give it away as he
pleased; or in case he died Intestate, it fell to his next Kindred, as Heir, or
Heirs at Law. To this Mr. I. makes no Reply. Nor indeed could he make any
defense for his Foreign Notion of an Heir and Inheritance, which is in truth as
great a fallacy as a scale of Dutch Miles in a Map of Middlesex. For a Roman
Heir, and English Heir, like Dutch and English Miles, agree in nothing but an
ambiguous Name; they are distinct Species of Title, and have not the same
formal Conception, as Dutch and English Miles are distinct species of Measure.
Whether there be not more Wit than Truth in his representing Mr. Dean's Notion
of a Sovereign to be such a deceit, I shall have another occasion to consider.

The other main Notion in his Book, and that which (for ought I know) he may
have the honor of first discovering, is that a Prince persecuting against Law,
may lawfully be resisted by force of Arms, and that the reason why the
Primitive Christians treated Julian worse than former persecuting Emperors,
was, because they persecuted by virtue of Law against Christianity, whereas he
persecuted against Laws which established the Christian Religion. Now to this
new Hypothesis of Mr. Johnson, the Dean objects two things. 1. That it is next
to impossible for a Roman Emperor to persecute against Law, considering his
absolute power over the Laws, and that his Edicts, Rescripts, and indeed his
Pleasure any way expressed, had the force of a Law. And as for what was done
against Christianity, by his Officers presuming on his connivence, and secret
approbation, was no more than what had been usual in former Reigns, and
therefore could no more justify resistance under Julian, than it would have
done it under former Emperors. And at this answer he just nibbles, p. 158.

2. He says, that if oppressing the Christians contrary to former Laws, their
civil Liberties as Romans, were persecuting against Law, the former Christians,
as many as were Roman Citizens, were also persecuted against Law, put to Death
upon shams, and pretended Crimes of Treason, tortured to deny their Religion,
which was their pretended Crime, and not as other Malefactors, to bring them to
confess it, denied the Liberty of making their defense, which the Laws of the
Empire allowed all Men, and this he makes good by the Testimony of Tertullian;
and he shows at large, how Galerius invaded the civil rights of all Men, as
well as the Christians, subverted the fundamental Laws of the Empire, and
endeavored to introduce the Persian Tyrannical Form of Government, and to
enslave the freeborn Roman People. His illegal and barbarous treatment of his
Subjects in general, is described from Lactantius and Eusebius, and yet never
in any Persecution did the Christians suffer more patiently than in this
Galerian Persecution, when if Persecution against Law would warrant Resistance,
they had sufficient provocation to take Arms; if in other Persecutions they
were discouraged by want of sufficient Force and Numbers, yet in this they
could not want either, but might have expected, that their Pagan Neighbors
would have joined with them for their common defense against such a Monster and
Tyrant. And what says the unanswerable Man to all this? Why truly not one
word, no not so much as that this Chapter is of small concernment in the
Controversy. I have noted these material parts of Iovian, to which he has
given no sort of answer to let you see how little reason his Admirers have to
magnify this Reply, in which he declines meddling with the most considerable
Arguments urged against him, which stand in full force against his first Book,
notwithstanding the Show he makes of defending it. To avoid being tedious, I
purposely omit the mention of many other considerable things in Iovian, of
which he takes no notice. And having shown, that he has given no full Answer
to that Book, I shall proceed to show, that this Reply is not a fair one, but
full of fallacy and deceit.

1. As he does not consider many of Iovian's Arguments, so when he vouchsafes
to Reply to others, he frequently misrepresents them, or co^cealeth the Reasons
and Authorities which support and enforce them, and shams them off with a
Droll. Which is very unbecoming a fair and generous Adversary, and unworthy (I
will not say of a Christian or Divine, but even) of an honest Man, and a
Scholar, though a mere Pagan. I will not trouble you with particular instances
of such foul dealing, because they will frequently occur in my Remarks on
several passages of his Book, such as the shuffle he makes to exclude Procopius
from the Flavian house, the account he gives of the distinction of Laws in^o
Imperial and Political.

2. His main Authorities are Rhetorical Amplifications, and flourishes in
Panegyricks and Invectives, in which the Orator does not tie him strictly to
truth, and the proper use of words, so that there is no arguing from the
literal sense, but abatements must be made for Hyperbolical Speech on both
hands, for lofty strains of Complement in Panegyric, and for heavy and
Tragical Aggravation in the Steliteutick, or Invective. This deceitful artifice
is the Masterpiece of our Popish Adversaries; when they pretend the Father's
Authority for the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, etc.
they ransack their Declamatory pieces for lofty Expressions, touching the
dignity and benefits of the Holy Eucharist, and take Metaphors, See Archbishop
Usher's Answer to the Jesuits Challenge. p. 386. ed. 1625.
and Metonymies in a proper and literal sense. They urge this very Apostrophe
of Gregory Nazianzen to Constantius, whence Mr. Johnson would infer the
Doctrine of Exclusion as a notable Testimony for the Invocation of Saints; and
for my part, I think it proves the one as much as the other. This foul play his
Adversaries have sufficiently complained of, but cannot prevail with him to
leave it, he is conscious that he needs such advantages, and dares not let them
go. For having made such a wild assertion, as that the Empire was Hereditary,
and being hard pressed by his Answerers, and withal resolved not to bate them
one syllable in his whole Book, Answer to Iovian, p. 209.
he is forced to outface plain History with strains of Rhetoric, in which the
Orator frequently allows fancy as licentious flights, as the very Poets, and
nay even to stretch Hyperboles too by an advantageous Translation. Now this
argues great want of Ingenuity, an unchristian and wrangling temper, and that
he contends not so much for the love of truth, as for Glory and Victory.
Whether he has obtained it, or not, will be further seen in the particular
Remarks to which I am proceeding.

His Intimation, that Mr. Dean waited to see the other Answers to Julian, and
then gave the substance of them in his Book, scarce deserves any notice. It is
well known, that Iovian was written, currente prelo, and great part of it
Printed before those Answers appeared. The expectation of it made my self and
diverse others never look into them, and quite spoiled the sale of Mr. Long's
Book, as the Bookseller concerned has complained to many.

It is more material for me to enquire, whether Iovian has given us an
outlandish notion of a Sovereign, for if he has not, the deceit will lie at
Mr. Iohnson's Door. If his Notion be supported by the joint Authority of the
Common and Statute Laws, it is great injustice to call it an outlandish one.
Now Iovian does not set up an English Sovereign furnished with an Arbitrary,
and boundless Power, like that of the French King, or Grand Seignior. He
acknowledges him to be under the direction of the Law, though he ascribe to
him a Supremacy over all Persons within his Dominions, Chapter 10.
which let Mr. I. say what he pleases, is the formal notion of a Sovereign,
Iovian from p. 208. to p. 214
unless the word be taken in an improper sense. This Supremacy he proves to
belong to an English Sovereign by many Statutes, and the Testimony of our most
eminent Lawyers both Ancient and Modern, against which Mr. Johnson has not one
word to reply. He proceeds to a particular recital of the Essential Rights and
Properties of a true Sovereign, viz. to be unaccountable, to have the sole
power of the Sword, to be free from Coercion, P. 218, and 219.
and Military Resistance. He shows these Prerogatives to be the King's due by
express Statute Law, which Statutes do not vest any new Right in the Crown, but
only declare what always has been the Ancient and Fundamental Law of this
Realm in those Cases. So that Iovian's Sovereign is an English Sovereign, for
ought Mr. I. has proved to the contrary, and therefore his Jest of a Dutch
Scale in a Map of Middlesex, is both false and impertinent. For though the
Miles of several Countries have no formal Conceptions, in which they all agree,
as Individuals of the same Species, yet all proper Sovereigns have, viz.
Supremacy, from which the forementioned rights are inseparable. Nor will his
doughty Demonstration from an Act of Parliament, Preface, p viii.
which uses the Term in a lax and improper sense, convince Mr. Dean, or any
Man else, that the Notion of a Sovereign implies nothing in it but Superiority.
For at that rate there will be no fixing the formal Conception of any thing, if
it must be stretched so wide as to take in whatsoever, though improperly, bears
the same name. The sense of the Term Sovereign, with respect to a civil
Society, is so very well known, and agreed upon in the World, that upon the
very hearing it, every body forms a conception in his mind of somewhat more
than Superiority, and understands thereby such a superior as is above all, and
has none above him, which imports Supremacy, and Mr. I. might as well have
argued, that the formal conception of a Baron of England does not imply
Peerage, with all the R^ghts Essential to a Peer of this Realm, because the
Baron of Kinderton, the Barons of the Cinque Ports, and the Barons of the
Exchequer, are not Peers, and have none of those great Privileges.

The next material thing in his Preface, is his quarrel against the Distinction
of Imperial and Political Laws. Now let us first ^ee how Iovian explains this
Distinction, and then what work Mr. I. makes with it. P. 204.
He calls those Imperial Laws which ascertain the Rights of the Sovereign, and
those Political which secure the Rights of the Subject. That there are Laws of
both sorts, I presume Mr. I. will not deny, in this and all other Kingdoms, and
so I see no reason for his fury against any person who invents Terms to
distinguish them.

But Mr. I. represents this Distinction most disingenuously, and quite contrary
to the Author's Mind. As though it set up a new sort of Law never heard of in
this Nation, Authorizing our Kings to do all manner of Injustice; nay, to
commission others also to Murder, Plunder, and commit all manner of outrage,
and ^o indemnifie them when they have done it. And that he may the more
effectually delude his Reader into this belief, he fraudulently confounds
Imperial Power, (by which Fortescue, cited by him, understands Absolute and
Arbitrary Power, which is no where given by Iovian to our Kings) with Imperial
Laws, and then deduces from it the most odious consequences he could devise.

Now I defy him to show where Mr. Dean ascribes to our Kings Imperial Power in
Fortescue's sense or pretends, that the Imperial Laws of this Realm allow them
to Act, or Authorize any of those outrages he talks of. Where does he deny,
that the Advisers or Instruments of such Oppressions are accountable and
punishable, or pretend that any Commission will warrant and bear them out?
Therefore all his odious consequences vanish into smoke, P. 172.
and his tedious citation out of Fortescue is wholly impertinent, since Iovian
no where gives our Kings absolute and Imperial Power, though he say, that the
Imperial Laws of this Realm forbid Subjects all Military Resistance, when their
Sovereign strains Prerogative beyond its legal bounds.

Mr. Johnson in his former Book demanded, in case we are persecuted for
Religion, under a Popish Successor, by what Law we must die? And he supposes
his Adversary devised this Distinction to answer that question. Admit it to be
so, he says by the Imperial Laws we must die. Yet it is plain, he does not
pretend that those Laws authorize the Popish Successor to persecute, or give
him power to subvert the established Religion, or condemn and execute its
Professors against Law. All he says, is, that those Laws forbid me in those
circumstances to save my Life by Rebellion. Had I been to answer his Book, I
would have turned the question upon him, and have demanded by what Law I am
allowed to draw the Sword, and raise Forces against my Sovereign for self
defense. Those Laws which give him the sole power of the Sword, and condemn a
defensive War against the King, whether levied by the body Collective, or body
Representative of the people, do in effect require me to submit to be
murdered, and in that case he himself will admit that I must die, my time is
come.

If splitting this same Law of the Land into Imperial and Political displease
him, it is because he was in a peevish humor, for I never yet have learned,
that it is a faulty distinction which divides the whole into its parts. However
you see he grants the Imperial as well as Political Laws to be the Law of the
Land; and if they be so, let the World judge whether he has shown the Charity
of a Christian, or the Candor of a generous Adversary in thus representing the
Distinction.

I will not reckon his Allusion to the words of the Devil; Acts 19. 15.
Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? among his profanations of Holy
Scripture. But he is a very sorry Exorcist, who will be gravelled with his
Question. Common Law we know, and Statute Law we know, but who are ye? For the
Imperial and Political Laws are both common and Statute Law, and by his own
Confession the Law of the Land.

If his suggestion were true, that Passive Obedience, as it is taught by his
Adversaries, is Popery established by a Law, by which he only means, that it
would be an encouragement to a Popish Prince to set it up without Law, an
irresistible temptation to persecute the Reformed Religion, and to commit all
manner of Lawless Oppression; I say, if this were true, it is no Argument that
the Doctrine of Passive Obedience is false, because ill Governors may take
occasion to abuse it. Is our Savior's Passi^e Doctrine on the Mount either
false or foolish because Julian was thence encouraged to oppress Chri^tianity,
and becoming his own Chaplain, Preached it himself? This is the very fallacy, a
non causa, which he unjustly in another place of this Preface charge upon his
Answerer.

If the Laws oblige us to non Resistance, and allow no pretense of levying
defensive War, and this liberty denied will as surely establish Popery as 10000
Political Acts o^ Parliament, let him arraign the Laws, and not this poor
innocent Distinction, or Iovian, who only teaches obedience according to Law.
But I pray you, may not ill Men make as wicked and dangerous advantages of the
contrary Doctrine? why may not the Doctrine of civil liberty, as well as
Christian Liberty, be made a Cloak of maliciousness? It is notorious, that it
has been so abused, yet I would urge no Man to renounce his interest, either
in the one or the other, on that account. Are not Subjects as apt to be
clamorous and turbulent as Princes to be Arbitrary? are not the former as apt
to claim undue Liberties, as the latter undue Prerogatives? Is it an
unhappiness peculiar to Princes only to be haunted with Flatterers? Have not
the People also Parasites and Sycophants about them, both Divines and Lawyers,
who ^latter them into an opinion of a boundless English as much unknown Liberty
to our Ancestors, as boundless Power in the Prince? And have not these
Sycophants as much the temptation of interest, and as fair a prospect before
them in working confusions and revolutions, as the other Parasites^ can have in
the hopes of Court favors? To conclude, is not Arbitrary Subjection, and an
ungovernable humor in the people, as destructive to Society as Arbitrary
Government? If then the Inconveniences which may arise, render a Doctrine
foolish or wicked, the Doctrine of Resistance is full as much in danger as the
slavish Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and the mischievous consequences, I
fear, are not altogether so accidental to the former as to the latter.

Oh! but Iovian owns the consequences of Non-Resistance, and says expressly, p.
242. In all Sovereign Governments Subjects must be Slaves as to this
particular, that is, of their lives and liberties; and he would fain know then
in what particular they are Freemen? Is Mr. I. sure Iovian says so? or is he
sure that life and liberty are the particulars as to which he says Subjects
must be Slaves? I doubt he is guilty of a mistake, or a worse fault. The
passage as torn from the context, and expounded by Mr. I. sounds very harsh^
but I will set it down entire, and then a very ordinary Reader will understand
the measure of his Candor and Honesty, in representing Iovian. The passage
runs thus. Therefore to cut off Resistance in the English Government, the three
Estates have declared against all Defensive, as well as Offensive War, it being
impossible for the Sovereignty to consist with the Liberty of that pretense.
Just as among the Romans it was inconsistent with the Sovereign unaccountable
Power, which the Masters by Law had over the Slaves, for them to have a liberty
of rising up against them on the pretense of Self-defence.

In all Sovereign Governments Subjects must be Slaves in this particular, they
must trust their Lives and Liberties with their Sovereign. You see what this
particular is in which Subjects must be Slaves, not the particular of their
Lives and Liberties, but they may not levy War against their Sovereign under
color of Self-Defence. And though he says they must Trust their Lives and
Liberties with their Sovereign, it will not follow that he makes them to be
wholly at the Discretion of their Prince. If Mr. I. and his Friends will think
themselves inslaved because they may not be allowed, what he calls, just and
necessary Defense when grieved and oppressed by the Government, I know no
Country in the World in which they may enjoy their freedom. I am sure that
Prince would purchase their good opinion at too dear a rate, who would allow
them that liberty, for they would never want pretenses, which they would esteem
just and necessary occasions to use it, and quickly make him know, that Kings
are only Servants and Trustees, and hold their Crowns and Lives too at the
Peoples Discretion. To his Zealous Cant, which, fills the next four Pages of
his Preface, I shall say nothing, since they contain nothing of Answer to any
part of Iovian. Julian, p. 92.
Indeed he has answered it all himself, in his first Book in this Proposition:
That Christianity destroys no Man's Natural or Civil Rights, but confirms them:
for if the Law of the Land make the Sovereign unaccountable and irresistible,
and declare, that the People, in whatever capacity considered, have no
Authority to levy a Defensive War against him, Christianity by his own
Confession confirms those Rights to the Prince, as well as the Civil Liberties
to the People. And whoever he is, who asserts a liberty of rising up against
him for Self-Defence, is guilty of removing the ancient Landmarks; and the
Nation have reason to Curse him. He takes the liberty over and over, to call
Passive Obedience the Doctrine of the Bow-string, and Turkish Doctrine, but
till he has proved as well as asserted, that See the contrary of all this
fully proved in an excellent Treatise^ Entit. Christianity a Doctrine of the
Cross, or Passive Obedience, etc. wherein Mr Iohnson's Arguments against
Passive Obedience are fully considered.
Martyrdom is only suffering according to Law, that our Savior only forbids
the Resisting of legal violence, That St. Paul only forbids resisting the
higher Powers, which govern according to Law, as we are to suppose Nero did,
and till he shall have answered, the ninth Chapter of Jovian, to which he has
not returned one word, and shown us, that in all the ten Persecutions the
Emperors and their Officers inflicted no illegal punishments upon the Martyrs
and Confessors, but that whatever Imprisonments, Tortures, or D^aths they
suffered, all was warranted by the Roman Laws, and had it been otherwise they
would not have so tamely submitted to their Murderers; I say till all this be
done, Mr. I. has no right to call the Doctrine of Non Resistance, the Slavish
Doctrine of the Bow-string, nor yet will he, in the judgment of Indifferent
Persons, have fairly vindicated himself from the charge of burlesquing the
Doctrine of the Cross.

There is but one thing more in his Preface to be considered, and that is,
whether Iovian be guilty of that cheat which the learned call the fallacy of
non causa, pro causa, in asserting that Self Defense does more mischief than
the most outrageous and bloody Oppression. This he says is repeated often, but
I cannot find it so much as once; It is true Iovian says, P. 256.
That there is some inconvenience in the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, but the
inconvenience of Resisting the Sovereign is ten times worse, P. 260.
and that it is a remedy against Tyranny worse than the disease. And he has
largely proved it by reasons, by instances, and by the Authority of a Book
which Mr. I. pretends to honor next his Bible, The Book of Homilies, and to
all this he vouchsafes not the least Reply. Only Rebellion is with him
Self-Defence, Drawing the Sword without Authority must be righting ones self,
and the natural and necessary consequences of this illegal Defense must be
accidental only, and then it is an errant fallacy to say the Inconveniences of
Resistance are greater and worse than those of Passive Obedience, though ten
thousand Lives and Fortunes are destroyed in an Illegal Defensive War, for ten
that would be lost by the Arbitrary stretching the Prerogative beyond its legal
bounds. This is fallacy all over, but Mr. I. and his Friends have a notable
faculty of charging innocent Men with their own faults, and I fear were they
entrusted with the liberty of Self-Defence, they would quickly make a very
offensive use of it. They would invade other Men's Lives and Liberties by way of
Precaution. They would make sure of giving the first blow without expecting an
Assault. And Mr. Iohnson's just and necessary defense, would be a much more
destructive murdering piece, than Iovian's Turkish, Slavish, Bow-string,
Cutthroat Doctrine of Passive Obedience.

And thus I have done with his Preface. My Observations have swelled to a much
greater bulk than I designed when I began them, and instead of half a Letter, I
have written a little Book. Having this opportunity of conveying them to you by
Mr. R. who goes out of Town to Morrow, I shall break off in the middle, and
what remains you may expect (unless I can find some safer hand to entrust
therewith) at furthest, by the Carrier, this day Fortnight. I am,

Feb. 2. 168^. Dear Sir, Your most affectionate Servant.

The Second LETTER.
Dear Sir,
HAving in my former Letter given you a general view of Mr. Iohnson's work, and
a particular account of his Preface, I shall now proceed to the Book it self. I
shall say nothing either to Iulian's Arts, or his Answer to Constantius, as
being no part of the task you were pleased to impose upon me, though by the way
there are two things which I cannot but observe.

1. First that he is guilty of a strange omission in enumerating Iulian's Arts
to extirpate Christianity, in not allowing one Chapter to a very considerable
Stratagem of his, which very well deserved to have been more plainly and
largely insisted on. This Stratagem was the granting an unlimited Toleration to
all Sects and Heresies whatsoever: this Mr. I. durst only intimate obscurely,
and in short hints, for fear of disgusting those who best relish his writings:
For as things have since fallen out, it is plain he would have lost your good
opinion for ever. If he durst have adventured on the Argument, it is impossible
for him to have avoided observing the mischievous ^onsequences of that
State-Engine of the Papists, falsely called Liberty of Conscience; nor have we
reason to think he would have baulkt so diverting a subject as the Donatists
Address to Julian, in which they flattered him in strains of Complement, not
unlike those, which some of Mr. I's Friends used to (a Person who is in his
esteem) a worse Apostate than Julian, telling him in effect, That God and his
Church were more beholden to him than to any of his Christian Predecessors, who
all tyrannically imposed on men's natural Liberty in the ^^oice of their
Religion, and wickedly usurped the peculiar Jurisdiction of God, whereas he
with unparalleled Justice had done right to both, restoring God to his
Dominion over the Consciences of Men, and them to their natural freedom in
religious matters. Durst he have undertaken it, he would no doubt have made
admirable sport of it; for he has a great spite at Addresses, and a notable
faculty at exposing them: But Liberty of Conscience is too sacred to be
touched, it is an Engine which will serve others as well as Pagan or Popish
Apostates to ruin an established Orthodox Church: It Is the great Diana which
our Craftsmen cry up, when they have a mind to raise the Mobile, and set them
on work to pull down both the Monarchy and Church of England. I cannot forgive
him this omission because it is evident that it is a wilful one.

Secondly, I cannot but remark how favorably he speaks of Constantius, and
what Censures he passes (by innuendo's) against Hilary, Lucifer, and
Athanasius, for their rude treatment of him, though he will not allow the like
treatment of Julian to be blameable; as also how he insinuates in the Preface
to Julian, that the Orthodox Fathers were too stiff about words. These passages
make me call to mind some of his Discourses, in which I have heard him express
much tenderness for the Arians, and wrangle with extraordinary heat for the
Council of Ariminum, which he would have made of equal Authority with that of
Nice. These things consist but indifferently with the Character of a Divine of
the Church of England, and would tempt a Man shrewdly to suspect that he is not
in earnest when he calls the Arians Heretics.

This would be a necessary piece of Justice to himself by an express
Declaration to satisfy the World, that he is not of the Arian Sentiments in the
matter of the Trinity, but believes at least the Orthodox meaning of the word
Homoousios, and that all the favor he has for the Arians is upon the accoun^
of their free Principles as to the matter of Resistance, that they were not
like the Socinians, fettered with the Slavish Doctrine of Pa^sive Obedience,
and it is possible it may be the main dislike upon which some of Mr. I's Friends
have revolted from Socinus to the Arian persuasion of late years. These things
by the way.

Perhaps it has not been so much his Adversaries felicity to give the pregnant
Title of Iovian to his Book, as it is Mr. I's, who has taken advantage
thereupon, by making a flourish against the reasons why Mr. Dean pitched upon
that Title, to avoid ever looking into the Book; and to excuse himself from the
ungrateful task of defending a great part of his former Book: But since it is
his pleasure to let so many things in Julian shift for themselves, let us see
how he acquits himself, and answers those parts of Iovian, which he has
vouchsafed to take notice of.

The first Reason which the Author of Iovian offers, why he gave that Title to
his Book is, because he was chosen Emperor next to Julian, though nothing akin
to him, while Procopius, a great Man, and of the Blood, was alive; as also
because at his Death he left a Son who was passed by, and Valentinian chosen
Emperor by the Army, which overthrows Mr. I's Assertion, that the Empire was
Hereditary.

To this he answers, 1. That the Empire was Hereditary in Constantine's Family,
because the Historians mention not the Election of his Sons, but only say, that
the Army and Senate, Proclaimed and Recognized them to be Emperors. The
falsehood of this pretense I shall have occasion to show anon, where I am to
consider the importance of those Greek words, whence he would infer, that they
were only Proclaimed and Recognized without any Election.

2. He answers, that Procopius was not a great Man, and of the Blood, but a
base Impostor, impudently pretending kindred to Julian, in whom the Flavian
House was extinct.

Here Issue is joined, let us see what proof Iovian offers for the affirmative;
and then what Mr. I. has said to justify his confident denial, that Procopius
was a great Man, and of the Blood.

For the affirmative are alleged the Testimonies of good Historians See
Iovian, p. 75, 76.
, who expressly say, he was near of Kin to Julian and Constantius. Ammianus
Marcell. says, that he was Born of a noble Stock in Cilicia, and bred
accordingly, and regarded as an eminent Person, in consideration of his near
Kindred to Julian, who was afterwa^ds Emperor, and often mentions him as his
Kinsman. Zosimus mentions his Kin to Julian thrice over; telling us, that at
Sirmium, when he with Lucilian and Valentinian, were dispatched into Pannonia,
with the news of Iulian's Death, and the advancement of Iovian to the Empire;
the Soldiers who killed Lucilian for bringing so ill tidings, and had killed
Valentinian also, but that he was too nimble for them, spared Procopius, for
the respect they had to Iulian's Kindred. On the same account he tells you,
Julian entrusted him in joint Commission with Sebastianus, with a brave Army in
the Persian Expedition, and delivered to him the Imperial Purple. He tells you
further the credit he had with both the Roman Legions, and the Barbarous
Nations their Allies, who flocked in to him when he set up, was all on the
account of his being Iulian's Kinsman, and his Companion in all his Wars.
Philostorgius also testifies his relation to Julian, upon which account, it is
likely he had the care of his Funeral. Zonaras and Cedrenus go further to say
what the Relation was, and upon the whole matter the Learned Vales. ad lib. 23.
c. 3. p. 354.
H. Valesius in his Notes upon Ammian. Marc. concludes Julian and Procopius to
have been Cousin Germans. And thus much in proof that he was of the Blood. To
prove that, he made a considerable Figure in the time of Constantius and
Julian, he produces Ammian. Marcell. giving an account of his being one of the
Notarii, or Secretaries to the Emperor: of his being sent Ambassador into
Persia: as likewise how Julian entrusted him with a Detachment of thirty
thousand, or, as others relate it, but twenty thousand chosen Men. Now what
says Mr. I. to all this? does he say the Citations are false? or that they are
perverted and mis-applied? or does he confront the^e Authorities with
Historians of better credit, who give a contrary account of these things? Truly
no. But having nothing to say against them, he with more craft than honesty,
takes not the least notice of these Authorities in the Book to which the
Preface refers: But falls to his reasons against it, as though it were not
plain matter of fact fully made out by good Historians.

And let us see what worthy proof he brings to exclude Procopius the Imperial,
or Flavian House. First, He was born of an House in Cilicia, and what then?
might not a Daughter of the Flavian House match into a Noble Cilician Family?
what though his Fathers name be lost? Did not a Vide Trebell. Poll. in D.
Claudio.
Constantine, Sister to Constantius Chlorus, marry with an Assyrian Tribune,
whose name the Historian mentions not, and perhaps knew not any more than the
name of their great Grandfathers. The Father of Claudius, Quintillus, and
Crispus, could not be recovered by him, though it were his design in writing
that Life, to flatter Constantius Chlorus, with a Panegyric of his great Uncle
Claudius. It is worth observing too how shy Mr. I. is of citing his Author,
who informed him, that Procopius was of an House in Cilicia: he dares not trust
his Reader with direction to the place in Ammian. Marcell. for fear, that
instead of a Perkin he should find a true Plantagenet.^ The Author Lib. 26. c.
6. Insigni Genere Procopius in Cilicia natus and educatus, ea consideratione
qua propinquitate Julianum postea^ Principem contingebat, a primo gradu eluxit.
-- Notarius diu perspicaciter militans and Tribunus jamq; Summatibus Proximus,
post Constantii obitum in rerum conversione velut Imperatoris Cognatus altius
anhelabat admixtus consortio Comitum.
says, he was born of a noble stock in Cilicia, I need not tell you why Mr. I.
stifles the Epithete, with many other things which will not consist with the
Character of a base Impostor. I will set them down in the margin, for a
Specimen of his fidelity and modesty. Well but for all this, Ammian. Mar. makes
him a Pretender, and his Kindred to be pretended Kindred; which is none at all.
This I confess is very subtle, but are all pretenses false? Is the word pretend
always taken in a bad sense? If his Admirers know no better, I am sure Mr. I.
does, and must confess, that the justest Allegations in the World, brought to
make good a claim, are ordinarily called Pretenses.

Well, but Themistius makes him an impudent Pretender, a mean Fellow, a sorry
Pen and Inkhorn-Fellow, an Under-writer, or Clerk. Perhaps by the help of that
unconscionable stretch in translating Themistius, possibly Mr. I. may persuade
the greatest part of those that admire his performance, that Procopius was a
Iustice's Clerk, or an Atturney's Clerk, or it may be that he was a Brewer's
Clerk. And truly it were happy for him, if he were in this point as ignorant as
his credulous Readers are. But Mr. I. cannot be ignorant, that the Notarii were
in a Post of great Honor and Trust. That they were not sorry Clerks and
Vnder-writers, but the Emperors Secretaries, who had such an esteem for their
Order, that to assert their dignity which was considerable, there is a whole
Title in the Vide Theodos. Cod. vi. Tit. x. (...) vocant Graeci. -- Fuit ergo
haec Notariorum Schola -- magnae dignitati^. Vnde and Militia Nobilis dicitur.
l. ult hoc. tit. and Praeclarum Collegium. l. ult. de Senatoribus Supr. -- in
Consistorio Principis acta and secreta notabant. -- For As efferebant Imperialia
Responsa -- Missi etiam ab Imperatoribus Caesarum actibus explorandis, etc.
Consule Iac. Gothofredi Comment. in l. 1. hujus tituli. Notariorum Primicerios
-- non solum Vicariis anteponi, sed etiam Proconsulibus, aequari sancimus, ut
nihil nisi tempus intersit. Eodem honor -- sequens Primicerium -- perfruatur.
Alios porro Notarios and Tribunos, Vicariis jubemus aequari, and si priores id
vocari coeperint, anteferri. l. 2. and 3.
Theodosian Code, in which the first and second of the Order are made equal to
Proconsuls: The rest equal to the Vicarii, and Comites Orientis and AEgypti, to
precede according to Seniority. Ammian. Marc. makes Procopius a Primicerius and
secundicerius Notariorum a Marcellino vocantur Summates. Habiti enim erant
inter Summas Dignitates. Vide Cod. x. Tit. x. l. 21.
Notary, and Tribune, next in order to the Summates, that is, the first and
second who had Proconsular Dignity. Nor was it such a strange and insolent
thing for a Person of that Rank to pretend to the Empire. For Ammian. Marc.
mentions Lib. 25. c 8. lib. 26 c. 6. Iovianus primus inter Notarios omnes --
Iuliano perempto, ipse a paucis quoque nominatus, ut Imperio dignus, nec post
creatum Iovianum egit modeste, etc.
another Iovian, who was the chief of the Order of Notaries, who upon Iulian's
Death, was nominated by some as worthy of the Imperial Purple, and his Namesake
thought not himself secure till he had excluded him out of the World. This was
the brave Man, who at the Siege of Majozamalcha in Persia, with a few others,
made their way into the Town through a Mine, and surpised the place, as Amm.
Marcellinus and Zosimus both agree; and therefore the Learned Jos. Scaliger in
Animadv. in Eusebius Chron. p. 257. a.
Scaliger is mistaken in applying that passage in Zosimus to the Emperor
Iovian. But not to digress: Why must (...) be translated an Vnder-writer, or
Clerk^ I am confident Mr. Johnson did not find it so rendered in any Lexicon. I
have a better opinion of his Grecianship, than to believe, that he needed to
consult a Lexicon for the true sense of the word. But if Procopius must needs
be an Under-writer; why may we not say, that Julian was an Vnder-Reader? for
Naz. Orat. 3. p. 94. Sozom. l. 5. c. 7.
Greg. Naz. says, he was (...), and Sozomen, that he did (...). I am not
Herald enough to settle the matter of Precedence between an Under-writer, and
an Under-reader, perhaps Mr. I. is: But I am sure I should render my self very
ridiculous, should I translate that word after his Example, and thence infer,
that it is unlikely that Julian was of the Flavian House, and that he was an
Impudent Pretender.

But when all is done, where is the ingenuity of out-facing the plain evidence
of so many grave Historians, with a flattering Panegyric, spoken to Valens, on
occasion of his Victory over Procopius; in which Parum sincere haec and
adulatorie dicta. Constat enim Valenoem mirum in modum perculsum and
consternatum fuisse. Petavius ad Themistium, Par. 1618. p. 591. Post victoriam
in Tyranni fautores atrocissime saevitum est -- sed eruditus Adulator
Themistius ejusdem clementiam in sontes and noxios humanitatem exto^^it hac
Oratione, p. 590. Dicta h^c ad Principis adulationem and ambi^iose ficta. Quam
atrociter enim vi^toriam persecu^us sit Valens docet Ammian. l. 26. and Zosim.
etc p. 600. Haec habet Zosimus, l. 4. p. 739. in Hist. Romans Scriptores Graec.
Francof. 1590.
Petavius ob^erves, that he falsely celebrates his unshaken constancy; whereas
Amm. M. says, he was in great consternation upon the news that Procopius set
up for the Empire: that he celebrates his Clemency and Compassion toward his
Enemies, whereas the Historians represent the Executions after his Victory to
have been more Cruel than our Bloody Western Assizes after Monmouth's defeat,
and had been in all likelihood much more cruel than they were, but for the
Death of Serenianus, who would have urged the Emperor, naturally too
revengeful, unto greater inhumanities. Now as Themistius was to employ all the
Forces of his Eloquence to Tyranni s^evitiam exaggerat, and ex adverso legitimi
Principis mansuetudinem and clementiam. Petavius p. 590.
extol the Conqueror above his merit; so doubtless he did as extravagantly run
down Procopius, whose unfortunate Enterprise and Death, rendered it safe to rail
at him, and perhaps the humor of Valens made it necessary so to do. Wherefore
upon the whole matter, the Evidence of Themistius is to be set aside, and his
testimony is no balance to the Authority of those Historians alleged by Iovian.

He further adds, that Procopius setting up for the Empire, under pretense of
being of the Constantine Family, is a strong proof that the Empire was looked
upon as Hereditary. But by his leave, if we had not such abundant proof to the
contrary, it would be at most but a presumption, which falls very far short of
a strong proof: whereas the passing by Procopius, after the death of Julian,
and Varronianus, after the death of Iovian, are double presumption against him,
and much more strongly infer the contrary.

I have been more prolix on this head, to show how conscientiously Mr. Johnson
cites Authors, and must add a word or two more, to show you how much he abhors
the abuse of Scripture^ to expose an Adversary. As he is ridiculing Procopius,
who stands by himself at the bottom of the Flavian Genealogy, he applies to him
the Apostle's description of Melchizedek, Heb. 7. 3. without Father, without
Mother, and without Descent. I appeal to all the World, whether he did not
forget his Character as a Clergyman, and his professed abhorrence of the abuse
of Scripture, when he took this liberty to expose an Impostor, and Vagabond
Landloper, as he calls Procopius, in the very terms, wherein among others,
Melchizedek is by the Fathers taken to be described as a Type of Christ. If Mr.
I. be immoveably resolved as to Julian, that he will not abate one syllable in
the whole Book, yet I hope he will take more modest resolutions touching the
defense of it, and upon second thoughts, retract this irreverent and profane
Allusion.

Thirdly, He answers to the instance of Iovian's Son Varronianus, who was
passed by, and a Stranger Elected, whereas the younger Valentinian, at four
years old, was Created Emperor: That the setting aside the former signifies
nothing, but the Case of Valentinian is a greater Argument that the Empire was
Hereditary, than the setting aside of Ten at that Age is to prove the contrary.
I would know for what reason besides Mr. I's will and pleasure, the making
Edgar Atheling's Case parallel, is mere amusement. For besides, that his Father
before him was excluded by the Power of the Danes, and himself by the Friends
of Harold, and after by the Conquest of William, the greatest Friends to the
Succession will not undertake for a strict Hereditary Descent of the Crown in
the Saxon times.

But the reason why Varronian was passed by, and Valentinian the Younger, in
the like Nonage was made Emperor, is very obvious. Iovian reigned not long
enough to oblige the great Men in the Senate and Army, he was forced to make a
Peace upon such Terms as he could get with the Persians, and his short Rule
gave him neither time nor opportunity, by any glorious Achievements, to
recover his Credit, and endear himself to the Army and People. Whereas
Valentinian Reigned gloriously twelve Years, and was very Popular, had
Merobaudes his firm Friend, who was a wise Man, and by his Policy the younger
Valentinian was Created Emperor; Not that the Hereditary Right of the
Valentinian House, would otherwise have been usurped upon; for Valentinian the
Father was the first Emperor of that Race, and left his Brother Valens, and
Elder Son Gratian, in possession of the Imperial Throne; but as Ammi. Marcell.
intimates for fear lest on Valentinian's Death, the Legions in Gaul (who very
well knew the Empire was not Hereditary) should create another Emperor,
perhaps Sebastianus, who was for that reason sent far enough out of the way
Lib. 30. c. 10.
.

A second Reason for the Title Iovian, was his being a Confessor for his
Religion, under the Apostate, who is said to have persecuted against Law, and
yet Iovian demeaned himself quietly. To this he replies, that if Iovian were
quiet, Valentinian was not so, when he struck the Priest, nor the Caesareans
who destroyed the Temple of Fortune. But what is this to the Point? did they
offer to take Arms against Julian, or to Rebel against him that persecuted
their Religion against Law?

The impertinence of these instances Mr. I. was aware of, and for that reason
intimates somewhat, which if true, would be more to the Purpose, ( viz.) that
Julian durst not trust Iovian himself, nor leave him behind, lest he should
rebel during his absence in Persia.

This is the plain meaning of what Mr. I. does not speak out. He cannot imagine
what necessity Julian should have of Iovian's Company in the Persian War, for
that he was in no Post where his service could be considerable, but a Pikeman,
(...), p. 101.
not entrusted with any Command, so much as of a Sergeant, being no more than a
common Foot-Souldier. Here is Fiction upon Fiction, without the least Authority
to give it color. What a pregnant fancy has our Author, who can manage a
slight hint to ^uch advantage, and improve a single word into so formal a
story? He does not quote his Author for this, who was Themistius. He had
reason to conceal him, lest his Reader should take pains to consult the place,
and find no such thing but a plain intimation to the contrary, as you shall see
anon; and I wonder how he adventured to cite Socrates, who flatly contradicts
his groundless Assertion, that Iovian was no more than a common foot Soldier.
I will cite the entire passage, according to the Translation of Valesius.

Iovian being (...) Soc. l. 3. c. 22. Tribunus Militum. Valesius.
a Tribune when Julian gave the Soldiers their option by a Law, either to
Sacrifice or be cashiered, chose rather to lay down his Commission, than to
obey the Command of that ungodly Prince. Nevertheless Julian being constrained
by the necessity of the approaching War (...)frequenter pro (...) usurpatur.
, retained him among his Commanders. So Valesius more fully expresses the true
importance of the greek word, than Mr. I. who renders it had him among his
Commanders.

This place manifestly implies, that Iovian, notwithstanding his refusal to
Sacrifice, continued in the same Command: for though he chose rather to lay
down his Commission than Sacrifice, yet Julian chose rather to dispense with
his own Edict, than part with such an excellent Officer. So then Iovian was
neither cashiered nor reformed, as neither were Valentinian nor Valens, upon
their refusal to Sacrifice. For Socrates, in the beginning of the next Book,
relating the Election of Valentinian, and how steady in their Religion both he
and his Brother Valens were, expressly says, that though they both chose rather
to lose their Employments than to Sacrifice, yet the Emperor Julian knowing
them to be very serviceable to the Commonwealth, (...). Socr. l. 4. c. 1.
removed neither of them from their military stations, nor yet Iovian who
Reigned after him. And it is further evident, that Valentinian was not
dismissed his Command, from Theod. l. 3. c. 16.
Theodoret's relation of his striking the Priest, for which he incurred
Iulian's displeasure. The Historian tells us, that he was a Tribune, and
Captain of the Life-Guards, which kept the Apostates Palace: whereas if he had
been cashiered, he would not have been obliged to have attended Julian to his
Pagan-Worship, and by consequence would have had no provocation to strike the
Priest, for which he was Imprisoned.

But to return to Iovian. Domesticorum ordinis primus. Amm. Marc. l. 25. c. 5.
Ammian. Marcell. says expressly, that he was Captain of the Domestici, or
Life-Guards: and St. Ex Primicerio Domesticorum Imperator sactus est. Hieron.
in Chron.
Hierome in his Continuation of Eusebius says the same; and sure Mr. I. is a
bold Spark, who undertakes to persuade the World, that Julian entrusted him
with no Command, no not so much as that of a Sergeant, and insinuates a
suspicion in the Apostate, that Iovian would prove false to him had he been
left behind, when so good Authors assure us, that he trusted his Life in his
hands. I verily believe, that Mr. I. took this hint of Iovian's being a Pikeman
from the words of Themistius, cited by In notis ad Ammian. p. 430. Edit. 1681.
(...).
Valesius, in his notes on Ammian. Mar. and if so, it was disingenuously done
to wrest them against the express testimony of that Historian, as also of
Eutropius and St. Hierome, both cited in the same note, but if he took it at
the first hand from Themistius, it is evident in the same page, that by using
the word (...) idem quod (...) satelles, ita vocantur Protectores Domestici,
quorum Primicerius extitit Iovianus. (...). Socr. l. 1. c. 13.
(...), that Orator had no design to represent Iovian as an ordinary Pikeman,
and no more than a common foot Soldier, as Mr. I. pretends, but to show from
what rank of Military dignity Iovian rose to the Imperial Throne, ( viz.)
Captain of the Houshold-Guards, who were armed with Spears and Lances, and if
Mr. I. had pleased he might have made a Trooper of him, for some of them were
Horse, as In voce, (...).
Suidas informs us. The Protectores domestici were in a Post of Honor and
Trust, unto which the Veteran Soldiers of extraordinary merit were wont to be
preferred in recompense of their long and gallant Service. Thus was Julian Ep.
22. (...).
Leontius preferred by Julian. And in the Cod. vi. Tit. 24. l. 5. 7, 8, 9, 10,
11.
Theodosian Code, this Order is considered as a dignity of the Empire, and
great Privileges granted and confirmed by several Princes in their Laws there
extant. The Primate, or Chief of this Order, which was Iovian's station)
together with the Ten next below him, had the Dignity of Senators, and the
Title of Clarissimi, with other Honors, too long for me here particularly to
recount. And when (...).
Themistius commends the Modesty of Iovian, who was advanced from a Rank which
was not one of the very prime and most eminent, to the Supreme Dignity; he very
manifestly supposes him to have been an Officer of considerable Quality; as
also, where he mentions his lowly and courteous demeanor toward such as,
before his creation, were his Inferiors and Equals in Dignity. You see, by
this Instance, how far Mr. I. is to be trusted, and how much he presumes upon
either the Favor or Ignorance of his Admirers, who advances a Supposition
against plain matter of fact, attested by the best Historians, and draws
Inferences from his Fiction to support a desperate Cause.

A Third Reason for the Name Iovian, was, because the Antiochians abused and
libelled him as well as Julian: which shows, That it was the evil humor of
that People to lampoon and libel every body that displeased them. And he
further shows, That their Quarrel with Julian, was upon other accounts, there
mentioned, rather than his Religion.

To this Mr. I. answers, That none but the Heathens of Antioch abused Iovian,
probably because he was a Christian: whereas it is evident, from his Misopogon
and Theodoret, That the Hatred of the Christians of Antioch to Julian,
proceeded from the height of their Christianity and fervent Love to Christ; and
he quarrels with his Adversary as a Shuffler for calling their Zeal Scurrility,
P. 103, 104.

Certainly Mr. I. would lay a very signal Obligation upon the World, if, out of
the depth of his Grecianship, he would furnish us with some sure Rule, by which
it may be known when the word (...) is to be understood of none but the
Heathens of Antioch, and when only of the Christians of that City. I
acknowledge, That he does not expressly say, that none but the Christians of
Antioch abused Julian; but he foully insinuates as much, when taking no notice
that the Heathens also libelled him, he cites Theodoret to prove, That their
Libels were the effect of an Heroical degree of Christianity. The Historians
alleged by P. 99.
Iovian do all impute the Libels, and Abuses offered to both those Princes,
indefinitely, and without distinction, to the Antiochians. Wherefore till I see
some better Authority for it than Mr. I's bare word, I shall crave leave to
suspend my Belief, that none but the Heathens of Antioch lampoon'd and reviled
Iovian, upon account of the Peace made with the Persians: as for his Religion,
none of their Libels do so much as obliquely reflect upon it, unless Mr. I. or
Baronius have met with more of them than Suidas could give an account of.

Again, Mr. I. answers none of Iovian's Citations, which show expressly that it
was his morose and philosophic Humor, and setting so low a price on
Provisions at Antioch, that the Country People and Corn-Merchants could not
afford to sell them at so cheap rates, and thereupon left off the Market,
whereupon ensued great Scarcity: Neither does he take notice of those Vid.
Jovian. p. 99. ad p. 104.
other Testimonies, which prove the evil humor of the people, who were
voluptuous Lovers of the Theater, and Shows, given to Satyrs and Lampoons; he
turns his back upon them all, which I confess is more tolerable, than it would
be for him impudently to outface so many full and express Authorities.

Lastly, That a good zeal may be expressed in very extravagant, and
unwarrantable ways, is no new discovery; it is an old and necessary
distinction, which is commonly made of the pious affection from the indiscreet,
and sometimes sinful efforts thereof. And that in the height of their
Christianity, some People may fly out into as great an height of scurrility, we
need no other proof than Mr. I. himself; the height of whose Protestantism, and
hatred of Popery, has made him cast many scurrilous reflections, not only on
his Adversary, but also upon the best of the Primitive Bishops, and the best of
the present English Church.

The fourth and last reason for the name Iovian, was that to encourage him to
accept the Empire upon Iulian's Death, the Soldiers all cried out with one
common Voice, that they were Christians; which shows, that their Passive
Behavior under the Apostate, proceeded not from want of strength and numbers.

Mr. I. replies, that all Iulian's Army were professed Heathens, besides Iovian
and Valens, he never read of any professed Christians among them, unless he be
added whom Libanius and Sozomen talk of. i. e. As suspected to have killed the
Apostate. He seems, in the height of his Charity, almost willing to believe,
that his Answerers are mistaken, and that their error lies in jumbling
together the beginning and the latter end of Iulian's Reign, which ought to
have been carefully distinguished; because in the beginning of his Reign, the
Christians had a legal establishment, had numbers and Arms sufficient for their
defense, which ^hey had not in the latter end of his Reign, being disbanded and
disarmed; and by this notable expedient of a distinction, he labors to solve
the passages of Greg. Nazian. and St. Augustine, which prove the fidelity of
the Christian Soldiers to a Pagan Apostate.

Here Mr. I. according to his old custom, takes no notice of the other
Arguments which Iovian offers to prove, that it was impossible the Christians
should want strength and numbers, if they had the will to resist Julian; nor
does he consider how easy a matter it had been for them, in the Western part of
the Empire, to have set up an Emperor of their own Religion, while Julian was
employed in the East. There were undoubtedly many Legion^ in Gaul, in Britain,
in Spain, and Africa, in Germany, Helvetia, and Italy it self, and generally
Christians, for we read nothing of cashiering Christian Officers in all these
Countries; so that admitting Iulian's Army in Persia to have been composed
wholly of professed Pagans, yet Mr. I. has by no means made out what he
insinuates in his Taunton Proverb, that the Christians wanted not a stomach,
but only force for a Rebellion. It does not follow because we read not the
Names of any professed Christians in Iul^^n's Army besides Iovian, and Valens,
therefore they were all professed Heathens. I am apt to believe the Test was
not put upon all the Soldiers, but on Officers only; and not on them generally
but only on such as did militare in Palatio, who had Offices in the Guards. But
I will not be positive.

Mr. I. is very fond of the suggestion of Libanius, that a Christian killed
Julian; but if that instance serve the Hypothesis of Resistance, it does
overthrow what he insinu^^es in this place, ( viz.) that there was not a fourth
Christian in the Apostate's Army. For Libanius might have soon found out the
Murderer, and have described him by name, had there been no more than three
Christians in the Army, whereas he only describes him by his Religion, and
supposes many of the same Character to have been in the Army when Julian
Sozom. l. 6. c. 1.
received his death's wound.

But to proceed to his distinction, which his Answerers have been so blind as
not to observe, that the state of things was vastly different in the latter end
of Iulian's Reign from what it was in the beginning. ^ hope he does not pretend
to the honor of the first discovery; if he does, he is very unjust to Bellarm.
de Po^. Summi Pontif adversus Barclaium. c. 7. p. 92. Edit. Colon. 1611.
B^llarmine, who being pressed with this Authority of St. Augustine, evades it
with the very same disti^ction, of the beginning and later part of Iulian's
Reign; fo that he is beholding to that great Jesuit for this choice
distinction, as he was to another of that Society for his observation, that Jo
Mariana deRege and Regis Instit. lib. 1. c. 6.
Sozomen justified the supposed Assassination of Julian by some Christian.

Mr. I. is pleased in great scorn to call his Answerers, Transcribers, p. 112.
but if it be a scandalous Title, I had rather, with Mr. Dean, be twitted with
transcribing Bishop Bilson, Dr. Hakewell, Mr. Bochart, than with him deserve
reproach by transcribing Bellarmine and Mariana, out of Books expressly written
to maintain the deposing and King-killing Doctrine.

But since he has given himself the trouble, let us see whether it were worth
his while to fetch this distinction so far as Rome; let us try how it solves
Nazianzen's Testimony. Mr. I. for a certain reason, thought it not fit to trust
it entire with his Reader, but I will give it at large. The Orat. 3. p. 75.
Father having recounted Iulian's Arts, by which he perverted the greater part
of the Army, proceeds thus. But he did not draw off the whole, for he [the
Devil] who persecuted by him, gave him not so much power against us, but still
there were left above seven thousand who bowed not the knee to Baal, nor yet
worshipped the golden Image, nor were wounded of the Serpents [but were
preserved] by looking at the Serpent which was hanged up, and destroyed by the
Sufferings of Christ. There were many in places of Power and high Dignity, and
the more likely to be overcome both by Fears and Hopes; as also many of
inferior Condition, remarkable only for their Numbers; by whom (when he
assaulted them) he was repulsed, as a brave strong Wall does the Batteries of a
sorry Engine. Says Mr. I. our Author might easily see that Gregory mentions
this Remnant, of more than 7000. etc. before Julian had made any Edict against
the Christians, in any kind, etc. And it is intolerable false Reasoning to
conclude, That the state of Affairs in the End of Iulian's Reign, was the same
that it was in the Beginning. And it is as false Reasoning to infer, from the
mention of this Remnant of 7000. genuine brave Christians before Iulian's
Edicts against Christianity, That there were none of them left in the latter
end of his Reign; but that this passage entirely respects the quiet Beginnings
of his Government, before any Edict made against them, before the ensnaring
Donative, and many other Arts of corrupting were used. And to apply it thus,
renders this Passage intolerable Nonsense: why should Nazianzen speak of a
Remnant who bravely retained their integrity, before any considerable number
had Apostatized in hopes of Preferment, or for fear of Cashiering? Why does he
allude to the state of the Israelites under Ahab, when the Prophet Elijah
thought that almost no body was left besides himself, who had not Apostatized
to Baal's worship, if he had respect only to the beginning of the Apostate's
time, when Christianity was the established Religion of the Empire? Why does he
allude to the three Childrens refusal to worship the Golden Image, if the
Christians incurred no danger by refusing to Sacrifice? If there had been no
Edict against them, no not so much as to give them the nickname of Galilaeans,
much less any Edict to Cashier the Christians, how ridiculous is it for Gregory
to celebrate their constancy, which is generally in persons of great Power and
Dignity, more liable to be shaken through fear or hopes? What was there applied
to work upon their fear, if no severe Edicts had passed against them? or what
should move their ambitious Hopes, if no Baits of Preferment were laid to
ensnare them? In fine, how could Gregory say, That they repulsed the Assaults
of the Apostate, as a brave strong Wall does a sorry Engine, before any Assault
or Battery was made upon them? but rather than lose the benefit of Bellarmine's
distinction, Mr. I. is content that Gregory shall speak neither Truth nor Sense.

Let us see whether it answer the Testimony of St. August. any better: the
place, because curtailed by Mr. I. you will find entire in the Margin. Iulianus
extitit infidelis Imperator^ nonne extitit Apostata, iniquus Idololatra?
Mili^es christiani servi erant Imperatori Infideli. Vbi veniebant ad causam
Christi, non agnoscebant nisi Illum qui in coelo erat. Quando volebat ut Idola
colerent, ut thurificarent, praeponebant issi Deum: Quando autem dicebat,
producite aciem, ite contra illam gentem, statim obtemperabant. Distinguebant
Dominum aeternum a domino temporali, and tamen subditi erant propter Dominum
aeternum, etiam domino temporali. Aug tom. 8. in Psalm. 124.
When he [ Iulian] would have them to worship Idols, and offer Incense, they
preferred God before him: but when he said, Lead forth the Army, march against
such a Nation, they immediately obeyed. They distinguished their eternal Lord
from their temporal lord, etc. The Christian Soldiers were some of them, it
seems, Commanders of great quality in the Army; for the words, producite Aciem,
plainly import it. And if Mr. I's way of Arguing upon Nazianzen will hold,
That, because he mentions the Remnant of 7000. before the Edicts, the Passage
must relate to the former part of Iulian's Reign; St. August. Testimony will as
well prove Christians commanding the Apostate's Army after the Edict, which
obliged all to sacrifice to Idols or quit their Places; for he mentions their
Refusal to sacrifice before their Obedience to lawful Commands of the Apostate:
But it is very false Reasoning to infer the order of time from the order in
which things happen to be mentioned. We have clearer Evidence that this passage
of St. August. relates to the latter part of Iulian's Government; for the
Persian Expedition was in the later end of his Reign, and this was the only
Expedition on which the Apostate went. The Persians were the only Nation
against which Iulian's Christian Officers led forth their Soldiers. To
prosecute the War, the Apostate came to Antioch eleven Months before his Death,
( viz.) about the 26 th. of July, 362. and continued there till March 5. when
he took the field against the Persians, and before his arrival at Antioch, and
indeed before he left Constantinople, he discovered his Malice to Christianity,
and began to abridge and Vid. Cod. Theod. Cod. xii. Tit de Decurionibus. leg.
50.
repeal the Privileges granted by Constantine and his Sons to the Christians,
especially the Clergy. But immediately after his coming to Antioch, he began
openly to persecute the Christian Religion: and yet after this we find
Christians both in the Court and Camp. Iuventinus and Maximus, whose bold
Remonstrance against the Impiety of Julian procured them the Crown of
Martyrdom, were both in the Apostate's Life-Guards at Antioch, where they
sealed their good Confession with their Blood. The story of the Donative
plainly imports the number of Christians not to have been so very
inconsiderable in the Apostate's Palace and Guards: for Sozomen relating the
fraudulent Trick, says, that it was (...). Sozom. l. 5. c. 17. And the
punishment was Cashiering and Expulsion from the Court. (...). This is the
ground of my Conjecture, That the Edict of requiring all to sacrifice or to lay
down their Arms, was not thoroughly executed, but only in the Praetorian Bands,
and other Guards and Troops which did in Palati^ militare.
an occasion of showing their Courage to many who served in the Palace. He
proposes so many several Causes of the Compliance of the Christian Soldiers,
that we have reason to believe the number was not small; some through
Simplicity and deference to old Customs; some through Fear and Surprise;
others blinded by Covetousness: and besides these, some there were who showed
an heroic Christian Courage, refusing both to Sacrifice and to receive the
Emperors Donative; or as Theodoret relates the matter, absented themselves
under the pretense of sickness. And those who did comply, continued Christians
still. They did understand it to be an implicit denial of Christ; though they
were circumvented, and ensnared, they did not abjure their Savior, nor did
they leave the Army; none were cashiered but those that came to expostulate
with the Emperor for trapanning them into Idolatry. So that after this
ensnaring Donative, many Christians were still in Arms about the Emperor's
Person, and it is reasonable to believe, greater numbers in the rest of the
Army. I find no reason to doubt, but that Victor and Arintheus Ammian. Marcell.
l. 25. c. 5.
, who were both eminent Commanders in the Army of Constantius, and under
Julian, both Vide Zosim. l. 3. p. 162, 163. Amm. Marc. l. 24. c. 1.
general Officers in the Persian Expedition, were Christians in Iulian's time,
who appeared so zealously and courageously in defense of the Orthodox Faith, to
the very face of the Theodor. l. 4. c. 33.
Emperor Valens, but not having any Court Employments, their distance secured
them from those Trials, which those who were near at hand could not avoid.

Thus you see that after all Mr. I's. pains to sink the number of professed
Christians in the Apostate's Army, into two, or at most three, in the latter
end of his time, their number appears not so contemptible; and in case any
great Man should have set up against Julian, upon the score of his enmity to
the Christian Faith, the new Converts, who were not sincere Pagans, would have
been likely to have sided with him.

His Arguments to prove, that the Christians wanted Arms, are very trifling. As
for what force of Arms and Ammunition they had out of the Army, appears fully
by Julian. Ep. 52. quae est ad Bostrenos.
Iulian's Edict, a considerable time before, wherein he charges all the
Christian Laity in the Empire, not to be persuaded by their Bishops, to take up
stones and disobey their Magistrates. Truly a very dangerous Magazine! Can any
thing be more plainly said, to show that the Christians were disarmed?

What wretched Sophistry is this? He neither offers nor can produce any
positive and express evidence, that the Lay Christians throughout the Empire
were disarmed by Julian. None of his Historians mention any Edict of that
Importance, much less the Execution of any such Law. He may as easily squeeze
water out of a Flint, as a plain proof that the Christians had no other Weapons
but the stones in the streets, out of that passage of the Epistle, or Edict of
the Apostate, cited by him. What though the Rabble, on a sudden provocation,
threw stones at a Pagan Priest, or a busy small Officer, for which, upon
complaint, Julian chides the Bostrians, and makes this constitution? does it
follow, that nothing can be more plainly said, to show that the Christians, i.
e. all the Christian Laity of the Empire (as he just before expounds (...).
Which perhaps may respect only the Bostrians, and their Neighbors.
Iulian's words) were disarmed, naked and defenseless, even to contempt? For my
part, I confess, that I have not Logic enough to discern the connection of Mr.
I's inference with (...). Julian. Ep. 52.
the words he cites; and I know many othe^s to whom an express testimony of
some good Historian, that Julian caused all the Christians every where to be
disarmed, would be plainer evidence than these words. A Man of the next
Generation, who shall read, that Dr. Lamb was st^ned to Death by the London
Mobile, in the time o^ King Charl^s the F^^st, and pe^use all the Writings
which represent that Excellent King as an Arbitrary a^^ Tyrannical P^^^ce, may
even as ev^dently and plainly conclude thence, that all the People of London
were disarmed, that there was neither Sword, nor Spear, neither Pistol, nor
Musket, neither Powder nor Bullet in the whole City, that they had no other
Magazine of Weapons for offense, but the stones of the street. But no more of
this matter till we meet Julian at Nazianzum, in danger of kicking or drubbing
by old Gregory.

Before I leave this passage, I must acquaint you how much ^r ^. has improved
the Apostate's Calumny, in translating his words. He renders (...) Bishops,
which word signifies the (...). Phot. Nomocan. Ti. de Fide c. 31. in Textu.
Inferior Clergy, as distinguished from their Bishop; and is thus used (...).
Julian. ibid.
by Julian himself in this very Epistle, not many lines from this passage What
Julian very falsely charge on the Inferior Clergy, Mr. I. makes him impute
to the Bishops, viz. that they stirred up the People to make Riots, and raised
Sedition. What service this may do his Cause, I am not able to guess, I am sure
it shows what a Friend he is to the Episcopal Order.

Having thus answered Iovian with a few cavils against the Reasons given for
the Name, he makes some show of defending his strange Assertion, that the Roman
Empire was Hereditary, and alleges a passage out of Bishop Bilson, importing
as much. But since Mr. I. set so light by the Authority of that good Bishop,
when used by Preface to Iovian. p. 4, 5.
Iovian, to show, that the Christians did not want sufficient force to have
resisted the Apostate, would their Principles have allowed it, no Man will
believe that Mr. Johnson thinks that Learned Prelate Infallible. And I see no
reason why Mr. Dean may not take the same Liberty Mr. I. has done, and beg his
Pardon too. It Is a palpable Error. And yet though such a loose passage might
unwarily fall from Bishop Bilson, in a matter not directly in controversy,
without impeaching his Learning or Integrity, Mr. Johnson must not be so
excused, who has studied the point, and writes a Book whereof the main design
depends on the Truth of this Assertion.

You tell me, Sir, how much his boast of an uninterrupted Succession of five of
the Constantine Family takes with many, and passes for a demonstration, which
I wonder at, when Mr. I. himself confesses, that it is no proof of Right.
Unless those five claimed the Imperial Crown, as their Birthright, by virtue of
Proximity of Blood; this Allegation is nothing to the purpose, were it true.
But it is no less false than impertinent: For Maximianus Herculeus was not of
the Flavian house, his relation to Constantius Chlorus came by the Adoption of
Constantius, which engrafted not Maximian into the Family of his Adopted Son,
but contrariwise, made Chlorus a branch of Maximian's stock; but I need not
stand with him for so small a matter. It is plain, from his own kind Friends
Themistius and Eumenius, that Maximianus Her^. was not esteemed of the same
house with Constantine and his Sons, nor was their Succession counted from him.
(...). Themist. Orat. 1a p. 2. Edit. Paris. 1684. Item Orat. xvii. ex Edit.
Petavii, 1618. (...). Vid. Notas.
The former of them, in a flattering Oration on Constantius Junior, recounting
the various Subjects of the several Panegyricks made on the Emperor, tells us,
that some Orators chose the Nobility of his Family, and Three Successions in
the Imperial Throne, viz. of his Grandfather, his Father, and himself; whereas
if they could have hooked in Maximian into the Succession, those Orators would
not have failed to have called it a Royal Succession of Four Descents in the
same house. And the later, calling Constantius the Great a third Emperor of
the same Family, does not derive his Pedigree from Maximian, but from De
Claudio -- Ab illo generis autore in te Imperii fortuna descendit. Eumenius in
Panegyrico dicto Constable.
Claudius, who was Great Uncle to Constantine, by the Mother's side, from whom
no lineal Succession could be derived. And had not Constantius Chlorus been
made Caesar, neither his Descent from Claudius, nor his Adoption by Maximian,
would have given him any colorable Title to the Imperial Crown.

Thus, Sir, you see that the uninterrupted Succession in which your Neighbors
triumph, was of no more than Four, which is no such Rarity, as they are made to
believe. But to prove an Empire Hereditary, it is not so material to show how
many of one Family have reigned, as by what Title one succeeded another.

Now for some show of Right, Mr. I. is forced to trump up again a Passage of
Eusebius, cited in his former Book; which though fully considered by P. 61, 62,
63, 64, 65.
Iovian, and so clearly answered, that he has not one word to reply; yet with
a sort of Assurance, somewhat peculiar to himself, he tells the Reader it
cannot be answered.

If in this Passage Eusebius had declared that the Flavian house was the Royal
Family, or that the Laws of the Empire gave the Son a right to succeed the
Father, it would have been somewhat to the purpose; but he meddles not with the
Roman Constitution, he only tells us that Constantine receiving the Empire from
his Father, left it to his Sons, for whom, and their Posterity, it was reserved
as an everlasting Inheritance. It is no more than a good abode, that
Constantine leaving three Sons all Caesar's, the Empire would continue for ever
in his Family. And as much might be said in a Panegyric on the present
Emperor of Germany, if he shall leave three Sons behind him, having had the
happiness to get the eldest made King of the Romans in his life time.

But if Mr. I. think this single passage an unanswerable proof that the Empire
was Hereditary, he is a very unreasonable Man to call Iovian's account of the
Roman Succession a deceitful medium to prove the Empire Elective; for it is a
fair and complete Induction, showing that none of the several Emperors, from
Julius to Julian, claimed by Blood, but either by the Designaation of their
Predecessors, or Caesarship, or the Election of the Senate, or Army, or both.
To this matter of fact, he adds Testimonies of the best Authors, expressly
showing the Empire not to be Hereditary, which together make the strongest and
most convincing sort of evidence in Questions of this Nature. And Mr. I. grossly
abuses his kind Readers, when he insinuates, that the same Medium would prove
the English Monarchy not Hereditary; for it is notorious, that the Interruptions
of our Succession have no parity of Reason with the Arbitrary Translations of
the Roman Empire from one Family to another, without regard to Blood and
Birthright. Our Crown has all along from Henry the Second, at least. descened
in the same line, and where the next lineal Heir has been disturbed, it has
been by mere Violence, or on pretense that the Person in possession was not the
next lineal Heir, which was the Plea of the house of Lancaster; or that he was
illegitimate, which was the Suggestion of Richard the Third against his
Brother's Issue, as also of those who were against the Succession of Queen Mary
and Queen Elizabeth.

Now, these Allegations plainly suppose, what our Laws expressly declare, That
the Succession to the Imperial Crown of this Realm is Hereditary; whereas none
that set up for the Roman Empire, ever objected any thing of this Nature
against their Competitours, nor was it necessary, since by the Favor of the
Senate, and Legions any Family was capable thereof.

But Mr. I. is a generous Adversary, and though he needed not to have added
further Proof, after this Testimony of Eusebius; yet he is resolved to be
liberal, and produce fresh Arguments for his Assertion, and those so clear and
convincing, as to justify a Triumphant Q. E. D.

To clear the Point, as to matter of Fact, he asserts, [ P. 1.]

1. That the Emperors of Constantine's Line were only declared, recognized and
proclaimed, not elected, by the Senate or Army. And to make out this, he refers
to some Passages in P. 114. (...).
Eusebius, which I shall particularly examine, though indeed the whole stress
of his Proof lies on the single Greek words there mentioned, which, as he would
make us believe, signify no more than to declare, recognize, or proclaim the
Emperor.

It is not for lack of Grecianship, but of some Accomplishments much more
valuable, that Mr. I. presumes to impose upon the credulity of his Admirers at
this gross rate. (...), is equivalent to nuncupare, renunciare, salutare,
appellare Caesarem, Imperatorem, etc. which notoriously signify to create;
nay^ and even declarare too, as appears by this Passage of Latinus Pacatus of
Theodosius, Repulsam patitur Principatus, and unus est ambitus Candidati, ne
declararetur.
I need not inform you that one of those Words is ordinarily used, by the best
Authors, to signify such a Declaration as confers a Right to the Person, and
creates him what he is declared.

It often signifies the Creation or Election of a Prince or other Magistrate, of
Vide Plutarch. in Galb^ Herodian. Zosim. Dion. Socrat. Sozom. Zonar. and alios
passim.
Caesar's, of Emperors unquestionably elected, of annual Magistrates, as Plut
in Crasso, p. 552.
Consuls. Nay Plutarch uses the word to signify the choice of Virginius Rufus
by the Army, who refused the Empire. Plut. in Galba. p. 1055.

But to come to particulars. 1. As for Constantine, it is very evident, from
Lactantius, that he was, upon his Qui ei militibus commendato Imperium p^r
manus tradidit. Lact. de mort. Perscut. c. 24. Which Passage may imply a
Resignation to him.
Father's recommendaton, Constantinum vero non Imperatorem sicut factus erat,
sed Caesaremappellari juberet. c. 25.
created Emperor by the British Legions. And De Vita Constant. l. 1. c. 18,
and 20.
Eusebius twice over mentions it as a special Providence, that he came
seasonably to his Father, before his death, to succeed him in the Empire, which
otherwise he might have fairly missed. The design of Eusebius in De Vita Constable.
l. 1. c. 22. (...)^ i. e. Non primo Caesarem, sed Augustum statim renunciarunt.
Idem Hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. 13. (...), i. e. non Caesar sed Imperator, (...).
the Passage he cites, was not to show, that Constantine was proclaimed only,
not elected Emperor by the Army; but to show how God (who punished the
Persecutors of his Church with miserable Ends, and the extirpation of their
Posterity) blessed Constantine and his Father, who were good Princes and
Favorers of Christianity: How God possessed the Army with such an esteem of
him, and affection to him, partly for his Father's Merit, and partly for his
own, that they made him Emperor at the first Vote, without being made Caesar.
His words are these, They declared the Young King, with their first voice,
Emperor and Augustus. If from the word (...) he will infer, That the
Declaration of the Army was a mere Recognition, conferring no Right to the
Empire, but acknowledging an inherent Right in him; I know not what will become
of Constantine's Divine Right to the Empire, for^ which he contends in his
former Book, and cites a testimony from Eusebius, That Constantine taking the
Government upon him immediately, being by the Army, and long before that by God
himself, the King of all [(...)] declared Emperor and Augusto, favored our
Religion. It should seem, that Constantine owed his Crown to his Father alone,
was beholden neither to God nor Man for it; nor needed he to use Dei Gratia in
his style, since God did not elect nor create, but only proclaim [(...)] him
Emperor. Nay he was Emperor in his Father's Life time; for immediately upon
his Father's Death, the Soldiery declared him Emperor, and God had done it
long before. Such work will the straining of words make, especially in
Panegyricks.

2. The Succession of Constantine's Sons was secured by their being made
Caesar's; which would have entitled any stranger as much as them to the Empire.
The King of the Romans succeeds without a new Election upon Death or
Resignation of the Emperor; and yet though the Son succeed his Father, that
Empire is not Hereditary. And the passages in Eusebius, to which Mr. I. refers,
do plainly enough intimate, that the Senate and Legions did somewhat more than
only recognize and proclaim the Sons of Constantine. They seem to import
somewhat very like an Election. Mr. I. durst not produce the passages entire,
but pick a word out of each, which might give a little color to his false
assertion. The first runs thus; The Armies every where, Vit. Constant. l. 4. c.
68, 69. (...).
as though by divine Inspiration, upon the news of the Emperor's Death, (...)^
with one accord resolved, as though the great King had been still living, that
they would (...).
acknowledge none for Emperor of the Romans, save only his Sons. (...).
And not long after were pleased to call them all thenceforward, not Caesar's,
but Augusto's; which name is the highest title of Sovereign Majesty. And this
they did, signifying each to other every where by Letters. their (...).
respective Suffrages and Voices, and so the (...).
unanimous resolution of the Army, was in a moment made known to all People
every where. There are many things fit to be observed from this passage, which
will not well consist with Mr. I's fancy of a bare Declaration or Recognition.

1. Eusebius does not say what Mr. I. would have him, that the Army did not
Elect, but only Recognize them: but he says, that with one accord they
resolved to acknowledge none but them only.

2. This Resolution plainly shows, that they had power to have done otherwise;
and it was a great wonder they did not set up others, as Consorts of the Empire
with them: for which reason Eusebius ascribes their unanimity to Divine
Inspiration.

^. Here is express mention of the concurring Suffrages of the several parts of
the Army, which strongly implies an Election.

4. The Senate agreed with the Army in the Resolution, and they also declared
Constantine's (...).
Sons, and them only without Consorts, to be Emperors and Augusto's

I hope Mr. I. will not say, that Unanimity is inconsistent with an Election;
or that it is essential to it, that ^everal Candidates should appear, and the
matter be decided by a Poll.

5. That Constantine's Sons did not take upon them the Title of Augusto,
immediately upon their Father's decease, but 'twas given them by the Army, and
that not presently, but after some time.

You see how false his First Assertion, of Fact, is; and his Second, that
during that Family, there was no Interregnum, is no truer. For from this Place
it appears, that they were not Emperors, but only Ca^sars for a while after
their Father's death. And Post obitum Constantini Interregnum fuit. Nec ullus
in orb Romano Augustus imperavit -- tribus mensibus ac dimidio Orbis Romanus
sine Augusto imperio fuit.
Valesius in his Notes on the 67th Chapter expressly says, That after the death
of Constantine there was an Interregnum of three Months and an half. During
that space, there was no Augusto, though the Empire was not (...), for the
Caesar's took care of the Government. And if, upon the death of Chlorus, there
was no Interregnum in his share of the Empire, (for Mr. I's Testimonies relate
only to that) it must be ascribed to the speedy Agreement of the Army, to
advance Constan^ine to the Throne, according to his Father's desire, Illico --
universus in (...) consedit Exercitus, te omnium mentes oculiq^ signarunt; and
quanquam tu ad seniores Principes de summa Reipub. quid fieri placeret,
retulisses, praevenerunt tamen studio, quod illi mox judicio approbaverunt.
Eumen. in Panegyr.
without expecting an answer from Galerius and the Caesar's, to whom Constantine
had given an Account of his Father's death, and desired to know their pleasure
as to the Government. This I have upon the Authority of Eumenius, on which Mr.
I. depends much. But if his Assertion, as to Fact, were true; admit there were
no Interregnum, the same may happen in an Elective Succession. If a King of the
Romans happen to be chosen, there is no Interregnum upon the Death of the
German Emperor. Though wheresoever an Interregnum may be, it is certain the
Crown is not Hereditary; yet it follows not on the other side, that the
Kingdom, in which an Interregnum actually happens not, is for that reason
Hereditary.

As for his last matter of Fact, it is neither true nor pertinent; nay it is
plainly against him, and shows the great disparity of the English and Roman
Laws of Succession. If Chlorus succeeded, De Adoptivis -- qui Iure feudali non
succedunt. Cragii Jus Feud. l. 2. p. 231.
as the adopted Son of Maximinian; you know no such Title is allowed of in
Feudal Successions, as ours is. For in such the Inheritance descends lineally,
according to Proximity Corv. Jus Feudale, l. 2. Tit. 5. Quoniam Feuda dantur
sanguini. Adoptio jus sanguinis non adfert.
of Blood; and Adoption does not create Alliance in Blood. And if the Sons of
Constantine were Testamentary ^eirs; it shows a vast disparity in the Case,
since our Kings have no power to devize, by Will, their Realms, or divide them,
as a Roman Testator might his Patrimony, between two, three, or four Heirs.

But if what he says were pertinent, yet it is not true. For none succeeded as
Heirs at Law to the Empire, though some of the Constantine Family were Heirs at
Law to their Predecessors. An Incumbent dying may be succeeded in his Benefice,
by the Person who is his Heir at Law, but not as his Heir, much less as Heir at
Law to the Benefice. Several Princes of the Austrian Fami^y, have been Heirs at
Law to their Predecessors; The present Emperor was so to his Father; but he
succeeded him not as Heir, much less as Heir at Law, or Heir in Tail, to the
Empire. So likewise here, neither the Sons of Constantine, nor Julian,
succeeded their Predecessors in the Empire as Heirs, but in Right of Caesarship.

Hitherto for matter of fact, the Demonstration proceeds but untowardly, and
notorious falshood^ have been imposed upon the Reader; nor shall we meet with
more ingenuous dealing, when we come to see how he clears up matter of Right.
For he has recou^se wholly to Panegyricks, to support an Hereditary Right of
Succession in the Flavian House: he uses no other testimonies than some of
their Rhetorical flourishes, harping upon loose expressions and words
improperly, used, confining them to their native and proper significations. At
this rate of arguing, I would undertake to prove out of his own Authors, that
Julian had no title to the Crown, which was Iovian's Right upon the Death of
Constantius Junior. Themistius says so; as also, that Constantius had no
regard to Julian as his Kinsman, when he made him Caesar, but advanced him to
that pitch of Majesty, because he was a Philosopher. I could prove against him,
that Varronianus was not set aside for Nonage, by the Testimony of St. Ambrose,
which he cites [ p. 120] An Emperor is always at Age; the Descent of the
Imperial Crown takes away all defects. But if in Theological Disputations we
are not allowed to draw Arguments from Parables; I think the loose and lofty
strains of Panegyric are full as unconcluding in Questions of Law and Right.

For this reason I may, upon the Authority of Socrates, overlook the testimony
of Eusebius, as the loose expression of an Orator, who is not obliged to
accuracy and the proper sense of words. But without making the least abatement
for Rhetoric, Mr. Dean has Iovian, p. 66.
fully shown this passage, like an Inheritance imports, that it was not so. But
I suppose the s^rength of his Evidence for Constantine's Hered^tary Right, lies
in the Authority of Socrates; who gives an account of Constantine's Succession
in the very word, which is used to d^scribe the Jewish Succession. (...).
Cr^atus est Imperator in locum Patris Valesius.
He says, he was declared King in his Father's stead, (...). What a lucky
discovery is this? What a Du^ce, or Knave, was Valesius to translate, (...),
was Created Emperor; when the very word which is used to describe the Jewish
Succession, immediately followed, and should have directed him to render the
words, was declared Emperor? But you see, Sir, what it is to read the Fathers
carefully, and with a design in their head. Yet before we finally condemn
Valesius; it is but reasonable to know, whether the very word used to describe
the Jewish Succession, be the Greek word in his Margin, (...), or the English
word, in his stead. Now I am apt to believe it is not the Greek word, and then
Valesius is not to be blamed. I am confident, if you read the Sept^agint
Version of both the Books of Kings and Chronicles, Lxxii. passim usurpant
(...), ut 2 Kings xv. 10, 14, 30.
you will not once meet (...). And if Mr. I. would have us believe, that the
English words, in his stead, import a lineal and Hereditary Succession, I beg
his Pardon; because I read that Shallum conspired against Zachariah, and killed
him, and Reigned in his stead; and that Menahem slew Shallum, and Reigned in
his stead; and others, who had no Hereditary Title to the Crown of Israel, nor
indeed any at all, but that of Invasion, slew their Predecessors, and Reigned
in their stead. But it is a great felicity for a Man to know his Readers
beforehand: he may say any thing, who has insured their favor. The passage
cited from Eumenius, comes very much short of the point. I know no body will
deny, but that Constantine might be his Father's lawful Successor, without an
Hereditary Title. The Right, upon which he as eldest was preferable to his
Brothers, was a mere congruity; and if the Empire had been to descend from
Chlorus, as a Roman Patrimony, he would have been but one of the three lawful
Heirs, and only one third part would have fallen to his share.

As for Constantine's Wisdom in dividing the Roman World amongst his three
Sons, I question it not; but how does that prove the Empire Hereditary? If
there be any thing in the reason, which Eumenius gives, why Constantine was his
Father's undoubted Heir, viz. Primogeniture, there was more Prudence than
Justice in Constantine's Testament. But since the Roman Empire could be devized
by Will, it is a President from whence no Argument can be drawn touching the
Right of Succession in this Kingdom. In the proper and ordinary sense of the
term, no Kingdom is understood to be Hereditary, which may be devized by Will
of the Prince, and that if he please, from his own Children to Strangers.

The Title of Julian to the Empire is out of all dispute: but that it was
founded on blood and birthright, or that he succeeded Constantius as Heir at
Law, is an impudent sham. For the ordinary Right, by which Amm. Marcell. says,
he obtained the Empire, was Caesarship: which, (as Iovian largely proves) was
freely conferred upon him by Constantius, and which he might have deprived him
of again, or have conferred on another, as Consort with him, who would have
been his Colleague in the Empire upon the Death of Constantius, by the same
ordinary Right. By Ordinary Right, upon the resignation of Dioclesian, and
Maximianus Herculeus, Constantius, and Galerius, succeeded in the Imperial
Throne; and not Maxentius the Son of Herculeus, whose the Empire was, if blood
and birthright had been the ordinary right by which it went.

I am quite tired with exposing his gross Sophistry, and those Childish
fallacies with which he puts us off instead of Demonstrations. I shall only
add, that if lofty strains of Panegyric may pass; the Popish Writers have
admirably demonstrated, that Transubstantiation was the Doctrine of the
Primitive Church; and therefore I hope Mr. I. has by better Arguments proved
its Absolute Impossibility.

After this Bravade of Demonstration our Author thinks he may despise all
Iovian's Arguments as trifling objections, and without considering them
particularly, blows them off forty at one puff, and advances three Positions
against them.

The first is this, That there never was an unalterable Succession in the
World, and what then? This has some show of an Argument for Exclusion, but how
he will thence infer against Iovian, that the uncertain and arbitrary
Succession in the Roman Empire was nevertheless Hereditary, I cannot discern
consequences at distance enough to comprehend: But if it were to the purpose, I
conceive his Instance of Iehoahaz does not make out the Peoples right to govern
the Jewish Succession in David's Line: for Nude, and historice narrata: Vid.
Sanderson. de Obligatione Conscien. Praelect. 3. Sect. 6, 7, 8, 9^ etc.
a bare relation of the fact in Scripture proves not the justice thereof, Mr.
I. is not so mean a Casuist, as not to know^ that many things not censured, are
not to be drawn into Example, though done by good men: And the Order of the
Genealogy, 1 Chronicles. 3. 15. does no more infer a Scripture approbation of this
Action, than our Savior's Genealogy, Matthew. 1. 3. argues the Evangelists
approbation of Judah's incest with his Daughter-in-Law.

His second Position, that the Government of the Succession in the R. Empire,
was in the hands of the Emperor, shows, that Succession to be Arbitrary, and
not Hereditary, and is so far from answering Iovian's Objections, that it
yields the Point. Wherefore to his second and third Positions, I shall return
him an answer almost in his own words, and desire he would inform me in what
part of the Globe that Hereditary Kingdom lies, where the present Possessor of
the Crown has the Power of declaring whom he will, Relation or Stranger, his
Successor. What sort of Hereditary Succession was that, in which the first of
the Family named a single Successor, the second named a third, and the
Survivour of them though he had no other choice (if Mr. I. mistake not) yet did
amiss in naming Julian, and ought to have named a Stranger. I conceive that
Succession is every whit as much Elective, which depends on the free choice,
and nomination of one Person, as that which is determined by the majority of a
hundred Votes.

What he adds to prove the Empire Hereditary in the Families of Valentinian
and Theodosius, serves only to increase that dislike which I ever had to works
of Supererogation. It being all mere Rhetoric, such good wishes and
Complements as might have been made a King of Poland. And therefore I am much
amazed at Mr. I's. confidence in affirming, that every one knows the present
Kings Children, in an Elective Kingdom, are furthest off from succeeding, who
ever succeeds they shall not. He excepts only the German Empire, when every one
that knows any thing of the State of Europe, can tell him of two other famous
Monarchies both Elective, in which being of the Royal Family, is not a
prejudice to their Claim, but a Commendation to the Crown. The one is See
Fowler's History of Swethland and Poland. Mart. Cromeri Polonia, lib. 2. A
centum and amplius octoginta annis regnavit perpetua Successione Iagellonia
magnorum Ducum Lithuaniae progenies. Non haereditario tamen, sed Electionis
jure. Phil. Honorius de Interregno Polon. de Jagellone -- Cujus propago sive
linea postmodum annos ducentos foeliciter regnavit. Jo. Boterus in descriptione
Polon. -- Quamvis Corona Poloniae a Decreto Nobilitatis dependet, non tamen
legitur ipsos unquam Successores Regios exclusis^e, aut praeteriisse, nec
Regnum in aliam Familiam transtulisse, excepta una vice -- Filiarum Regum
quoque semper Ratio habita est -- Sigismundo tertio non parum profuit natum
fuisse Catharina Sigismundi August. and Annae sorore ut coronam Poloniae
adipisceretur.
the Kingdom of Denmark which was elective till within these thirty Years; and
yet all along from Waldemar to Frederick IV. they chose one of the same Family,
and for the most part the next lineal Heir.

The other ( viz.) the Crown of Poland, goes by Election to this day, which yet
in the present Century was successively worn by Sigismond, and his two Sons,
Ladislaus, and Casimir; and it was a great advantage to Sigismund, in his
pretenses to the Crown, that he was of the Iagellonian Race, and Grandson, by
the Mother-side, to Sigismund, and before that the Iagellonian Race Reigned two
hundred Years, and yet the Poles had no Jealousy that their Elective
Constitution should be changed into Hereditary. Nay, where the Male Issue has
failed, they have either chosen a Daughter, or else made her Husband King; as
in the Case of Hedwig Daughter of Ludovicus, Married to Iagello, and Anne
Daughter of Sigismund, first Married to King Stephen. Not to add, that if Mr.
I. have read the Rep. of Hungary, he cannot but have seen, that that Crown,
though held P. 214.
Electionis jure, has ordinarily descended to the King's P. 117, etc.
Son, or Brother, or other Relation. You see, Sir, How little reason we have to
trust either Mr. I's. Honesty or Politics.

We have done, at length, with those miserable Fallacies which Mr. I. was
forced to muster for the support of his desperate Assertion, that the Empire
was Hereditary, which he himself has so little confidence in, that he denies
the stress of his Argument to lie upon that Assertion, that the Empire was
Hereditary in Iulian's time, Certainly he was of another mind when he wrote his
former Julian, p. 18, 19.
Book, and thought it necessary to the fidelity of his proceedings, to consider
how the Roman Succession stood, etc.

Well but on second thoughts, Iovian's Concessions will serve his turn as well.
Julian was Caesar expectant of, and next to the Imperial Throne, and yet such
pretensions the Christians would have set aside for the security of their
Religion, and for fear of it, the Apostate dissembled it for ten years
together. Now, Sir, I desire you only to read Iovian's Iovian, p. 51, 52.
comparison of a Caesar, and a Prince of Wales, and you will quickly see how
unlike the Cases of Julian, and our Popish Successor were, and how little could
be concluded from the former in the latter case. Iovian shall readily grant
him, that it is a great sin in those who can legally and justly prevent a
Popish Successor, and do it not. That the Fathers had been to blame, if they
had known Iulian's Religion and Temper, and had not been for degrading him from
the Caesar-ship; nay, he undertakes that the Fathers of our Church (whom Mr. I.
so much vilifies, in comparison with the Bishops 13o Eliz.) P. 53.
would set aside a thousand such Titles as Iulian's to secure the Reformed
Religion, So that Mr. I's After-game will not save his stake.

I am now come to his Discourse about the Bill of Exclusion, to which I shall
say the less, because I always esteemed it an Argument quite above me, and
looked upon it as no small Felicity that my station in the World freed me from
those perplexities I should have been in, had I been a Member of that
honorable Body in which that weighty Case was so often debated, and on whose
votes the Decision of it so much depended. So far as I understand that
Controversy, you know my Sentiments already; which, as they do not in all
things exactly concur with those of Iovian, so do they much less accord with
his Adversary's.

You very well observe many passages in this P. 126.
Answer to I^vian, which are mere Jests and not Replies, and particularly his
Cavil against Mr. D'^ distinction, whereby he vindicates those who addressed
against the Bill of Exclusion, That it was not a Popish Successor, as Popish,
but the Succ^ssion which they promised to maintain. A Zeal for the Lineal
Succession where the next Heir is a Papist, and a Zeal for the next^ Heir as
Popish are things very different, and are not merely in notion distinct, but in
reality; insomuch that those very Persons who stickled most against the
Exclusion of a Popish Successor, deserted him (as Pref. p. 24.
Iovian undertook they would) in his Endeavors to overthrow the Protestant
Religion. Who were fittest Tools for that Service, the whole Nation knows, and
if Mr. I's Jest is too precious to be lost, he is too well acquainted with
another sort of Addressers, to whom the Distinction, not as Protestants but as
Addressers, may be more properly and truly applied. I am sure they very much
need the help of some good Friend to bring them off with honor, and if either
this, or any other distinction Mr. I. can devise will solve the Paradox, and
reconcile their fiery Zeal against Popery with their Addresses of Thanks for a
Declaration designed to introduce it, and their Promises to choose such a
Parliament as would destroy our best Securities against Popery, I shall
acknowledge him the greatest Man I ever met with.

In his Vindication of the Paper of Reasons, whereof he will have the Bishops
to be the Authors, there are many things very strange and diverting. First, he
will be wiser than his Author, Sir Simon Dewes, and make the Bishops Authors
of a Paper, which (as Iovian observes) Sir Simon supposes to have been drawn
up in the House of Commons. 2. He accuses the justly admired days of Queen
Elizabeth of most horrid Duncery, when he professes to believe, That few
besides the Bishops in those days were able to pen such a Piece; I presume he
will allow Sergeant Manwood or Mr. Mounson were some of those few, and if so,
the Reasons might be framed in the H. of Commons. Thirdly, He will not allow
the paper to be called Anonymous, although though not signed by one hand. I
have heard that in a Parliament a paper has been rejected as such, though
entitled the Humble Petition of the Gentlemen and Freeholders of the County of
Middlesex, because not subscribed by them. But what though the Bishops be
mentioned in the Body of the paper? what though it talks of Godly Bishops ^ may
it not nevertheless be composed by a Scotizing Prebyterian? Has Mr. I. forgot
the good Protestant Religion of our Good Church in Coleman's Declaration? or
Answ. to Iov. p. 199.
will he say that neither Coleman nor any Papist could be the Author, they
would have talked of black Swans as soon as of the Good Protestant Religion:
Sure the matter and scope of any Writing discovers the Author's principles,
much more certainly than a single phrase, perhaps designed for amusement.
Fourthly, He has found out a new privilege of Parliament, (viz.) That the
Bishops, and I presume any Member of either H. for the same reason, may urge
false and unconcluding Arguments, because there is f^l^ Authority to enact
their Conclusions.

Preface, p. 33, 34.
Iovian has shown in this Paper gross Mistakes in Divinity and Church History,
and the inconsequence of several Arguments. Yet says Mr. I. There is nothing
in those Reasons but what was fit ^or Bishops to urge in Parliament, to urge, I
say, in Parliament, where there was full Authority to have enacted their
Conclusions. No matter whether the premises will infer the Point in debate.
The Authority of King, Lords, and Commons is sufficient to purge all defects,
and makes the Conclusion valid in Law, which was not so in Logic.

Fifthly, It is very pleasant to see a Man who p. 128.
says his Adversary has raised Objections thick and threefold against this
Paper, challenge him to write against, and threaten to answer him if he does,
and yet not offer one word of Answer to what he has already said against it, I
have the Charity to believe whatever Mr. I. in an heat may say, that he will
not stand by those Principles which are the Foundation of a great part of that
Paper, which he calls the Bishops Arguments.

I cannot believe he thinks the Political Laws which God, by Moses, delivered
to the Children of Israel, are still in force, and ought to be received in all
Christian Governments: That all Crimes punishable with Death by those Laws,
ought to be Capital in all Christian Realms; and on the contrary, That it is
not lawful to punish with Death any Crime which was not made a Capital Offense
by the Law of Moses.

This Principle runs through that Paper or a worse (viz.) That all the
Scripture Examples of good Men are at least imitable, if they have not the
Force of a Precept. If Mr. I. will undertake the defense of these Principles, I
am sure he will be justly chargeable of making wast Paper of most Acts of
Parliament.

Though Mr. Dean may in part he mistaken in the Instance he makes to prove it,
yet he is not mistaken in saying, That though there was one good Argument why
the Queen's good Subjects might urge her Majesty to put the Queen of Scots to
death, viz. That She sought the Queen's Life; yet the question remains whether
she could be excluded from the Crown. There is no Conse^uence from the Justice
of punishing Treason according to the known Laws of the Realm with Death, to
the Excluding the next Heir from the Crown merely for being a Papist. And
therefore Mr. Dean adds, that those who addressed for preserving the
Succession, and were against Excluding the D. of Y. would Preface, p. 38.
upon sufficient Proof that he sought the Life of his Brother, have been
willing to Exclude him out of the World. This fully answers Mr. I. and
therefore, with his usual discretion, he takes no notice of it; but falls upon
the Instance of the Hebrew Firstborn, who, Mr. Dean says, might not be
dis-inherited for cursing or smiting their Father, though they might be put to
death. The Instance indeed holds not where the Firstborn had other Brothers,
but in case of the only Son, it is true; for De Success. in bon. c. 2^. Fas
esse h^eredes pro libitu instituere ex iis, qui ex lege cohaeredes forent.
Mr. Seldom in the Chapter to which Mr. I. refers, limits the power of the
Father in making his Heirs, to one of his Sons, if he have several Sons. He may
dis-inherit the Eldest Son, if he have a Second or Third to make his Heir; but
he may not dis-inherit an only Son, or all his Sons, and make Vid cap. 1. and
Misna ibi citat. Vid. etiam Ma^monid. More Nev. P 3. c. 24.
a Brother his Heir; because a Brother was not, by Law, a Coheir with a Man's
Sons or Daughters. So that the Instance is not wholly mistaken. I am confident,
did Mr. Dean think fit to vindicate Iovian (which you see it were very easy
for him to do), he would readily acknowledge this or a greater Mistake, he has
not Mr I's Forehead, he has more Humility and Modesty than to boast, Answ. to
Iov. p.
that he will not abate one syllable in his whole Book, as Mr. I. does.

To his flout, as to Mr. Dean's Skill in Jewish Learning, I shall only say,
That when Mr. I. shows as much of that Learning, and to so good a purpose, as
Dr. Hicks has done in his Peculium Dei, I will forgive him all the Blunders
and Prevarications of Julian, and this Defense of it.

Page 135. Mr. I. charge his Adversary with three things, of which I shall
easily clear him.

(1.) That Iovian talks of Statutes against King James's Succession, and
whereas he says, If our Author can show me but one of those many Statutes,
whereby King James stood Excluded, I will yield him the Cause. I doubt he will
hardly stand to his word. What are the 35 H. 8. which impowers the King to
devise the Crown by Will, and the Act of Recognition, 1 Eliz. which confirms
the 35 H. 8. but Statutes against the Succession of K. James? For K. Henry made
a Will, in which next his own Daughter, he limits the Crown to the Daughters of
his second Sister, the French Queen, See H. 8. Will in Full. C. H^st. Cent. 16.
by Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, passing by the Scotch Line. I know very
well what was said against that Will of K. H. 8. by Mr. Maitland in favor of
the Queen of Scot^and, in a Letter to the Lord Cecil, published in the
Collection of Papers, in the end of the first Volume of Dr. Burnet's History of
the Reformation: but what he says to invalidate the Will was never proved, and
this Paper lying unknown, could not (if true) influence that Parliament which
recognized K. James his Lineal Descent from Elizabeth Daughter of K. Edward the
Fourth. (2.) He quarrels with his Adversary for talking of the Exclusion of the
House of Suffolk, which he says, never had any pretensions to the Crown. Sure
Mr. I. was in a very cavilling humor. The Daughters of Charles Brandon Duke of
Suffolk, by the French Queen, and their Issue, are those whom Iovian intends by
the House of Suffolk, and why they may not as properly be called the House of
Suffolk, as the present Line the House of Scotland, I know not. For denying the
pretensions of that Line to the Crown, I leave him to answer to the Duke of
Somerset, and the Earl of Derby, and some other Noble Lords descended thence.
(3.) He represents Iovian as very absurd, for quoting the Act of Recognition, 1
Iacobi, when he is for invalidating all Acts of Parliament that limit and
determine the Succession. But the absurdity is his own. He seemed well enough
to understand the difference of Declaring or Recognizing from Creating and
Electing about 20 pages before; it is much he should so soon forget it. An Act
of Recognition confers no Title, but supposes it, An Act which limits the
Descent of the Crown creates a Title when it was not.
It is worth observing how strange an Answer he gives to two Authorities, cited
by Iovian, importing a Bill of Exclusion, P. 137.
which changes our Succession from Hereditary to Elective. Says he, An Act of
Disinheriting from the Crown, does own, and proclaim, and prove, the Kingdom to
be Hereditary. Right. But it makes it quite otherwise. So the Act for taking
away the King's Office, does own this Realm to be a Monarchy, but made it a
Commonwealth. The Ordinance for abolishing Episcopacy, does own and prove the
Government of these Churches to be Episcopal, and at the same time destroyed
it. I suppose that implicit acknowledgment did not cure the manifest Injustice
of those Acts.

His Reflection on Iovian's way of arguing is Childish, P. 139.
if there be four Terms in the Syllogism, or Enthymeme, they are of his own
making, and he is to answer for the honesty of it himself.

No less ridiculous is his pretense, that his Adversary professes to have
sworn Allegiance to Subjects. It is possible an Oath of Allegiance may be
broken by injuries done to a Subject, and yet no Allegiance be sworn to that
Subject; for instance, by ravishing, or killing the Queen, or the Prince, and
yet both the Queen and Prince are no more than Subjects. Whether an attempt to
debar the next Lineal Heir from Succeeding, be not an Invasion of the Rights
and Prerogative of the present King, especially when he is averse to it, and an
offense against his Crown and Dignity, may possibly be a doubt with Persons of
more Learning and Conscience than Mr. I. has shown, either in Julian, or his
Defense of it. Whether it be or not I will not determine.

The Rant wherewith he closes his Answer to Iovian's Preface, is to the tune
of Lewis du Moulin. Yet I presume no body takes Mr. Dean to have renounced the
Doctrine of our Glorious Reformers, or thinks him one step nearer Rome on that
Account. Some such Zealots against Popery, as Mr. I. about 60. years since fell
foul on Bishop Hall, who in his old Religion, acknowledges the Roman to be a
true, though a corrupt Church, and occasioned him to publish an Apologetical
Epistle called the Reconciler, Bishop Hall's Works. Vol. 2.
in which he faith, that to acknowledge the Church of Rome to be a True Church,
was common with the best Reformed Divines, and had been done by himself with
the Approbation, and Applause of the whole Representative Body of the Clergy of
this Kingdom. He explains himself as Iovian does, asserting, that in different
senses the Church of Rome is both a True, and a False Church, True in
Existence, False in Belief, that is, has a Natural not a Moral Trueness. As a
Thief, or a Cheat, is truly a Man, though not a True Man, or as the Devil is a
true Spirit, or Angel, though (not as Mr. I. fallaciously expresses himself, a
true Angel of Light) a false, lying Spirit. He adds, that Antichristianism,
though it justly makes the Church of Rome odious, and execrable to God, Angels
and Men, yet it cannot utterly dischurch it. He says in this Doctrine he
follows Zanchy, Luther, Calvin, Iunius, Plessis, Hooker, Andrews, Field,
Crakanthorp, Bedel and others, who deny not the Natural Verity of the Church of
Rome, though they deny it to be veram and puram. They own it to be a True
Church, such as the Ten Tribes were, notwithstanding the Idolatrous Worship set
up by Jeroboam, which is little to the advantage of the Roman Church, being
only in effect to say, They are neither Jews, Turks, nor Pagans, though
misbelieving, Heretical, and Idolatrous Christians, and this Epistle and
Doctrine is approved by Bishop Morton, Davenant and Prideaux, as also by Mr.
Primrose, Minister of the French Church.

Thus I have attended Mr. I. through his first Stage, and here I think it best,
for me, to rest a while with him. My motion has been somewhat slower than I
intended, and I confess in point of time, I have broken my word with you. But
you will pardon me when you consider, that his numberless Frauds, which I had
to detect, required more time than I allowed my self; for Fallacies are not
laid open, and confuted in as few words as they are committed. And withal I
have been the more particular in exposing this first part of his Answer,
because here it is that I am most capable of serving you, by showing how
wretchedly he prevaricates in abusing many good Authors, which you have not at
hand to consult. I hope to make a shorter business of what is behind, a great
part of it being already examined in my former Letter.

March 14. 1689. I remain, Dear Sir, Your most humble Servant.

The Third LETTER.
Dear Sir,
I Am now come to what Mr. I. is pleased to call an Answer to Iovian, and
concur with your Observation, that Brevity is the only good thing in it,
craving leave to add, that it would have been abundantly more commendable upon
that account, had he forborne Cavils, and spiteful misrepresentations of his
Adversary, without which his Answer would not have exceeded the fifth part of
its present bulk, as small as it is.

His Argument, a fortiori, if designed to prove, that the Christians of the
fourth Century, would in our Circumstances have been for Exclusion of a Popish
Successor, is wretched Fallacy, because of the vast disparity of their Case,
and Ours. For Mr. I. has not been able to maintain his Paradox, that the
Empire was Hereditary, against Iovian's Arguments. And if it be designed to
prove, that had the Christians known Julian to be a Pagan, they would have done
all in their Power to have kept him from the Crown, it is no less wretched
Impertinence, in regard his Adversary undertakes, that the Fathers of our
Church would readily set aside twenty such Titles as Iulian's, to secure their
Religion. His pretense that Iulian's illegal Oppression of the Christians, was
the cause of that rough treatment they gave him, together with his Insinuation
that nothing but their Weakness kept them from taking up Arms against that
Apostate to do themselves Right, Mr. Dean has confuted by more arguments than
Mr. Johnson P. 158.
thinks fit to take notice of. And that one at which he nibbles, is quite too
hard for his Teeth. Iovian, says Julian, did persecute Legally, because all
the Emperors Orders, and Decrees, how unjust soever, were Legal. Iov. P. 86.
He was an Absolute Sovereign, who governed by purely Regal Power, and whose
Pleasure [howsoever signified, whether by Letter, or word of Mouth] was a Law.
P. 86,87,88,90,91.
This is made out abundantly out of the best Authors both Historians, and
Lawyers, and it is a miserable shift to despise all these Citations as shreds of
Civil Law, not worthy the least consideration.

If these Citations are misapplied, why does he not show it, at least in one or
two Instances? Verily, his Readers are too kind if they take his word for it;
and if any be so rude as to demand better satisfaction, Mr. Johnson is resolved
to be even with them for their Curiosity. They must go many a weary step on his
Errand, who will trot all the Town over from Shop to Shop, till they meet with
Gothofred's Vlpian. But I confess it was done like one who is his
Craft's-Master to refer them to a Book, which scarce one in a thousand is ever
likely to see.

But this one Argument is by no means the Substance of what Mr. Dean offers
against this new Hypothesis. That illegal Oppression, and Tyranny, was the
cause of the Christians rough behavior toward Julian. For he shows that
other Emperors, some of them Christians too, were treated as coursely as
Julian, particularly Constantius by Hilary, Athanasius, and Lucifer, from whom
Mr. Johnson cites several such passages in his Answer to Constantius the
Apostate, as are far ruder than any thing in the Third Chapter of his Julian.
So that the Phenomenon he would solve by this Hy^othesis, is not Real Fact,
but a mere Fiction. The Christians were not more rough in their behavior
toward Julian, than elder Christians had been toward several of his
Predecessors, not only Pagan, but also Christian Princes.

Again, He shows that Julian had the malice of a Devil against our Savior, and
his Religion in which he persisted against the plain Evidence of Miracles, See
Iov^ p. 141. and to the end of the vi. Chapter
and in spite of many remarkable Judgments of God upon his Uncle, and other
blasphemers of Christ and persecutors of his Church. So that the Christians
might reasonably conclude him Irrecoverable, and past Repentance, and treat him
the more severely on that account, nay believing him so, they might possibly
pray for his destruction, as the only probable means of the Churches
deliverance; and yet it follows not that they would have lifted up their hand
against him, or been the Instruments of that destruction they prayed for.

Again he proves, if Julian were guilty of Illegal Oppression, and Tyranny, See
Iov. Chapter ix.
so were other Persecuting Emperors before him, particularly Galerius; so that
there was nothing singular in the case of Iulian's Christians, nor can he infer
from their Example, that Illegal Oppression will warrant Subjects to take Arms
against their Lawful Prince to do themselves Right.

In the next Page we find Mr. I. in a very peevish humor, quarrelling with
Iovian for what he himself said in effect over and over. It Is only the Phrase
moves his Choler, viz. the main ground of their displeasure was, that he did
not formally persecute them, nor put them to Death enough. Mr. Dean explains
himself sufficiently, the Christians desired rather to be persecuted in the old
Decian, and Dioclesian way, i. e. to have Their Religion made their Crime, and
Death their Punishment. This the Authors referred to in the Margin plainly
evince, and the instances of Iuventinus, and Maximus, and Romanus, and his
fellow Soldiers show, that some under Julian, were as ambitious of the Crown
of Martyrdom, as the Elder Christians, who sought it by voluntary Confession,
and provoked their Pagan Rulers to persecute them with the utmost Cruelty. Mr.
I. it seems, thinks them too free of their Passive Throats, and if they were so
fond of Martyrdom, they might even as well have hanged, and drowned themselves,
and saved their Persecutors the trouble. I know not what he can mean else by
reviving the Sarcasm of a Pagan, Bloody Persecutor, Apud Tertull. ad Scap. c.
4. (...).
Arrius Antoninus, who thus reproached voluntary Confession with the desire of
Martyrdom. Were there no Halters, or Precipices in the Roman Empire? P. 161.
Mr. I. buckles closer to his work, and pretends accurately to state the Case of
Passive Obedience, and says, he and Iovian are perfectly agreed, 1. That the
King's Person is sacred, and Inviolable. 2. That Inferior Magistracy acting by
the King's Authority, according to Law, may not be resisted.

I am glad to see that the peevish humor has somewhat spent it self, and that
he can agree with his Adversary in any thing. I presume when he says, that the
King's Person is Sacred and Inviolable, he means by those fine words, he may
not be resisted: and if so, it may deserve considering, how well he agrees with
himself. For in his former Book he quoted a shrewd saying of a worthy Person,
Iul. p. 88.
That one single Arm unresisted may go a great way in massacring a Nation.
Every one knows whose single Arm is meant, and no Man who praises that saying
can agree, that the King's Person may not be resisted.

How fairly he states the difference between himself and Iovian, In the First
Letter.
I have in some measure shown already: Impartial Readers, though but of an
ordinary Capacity, who will be at the pains to compare the Book with this
Answer, may observe, without my help, that a great part thereof is employed in
confuting his own slanderous Fictions. For where does Iovian assert any of the
things imposed upon him, as that by the Imperial Laws, a Popish Prince may send
Forces to murder his Liege People? Answ. p. 162, 163. 164, 166. p. 169, 181,
etc.
That a Sovereign can Authorize his Forces to do any Act of Illegal Violence?
Where does he give the King Boundless Power? Or the whole Legislative Power? I
am sure Mr. I. can show no such Assertions in the Book he pretends to Answer.
And therefore how unconscionably does he abuse both his Adversary and his
Reader for almost forty pages together? And how impertinently does he swagger
with Citations out of Bracton, the Miroir, Fortescue, Judge Ienkins, and King
Charles the First, of Blessed Memory, to disprove what Iovian no where affirms?

It would indeed have signified something, could he have produced but one clear
Passage out of all those Authors in which any of them declares it lawful for
Subjects to raise but a single Regiment, or Troop, to resist Forces legally
Commissioned even in illegal, and uncommissionated Acts of Violence. And till
he can at least show this in our Law Books, he has no right to call Mr. Dean a
Proteus of Passive Obedience, or reproach him as not consistent with himself.
It is no Contradiction to allow Subjects the Liberty of Private Resistance,
when illegal Violence is offerred to them, and yet to deny them Power to raise
Forces, and to wage a Defensive War against those, who, as Mr. I. maliciously
supposes, will murder in Troops. I hope he will not be so hardy as to say,
that a single Captain can be made, or that one private Soldier can be listed
according to our Laws, without Their Majesty's Commission, or that in their
Realms and Dominions, and besides Their Majesty's is vested with Legal
Authority to grant Commissions to levy Forces. Though the Laws secure men's Lives
and Properties, against Arbitrary Power, yet they do it not by giving Subjects
the Power of the Sword.

By this you may see, Sir, how mean Judges your Neighbors are, who discern not
how gross a Fallacy Mr. I. puts upon them, when he insinuates, that his
Adversary is so senseless as to allow. That it is lawful to resist a single
Cutthroat, and yet makes it a damnable sin to resist Cutthroats, Answ. p. 163.
169.
as also to hold "that the Sovereign can Authorize Forces, and great Numbers,
though he cannot single Persons, to do Acts of illegal Violence.

Sir, you know the Author of Iovian, is as far as Mr. Johnson himself from
believing that Numbers are Sacred, or can Legitimate Oppression; or that the
Sovereign can give a Valid Commission to his Forces to outrage, or Murder his
Liege People, and render them unaccountable for such Acts of Violence. He no
where denies Subjects the Liberty of making a Legal Defense against any number
of Thieves, and Cutthroats how great soever, and by whomsoever Commissioned.
Nor does he in the least insinuate that the damnableness of resisting lies in
that they are Forces. But he makes it to consist in raising Forces without
lawful Authority to resist with, and in defending themselves in such a manner
as casts off Subjection, and is a manifest, and dangerous Usurpation upon the
Legal Rights of an English Sovereign. He makes that Law the measure of the
Subjects Power as well as of the Kings, and this it seems is his great Crime.

If Subjects be allowed to defend themselves at discretion, the King must hold
his Crown but during pleasure. Some of Mr. Iohnson's Friends, will complain,
that their Throats are in danger, and will never think them safe till they have
the King's Throat in their Power. They have made so good advantage formerly of
what he calls Legal Defense against the Vnauthoriz'd Illegal Violence of
Subjects, that I do not wonder that they would fain be at the same Trade again.
But I cannot forget that they held the King's Person as Sacred as Mr. Johnson
does, and were as clamorous Zealots for Religion, and Property, who
notwithstanding brought their Majesty's Royal Grandfather to the Block,
subverted the Ancient, and Excellent Constitution of this Noble Realm both in
Church and State, and enslaved the whole Nation.

Neither you nor I can have while to entertain our selves with so diverting a
Spectacle as Mr. Iohnson's Triumphs over an Adversary of Straw of his own
making, and therefore leaving him for some time at that Sport by himself,
bateing a few strictures here and there, I shall say little till I meet him p.
201.

Among several things worthy of Censure, the first I shall note, is the rude
treatment of a very Eminent Protestant Writer, p. 165.
where having impertinently cited two passages out of Bracton, and K. Edwards,
Laws, for they contradict nothing in Iovian, he concludes in these words. These
I hope are better Authorities in this matter, than Sam. Bochart, our Author's
French Oracles, etc. Certainly, Mr. I. is the first man who ever mentioned that
great Name without some Addition of Respect, not to say with scorn and
contempt. And that Epistle, which he so much vilifies, has ever been in great
Esteem with all sorts of men. It is in effect an Apologetick Declaration of the
whole Protestant French-Church, professing their just abhorrence of the great
Rebellion, which ended in the most execrable Murder of the King. In a word,
the Memory of Mr. Bochart will ever be precious whilst the world pretends to
retain any degree of Honor for eminent Piety and Learning.

In the next page he charge Mr. Dean with attributing to the Sovereign the
whole Legislative Power, P. 166.
and by his answer, it is plain he accuses him of giving the Kings of England
that vast Power. I marvel how Mr. I. has disposed of his Conscience, if he
ever had any, or with what face he can obtrude so gross a slander.

It is very evident that no such thing can be intended in the place he refers
to. For, 1. Mr. Dean is speaking of All proper, and complete Sovereigns, as
well States, as Monarchs, and not in particular of our Kings.

2. He does not ascribe to such Sovereigns the Whole Legislative Power. The
word Whole is added by Mr. I. who could not otherwise have found any thing to
cavil at.

3. In those words which respect an English Sovereign, he ascribes no more to
him, than the influence of a principal Efficient, viz. to give our Laws their
last form, to give life and soul to Bills prepared by others. And who dares
deny that the Royal Assent gives those Bills which pass both Houses, the Name,
Essence, and Authority of Laws, and that they are, P. 202.
as Iovian speaks, but a dead Letter without it. How honestly Mr. I. calls this
giving the Sovereign the whole Legislative Power, I need not observe for you.

P. 171. Mr. I. will needs have Iovian to have founded his distinction of
Imperial, and Political Laws, upon a perverted passage of Fortescue, who
distinguishes Dominion into Imperial, and Political, and mixed of both. But if
he would have pleased to consider the Book, he pretends to Answer, he might
easily have observed it, that his Adversary framed that distinction upon quite
another ground, and uses the Terms in a sense, far different. For as our most
eminent Lawyers, and the Laws themselves call this Realm an Empire, and the
Crown an Imperial Crown, and the King an Imperial Sovereign, See them cited by
Iov. p. 208, and 209.
that is as Sir Orlando Bridgman, and Mr. Dean, both expound the Term, a Free
Independent, and Vnconditional Sovereign: so the Laws which secure the Rights
of the Sovereign are aptly by him called Imperial Laws. And Archbishop Cranmer
cited in Iovian, uses the Term, though not precisely in this sense, to signify
those Laws of the Realm which secure the Royal Prerogative against the
Usurpations of the Pope.

But neither Mr. Dean, nor Sir O. Bridgman ever intended hereby to give the
King Imperial Power, ( i. e.) Absolute, and Arbitrary Power, but both declare
the contrary. I will cite the words of the latter. It is one thing to have an
Imperial Crown, and another to govern absolutely. What is an Imperial Crown?
Trial Regis in 4 to. p. 11, 12.
It is that which as to the coercive part is subject to no man under God. The
King of Poland has a Crown, but what is it? At his Coronation it is
conditioned with the People, That if he shall not govern them according to such
Rules, they shall be freed from their Homage and Allegiance; But the Crown of
England is, and always was, an Imperial Crown, and so sworn -- not subject to
any Humane Tribunal, or Judicature whatsoever. God forbid I should intend any
Absolute Government by this, etc.

In like manner Mr. Dea^ making all such Princes as the King of Poland, not to
be Proper, Complete, and Imperial Sovereigns, tells you what he means by an
Imperial Sovereign, Iov. p. 209.
viz One who is supreme in his Dominions, next under God, who has full,
perfect, and entire Jurisdiction from God alone, and all others in his
Dominions, by Emanation from him. But though he asserts the Kings of this Realm
to be true, proper, and Imperial Sovereigns, yet he is as far as Mr^ I. from
asserting an Arbitrary, and boundless Power in them. For he at the same time
declares, that to be Arbitrary is no way of the Essence of an Imperial
Sovereign, and though after Sir Edw. Cook he cites the Titles of Edgar, and
Edward, it is not to prove, that the Saxon Kings were Arbitrary, and Absolute;
but to show, that they were Complete, Unconditional, and Independent
Sovereigns, the Natural Consequence of which is, that they are unaccountable,
free from Coercion, of force, and not to be resisted.

Therefore Mr. I. needed not to have taken all that pains he has done, p. 183.
to prove it Nonsense to say, that Boundless Power may be limited in the
Exercise. His Adversary says nothing like it. But only asserts, that a King
under the Direction of Laws, may nevertheless be a proper^ Complete, and
Imperial Sovereign. And his Illustration of the matter, by the similitude of a
Fountain, is clear and apposite, and what nobody but Mr. I. will deride. The
Essence of Sovereign Power is not destroyed or changed by this limitation it
receives from Concessions, and Civil Contracts, though the extent of it may be
somewhat lessened. It is still Supreme, Unconditional, and Independent, and the
Prince who enjoys it, though he be bound in Conscience to govern according to
such Laws, and Compacts, yet may not be called to an account, or punished by
any (save God his only Superior) for violating those Laws, and transgressing
the Legal Bounds of his Power.

His Answer to Mr. Dean's other Illustration of the Point, viz. That being
confined in the Exercise, does not destroy the Perfection of Sovereign Power,
because then the Power of God himself could not be Sovereign, etc. is not at
all satisfactory. I confess what he says would be pertinent, and considerable,
if God were confined only from such things as are evil in themselves, and
therefore inconsistent with the Perfection of the Divine Nature. But we all
know, that the free Counsels of his own Will, have set such bounds to the
Exercise of his Almighty Power, as render many things neither impossible in
themselves, nor yet repugnant, either to the Wisdom, Holiness, or Goodness of
God, impossible for him to do. For Example, No Man will presume to deny, That
God, if he had so pleased, might have left fallen Man to have perished without a
Savior, and that without the least impeachment of his Wisdom, Justice, or
Goodness. And yet God having determined, and declared, that he will save all
that believe in Jesus Christ, it is impossible for him to suffer all Mankind to
perish. If Mr. I. please to consult the old Schoolman, whom Fortescue cites as
the Author de Regimine Principum, Aquin. ^um. Theol. p. 1 q 25 art. 5. ad. 1.
^ecundum potentiam absolutam, and de potentia ordinata. Vid. Estium. in l 1.
sent. did. 43.. 2^
He will find a Distinction of God's Power into Absolute Power, by which God
can do every thing which implies no contradiction in it self, or imperfection
in him, and Ordinate Power by which he can do nothing but what is agreeable to
the Counsels of his own w^^l This distinction plainly shows, that being limited
in things implying neither Contradiction in themselves, nor defect in God, is
no impeachment of the Truth, or perfection of God's Sovereignty, and therefore
being limited by Rules of Government; does not destroy the Essence of Humane
Sovereign Authority. Princes cease not to be Supreme in their Dominions, by
reason of their Concessions, and submitting their Government to the Regulation
of Political Laws^ even as God cease not to be the Supreme Governor of the
World^ by reason of his Gracious Purposes, and Promises revealed in Holy
Scripture, though ^t be impossible for him to act any way contrary to those
Declarations.

The twelfth Chapter of Iovian, wherein the Author shows, what security
Subjects have of their Lives, Properties, and Religion, under a Popish Prince,
notwithstanding the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, is a rational, grave and pious
Discourse, and deserves to be considered after another fashion than Mr. I. has
done. He was pleased to droll it off Answ. p. 197, 198.
, but whosoever shall with sobriety, and a mind void of prejudice, weigh what
has been said on both sides, will find a better sort of reasoning, a better
Spirit, and a deeper sense of Religion in Iovian's Discourse than appears in
this Answer.

It is certain, that an Absolute Security against Rebellion on the one hand, or
against Arbitrary Government, and Oppression on the other, neither Prince nor
People must expect. For this cannot be had, till either the People be so
effectually enslaved, as to render them as little able to serve, and assist
their Prince, as they are to disturb and dethrone him; or till the Prince has
so little Power left him, that he will be equally unable, either to protect, or
oppress his Subjects. And in such a state, both King and People will be in a
most desperate condition. So that whether the one or other compass their ends
for the present, and obtain that absolute security which they affected, they
will enjoy it but a little while; for both will inevitably hereby become the
Subjects of Foreign Tyranny and Oppression.

A Moral security therefore must ^erve the turn, and both Prince and People
must acquiesce therein, and trust each other with such a measure of Power, as
if abused, may be of very ill consequence. But vain and unreasonable Fears on
either part, must not be regarded, or provided against. If what he says be not
satisfactory to some of Mr. I's Friends, we are the less to wonder, seeing some
of them profess to think, that God has not given so satisfactory an assurance
of his own Being, and Providence, and of the Truth and Authority of the Holy
Scriptures, of the last Judgment, and a future State of Rewards and
Punishments, as they expect.

All Men confess, that the measures of the Jesuits, who during the last Reign,
had too great an Influence on Public Affairs, are utterly unaccountable. And
the Credit that Order had with King James, carried him to Undertakings as
contrary to his own Interest, as to those of the Nation, and by consequence a
Regard to his own Honor and Safety, did not prove so effectual a Restraint
from Arbitrary Proceedings, as the Author of Iovian hoped, and all wise Men
reasonably expected. Yet Experience has however confirmed the Opinion of
Iovian, and in violent Undertakings, far short of the Cruelty of Massacres, all
good men did withdraw from the service of that Unfortunate Prince, and many bad
men durst not serve him. As for those few who did, they are likely to suffer
exemplary Punishment according to their Demerit.

I am now come to see how justly Mr. I. charge his Adversary with raising
Cavils against matter of Fact, page 157. and 201.

He begins with Mr. Dean's Discourse about Iuventinus and Maximus, which he
makes to be a whole Heap of Falsifications. Perhaps the Falsification lies in
not mentioning the precise words in Theodoret, to which Mr. I. refers, Thou
have delivered us to an Unrighteous King, and such an Apostate as is not again
upon the ^ace of the Earth. Now who knew them till Mr. I. in this Answer
vouchsafed to tell what the words were? In his first Book he cited no words,
and refers to St. Chrysostom's Homily on their Anniversary; is it a
Falsification that Iovian does not insert this passage of Theodoret into their
Speech, as St. Chrysostom relates it? This were very hard. Mr. Dean had no
Interest to conceal their words, nor do I see any great advantage Mr. I. can
make of them. Do they prove that Iuventinus, and Maximus would have been for a
Bill of Exclusion, had they lived in our days? Or that they would have rebelled
in defense of their Religion? There is nothing in them which founds that way.
Whoever reads these Speeches as rendered from Chrysostom in Iovian, or^ the
Story as Mr. I. himself relates it ou^ of Theo^oret, will find the Primitive
Passive Spirit the Faith and Patience of the Ancient Saints in these two
Christian Captains^ the same Ambition to be crowned with Martyrdom, and that
Iovian commits no falsification when he tells us that their sayings sound like
the Speeches of Mauritius and Exuperius, in the Theb^an Legion.

The same Spirit appear^ng in those Soldiers who had been trapann'd into
Sacrificing, gave Mr. Dean occasion to say that Iuventinus, and Maximus with
these Soldiers should be his Thundering Legion for the future. Now, what Mr. I.
replies, is a shameful childish Cavil, which any School Boy who had once read
Butler's Rhetoric, is able to see through, and would deride. He would easily
comprehend the true sense of so common a Figure, and understand that Iovian
never intended to muster them for a complete Legion, or represent them as a
force able to have beaten Iulian's whole Army, but only to show that they had
the same Passive Braver^ with the Thebaean Legion, the same Zeal for Christ,
and forwardness to lay down their Lives for his Religion, had the Apostate put
them to it, and though they had been a full Legion, nay, eleven Legions to one,
they would have died like them, with their Swords in their Scabbards, and not
have drawn them in defense of their lives against this Lawless, Apostate
Persecutor. Thus the fallacy lies at Mr I's own door.

His next quarrel with Iovian is, for shuffling with the Stories of Maris
Bishop of Chalcedon, p. 203.
the Nobleman of Beraea, and Publica. By Mr. I's favor, a direct Answer is not
shuffling, and such an Answer he has received. Mr. Dean tells him, that these
Stories are impertinently alleged, and will not make out his Hypothesis: That
Julian was worse used than former Pagan Emperors, because he persecuted
contrary to Law.

The Author of Iovian shows that there was nothing singular in these
stories; that elder times had many Instances, some of which he m^ntions,
wherein the Martyrs and Confessors used no less Heroic Freedom of speech
before other Pagan Emperors and Magistrates. As for Maris, he adds, that if
there be any thing singular in his case, it ought not to be drawn into example,
because he was an ill Man, a persecuting Arrian Zealot, which he has proved by
unanswerable Testimonies, to which Mr. I. replies not one word; but slides
away, leaving behind him an uncharitable Surmise; for it was no more when he
wrote it, but it is now improved into an impudent and malicious Slander, by the
Publication, after that his Learned Adversary has given so many and ample
Proofs of a sincere Zeal against Popery, not a jot less fervent, and abundantly
more Regular and Useful than his own

His Reflection on what is said touching the Antiochian Psalms, is a mixture of
Scurrility and Profaneness dressed to the gust of his Admirers. I am sure Men
of Sense and Sobriety will think never the better of him for his rude Sarcasm,
nor the worse of Iovian for expounding that passage of the Palmist Psalm. 97. 7.
in a milder sense than he likes. Mr. D. followed good Versions and Authors
herein. Dr. Patrick had paraphrased it thus, Which may well make them all
ashamed (and they shall be confounded by him if they will not renounce their
Errors) who worship graven Images. Certainly the Phrase has a milder
acceptance than breaking of bones, in many places of the Psalms, as in Ps. 83.
16. Fill their Faces with shame that they may seek thy Name, O Lord; otherwise
that Learned Expositor is frequently mistaken, particularly on Psalm. 25. and
71. which Mr. I. has expounded in Burlesque to abuse his Adversary.

Be it as it will, I am sure that Man acts more like a good Christian and
Casuist, who makes the best of the doubtful Actions of the Primitive
Christians, than he who represents them in the worst Colors, and at the same
time proposes them for Patterns.

In the same page Mr. I. complains that he is not permitted to call the joint
Prayers of Gregory and his Church of Nazianzum, their Prayers; and that the
Practice of the purest Church of that Age, must not pass for the practice of
the Church. But the Question still remains unanswered. What is the Practice of
Old Gregory and his Church to all the Churches of the Empire?

If Mr. Dean were too severe when he charged Mr. I. with wilful Blindness for
saying that he could not find one single Wish for Iulian's Conversion among the
Ancients, the Censure is now become Just, since he refuses to see one when
it is shown him. Sozomen's Sozom^ l. 6. c. 2. (...).
words are these, Didymus upon the Emperor's Apostasy in Religion, being
extremely grieved both for him [Julian] who was in a grievous Error, and also
for the Church's Affliction, fasted, and made supplications to God^ on that
Account. Here it is very evident, that Didymus was grieved and concerned, not
only for the Church's Sufferings, but also for Iulian's Error; and that he made
supplication to God as well for Julian as for the Church. Now what can we
imagine that he should ask of God, with respect to Julian, for whose Error he
was grieved, but his Conversion and Return to the True Religion.

By this it appears that Mr. Dean has given the true sense of the Greek cited
at large in the Margin, he was not bound to give a literal Translation. I
wonder Mr. I. is not ashamed here to accuse him of forging and foisting in
words at pleasure, as he had charged him before with Falsifications; nay, a
whole heap of them without being able to as^ign one single fraud. He might as
well have accused him of Bulglary, or Horse-stealing, and he has equal
Evidence for them, and a pack of Readers prepared to swallow any Calumny.

I acknowledge that it was the Historian's design in this Chapter to show that
Iulian's destruction was from God, for laying waste his Church, and that
account of the Prayers of Didymus for the Apostate's Conversion, dropped from him
on the by; we should never have heard of them, but for the miraculous
Revelation of Iulian's Death. But this does not impeach its Truth, nay, it is a
fair ground to believe, notwithstanding the silence of Historians, that many
other Christians did the same.

However, I can by no means grant that the miraculous Answer to his Prayer was
a strong Proof that Didymus prayed for Iulian's destruction, or that his
breaking Fast upon the News, gives the least support to the conceit. The
express words of Sozomen^ show the contrary: And the miraculous Revelation
proves no more than the Historian designed, viz. That he fell by the just
Judgment of God for making havoc of his Church. (...).
Didymus had the Answer of his Prayers in the Churches Deliverance, which God
if he had seen meet, was able to have accomplished by Iulian's Conversion, as
easily as by his Death, and his breaking Fast upon the News, only shows his
firm belief that the Dream was Divine, and the Revelation true. The occasion of
his Fasting was now over, God had delivered his Church, and Julian was
incapable of receiving benefit by his Prayers. Mr. I. might as reasonably have
concluded that David fasted and prayed for the Destruction of his Child,
because as soon as he heard he was dead, he called for meat, and fell to eating.

Page 208. I perceive that Mr. I. is very loath to quit the honor of his
notable discovery, that Julian narrowly escaped a kicking from old Gregory, though
he be not able to answer any one of Iovian's proofs of the vanity of that
conceit. Yet he stands in it, that the words of Gregory will bear no other
sense.

1. He says it was Julian in person, and not the Captain of Archers, for Elias
Cretensis expounds (...) by ille impius: I grant it, but then neither Elias,
nor Billius, ever dreamt that Julian led those Soldiers to Nazianzum, Elias
Cretensis quos impius ille adversus Ecclesias concitabat. Naz. To. 2. Col 747.
Billius Tom. 1. p. 307. quos in Ecclesias nostros immiserat.
but say only he sent them against that and other Churches^ And probably the
Greek Elias Cretensis, and some other MSS. of Nazianzen read in this place
(...), and not (...), and so the Transubstantiation Soloecism is avoided. But
trusty Mr. I. conceals this which is really a fraud, and falsifieth the Author^
whose Testimony he produces.

2. Whereas Iovian says it could not be Julian but the Captain, because he
came (...) with Orders. Mr. I. says, the Greek words are falsely rendered with
the Emperor's Orders, and that they signify in an Imperious way. I believe
Billius was not of his mind, but by pro imperio and jussis meant according to
his Orders, and instructions. I doubt not in the least but by (...) Gregory
meant the Edict for demolishing Christian Churches, which in all probability
the Officer carried with him. The Emperors Edicts are commonly styled (...).
So Julian calls his own Epist. 52. p. 213. (...).
Edicts. So they are styled by l. 5. c. 10 (...). Item c. 15. bis.
Sozomen frequently, and by (...), p. 74. (...). p. 86.
Nazianzen himself, in this Invective, where this particular Edict for
demolishing of Churches is so called. This is a much more natural and easy
sense of the words than that which Mr. I. would force upon them. Lastly,
whereas Iovian shows, out of Phavorinus, that (...) signifies to suffer, and
(...) implies the Feet to be the Subject hurt, not the Instrument offering that
Violence, of which Mr. I. will have the Apostate in danger, and so renders the
words, though he was ill of his Feet. Mr. I. takes occasion to despise his
Adversary's Grecianship, and will not take notice that Mr. Dean was not the
first who took the words in that sense, but follows Bilibaldus Perkeymer, a
great Master in the Greek, and Restorer of Learning, who had thus rendered the
words above an hundred years before Mr. Dean was born. Nor is it at all
necessary that (...) should signify being beaten with a Club on the soles of
the Feet, as Mr. I. drollingly insinuates. Being foundred, or foot-sore with a
hard March, may far more easily be reconciled with Elias Cretensis, who renders
it pedibus contusus, than his device of drubbing.

Thus you see, Sir, that here is no evidence of Iulian's being at Nazianzum, or
receiving any affront, in Person, from the old Bishop, nor yet of his imminent
danger of being kicked, which he escaped by a seasonable retreat. Were it either
necessary or worth while, I am confident a Man might, from Ammianus
Marcellinus, and the date of his Edicts in the Theodosian Code, give such an
account of Iulian's Residence from his leaving Constantinople, till he left
Antioch to march against the Persians, as would prove it scarce possible for
Julian to have been in person at Nazianzum. We have no account that Julian with
all his Zeal against Christianity ever went in person to see this Edict put in
Execution, and there is no reason to doubt, but if he had done it, Nazianzen,
who omits no circumstance that may aggravate Iulian's Crimes, and the
Historians would have recorded it, as an instance of his devilish Spite against
Christ Jesus.

In the next page, he tells us, that his Adversary's Inconsistencies and
Contradictions, would fill a Book. If he had such choice, Mr. I. was much to
blame, that he did not pick out more evident and palpable Instances of it, than
those two he produces. I cannot see that inconsistence in them he pretends.

The Roman Empire, he says, was Elective. Well! What then? Julius Caesar left
no Sons, Yet p. 9. It was decreed by the Senate to Julius Caesar, and the Sons
of his Body.
but died, and the Monarchy with him. For Octavius did not take the Empire upon
him till long after Caesar's death, he did not as an Adopted Son, claim it by
Hereditary Right in Virtue of that Decree, which no Author but Dio ever
mentions. And this Decree, if ever it had the force of a Law, was abrogated by
contrary Usage, being never put in Execution, or so much as once mentioned in
the long Succession of Emperors down to Julian.

The other Instance has as little of Contradiction in it.

Iovian, p. 222. Condemns this Principle as Atheistical and Illegal here in
England. That all Power is radically in the People, and that the King is their
Minister, and not God's.
Yet page 240. he acknowledges, That in SPARTA the King had not the Sovereign
Power, which was Radically, and Originally in the People. And again, that the
Magistrates in Switzerland derive their Power from the People.

I am not able to discern the Contradiction he talks of. All Power is not
Radically in the People. i. e. The People have not the Sovereign Power in all
Nations. In England they have not, in Spain and France, they have it not. But
in Sparta they had, and in Switzerland they have it. Ay, but he calls this
principle Atheistical, and what is Atheism in one Country is so all the World
over: True. But Mr. I. now and then, meets with Gentlemen, who so assert All
Power to be radically in the People, as to give St. Paul the lie, and make
Government to be no Divine Institution, but a pure Humane Invention, and with
respect to them Iovian calls this Principle Atheistical as may appear by the
latter Assertion added to explain the former, that the King is their [ viz. the
People's] Minister, and not GOD's. This Mr. I. fraudulently omitted. These are
notoriously the sentiments of most of our English Republicans, and they are
Atheistical every where as well in Popular Governments as in Monarchies. And it
would be no less Atheistical to assert that All Power is radically and
originally in the King, so as to exclude its derivation from God.

But if the consistency of the propositions be only cons^d^red, the bare
denial. That all Power is radically in the People^ does not infer that
Sovereign Power is no where in the People. The opposition of Mr. Dean's two
propositions set at variance by Mr. I. is neither contradictory, nor contrary,
but what the Logicians call Sub-contrary concerning which every Freshman has
learnt this Rule, that such propositions are consistent, and may be both true
together. But Mr. I. is a happy man, he has so candid Readers that they will
overlook the greatest mistakes in Logic, History, Law, or any thing else, that
he can either ignorantly, or wilfully commit.

The King's recommendation of Mr. Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, does not make
the Author infallible, nor yet imply his Majesty's Assent to every Proposition
in that Excellent Work. I am sure the passage he cites could never obtain his
Majesty's Approbation. Vid. Christ. Directory, part 4. page 10, 11.
And Mr. Baxter, who cannot be supposed to have any design to advance Arbitrary
Government, has at large solidly confuted Mr. Hooker's notion. Though when
All Is done, what Mr. I. cites out of Mr. Hooker, is nothing like the
Propositions condemned in Iovian. He does not make the King the People's
Minister, nor does he allow them to resume the Power, which by mistake he
supposes to have been once derived from them, or any way else favor the
Doctrine of Resistance.

The last matter of Fact is, Simson's Case, who killed the Pursuivant. Mr. Dean
accuses Mr. I. with the fraudulent concealing, that according to Brownlow it
was found Homicide, or Manslaughter; and Mr. I. with most wonderful scorn,
replieth, That Brownlow's Reports were writ for those? who understood the word
Homicide, which among, other things is Chance Medley, or se defendendo. I
confess the word Homicide, as a common genus includes them, and so it does
Murder also, yet by Mr. I's leave in Verdicts, and (where Jurors doubt) in the
Opinions of Judges, it must have a more strict Notion, and imports
Manslaughter in the Law-sense, as it is opposed to all other kinds of Homicide.
So that this scurrilous ^lout^, is an unjust as well as a rude Reflection.

But sure Mr. I. made this Answer without ever looking into Brownlow, who does
not use the word Homicide, but says it was found Manslaughter. Homicide in
Iovian was added as a synonymous Term, by Mr. Dean, on the Authority of Judge
Crook, cited in the Margin. So that Mr. I. has no reason to insult, or yet to
enter a Caveat against the forfeiture of his Integrity, by another Man's
ignorance; I very much fear that it is already forfeited, and for faults not so
pardonable as Ignorance.

I find that the Lord Coke, in that report to which Mr. I. refers in this
Answer, says it was found se defendendo, and I shall not take upon me to
Umpire the matter between him and Brownlow. Nor do I think it necessary to
Apologize for Iovian's Ignorance of this Report, it being unreasonable to
expect that a Divine should be able to Cap Cases with the whole Post of
Republican Lawyers.

But admitting Lord Coke to be in the Right, Mr. Dean put a close Question,
which Mr. I. evades like a Jesuit, instead of answering. It Is whether he would
make the Law the adaequate rule of his Actions? The plain meaning of this
Question is, Whether a Man may with a good Conscience take the utmost liberties
of self-defence, which are out of the reach of the Law? Instead of an Honest,
and Categorical Answer he cites a Case out of Bishop Hall, quite of a different
nature, and insinuates, that the Law gives a Man less liberty of self-defence,
than he may honestly use. Now, Sir, he is a very mean Casuist, who knows not
that a Man may not with a safe Conscience do many things which will not bring
his Neck into danger, and that Tyburn is not the only way to Hell.

I need not tell you how great a Stranger I am to the Law Books, but my desire
to serve you in the only thing wherein you could need my help (the Examining of
Citations in Books you could not consult in the Country) obliged me to look
into Judge Crook's Reports, where I found a Case by accident much to the
purpose of Mr. Dean's Question.

Sir H. Ferrers Baronet, Crook's Rep. Part 3. p. 372.
being Arrested, some in his own Company killed a Bailiff, and Sir H. was
brought to a Trial. He pleaded that the Bailiff had no Authority to Arrest him,
because the Warrant was by the name of Sir H. F. Knight, and he was never
Knighted. It was held, by all the Court, that it was a variance in an Essential
part of Name, and they had no Authority to arrest Sir H. F. Baronet. So it was
an ill Warrant, and the Killing an Officer in the Execution of it, could not be
Murder.

Would Mr. I. take or approve taking advantage of a Misnomer, to kill a
Bailiff, and escape? If he durst take such a Liberty of Self-defence, he has
not that tender regard to Men's Lives which he professes; and if he durst not,
I wonder for what reason he cites Simson's Case. Such Ghostly Fathers as he,
are sometimes out in their Law, and encourage Men to exceed the Legal bounds of
Self-Defence, and so cheat Men out of their Lives as well as their Salvation.
But if they are not, you know, Sir, as well as I, that those are none of the
honestest, or safest Spiritual Guides, who teach Men how near to sin they may
adventure without danger, and having removed all rubs out of the way, send Men
to Hell with a quiet Conscience.

Sir, my readiness to oblige you has put me under a necessity of having too
much to do with a Casuist, of whom I now most joyfully take leave; and after
the performance of so ungrateful a task, in obedience to your Commands, I am
sure you can have no reason to doubt that I am,

May 6. 1689. Dear Sir, Your very faithful Servant.

FINIS.
BOOKS written by the Reverend Dr. Hicks, And Printed for Walter Kettilby.
JOvian, or, An Answer to Julian the Apostate. Octavo.

A Sermon, proving, That the strongest Temptations are conquerable by
Christians, Preached before the Lord Mayor, Ian. 14. 1676. on 1 Cor. x. 13.

The Spirit of Enthusiasm Ex^rcised, Preached at Oxford, on Act-Sunday, July
11. 1680. on 1 Cor. xii. 4.

Peculium Dei, Preached before the Lord Mayor, Feb. 6. 1680. on Romans ix. 4, 5.

The Notion of Persecution stated, on 2 Cor. iv. 9.

A Sermon before the Lord Mayor, Ian. 30. 1681. on Acts xvii. 7.

The Moral Shecinah, Preached at the Yorkshire-Feast, June 11. 1682. on 1 Cor.
x. 32.

A Spittle-Sermon, at St. Bridget's, April 1. 1684. on Heb. xiii. 16.

A Sermon, May 29. 1684. at Worcester, on Psalm. xiv. 7.

The Harmony of Divinity and Law, in a Discourse about not resisting of
Sovereign Princes. Quarto.

Speculum B. Virginis, A Discourse of the ^ue Praise and Honor of the Blessed
Virgin. Quarto.

An Apologetical Vindication of the Church of England, in Answer to those who
reproach her with the English Heresies and Schisms, or suspect her not to be a
Catholic Church, upon their Account.

The Spirit of Popery speaking out of the Mouths of Fanatical Protestants; or
the la^^ Speeches of Mr. John Kid and Mr. John King, two Presbyterian
Ministers, who were executed for High Treason and Rebellion at Edinburgh,
August the 14 t^. 1679. with Animadversions, and the History of the Archbishop
of S. Andrews his Murder, extracted out of the Registers of the Privy Council,
etc.

Ravillac Redivivus: being a Narrative of the late Trial of Mr. James Mitchel,
a Conventicle-Preacher; who was executed the 18 th. of January 1677. for an
attempt which he made on the sacred Person of the Archbishop of S. Andrews. To
which is annexed, an account of the Trial of that most wicked Pharisee, Major
Thomas Weir, who was executed for Adultery, Incest and Bestiality. In which are
many observable Passages, especially relating to the Church and State of
Scotland.


