A SERMON Preached before the KING AT KENSINGTON, SUNDAY, Jan. 20. 1695.

By GEO. HOOPER, Dean of Canterbury, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCV.

A SERMON Preached before the KING.
1 John iii. 20. If our Heart condemn us, God is greater than our Heart --


THE words of the Text are introduced upon the subject of Charity and Love to
our Brethren, the Argument so much recommended through the whole Epistle, by
the Loving and most Beloved Apostle. What occasion the Disciples had given for
the Discourse, or wherein they had offended, St. John in the same Spirit of
Charity conceals: not exposing the particulars to common notice; but referring
the inquiry to their private thoughts, and leaving the prosecution to their own
hearts: adding only this necessary intimation, That if upon the examination
they found themselves innocent, they might then appear before God with
confidence, assured of his Favor; but if they were conscious to themselves of
any Sins they cherished, they were then to think that the same Observations
were made by the Almighty, and had nothing to expect but his Displeasure. For
if our Heart condemn us, God is greater than our Heart, and knows all things.

Where the Apostle we see proceeds from a double supposition: for in the same
insinuation, where these Christians are Accused, it is presumed too, that they
are not of reprobate profligate Minds; that they have retained Sense enough to
discern their faults, Ingenuity to acknowledge, and Justice to condemn them.
But why then, infers the Apostle, do they not forsake them? and what have they
to pretend before their Maker? They stand already convict, and pre-condemn'd by
themselves; and what have they to say in Arrest of Judgment? How shall they
escape the Condemnation of God? If our Heart condemn us, God is greater than
our Heart --

According to the tenor of these words, the Discourse which now begs your
Patience, is designed,

I. First, To consider the Supposition of St. John; And then, II. Secondly, To
reinforce his Conclusion.
I. First, The Supposition consists of Two Parts;

First, The Knowledge these Christians had of their Duties; And, Secondly,
Their Offense against it.
What the Measure of their Knowledge was, and what the Particulars of their
Offense, they themselves were to consider by the Direction of the Apostle: we
are neither informed about it, nor concerned. It may be enough for us to take
that for granted which we cannot deny; That, in general, Mankind is so knowing,
as to be sensible of a Duty; and so unhappy, as not to perform it: this may be
enough to confess with shame before Men and Angels, with fear and trembling
before our GOD.

And First, That Man is born obnoxious to some Duties, and is conscious to
himself of several Obligations bound upon him by Nature; This is a Principle so
well known, and universally owned, that no other of any the most certain
Science can pretend to a clearer light: the Notions of Equal and Unequal,
Straight and Crooked not being more easy and natural, than those of Just and
Unjust, Merit and Demerit: a Truth therefore not to be called in question by
the Attempt of a Proof, nor now to be insisted on for greater Evidence; but
only for the Weight that hangs upon it, and the great Consequences that attend
it.

For what we here suppose, amounts to no more than this: That as all Animals
have peculiar to them a Sense and Perception of what comes within their Sphere,
and is necessary for the Uses of their Life; as they distinguish by Taste,
Smell, and Sight, find some things grateful, others ungrateful, receiving their
Impressions with Pleasure and Pain; as they have such a Consciousness, which
attends not the Growth of Plants: So in Man, the Being of the next higher Rank,
there is a new Sense, if I may so speak, added, a farther Perception given, of
what is Just and Unjust, Decent and Indecent; A Sense not only of the Congruity
or Incongruity of Bodies to Bodies, of an Object to the Organ; but of our Will
to our Reason, of our Actions to our Rule, of our particular Designs to the
Design of humane Nature: and that such a Sense as this, like the other outward,
to be felt and not expressed, is not neither without its Satisfaction or
Dissatisfaction, its Pleasure or its Pain. That is; As the Eye, besides the
serviceable notice it gives us of the Figure and Countenance of Things, their
Magnitude and Parvitude, Distance and Approach; has in it too a pleasing
Perception of the beauty of Colors, and Symmetry of Proportion: and as the Ear
is made to give us an account of the motions and meetings of Bodies, in the
Effect or Signification of which we may be concerned; and has besides a
distinctive Notion of the Agreeableness or Disagreeableness of Sounds: in like
manner, the Reasonable Part of Man is not only endued with the Faculty of being
able to reflect and look back, to view and compare, to foresee and provide, so
to conduct our Actions in particular; but has in it too some sense of their
Suitableness or Unsuitableness to the common Intentions of its Being;
comprehends the difference of Good and Ill, Beneficence and Inhumanity,
Generosity and Ingratitude, Justice and Injustice, and is it self thence as
differently affected. For as a considering Man, after all Philosophical
Attempts to the contrary, cannot but acknowledge an intention and contrivance
in the Fabric of Plants and Animals, in the Nourishment and Growth of both, in
the Actions and Motions of the last, especially those toward the Production
and Preservation of their Young; those brute Creatures constantly pursuing the
original Intention by an orderly course, and well-manag'd conduct; seeming to
have a design of their own, but executing that of their Creator: So in us Men,
when our reason gives us a new Life above that of common Animals, we suppose it
brings along with it new dispositions and higher intentions; such as are those,
to live Sociably, to deal Justly, to relieve Charitably: to these things we Men
are orderly prompted, and gently inclined, by the frame of our Constitution, by
I know not what Spring, by some thing our Maker has put within us, which we
find to be there, but know not how to describe.

Such a Direction there is implanted within us by our Creator: neither matters
it much by what Physical Method it is wrought, whether it proceeds from Innate
Notions already formed, or from an Original Aptitude in us to form these
Notions our selves. As a Fowl of the Air no less Naturally builds its Nest,
whether it sets on the work from an Idea or Model before traced in the
imagination, or is stirred up to it regularly by a Mechanical Impulse. Whatever
Phrase we will choose to use, whether Nature has wrote these Laws Her self, or
Dictates them to be writ by us, the Law and Course of Humane Nature is still
the same: by that we are conscious to our selves we should guide our Actions,
and by that we judge them, our Thoughts Accusing or Excusing us. From that
ground there arises a Complacency and satisfaction in what we do well, in our
selves it is remembered with Delight, Applauded and Approved in others: thence
too is our Dislike of what is ill; it is Unseemly, Improper, Absurd, and
Odious, always in other Men, and not without difficulty connived at, and
dissembled at home.

For take from Man any concern of his own, set him out of the Commerce, and
disengage him from the Interest of the World; let him stand by but as an
Indifferent Spectator; and as he cannot forbear to commend what is Beautiful to
the Eye, or Harmonious to the Ear, so neither what is apt, and fit and suitable
to the Mind. He that shall be found Regular and Temperate, Just and Impartial,
Charitable and Beneficent, Contributing to the Good of the Universe, Grateful
to all, but with a peculiar duty to his Almighty Benefactor; must be supposed
to act Rightly and Commendably, according to the Law of his Creation, the
Delight and the Admiration of his kind. And he on the contrary that should
offend by Intemperance against the excellency of his own Nature, or by
Injustice, Unmercifulness or Cruelty against the Lives or Fortunes of other
Men; must be allowed to have acted Wrong, and Disorderly, unsuitably to the
intent of his nature, and design of his Maker; a disagreeable sight; unworthy
of the Favor of his God, and obnoxious to his Displeasure.

With such a notion of good and ill are the Characters of Men in story
transmitted and received, and the Bad censured often by those that are not
Better. So true generally and free is our judgment concerning the actions of
others, though perverted or restrained at our own. But this natural sense of
Good and Ill never shows it self more certainly than when we come to suffer the
Cruelty or Injustice our selves, then we quickly find a Law of Nature, and
understand the difference of right and wrong; then we speak it out loudly and
sensibly; appeal to the World for the unworthiness and unreasonableness of the
action; and expect it should be condemned by the rest of Men.

This is our apprehension concerning the Actions of others; and for the most
part too we fail not to have the same sense of our own. Our Thoughts cannot be
brought always to favor us, and Nature will speak its Mind: in its Checks and
Dissents before the fact, in its Regrets and Remorses after. Or if our youthful
Passions prevail, give no time to consider, and hurry on; yet when the fury and
heat is over, and we can think; or adversity put us to a stand, and we begin to
look back; our sense of Good and Ill returns to us, and we see behind us the
crooked Errors of our ways. Then when at a distance, and in our temperate
thoughts we review our Actions; as an Artist examines his Work, or a Writer
revises his Composition, we easily espy our Faults, come upon them as
strangers, and censure them with an impartial eye. But if any one has not yet
given himself this leisure, always in haste, or in a perpetual heat; yet a
fatal stop will come, and a cooler time: then the fumes will be evaporated; and
the forced thoughts, we have lived with, give place to those of Nature. Man,
when he comes to own his Mortality in earnest, will acknowledge too the other
Conditions of his Being: and when he is brought to pay his last Debt, confess
the rest of his Obligations: going to obey the Will of his God now, and O that
he had complied before! Think then, says Epicurus, of the Pleasures you
formerly enjoyed: let him think of them then, if he can, without regret: but it
would be happier much to have good Actions to think of; then he might look back
with joy, and go on with assurance.

Such, certainly, is the sense of Mankind, generally speaking, upon the first
opportunities naturally arising in us, in our maturest Age, in our freest,
soberest and least suspected hours: follow Man into his Retirement and see,
whether these are not the Notions of his undisturbed recollected Thoughts: Go
to his Deathbed and ask him, see what he thinks there; hearken how he counsels
his Friends, and directs his Relations.

There is therefore for such a moral sense of humane Nature, all the moral
evidence that can be expected: it admitting not of more Proof, because it needs
it not; as we urge not Arguments to evince that Men see or hear, and believe it
to be true, notwithstanding what may be pretended by the wittiest of the blind
or the deaf. For in such Subjects as these the wonder is not, that Proof cannot
be given, but that it should be demanded: it being enough that we have for its
Truth, the general Attestation of Mankind in all Ages and Places, added to our
own private Experience.

Neither is this common Opinion and universal Consent to be imputed to the
Policy of Lawgivers, the Contrivance of Princes or Priests. For some Writers
of Politics have favored the Truth but little; neither has Atheism always
been made the secret it is sometimes called. The Doctrine of private Profit and
Pleasure is not so difficult to comprehend, but that the Commonalty might learn
it well; nor has it wanted it Apostles so, but that it has been very faithfully
spread, and diligently recommended: It might have been quickly received too,
had it been found as true, as it is easy and tempting; could the private
Judgment and natural Apprehension of Man have been brought to consent, it would
long ago have been the Catholic Doctrine, not continued a Paradox, not given
its Abettors the Pleasure of Singularity. Those too that publish these Notions
of Virtue and Vice, Punishment and Reward hereafter, give them not Authority,
but receive it from them: from the Credit of such Truths it is that we are
recommended to the People; who when they hear of these Dictates of Nature,
believe only what they feel, and assent to nothing but what they know.

However we are not to expect, that this Supposition should pass without
contradiction; for what is that Truth which has not been disputed? This
therefore too, we may confess without any derogation to it, has been denied by
two sorts of Men:

The One, who find this Notion of Good and Ill working within them, but own it
not, esteem it a piece of weakness to confess their fears, and out of false
bravery defy and tremble; these argue against themselves, and their words are
condemned by their hearts.

The other may seem more Ingenuous, who have made themselves as insensible as
they pretend, and are in some measure to be believed for the Ignorance they
profess: but they ought not then to set up for Patterns; to oppose their single
instance against the conspiring testimony of all the rest, and by an
Irregularity to shape the course of Nature.

For when we suppose a Natural Conscience in Man, we suppose too that it may be
much Oppressed, and in some few it may be well-nigh Extinguished. What was begun
in Adam may be perfected by his Sons; and the original Bent of our Constitution
weakened at first by Him, at last wholly destroyed by Us. For these
Inclinations of our Rational part to Good, move not in us necessarily, nor act
irresistibly, as those of other Animals: they are accompanied with a freedom of
the Will, which should Direct, but may Overrule. For that freedom of Choice
given to Man, may check and divest our very Natural desires, may refuse to eat
or drink; so easily may we imagine the same power over the other spiritual
propensions: however neither of them, though disturbed by Man's Will, are
therefore Imaginary; to be Crossed and Disordered, but not to be Denied. A
Mother that shall be able, by the unhappy exercise of her freedom, to restrain
her Natural Affection to her Infant, is not therefore a good Argument against
that Kind Design of Nature: nor shall a Man, that has prevailed upon himself to
be Unmerciful, Ungrateful, Insensible of a God, and Unapprehensive of the
Future; persuade us therefore that this is Human, or the genuine result of his
First Constitution.

As Man is Lord of himself, and enjoys his Liberty, so he may use it against
himself; and destroy what he was entrusted to preserve: by debauch he may
weaken and enervate the tone of his Body, and he may soften the Firmness of his
Mind; he may deform God's Outward Image, and may efface the Characters within:
he may put out his Eyes, and cut off his Hands or his Feet, either wilfully, or
as some have done, upon design to escape the Service of their Country; but the
design can never be this, to make Men believe that the Maimed Trunk was the
Original Shape; and that the Eyes and Limbs of other Men are Artificial things,
and Additions to Nature.

It is not therefore to be wondered that some Men have effected, what they
labored so much; and that all the Industry and contrivance against themselves,
of those that are the supposed Masters of Wit, should in some measure succeed.
The pleasures of one outward sense may be so violent as to supersede the
perceptions of the other; and the Soul strongly diverted at the Eye, may forget
it has an Ear: so easily, when it is called outward at all the senses, may it
disregard the notices of the Inner; and suffer the gentle directions Within to
be overpowered by a violence from Abroad. Then the Higher Rational part of Man
is brought to submit to the Lower, and our Reason is put on the task to prove
us Beasts. There are then other suppositions made than those we mention, of
Chance and Hazard in the Universe, and of Ill Nature in Men: the one to be the
cause of the Beauty and Regularity of the World, and the other the original of
human Society. Such suppositions are then made, not as would arise Naturally
from our first Thoughts, but such as are Necessary for absurd Consequences;
such as were attempted by one of the same Authors in other Learning, but did
not succeed as well; when a Point was to be Big and a Line to be Broad: and
those might, it may be, have been granted too, had the deductions been, not
concerning the impertinence of a squared Circle, or a doubled Cube; could those
rich Consequences have followed thence, that profit and pleasure were the chief
end of Man; that there was no Control now, nor Judgment hereafter.

For there is a great advantage designed to be gained by the denial of what we
suppose: they that have overcome their Conscience, triumph as over a slain
Enemy, and seem the only happy, the only free, Men: they are in perfect peace,
and full security; by rejecting this single Principle, they are rid of all
their Disquiets, Regrets, and Fears, they have chased away the Spectrum that
haunted them, the peevish Monitor that disturbed them.

And so there may be a deeper quiet about a Prince when his Guards are asleep;
but it is but a dream of security: and a Man is at more ease without the
Admonitions of his Friend, but in greater danger. All this Gaiety is but as of
those who have lost their Senses; who seem at ease, and better than ever, in
the flattering Delirium, under the height of their Distemper.

For so the outward Sense of Feeling may be dulled and deadned by Art, may be
made a Boast, and exposed for a Show; such are capable of no Pain, and have not
the afflicting Impressions that others suffer: but this Pain was designed for
their Use, and they are made sensible of Hurt, that they may avoid it, who
otherwise might heedlesly suffer their Limbs to be lopped off, or their Life to
be taken away.

In the same manner may Men boast they are without Pain within, but it is but
an ill condition: they are without the sense that should grieve them when they
do ill, and feel not the satisfaction of those that do well; without it they
cannot live to the Advantages of the present Life, nor ever arrive at that to
come.

But prudent Men will act according to the intention of their Creator; and
think it most fit for a Rational Being to pursue the design of the All-wise:
they will, as much as they can, quicken this inward sense, improve this
discerning Power of the Mind, and encourage its Reflections; careful to
maintain and keep up the Conscience, tender of its sight as of the Apple of
their Eye.

To this necessary purpose are all Holy Times; so many pauses interposed, and
stops made in our lives, that we may stand still, consider, and look back; a
quiet from abroad, to hearken within; to hear what God speaks, not only in his
loud, but in his still voice. To this purpose we come, as now, to the Word of
God; to have the Law on our Hearts, refreshed by that of the Holy Book; to have
the fleshly Tables, injured in Adam, and in us, (as those first of stone were
broke in Moses his hand) supplied again, if possible, and corrected by this
Authentic Copy; to have our domestic Monitor checked, it may be, at home,
encouraged and assisted by the Public; to hear the same Reflections made,
Directions and Reproofs seconded, by those that speak in our Maker's Name.

Thus far for the first Supposition, That there is in Mankind a Sense of Good
and Ill, Natural Notices of our Duty, which may be suppressed, but ought to be
cherished and promoted.

The Other Supposition of the Text is harder to be imagined, though it will be
granted more easily: That Men may act contrary to what they know, and persist
in that which they condemn. For it may not be difficult to conceive, how a
Rational Creature should understand its Duty, and be sensible of the design of
its Frame: but hardly to be thought, he should oppose his Judgments by his
Actions, and consent to what he disallows.

And yet this Real Contradiction, between our Will and our Reason, a seeming
Contradiction in Nature, is too well attested by Practice, and understood by
each of us: it needs no Demonstration, is the Hypothesis of our Nature, and to
be confessed by all the Sons of Adam. For it is the Case of all Mankind that
St. Paul expresses; that which I do, I allow not; but what I hate that do I.
Upon the sight of which desperate profligate Condition, He well cries out, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin? Who shall
deliver me from this inconceivable mystery of Iniquity, this fatal perplexed
Absurdity? How shall I be reconciled to my self? But who will reconcile me to
my Maker? For if my heart condemn me, God is greater than my heart.

For as there was certainly an Intention and Design in the Parts of my Body,
and their Functions; so in these Perceptions and Inclinations of my Mind: and
if we Act not according to this our Creator's first Intention, what other he
may have for us we may justly fear; we transgressing by the arbitrary Pleasure
of our own Will, and obnoxious therefore to the Justice of His. Those Notions
were imprinted in us by some superior Cause, and will not an Account be taken
of them by the same hand? So does the Sense of this Law prescribed, suppose a
Lawgiver; and the Conscience of our Trangressions, infer a Judge. But because
infinite other Considerations would direct us to the Being of God, I shall
therefore only follow these, as they lead us Prisoners to his Judgment seat,
and as the Apostle has made the Chain; If our hearts condemn us, God is greater
than our hearts.

For if our hearts have condemned us, the Sentence is not a groundless trifling
Thought; It is the voice of our Constitution, and was suggested by our Maker;
It carries his Authority along with it, and proceeds from an Oracle in the
breast of each Man, as sacred as that on the Breast Plate of Aaron. If our
hearts have condemned us, this has been only a Preparatory Hearing, nor can it
be pleaded in bar to another Trial. We may slight the Sentence, think to
Revoke, or endeavor to Erase it: but the Record will be removed, and the Cause
taken out of our hands; brought finally before a Judge, Omniscient, most Holy,
and Omnipotent, from whose sight we cannot be Hid, in whose Eye we cannot be
Innocent, and to whose Power we must submit. For God is greater than our hearts.

God is greater than our hearts, and knows all things, adds the Apostle: as
if that Attribute alone were Great enough to confound the Sinners Presumption.

From Men we may conceal the Sentence, and pass for Innocent; the judgment not
to be read on the Forehead, and more gaiety it may be on the Face of the
Self-condemned: but the great God was not a stranger to the whole procedure, he
saw the fact committed, knew the particular Circumstances of the Crime, and
Articles of the Law, and was present at the whole Conviction; the guilty Person
is still in his Eye, and his Justice knows how to find him.

He is therefore represented to laugh from above, at the folly of those that
would abscond from Him; that think they are hid, when Man does not see. He sees
the vain disingenuity of those that argue against their Sense, and deny what
they Know: their solitary private thoughts are before him, what they own to
Themselves, and forebode when they are Alone. He sees too the Arts that have
been used to stifle the Evidence, and corrupt the Judge; the Practices to Alter
the natural direction, and to defeat the Original Intention; how much we have
endeavored to change our Constitution, and to new Make our selves, because we
would disown our Creator. He was conscious to the Remonstrances, we would not
hear, and to the good thoughts, we were able to suppress; he took notice, when
we would take none. The sense of good and ill might be taken away, but the
nature of it was not: that Immovable boundary stood fast, as the great Depth,
as the Everlasting Mountains. Our Minds might be deprived of their natural
light; but God was greater than our hearts, and his knowledge could not be
impaired: as Man may shut his Eyes, but that puts not out the Sun.

Knew our God, knew Man of us, but as much as we do our selves; we should call
for the Rocks to cover us, and for the Mountains to shelter us. But what we
have observed, is but a part of that which lies open to the All-seeing Eye: in
the light of his Countenance are our secret Sins, such as our understanding
never marked, or our Memory has let go. He is greater than our hearts, the
searcher of them; He knows how negligently they have watched over our actions,
and how little they have improved their first notices: our very Conscience,
though esteemed by us too scrupulous, will be accused of its defaults; our
Judge will be condemned; and where then shall we appear?

Especially when we consider not only the knowledge, but

Secondly, The Justice and Holiness of our Maker. For though we may have
complained of the Rigor of our Conscience, as if the Judge in our Breast were
inexorable, and we had better appeal to a Stranger; yet we must have been
favored still, and we have all the while been judges in our Cause: if we are
condemned, it is with reluctance; and the Sentence cannot but be indulgent. But
that we expect from God, cannot but be just: shall he accept our Person? or the
Judge of all the Earth fail to do right, for our sakes? As if when he saw a
Thief, then he consented with him; and would be partaker with the Adulterers.

If our own Hearts have not been able to bear with our Iniquities; have been
offended, and grieved, and complained under their intolerable burden; if our
Eclipsed darkened reason could not but discern the Guilt, and Dust and Ashes
abhor the Impurity; if sometimes we have been provoked even to hate our selves:
how must we appear in the sight of Him, to whom the Heavens are not pure, nor
the Angels without spot; the blessed Holy Being, the most Opposite to what is
Irregular, and Impatient of what is Unclean? With what displeasure and
Aversation must he have viewed us? and what doom are we to expect? No Pain
certainly can be more contrary hereafter to Human Nature, than our Wickedness
has been to the Divine?

If it is irksome to the disposition of our Nature, to be ill directed; and
painful to our make, to be distorted, and put out of its first Order; how will
the Author and Creator endure the perverse Change, this defacing his
Workmanship, and opposing his Pleasure? Will he not, think we, stand by his
Laws, and justify his Intention? and how then (in the last place) shall we
escape his Power, or abide his Indignation?

Little have some been able to endure the Regrets of their own thoughts, and
what would they have given to have been delivered from themselves? Under the
judgment of their hearts, they have appeared indeed as condemned Men; and their
own evil Spirit has sufficiently tormented them: so sensible were they of what
they had deserved, that none but their God could afflict them more; but his
terrors were Greater still, and they felt not yet his Almighty Arm.

Some indeed escape better here; they have the Address to Overruled the Sentence
of their hearts, or divert the Execution; find other entertainment for their
thoughts, and by new guilt deliver themselves from the past; call in Company
for their help against themselves, to rescue, or to intercede; will not be at
leisure to hear, nor suffer the Soul to speak; drown the Voice of Nature with a
noise of Music, and its fears in Wine.

But these are but methods to practice upon themselves; Arts that can succeed
only on our own weak Minds; God is Greater: that Judge is not in our power, nor
to be diverted by such Amusements. The Sentence therefore aggravated by these
unprofitable criminal Delays, will at last be pronounced, and as certainly
executed: whispered before, but then spoke out, by the glorious God that makes
the Thunder; by the God, that speaks to the Dead, and they hearken, to the old
Criminals of Ages past, and they rise up and appear. Then our Maker must be
owned, when He has twice formed us; must be confessed, at least by Torture.
Then the Difference of Good and Ill, will be sensibly felt; the wide difference
plainly discerned; wide, as the great Gulf betwixt Heaven and Hell.

Let us therefore now begin to consider, and timely enter upon the necessary
Review: let us examine our selves for the Reflections we have neglected, and
for those we have been able to prevent: let us recover the Notices we have
stifled, and restore the Judicature to GOD within us. Let us judge our selves,
that we be not judged; and prevent the Condemnation to come. Let our
Apprehensions of GOD be as Great as His Majesty; and let us think of
reconciling our selves to a Power we must obey.

For if our hearts condemn us, and we persist to offend; where is our Hope? Or
who is it that shall give the Pardon? Will GOD be less Holy than our selves,
and our Sins less disagreeable to Him? Or will His Judgment want of the
Righteousness of ours? And is Iniquity like to find favor there? To practice,
what we cannot but condemn, is the highest disingenuity: but to expect that
what we cannot but condemn, should not be condemned by GOD, is a Blasphemous
Presumption.

And if, in the Course of a vicious Life, our hearts condemn us not; (a
Supposition St. John would not make): we have then more yet to dread, lest we
should have been already condemned by the Almighty, and given up to this
reprobate Mind; lest our Consciences, seared so as with a hot Iron, should have
been branded by a Judicial Sentence from above. Our Case is desperate indeed,
abandoned by our selves, and given over by our Maker. We hear no more of the
Inferior Judge deputed to fit in our hearts, to enquire and to determine: but
we shall not so escape, he is assaulted and slain by our Treason; a Treason
added to our other Crimes, committed against the Sovereign, the proper
Conusance of the Great and Terrible Day.

But if, when our hearts have condemned us, we repent and amend; are grieved
for what we cannot recall; and resolved hereafter to obey the Directions of our
Reason: Our future good Deeds cannot indeed blot out the committed Ill; nor our
Hearts pardon us, and reverse the Sentence it has justly passed: but, to our
Comfort, God is greater; He can pardon our Faults, and will do away our fences;
by Him we are restored as at the beginning, and it is the part then of Satan,
not of our Hearts, to accuse us. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's
Elect, is the Challenge then of St. Paul? It is God that justifies, who is he
that condemns?

And then when a New Life shall have proceeded from this Beginning; a Life
clear of Injustice, Intemperance, Profaneness; Actions always unnatural to Man,
but at last his surest Aversion, and most dreaded Horror: when Temperance in
our selves, Charity to Men, Services and Duty to our GOD, shall have traced out
a fair and happy way to Heaven; a course, upon the Reflection, the most
delightful and agreeable sight to a Humane Mind: when at the Even of our Days
we shall come to review our Actions, and see, with a satisfaction like to that
of our Creator, That all is Good: with Him we shall enter into a Sabbath too;
and on our Deathbeds be in a State of Rest and unspeakable Joy, greater than
Voluptuousness, Honor and Riches ever afforded the ungodly Offender; the same
Instinct that prompted us before to our Duty, assuring us now of a Reward; and
adding, to the pleasing View of the past time, the glorious Prospect of an
infinitely happy Eternity to come. With those then who have so lived, like the
Creatures of GOD, and according to the Truth of their Humane Nature; He will
likewise deal according to the infinite Goodness and Kindness of his own;
acknowledging them for His, whom He finds after his Image, and advancing them
to a greater Likeness, and nearer Approach: Well done, thou Good, thou Faithful
and Obedient Creature, enter thou into the Joy of thy Maker.

Thither may He please to bring us all by the Merits of His Son, and the
Assistance of His Spirit: and to Them in their Trinity, etc. FINIS.

