A Comfortable Corroborative Cordial: OR, A Sovereign Antidote against, And
Preservative from, the Horrors and Harms of DEATH: Affording a Direction how
to Live and Die, so as to be fortified and fenced against the grearest fears
and sharpest sense of that KING of TERRORS.

Represented in some Observations made upon Rev. 14.13. Upon occasion of the
late Death and Burial of Mrs. REBECCAH JACKLER Late Wife of Mr. John Jackler of
Kings-Lynn in Norfolk, Woollen-Draper; who deceased October. 5. and was buried
October. 7. 1671.

By John Horn, Sometime Preacher of Gods Word in Lynn-Alhallows in the same
Town.

Useful to be considered by all men living in this state of Mortality: Because
there is no man living but must certainly Die.

Let me die the death of the righteous: and let my last end be like to his.

Numb. 23.10. For,

The righteous has hope in his Death.

Prove. 14.32. Quanta est felicitaes eorum! quam immensa latitia, qui, nimirum.
tripl ei gaudie. De recerdatione transacta virtutis. De exhibitione pro entis
quie^^s. De certa expectatione sutura consummationis, exultant!

Bern, Sermon. 2. in festo omnium Sanctorum. LONDON. Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe,
and N. Thompson, for B. Southwood at the Star next to Serjeants-Inn in
Chancery Lane. 1672.

To the READER.
Reader,
SEeing it is a thing generally known and acknowledged, whereof none can plead
ignorance, that it is appointed for men once to die: (for the living know that
they must die, Eccles. 9.5.) And seeing the time of death is generally to men
most uncertain, and the Word of God assures, that after Death there will be a
Judgment, in which every man must give an account of himself to God, and
receive according to the things done in the Body whether good or evil, Heb.
9.27. 2 Cor. 5.10. Seeing also further, that the same infallible word of the
living God, who has given us life and breath, and all things, and has us and
our breath in his hands, declares to us that He of his great mercy has devised
and made a way, though not to escape this bodily Death, yet whereby we may
stand in the Judgment and receive the doom and Sentence of an everlasting and
most blessed life: which way if it be neglected, there will ensue an
everlasting state of woe and misery. It must needs follow, that it is of
greatest moment and concernment to All to enquire after, and set their heart to
that way and device, making it their greatest work and business, whatever else
is neglected, that they may lay hold on that eternal life, and avoid that
misery. Yea, and forasmuch as the time of this uncertain life is the whole of
the time allotted for our preparing for the Judgment, it behooves every man to
take heed of mispending it, and to be careful to redeem it, and diligently
improve it, to make sure of Happiness in Eternity, not procrastinating to seek
after God: nor presuming upon Gods patience and longer continuance in the Land
of the living. Which things being considered it must needs be by all thought
and acknowledged, that Discourses of this nature are always seasonable, and if
any thing well done, worthy acceptance. Discourses, I say, upon such a Subject
as I here propound to present thee with, namely, such as show the Happiness to
be enjoyed notwithstanding Death; and the way how we may be brought to the
enjoyment thereof, and to be secured against the Fears of Death: or what harms
or mischiefs will otherwise be occasioned by it to us. I cannot, I confess,
commend the worthiness of my performance upon so serious and weighty a Subject
which deserves a far larger and more pressing Treatise, and has also obtained
it by some more Reverend and Learned hands.

What I here present was not in the least intended in my first consideration of
it, or writing upon it for the Press, only to satisfy the desire of a loving
Friend concerned mainly in the occasion of its consideration, I have
endeavored to make it public. And such as it is commend it to Gods blessing,
and thy perusal. Praying it may be both for my own and thy future and eternal
benefit, and resting a servant to thee and all men, for Jesus sake.

John Horn.
February 8. 1671/2.
A Comfortable Corroborative Cordial: Or, A Sovereign Antidote against, and
Preservative from, the Horrors and Harms of DEATH.
Rev. 14.13. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed
are the Dead that die in the Lord from henceforth, Yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.


OUr Lord Jesus Christ having (after many other things of great concernment to
his Churches) showed by his Angel to his servant John, in the twelfth Chapter,
the oppositions of the Dragon (or Devil and Satan) first in the Roman Pagan
Empire against Christ and his Church, and his dejection or casting down from
Heaven (from his state of being worshipped as a Deity) and after that in his
stirring up a flood of errors and heresies to carry away the Church with, and
how God preserved her against them. And in the thirteenth Chapter, the troubles
and persecutions that Satan would further raise against his Church by a
twofold Antichristian persecuting power called Beasts, setting up and managing
a corrupt Worship, and persecuting its refusers. In this Chapter shows him
diverse things tending to animate his servants in their constancy against them.
As to say,

1. Verse. 1. He showed him the Lamb, (Christ himself) standing (safe and
unmoved for all his enemies) upon mount Sion (where God had set him as King,
Psalm. 2.5. a place which cannot be moved, but stands fast for ever, Psalm.
125.1. and 11.4.) and with him (in the same sure state) an hundred forty four
thousand (the number of the sealed in Chap. 7.) having his Fathers name (not
the Beasts, either Authority or Doctrine) written in their foreheads (as openly
and boldly avowed yet by them)

2. Verse. 2. And made him hear a voice from heaven as the voice of many waters,
(as loud, evident and certain, as if many peoples, nations, and languages
compared to many waters, Isa. 17:12. and Rev. 17.15. had attested the things
spoken as eyewitnesses thereof) and as the voice of a great thunder
(signifying their boldness in Christ, and dreadfulness to their enemies) and a
voice of harpers harping with harps. (as rejoicing in their victory over their
enemies, as was the custom in Israel to solemnize their Victories with musical
instruments; as in Exodus 15.20. 1 Samuel 18 6. 2 Chronicles. 20.28)

3. Verse. 3. And they sung a new song (as such songs of praises upon escapes of
dangers, and upon victories are styled, Psalm. 40.3. and 98.1) before the Throne
and before the four living creatures (was badly translated Beasts, that is in
short, before God and his Church) And no man could learn that song but the
hundred forty and four thousand which were redeemed from the earth (either
from the love of earthly things through the efficacy of Gods grace evidenced in
the blood of Christ; or also taken from the earth by Death, Peculiar services,
sufferings, and successes against Gods enemies have their peculiar joys not
common to others. Then showing,

4. Verse. 3. What ones these redeemed ones were, he adds: These are they that
were not defiled with women (with the Congregations and Assemblies of corrupt
Teachers, Idolaters, and their corruptions in Doctrine and Worship, compared to
women or harlots, Prove. 9.13. and 14.1. Rev. 17.5. for they are virgins (chaste
and single to Christ his Faith and Worship) these follow the Lamb whithersoever
he goes (that is, they cleave in all things to Christ, and his word, and
commands, and are not moved therefrom by any false pretenses of the false
Prophet or two-horned Beast, and his false and lying miracles; nor by the
greatness and dreadfulness of the seven headed and ten-horned Beast, and their
contrary commands) for these were redeemed (powerfully through the grace of God
believed by them, brought out unto Christ) from among men (from the idolatrous
and wicked world, to be holy to God) being the first fruits (most desirable and
pleasing, Mic. 7.1.) to God and to the Lamb.

5. Verse. 4. And in their mouth was found no guile (they were upright and
orthodox Christians, not dissembling with men to avoid persecutions) for they
are without fault before the Throne of God. (Nathaniels or Israelites indeed in
whom there is no guile, believers in Christ, and walkers after his Spirit, and
so in the light as God is in the light directing and strengthening them, and
therefore there is no condemnation to them, but the blood of Christ cleansing
them from all sin they have fellowship with God, Romans 8.1. 1 John 1.7. The
trusters in God, and unmovable as mount Sion, Psalm. 125.1. But let none imagine
that Christ died only for these and such like, because called redeemed ones,
but mind that he adds

6. Verse 4. I saw another Angel flying in the midst of heaven (most openly)
having the Everlasting Gospel to preach to them that dwell on (not yet redeemed
from) the earth, and to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. As the
Angels sometime appeared clothed in linen like the Priests in the Temple, as in
Dan. 10.5. Rev, 15.6. So the holy Priesthood or Gospel Preachers may be here
denoted by Angels, and here is Gospel preached to others besides those redeemed
ones, even to all people; but there is no Gospel for any for whom Christ died
not, and for whom in him no help or salvation: therefore Christ's death is not
to be limited to, or measured by, such expressions as those in the foregoing
verses, or that in Chap. 5.9. The sum of the Gospel to be preached, is that in
1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. that God wills that all men be saved and come to the
knowledge of the Truth: for there is one God and one Mediator of God and men,
the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, a testimony, (or this
is the testimony) in due times; whereunto the Apostle says, He was ordained a
Preacher and Apostle, etc. verse. 7. the Everlasting Gospel, and therefore
Gospel in all ages as well as then. Other expressions of the sum of the Gospel,
see in 1 Cor. 15.2, 3, 4. 1 Timothy 1.15. The being redeemed from the earth and
from among men is a further business, at least an effectual product of the
grace of God believed in men's hearts and consciences, as is fore-hinted; but
this Angel in Preaching the Gospel said with a loud voice, (what the whole
Gospel loudly speaks to be the duty of all men, viz.

7. Verse. 7. Fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is
come, (not unlike that in Matthew. 3.8, 10. Acts 17.30, 31. though it may here
have some special eye at the ruin of Babylon presently predicted) and worship
him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters;
(expressions like those which the Apostle says was the sum or end of their
preaching, in Acts 14.15. but after this follows)

8. Verse. 8. And another Angel followed, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen
(the doubling expression implies its certainty and speediness, and the joy of
Gods holy ones at it, Genesis 41.32. Rev. 18.20.) that great city (the opposite to
Jerusalem the holy City or true Church of God) because she made all nations
drink of the wine of her fornications. (Babylon is the then ruling City over
the kings of the earth, Rev. 17.18. which was Rome, and so denotes that
idolatrous Church, called the Whore for her being corrupted from Christ, and
the sincere Faith and worship of him, forsaking her fidelity to him to follow
after and prostitute her self to the Kings of the earth, seeking and loving
their favor, riches, gifts, honor, defense etc. and yet (as Harlots use to do
with their Paramours Jud. 16.6, 20.) ordering and ruling them as she lists,
pretending that she is the Lady and Queen of Heaven; that only Catholic
Church from whom they must receive all their Faith, Worship and Religion, and
it may be noted that her downfall, and so of all Idolatry, Heresy and false
worship, either is and will be the effect (not of Seditions and Rebellions,
but) of the sincere and bold Preaching the Gospel of Christ with its
instructions by holy living; or Angel-like persons, not by might, nor by power,
but by my Spirit, says the Lord, Zech. 4.6.) or will otherwise join, and
follow after it.

9. Verse. 9, 10, 11. After these, Christ showed him a third Angel that
followed, and warned of the danger of worshipping the Beast (especially after
the Gospel preached and the fall of Babylon denounced) saying with a loud
voice, If any man worship the Beast or his Image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and shall
be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and
in the presence of the Lamb: And the smoke of their torment ascends up for
ever and ever. And they have no rest day nor night who worship the Beast and
his Image, and whosoever receives the mark of his name. A dreadful Sentence
that might awaken all to enquire what this Beast and his Image, Mark and Name
are, and what the worship thus threatened, and carefully avoid all things
thereof. I shall only here say, it is the preferring some other powers above
Christ, and so is the same in substance with that. Cursed is the man that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and his heart departs from the
Lord Jer. 17.5. but that that time will be sad, is signified in the following
exclamation, whether of the Angel or Evangelist, which says,

10 Verse 12. Here is the patience of the Saints. here at this time most
eminently tried and exercised. Here are they (emphatically) that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus, and forsake them not for the Beast
Worship; but then to hearten unto those sufferings though to death, he adds in
the Text.

Ver. 14. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying, Blessed are the dead that
dye in the Lord, etc. from the following whereof so immediately upon the former
intimation, we may note Christ's great care of his Church; as when he formerly
told his Disciples of weeping and mourning, he presently tells them too of what
might support them, and bear up their sorrowful hearts from sinking: When he
tells them he must leave them, he tells them also, that he would see them
again, and not leave them comfortless, or as Orphans; and that upon his seeing
them again, their hearts should rejoice, and their joy should no man take from
them; and that in him they should have peace, who had also overcome the world,
Joh. 14.18. and 16.20, 21, 22, 23. And when the Lord speaks of the like sad
things with these by the Prophet Isaiah; That all the beasts would come to
devour, his watchmen being blind, and the shepherds void of understanding; so
that the righteous perish, no man regarding it, and merciful men are taken away
from the evil: Yet then also for encouraging the hearts of his suffering
servants, he proclaims like things with these here, even the sweet and
excellent state of those righteous and merciful men, when so taken away and
perished from among men, that is, when Dead: He shall enter into peace, they
shall lie in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness; while he
threatens judgment to the seed of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer, and
of the whore, Isa. 56.9, 10. and 57.1, 2, 3. Though our Lord leads his
followers in^o afflictions because he sees them needful and useful for them,
yet he would not have them faint under their afflictions, to deprive themselves
of the good intended by them. His Word and Gospel occasion troubles to them
from the world, while they are thereby drawn out of the world, and are led to
testify of him to, and against the wickedness of the world: but he provides
comforts and supports for them by the same word, by, and for which they suffer,
that they might be enabled patiently to endure the things which they must
suffer.

Yea, and we may further note from this Voice and Proclamation of the blessed
state of the dead that die in the Lord, following so immediately after that
acclamation, Here is the patience of the Saints; That the consideration of the
happy state of the dead in Christ, is an excellent motive to a patient
continuance in well-doing, though suffering for it unto death: Rejoicing in
hope first, we may be patient in tribulation, Romans 12.12. Did we expect still a
continuance of evils in Death, and that it would make us still unhappy and
miserable; and that Death is the end and recompense of an holy life from the
world, it would exceedingly damp and take off the courage of men from
exercising patience, and continuing to keep the Commandments of God, and the
faith of Jesus: But being rooted and grounded in the Faith, and not moved from
the hope of the Gospel, we may be there through strengthened to all long
suffering, and patience with joyfulness, Col. 1.11.23.

The words themselves are a commandment, and we have thereabout,

1. The person acquainted with it, I, the holy Apostle or Penman of these
Visions: Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reveals his secret unto
his servants the Prophets, Amos 3.7. The secret of the Lord is with those that
fear him, etc. Psalm. 25.14.

2. The way of his perceiving or receiving it; and that was by the ear, at
least the ear of his Spirit. I heard. God speaks once and twice, and man
regards it not, or perceives it not, Job 33.14. But blessed are the ears of his
Disciples, for they hear, etc. Matthew. 13.16.

3. The way of its being conveyed to him, and that was by a voice: Sound or
voice are the proper ways of conveying things to the ear, and by the ear to the
mind; and a voice is but an articulate sound. There may be voice where there is
no hearing, as above is signified in Job 33.14, etc. And as is said of the
Levites wife when dead, Judge. 19.25. and of the Shunammits son, 2 King. 4.31.
But there can be no hearing without some sound or voice.

4. We have the place whence it came from heaven. Which being the place of Gods
most glorious Residence, and Manifestation of himself; and where our Lord Jesus
Christ the holy and just one, is on the Throne of Majesty; and where only holy
Angels, and the spirits of just men have place: But no evil Angel, Satan being
cast out thence, nor no unclean thing may be admitted to enter: We may be sure
no voice comes from thence, but what is holy and true, and such as is worthy to
be received with all acceptance, being supremely and originally the voice of
God, and of our Lord Jesus, though it might be instrumentally uttered by some
holy Angel. And so the Command here, was a Command of God and Christ.

5. We have the person to whom it was directed; and that was to the Apostle
himself: I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me. He heard diverse voices in
and from heaven not directed to him, as may be seen Chap. 5.2, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13. Voices directed to Christ, some to God, as Chap. 16.5. 7. and Chap. 19.1.5,
6, 7. Some to the people of God, Chap 18.4. but this was directed to this Saint
John himself; wherein we have,

6. The matter of the Voice, the Command it self; and therein,

1. The Act commanded him, and that was to write; Saying to me, Write. And this
was an exercise that God employed diverse of his holy Servants in, but is not
universally the work and business of all his Servants, or of those that are
accepted of him: as all are not Apostles, nor all Prophets, nor all Teachers,
etc. 1 Cor. 12, 28, 29, 30. so neither are, or have all his Servants been
either Penmen of Holy Scriptures, or of other Divine Matters; but as the same
Spirit distributes his sundry Gifts variously, so has he given commands to
some to speak, to others to write the heavenly Truths. But neither the one nor
the other so generally as the hearing of them; this was an honor put upon his
Servants according as he pleased for others usefulness. Jeremiah was employed
to speak, and Baruch to write the words from his mouth. Jer. 36.17, 18 Moses
did both write and speak to the people the words of the Law, and Commands of
God, and of the Song he was to put into the peoples mouths, Deuteronomy. 31.9, 19, 22,
24, 30. Yea, this Gift of Writing is an excellent Gift of God, a way of
conveying his Truths, and of his great works and doings which he himself has
made use of; as he wrote the Ten Commandments with his own hand or finger,
Exodus 31.18. and 32.16. and 34.1. Deuteronomy. 10 1, 2 4. and many of his holy
Prophets, and the Evangelists, and Apostles, diverse of them were employed in
this Exercise, whose Writing he owns also as his own, and therefore says, Have
not I written to thee excellent things, Prove. 22.20. And I have written to them
the great things of my Law, Hos. 8.12.

And it may be minded, yea, and must be acknowledged, that in some respects
this way of conveying over knowledge unto men, has the pre-eminence in diverse
respects above that of speech; both as

1. It may be preserved a longer time what is this way imparted; when as the
voice of words pass away into the air, after they are uttered: and so knowledge
may be, and has been transmitted this way to after ages and generations, long
after those that have uttered those truths by words of mouth are dead and gone.
And this use of Writing, or end of Gods making use of it, or commanding it to
be used, is expressly signified by himself; for not only did Moses write the
Law, and deliver it to the Priests, as a means to acquaint with it, and with
the works of God therein mentioned, those that had not known them, even the
children to be born, commanding them to that purpose at the end of every seven
years to read it to all the people, men, women, and children, and the strangers
within their gates, Deuteronomy. 31.10, 11, 12, 13. but also God ordered Moses to
write the Song mentioned in the same Chapter, that it might be a witness for
him against the children of Israel, that it might not be forgotten out of the
mouths of their seed, verse. 19.21. And the Lord bade Isaiah go write it on a
Table, and note it in a Book, that it might be for the time to come (or for the
latter day) even for ever and ever, that this is a rebellious people, etc. Isa.
30.8.9. See also Psalm. 102.18.

2. This way the knowledge of things, and of Gods Works and Words, may be made
known to many more then they can by any ones audible voice be declared to, as
in all these Nations we have this way the declarations of those things brought
to us that were done in Israel and Judah; and the words spoken in those places
are this way brought to our cognizance; yea, by this way things spoken in
secret, yea, or when we can have no opportunity to speak our minds to any body,
what we would speak may be conveyed abroad, and made public; and things spoken
in the ear (as diverse of our Saviors Parables) may be published all over the
World. Yea, and

3. This is a more safe and certain way of conveyance of knowledge. Words may
be mistaken and misrelated by those that hear, and would relate them: many
things in that way may be, and often have been, added, omitted, or altered. But
what it written remains fixed, and may without addition, omission, or
alteration be read and transcribed. Thence it is said, I have written to thee
excellent things, that I might make thee know the certainty of the words of
truth; and that thou may answer the words of truth to those that send to
thee, Prove. 22.20, 21. Bless we God for so excellent and useful a gift, and for
the great good things made known to us thereby, and take we heed of abusing, or
being harmed by it; for as God ordered it for great good and profit to men, so
Satan who can create nothing himself but lies, abuses, and leads his followers
to abuse this (as all other gifts of God) to Gods dishonor, and men's
destruction: and scarce any so much as this while it is made use of to
propagate and keep on foot all manner of lies and mischievous devices: as is
too evident.

But now, as every Act must have its object or matter about which it is
exercised, so this writing must be of something to be written. And indeed the
thing that God commanded to be written, is generally something, both true, as
it is said, That which was written was upright, even words of truth, Eccles.
12.10. As also the Lord ordering the things concerning the New Jerusalem to be
written, adds this as a reason; For these words are faithful and true, Rev.
21.5. And also of weight and usefulness for the generations and people to whom
they are ordered, and for whose sake written; and so it is said, Whatsoever
things were written aforetime, were written for our instruction, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4. and
they were written for our admonition, 1 Cor. 10.11. and write the vision, and
make it plain upon tables, that he may run that reads it. That he may be
encouraged and strengthend to run with patience the race set before him, Habak.
2.2. And so here is,

2. The matter to be written, some faithful and useful matter to be preserved
for the benefit of after ages. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, etc.
Wherein there is,

1. A heavenly Oracle, Doctrine, or Assertion, viz. That the Dead that dye in
the Lord are henceforth blessed.

2. A Confirmation of this Assertion or Doctrine. And that both, 1. By
Authority or Testimony; the highest, greatest, and most indisputable, Yea,
says the Spirit. 2. By Proof, or Demonstration, or Reason alleged; and that
also is twofold, viz. 1. That they may rest from their labors. 2. And their
works do follow them, or follow with them.



I shall endeavor to consider them briefly in this order, with some
Application.

1. The Doctrine commanded to be written, and accordingly written, is, That the
Dead that dye in the Lord henceforth are blessed, or are henceforth blessed.
Wherein we have,

1. The subject of the Assertion, or that whereabout it is; and that is, The
Dead.

2. A qualification of this Subject, rendering it the proper Subject asserted
of; and that is, That dye in the Lord.

3. The thing asserted or these; and that is, That they are blessed.

4. The time from whence either the Subject asserted of, or the thing asserted
of them commenceth; for it may be either way construed: either the dead that
dye in the Lord henceforth, and so it is a more special limitation of the
Subject asserted of; or, the Dead that dye in the Lord (generally or
whenever) are henceforth blessed.

1. The Subject is the Dead, not the Living. And this term (the Dead) is spoken
of variously in the Scriptures, according to a various way of dying; as there
are that are dead in sins and trespasses, but they are not blessed, and
therefore not here meant, Ephesians. 2.1. and 4.18. And there are that are dead to
sin, and ought so to reckon themselves, 1 Pet. 2.24. Romans 6.11. And dead to the
Law, for seeking righteousness thereby, and having their hope and confidence
therefrom, Gal. 2.19, 20. And these are in a sense blessed, or in the way to
it. And there are that are dead in the body, and as to natural life; as Abraham
is dead, and the Prophets be dead, Joh. 8.52. And that is the sense of the
words here. Thence note.

Note 1. That bodily Death and Blessedness may be consistent; men that dye, and
are dead, may be blessed: Not only those that are dead to the Law by the Body
of Christ delivered from the curse of that, and from being under it as the
Covenant of Life; or that are dead to sin, or rather persons not only dead in
those considerations, but also that are bodily dead, may be happy, in a very
good, safe, and desirable condition; so as that their state may worthily be
commended as very excellent: They may have their sins forgiven and blotted out,
and they that are in that condition are blessed, Psalm. 32.12. They may have the
favor of God, and be accepted and beloved of him, and they that are so, are
blessed, Prove. 8.34, 35. and (which includes both the former) they may have God
to be their God, and to own them as his people, as it is said of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob long after they were dead and buried; I am the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, Exodus 3.6.15. And blessed are the
people whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144.15. And forgiveness of sins, and the
favor of God are both implied to be the portion of those Souls seen in vision
under the Altar, even the Souls of those that had been slain for the Word of
God, and for the Testimony that they held, in that there were white Robes given
to every one of them, as a token both of their free and full acquittance from
sin, and their being owned of God as righteous ones, and also of their being
highly honored and favored of God, Rev. 6.9, 10, 11.

And this not a little takes off the dreadfulness of this bodily Death, that it
may consist with Blessedness; and that it is not of it self able to hinder and
deprive us thereof: Men may be happy notwithstanding its power and force.
That Is the dreadful Death, that men cannot be happy in, or under such as the
death in Sin, the spiritual death of the Soul under the guilt and power of sin
committed and continued in; and therefore that is threatened as a very sad evil
to be shunned. To be carnally minded, or the minding of the flesh is death,
Romans 8.6. a state not to be continued in where it is, nor by any means to be
run into where men are delivered therefrom: As also, The second Death, the
separation of the Soul, or of the whole man rather from God in Soul and Body
for ever; the everlasting fire or lake burning with fire and brimstone, the
portion of the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25.41. Rev. 20.14. This is a sad
and dreadful state indeed, namely this of the second Death: While men are
spiritually dead in sin, their sins are imputed, and they have no fellowship
with God; but yet while alive in the body, they are in a possibility of being
called and made alive to God, to him that is joined to all the living there is
hope, Eccles. 9.6. But in the second Death is nothing but misery without hope
of remedy or redemption; This, this is the Death then with all diligence to be
shunned, and therefore care is to be taken to awake out of sin also by
repentance; for death in sin continued in, brings the second Death inevitably
upon men. But as for this bodily Death, that is not so dreadful in it self; men
may do well for all that: and the reason is, because Christ has died for us,
and is risen again. This death indeed, as it was in its first threatening, and
as upon our desert incurred by us in the Fall of our first Parents, deprived us
of all Blessedness, and would inevitably have done so for ever, had not God
provided a deliverer; and deliverance from it, had not he graciously devised a
device that his banished might not be expelled for ever from him, 2 Samuel 14.14.
But blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has raised up an Horn of salvation
for us in the house of his servant David, that by him we might be saved from
our enemies; that has given his only begotten Son to be the propitiation for
our sins that we might live through him, Luke 1.68, 69, 70. 1 John 4.9.10. And
blessed be the Son of God that willingly took upon himself in compliance with
his Fathers will to suffer and die for us, that we through his stripes might be
healed of that deadly wound wherewith in our listening to the Serpent, we were
wounded by him, he having giv^n himself the ransom for all, and tasted Death
by the grace of God, for every man; has abolished or taken away the
destructive power of this Death; and destroyed through his Death, him that had
the power of it, that is the Devil; and being raised again from the dead he
has obtained even all redemption of all mankind from out this Death, so as
none of them shall finally perish therein, but be all raised out thereof: for
as by man (Adam) came death: even by man (even the man Christ Jesus) comes the
resurrection of the dead: for as in Adam all die: so in Christ shall all be
made alive. 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. 2 Cor. 5.14. 2 Timothy 1.10. Heb. 9.2. 1 Cor.
15.21, 22. He is the resurrection and the life, and through him there is an
open passage now made through this death, and all the precedents, concomitants
and consequences of it to life and immortality, even to eternal life, in which
is, and stands the only true blessedness. In Christ there is given us (even
(...) mankind generally considered) eternal life, 1 John 5.11. in him the
righteousness of God is for, or unto all, Romans 3.22. and the free gift unto all
men for the justification of life, Romans 5 18. In him is forgiveness of sins,
and plenteousness of Redemption through his blood, Psalm. 130.4.5. Coll. 1.14.
and therefore by means of him men may be brought back to God, and enjoy him,
his favor, and Kingdom notwithstanding this death, yea in the very state of
it, and while actually dead they may be blessed. Bless we God for this gracious
Device and doing of his for us, in, and by Christ; and bless we Christ Jesus
our Lord, that he has so acted and wrought through his Cross for us; and
embrace we the glad tidings of it with all acceptance and thankfulness.

2. But yet, In that the Holy Spirit stopped not there at Blessed are the Dead,
but adds a restrictive, distinctive qualification, saying, The Dead that die in
the Lord. Learn we thence.

Note, Secondly, That though this bodily death and blessedness may stand and be
together, yet all that die this Death or are dead in it are not blessed. No, we
cannot say so, there be many that dye, and are dead in the Body, that shall
never meet with blessedness, though blessedness may be met with notwithstanding
this death. We read of two men that dyed this Death, the one blessed and the
other cursed; the Rich man, and Lazarus: Lazarus was blessed and happy, being
carried of the Angels into Abraham's bosom; but the Rich man was most miserably
wretched, being carried into Hell, and there grievously tormented; without so
much relief or hope of possibility of finding so much relief, as might amount
to or be resembled by a drop of water to cool his tongue, Luke 16.19.25, 26.
and we find mention of a multitude, nay, of diverse Princes with their
multitudes gone down into the Pit of destruction in their uncircumcisedness,
Ezekiel. 32.18.30, 31. and our Savior tells us of Gods killing the body and
casting into Hell. Luke 12 5. and that the Gate is wide and the Way broad that
leads to Destruction, and that many go in thereat, Matthew. 7.13. for the many
dye in their sins, and that is a sad dying, and is mentioned as such by our
Savior, when he says to the Jews, I go my way and ye shall seek me, and dye
in your sins, whither I go (and that was to heaven to his Father) ye cannot
come. Ye are of this world, I am not of this world. I said therefore that ye
shall dye in your sins, for if ye believe not that I am He, ye shall dye in
your sins, Joh 8.21, 24. And indeed that is the only thing that makes any
miserable that are dead: that they dyed in their sins, and their sins lie down
with them in the dust, as is said, Job 20.11. For where sin is continued in and
not repented of, there it is not pardoned; and where sin is not pardoned, men
are not blessed, but cursed. But this proceeds not from the force of the first
or bodily death, but from the wilfulness and carelessness of men, while they be
here alive; in neglecting Christ and the grace in him, and the salvation
tendered to them; in that when He by his wisdom calls men to himself, and
offers to make them wise and to save them; as is abundantly signified in Prove.
81.4, 5. and 9.1.4.5. Matthew. 23.37. yea, and counsels them to what is good, and
reproves their contrary courses, and neglects or rejections of his Counsels,
and waits upon them with long-suffering, yet they refuse and slight all his
love and good will, and harden their hearts against all means and methods in
inlargements and chastisements tending to their good: as is signified Prove.
1.22, 23, 24, 25.29, 30. Psalm. 81.9, 10, 11, 12, etc. Matthew. 23.37. Joh. 5.39,
40, etc. It is true that Christ dyed for all, even while sinners; for the
ungodly and enemies, and thereby has ransomed them from under the first
Judgment, and from the lordship of Satan into his own power and dispose, as
is signified, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Romans 5.18. and 14.9. yea, and has obtained into
himself all fullness of grace and blessing: So as in him all the Families of the
earth are blessed; that is, abundantly provided for of all things tending to,
and sufficient to render them blessed in the participation thereof; so as he is
represented as a full and large feast prepared for all people, Isa. 25.6. being
the Salvation prepared of God before the face of (or over against the needs of)
all people, Luke 2.31. as a like phrase signifies and is equivalently rendered
in Genesis 2.18. and having wrought a perfect righteousness which is for, unto
all, Rev. 3.22. But yet men cannot receive the benefit of all this, but in
receiving, submitting to, and obeying: even as the Feast prepared profited not
those that were invited to it and refused to come; nay they refusing it, and
therein sleighting the love of him that made it and called them to it, provoked
new anger and wrath to their destruction, Matthew. 22.4.7. Luke 14, 16, 17.24.
the Salvation neglected, is a healing medicine refused and not taken, which
leaves the miserable, like persons desperately diseased, in that case, to die
of their Disease without remedy or escape. Heb. 2.1, 3. the righteousness for
all comes upon all that believe; and therefore it being through unbelief
refused, is like the Weeding garment not put on, which neither clothes nor
warms the person refusing it, nor makes him comely and lovely; but being not on
a man, the man's nakedness and unhandsomness, together with the refusal of the
Charity showed and proffered in preparing it for, and offering it to him, lays
the person open to be expelled (though come into Gods house) and to be cast out
into outer darkness, Romans 3.22. Matthew. 22.10, 11, 12, 13. the Life Eternal
given us in Christ is so given in and with him, that he that has him, he only
has and enjoys it; and he that rejects and has not Him, has not it, 1 John
5.11, 12. To the enjoyment of Blessedness then, there must be a receiving and
obedience to Christ, the Fountain and treasury of it; otherwise, though men
perish not in the first Death, they will and must in the second: for the soul
that sins (that still and perpetually or impenitently sins) though it die
not for the Fathers iniquity, nor have its teeth set on edge, because its
Father Adam eat the forbidden sour grape, and so the son shall not bear the
fathers iniquity; that proverb before mentioned with reference to the second
and Eternal Death, shall not take place, yet for its own sinning it shall die,
Ezekiel. 18.2, 3, 4.19, 20. Jer. 31.29, 30.

The dealings of God here are somewhat answerable to his dealings with Israel,
when having brought them all out of Egypt (not leaving Man nor mothers Child,
nor any Hoof there) yet He afterward destroyed them that believed not, for
their unbelief and rebellious sinning and going on to sin against him in the
Wilderness, Jude 5. Heb. 3.17, 18. even so here, it is not the first Death and
Judgment detains any; but yet Christ having bought all into his dispose from
perishing in that, will afterward judge to Eternal Death those that believe or
obey not. It is not any want of merit or worthiness in Christ's Death, or
exclusion of them from being of its object, nor want of fullness or readiness in
him for saving them; but this is the condemnation, that Light is come into the
world, and men love darkness rather then light Joh. 3.19. Only Death, this
bodily Death puts an end to the time of Gods patient waiting for their coming
to Christ, closing with his Light and Love, and repenting of their sins, and
finding mercy with him. All the time God continues men's lives here, there is a
possibility of escaping the Wrath to come: For God is patient toward us not
willing any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9.
Yea, his goodness and forbearance is inviting and leading men to repentance,
Romans 2.4. and is to be accounted Salvation, 2 Pet. 3 15. Even Jezabel while
Christ spared her he gave her space to repent, though she repented not, Rev.
2.21. yea, and when he threatens to cast her into a Bed, and them that commit
adultery with her, even into great tribulation, yet it is with this Proviso
mentioned, Except they repent of their deeds, verse. 22. so slow is God to
anger, and so loathe to exclude men from bliss and happiness, and so ready to
show mercy and to forgive, and so agreeable are Gods dealings to his Word and
Oath, wherein he says, and swears to it, that as He lives he has no pleasure
(none at all secret or revealed) in the Death of the wicked, but rather that he
turn and live, Ezech. 33 11. To him that is joined to all the living there is
hope, Eccles. 9.4. And Christ Dyed for all, that they that live (while yet they
live) should not henceforth live to themselves, but to him that Dyed for them
and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.15. But now when Death seizes on a man and cuts him
off, then the door is shut upon him, and should he now stand without and knock,
it is too late; the answer from within is, I know you not: Depart from me ye
workers of iniquity; No opening then, nor any admission, Luke 13.25, 26, 27.
the Feast slighted shall not then be tasted of for ever by them, Luke 14.24.
thence the Gulf is for ever fixed so that there is no coming of any from Heaven
to help them: nor no going from their state of Misery to a state of Salvation,
Luke 16.26. in the Grave whither we go there is no work, nor device: no
knowledge or wisdom, for the helpfulness of any that have here neglected Gods
work and device declared to them, and the knowledge and wisdom here offered
them, Eccles. 9.10. Now is the accepted time; now is the day of Salvation, now
is the day for men to hear in, and to work the works of God in; but if this be
slighted, and men harden their hearts now, and will not hear Gods voice, the
night comes and will come upon them wherein no man can work; after which there
will be no more day, except an everlasting Judgment upon them. And therefore in
the state of Death, they that dye in their sins are so far from being happy and
blessed, that they are far more wretched then, then before; for though they are
not blessed while here, because their sins are not blotted out, yet there is a
possibility they may be so, and there is yet such a mercy held forth to them as
obtainable by them; for if the wicked man will turn from all his sins that he
has committed and keep all Gods statutes, and do that which is lawful and
right, if he will listen to and believe on Christ Jesus, and not walk any
longer after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, there shall be no longer any
Condemnation to him, He stall surely live, he shall not dye; namely, the second
Death, Romans 8 1. Ezekiel. 18.21. all his transgressions that he has committed
they shall not be mentioned to him, etc. verse. 22. But when dead in his sins,
then there is no more hope or possibility of being happy; He who was miserable
before under a possibility of mercy, is now endlesly and remedilesly miserable
without that possibility. Oh! therefore how does it behove every one now to
strive to enter in at the strait gate, Luke 13.24. to do what his hands find
him to do with all his might, for seeking mercy and favor with God, seeking
the Lord while he may be found, and calling upon him while he is nigh at hand,
Isa. 55.6. Eccles. 9.10. while it is yet said, or called to day, not hardening
the heart but hearkening to Gods voice, Psalm. 95.7.8. Heb. 3.7, 8, 15. making
haste and not delaying to keep Gods Commandments, Psalm 119.59, 60. hasting to
escape (as the Angels said to Lot when they brought him and his Family out of
Sodom, Genesis 19.17.) as for our lives or souls not looking back, staying or
lingering in all the Plain of this World, but escape to the mountain of the Lord
left we be consumed, giving diligence to know, win and be found in Christ
Jesus: and being brought in to him, to abide in him and be faithful to him to
the Death, and then no danger of being miserable for ever: For

Blessed are they that dye in the Lord from henceforth. And so we come to the
Substance of the Words, and their plain and full import. viz. That

Note 3. All they that Dye in the Lord are Blessed from henceforth; where we
shall enquire and show 1. Who is meant here by the Lord. 2. What it is to Dye
in the Lord, or who they are that may be said so to dye. 3. Wherein they are
blessed, or what and whence that blessedness is, that is asserted of them. 4.
What is the meaning of that additional word, henceforth, and what it may import.


1. By the Lord here is without all doubt meant Jesus Christ, for He is Lord of
All, Acts 10.36. for though there are that are called Lords, many, yet to us
(says the Apostle) there is but one Lord, Jesus Christ by whom are all things
and we by him, 1 Cor. 8.6. and we find like phrases as this, expressly mention
him, as He in whom the believers on him dye; thus in 1 Cor. 15.18. they are
fallen asleep in Christ. And in 1 These. 4.14.16. Them that sleep is Jesus will
God bring with him, and the Dead in Christ shall rise first. He then is here
meant by the Lord, yet not so as to exclude but include the Father and Holy
Spirit, who are in and upon him; and He may well be styled the Lord: For,

1. As God, the Word with God in the beginning who was God, so all things were
made by him, and He was and is by that right and style as one with the Father
(who made all things by him) and with the holy Spirit (by whom or which he gave
them their Forms, Virtues, and Beings) the Lord of All, Joh. 1.1, 2. Col.
1.16, 17. Heb. 1.2, 3.

2. As man also taken into unity of person with the eternal word he must needs
be, and so was and is Lord; the Manhood by that assumption into that personal
union being advanced into interest in and communion with him in that his
Dignity and Authority. And so the Angel that came to declare to the Shepherds
his Nativity called him, while he lay in the Manger, Christ the Lord, Luke
2.10.11. so the Evangelists speak of him too in his state of Ministry and
service very often, as the Lord appointed seventy, Luke 10.1. the Apostles said
unto the Lord, Lord incrase our Faith, Luke 17.5. and himself bid the man out
of whom he cast a Legion of Devils, Go and show how great things the Lord has
done for thee. Mark. 5.19. yea, and even in his dead state as to his Body, the
Angels sent to declare his Resurrection, call him Lord, as to his Body laid in
the Sepulcher, saying, Come see the place where the Lord lay, Matthew. 28.6. But
especially,

3. As Mediator and Immanuel in his exalted and glorified state, he is made of
God the Father, and so declared to be Lord and Christ, as the fruit and reward
of his Obedience and Sufferings to Death, the Death of the Cross. And as to his
actual possessing in the nature of Man the Throne of Majesty, and having
thereon all Authority and Power instated on and exercised by him.

To this end Christ both Dyed, Rose and revived (or lived again) that he might
be Lord of (or as the word (...). rather signifies that he might Lord it, or
exercise Dominion over) the quick and dead, Romans 14.9. and because he humbled
himself, and became obedient to the Death, the death of the Cross, for this
cause God has highly exalted him and given him a Name above every name, That
at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow both of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth: and that every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord to the glory of God the Father, Phil.
2.8, 9, 10, 11. who has put all things under his feet, and made Angels,
Authorities and Powers subject unto him. Yea indeed, over men he is worthily
Lord by way of Purchase and right of Redemption, having given himself a Ransom
for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. whence the false Teachers are charged with denying the Lord
that bought them, 2 Pet. 2.1. And he dyed (it is said) for all that they
(whoever they be of mankind) that live should not henceforth live to
themselves, but unto him who dyed for them and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.15. Live to
him, namely, as Servants to their proper Lord to whom they must give an account
for all things. He is Lord over the Devils and evil Spirits by way of Conquest,
having Conquered and overcome them, spoiled them and led them Captive in
Triumph, and so has power to do his pleasure with them, Col 2.15. And the good
Angels willingly submit themselves to him as given to him of God with all other
things in Heaven, Earth, under the earth, and in the Seas; and as to one whom
God has exalted to be over them, and bids to Worship him; yea, and they judge
him most worthy of this Power and Dignity, because of his unparalleld acts for
us and Conquest over Death, and Hell, and Devils by his Death and Sufferings,
ascribing blessing, honor, glory and power to him, Heb. 1.6. with Psalm. 97.7.
Rev. 5.11.12, 13. He then is the Lord in whom whosoever dies is blessed But

2. What Is that dying in the Lord! For it is employed here that some do dye in
the Lord, and that there is a dying in the Lord. But what is that! Indeed we may
say in a sense there is a dying in the Lord, and in a sense there is no dying
in him. In this sense there is no dying in Christ, that is, He is not the
Subject of this Dying; as in Christ, and in him, sometimes signify in him as
the subject of the thing spoken of, as when it is said, in him we are Complete,
Col. 2.10. in him is no sin, 1 John 2.5. in this sense there is no Death or
dying in him. He once dyed for sin, the just for us unjust, but he dies no
more, Death has no more dominion over him, Romans 6.9, 10. He was dead but is
alive, and lives for evermore, Amen, Rev. 1.18. The song of the Saints is and
shall be (as our Deceased friend and Sister on her Deathbed noted) Worthy is
the Lamb (not that is, but) that was slain to open the Book, etc. He now is
neither dying nor dead, Rev 5.9. it is true the Apostle said, they bare about
in their body the dying of the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.10. but that is to be
understood either of the sufferings occasioned by the constraining operations
of his love in dying for them believed by them, the dying that Christ's love led
them to endure for him and his Names sake, and that to be the sense, the next
words may argue, in which he says, We that live are always delivered unto Death
for Jesus sake, verse. 11. so as the dying of Jesus is the dying for Jesus sake;
or else the dying of Jesus is the dying of those that are his Members, what is
done to them being taken by him as done to himself, as is said Matthew. 25.40.45.
Zech. 2.8. Acts 9.4. But otherwise he dies not, in himself he dies not, nor
may any such thing be imagined to be here employed where the speech is of others
dying in him; concerning whom also neither may we understand that they dye in
him as to their state in him, or so as in the things which are properly of him,
as such a like Phrase sometimes signifies, as when it is said, Ye are light in
the Lord; that is, in what ye have in him, in his person, or in what ye have
derived from him, and have or are after him as found in him, Ephesians. 5.8. and ye
are wise in Christ, 1 Cor. 4.10. they that dye in him in such a sense are not
blessed, but wretched; if any dye as to what they are in him, or derive from
him; such as Crucify Christ again to themselves, and that dye as to their
dependence on him; Faith, Hope, and Rejoicing in him, or the like. Nor can it
be said that men dye by or as coming unto or into him, or being in him as to
their state Godward, and in their spirits; but men live in and by him. He
conveys not Death but Life unto men in their coming to and being in him; as is
said, In the way of righteousness is Life, and in the path way thereof there is
no Death, Prove. 12.28. Death, as it is the wages of sin, though suffered and
sustained by Christ, yet it is not met with in and from Christ as a proper
consequent of him or of Faith in him, but Life: He that has the Son has life,
1 John 5.12. who dyed that we might live in and by him, 1 John 4.9, 10. And yet
there is a dying in the Lord, that is, of those that are in the Lord, and that
in the view and beholding of him as the effect or operation of him beheld and
believed on. As to say,

There is a Dying to our Selves, the World, and Sin; a letting go our
Confidence, rejoicing in, or resting on our own wisdom, righteousness, the
flesh or fleshly privileges, and expectations of life from our keeping of or
conformity to the Law of Moses, or the like; as in this sense the Apostle
says, I through the law am dead to the law that I may live to God: I am
crucified with Christ, yet I live, not I, but Christ lives in me, etc. Gal.
2.19, 20, and ye brethren, are dead to the law by the Body of Christ, namely by
it as Crucified for you, believed in by you, Romans 7.4. and so God forbid that I
should glory in any thing save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which
the World is crucified to me and I to the World, Gal. 6.14. and what things
were advantage to me those I counted loss for Christ, Phil. 3.7. and reckon
your selves dead to sin, etc. Romans 6.11. And this kind of Dying may be taken in
here inclusively as that that foreruns and makes way for this dying in the
Lord, and they are blesed that in such sense Dye in or through the Lord, or the
knowledge of him: For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him, 2.
Tim. 2.11.

But that which is properly meant here is, that those that are in Christ may
dye as to the bodily death, the being in Christ and the Bodily death are
consistent; otherwise Dying and blessedness could not consist together, as we
showed they do: for there is no blessedness out of Christ. And that a bodily in
Christ may stand together with bodily death is further clear, in that as Christ
^e not to prevent and keep men from bodily death by his dying, but to obtain a
resurrection out of it; so neither does men ^^ing in Christ prevent or annull
(...) the deriving life from Christ is not such (...) deriving life as puts by
the Body from dying: For it is not derived upon the Body, but from (and so
after) its Death. It is appointed for men once to Dye, and that appointment was
made after the promise of Christ and of his defeating the Devils Plot, the
bruising his head, and therefore is consistent with it. Christ can can and will
defeat Satan's plot for keeping man out everlastingly from God though they dye
as to the Body, Heb. 9.27. with Genesis 3.15, 16. Christ indeed being believed on,
gives forth his divine Spirit and life for quickening our spirit and expelling
Death out of that, raising it up to a lively hope in God; but it expels not
Death out of the body till the Resurrection of the dead. The body is still dead
(under the Sentence of and in the way to Death) because of sin (that yet
remains in it) but the Spirit or inward man, is life for righteousness, Romans
8.10. thence, we see wise men dye, Psalm. 49.11. and as was mentioned before,
Abraham is dead, and Moses (...) the Prophets are dead, in respect of (...)
outward man; though they were brought into and lived and abode in Christ, and
(...) must others fare also. And this God orders for diverse good causes, as I
have showed in (...) Balaams wish, as to keep us always lo^ and humble in our
selves; and dependan^ on God and mindful of our latter end; and so more heedful
to the instructions of wisdom; and that God and Christ might be glorified in
raising us up from the Dead.

But now to dye in the Lord in this sense signifies and has in it,

1. A continuance in Christ, even in the Faith and Obedience of him till Death
and in Death, so as that we lay down our lives or give up our breath, holding
fast the Faith and grace of Christ, as it is said of the Patriarchs, that they
all dyed in the Faith, so as retaining and not going out from the Faith; when
their spirits left and went out of their bodies, yet they went not out from
Christ, from believing and hoping in him, Heb. 11.13. And there may be further
in it

2. A spending and laying down the Bodily life in an exercise of Faith and Hope
in Christ and walking in the Spirit, virtues and service of Christ, so as that
the dying is in a sense the effect and product to the Flesh of believing and
walking in him, as the Apostles that so walked in Christ, as that they spent
themselves, and strength, and life as it were in the flames of his love to
them, and zeal for him thence springing, being offered up as a Sacrifice as it
were, upon the sacrifice and service of the Faith, Phil. 2.17. offered (or
pouered out as a drink offering, as the word signifies) in 2 Timothy 4.6. and in
some cases and times (as those before mentioned under the cruelties of the
Beast and false Prophet) it takes in

3. A Dying in the Cause of Christ, and for his sake as Martyrs put to Death
for bearing witness and testimony to him, as those beheaded for the witness of
Christ, and the Word of God, and for not worshipping the Beast, etc. Rev. 6.9.
and 20.4. We may put them together and say, that when men are, and continue in
the Faith of Christ, and so in the love and virtues of Christ too, and in
death, Rev. 2.10 and by the force of that they have in and from Christ, lay
down or spend out their lives either in serving, or suffering for Christ; then
may they be said to dye in the Lord: and all that so dye, dye in the Lord. But
yet further, they that in any such sense dye in the Lord, may be said also in
another sense (which pertains to, and is the immediate spring of their
blessedness) to dye in him. viz.

4. In the love of the Lord; as being the objects of his favorable acceptance,
and so enclosed as it were in his arms: in his virtues as being encompassed
about with the virtues of his Sufferings and Sacrifice, and so in his Covenant
and Promises; and thence They, all they that so Dye, in what way soever, as to
the outward way of dying they dye: whether by a fair Death on their Beds, or by
any violent Death inflicted on them, whether by a more easy, or more sharp and
painful death; yea, though they dye of Poverty, or are full of Sores, as
Lazarus, yet they are Blessed; though in the sight of men they seem most
miserable, yet they are in a happy state and condition. Which we are nextly

3. To enquire into, and show what that Blessedeess is, and how they are
blessed; we may say, Blessedness stands in exemption or freedom from what is
evil and harmful: and in having interest in and enjoyment of good to content
and satisfaction; and they that dye in the Lord are in such a state even while
dead; and needs they must be so. For,

1. In Christ there is all that may free, exempt or deliver a man from evil;
and there is all that may do good, and make content and satisfied, and so all
that may make one both privatively and positively Blessed.

1. In him is freedom and deliverance from evil not only for himself, but so
as it may be for the freeing of others, not only sin has no dominion over, or
place in him (though he was made sin, and bare our sins for us, yet having dyed
for it, and being raised again, in him is no sin, no sin now, on, or imputed to
him) but also there is freedom from it for us, forgiveness of it, and
justification from it as is said. Be it known to you that in this man is
preached to you forgiveness of sins, Acts 13.38. And, there is forgiveness with
thee that thou may be feared, Psalm. 130.4. yea, and not only is he clean
from it, but with him is cleansing too; He has made a purgation of our sins,
Heb. 1.3. opened a fountain for washing and cleansing us, Zech. 13.1. and in
both respects he is the Savior from sin, both as to the imputation, and as to
the pollution of it. And where sin is taken away, or removed, evil of Wrath and
Punishment has no place. While sin was imputed to, and laid upon Christ, he
was also obnoxious to the curse, and wrath, that was the Wages of it: And while
God imputes sin, and it is not washed off a man, punishment, and evil of wrath
may befall him; but as in him there is forgiveness of, and cleansing from sin,
so in him is deliverance from wrath too, either as to misery inflicted on the
Creature, or as to the hiding of Gods face, or withdrawing his favor from it,
being justified from his Blood, how much more saved from wrath! both Positive
and Privative; Positive of evil, and Privative of good, Romans 5.9. and then, as
there is none has power over him in the least, so in him there is that
infinite wisdom and power, by which he is All sufficient to save us from them;
and order their enmities as he sees good: so as he can suffer them to act forth
their malice, and yet secure those against whom it is acted, so as it shall have
no evil influence upon them; yea, all enemies spiritual and corporal are at his
beck and will, to do to, or with them as he pleases, and he can let out or
restrain their wrath; inflict punishments by them, or save from, or deliver out
of the troubles they occasion, as he pleases, Psalm. 76.10.

2. In him also is all fullness of good wherewith he may do us good, and
content, and satisfy us; for all the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily in
him, and in him we are complete, Col. 2.9, 10. It has pleased all fullness to
(or it has pleased the Father, that all Fullness should) dwell in him, Col
1.19. the Father is in him, with all the fullness of his love and favor, He is
enough to satisfy the Soul for ever, and produce any good to it that he
pleases. In him is the fullness of the holy Spirit, and of all his glorious
Power, Wisdom, Love, Sweetness and Comfort; and with all its most enabling and
enriching virtues, so as he can baptize with it, us, and whom he pleases, Isa.
42.1. Mat. 3.11. Joh. 1.33. and 7.37, 38, 39. His are all Riches and precious
treasures; all things in Heaven and Earth are his, Riches and Honor are with
him, yea, durable Riches and Righteousness; his Fruit is better then gold, yea
then fine gold, and his revenue better then choice silver, Prove. 8.18, 19.
Length of days are in his right hand (even Immortality and Eternal Life) and in
his left hand Riches and Honor. His ways are ways of pleasantness and all his
paths are peace. He is a tree of life to them that lay hold on him, and happy
therefore is every one that retains him, Prove. 3.15, 16, 17, 18. Happy indeed,
For

2. Whosoever comes into him, is, and abides in him, is interested in all that
is his, and that is in him and comes to the participation of the benefit
thereof; they that are made in him through the grace of God, to them he is made
of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Holiness and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. They have
him to be theirs, 1 John 5.12. yea, and in him they have the Father also, being
and continuing in the Son, they are in the Father also, 1 John 2 24. In God the
Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 1.1. and 2 These. 1.1. and as they
are both in Father, and Son, so they have both, 2 John 9. And how can they that
have such a portion and Inheritance, but be happy?

1. Privatively Happy, so as to be exempted from all that is evil; from sin,
the Root of all evil, so it is not imputed to to them, In him all that believe
are justified from all things which they could not be justified by the law of
Moses, Acts 13.9. in him we have redemption through his Blood the forgiveness
of sins, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14 so as to be sanctified and cleansed from sin, so
as it shall not have dominion over those that believe in (and so are, and abide
in him) Rom 6.14. He that abides in him sins not, 1 John 3.6. and then
there is no Condemnation to them that are in him, that walk not after the Flesh
but after the Spirit, Romans 8.1. And so there is no evil in their Portion, there
shall no evil happen to the just, as they are that are in, and abide in Christ,
Prove. 12.21. All things work together for good to them, Romans 8.28. and so there
is no Death to them, nothing of misery, or separation from God, which is the
death of the Soul, nothing of destruction, they shall not perish, Joh. 3.16.

True it is, that they may have, and actually have Enemies against them,
within, and without; but Christ is to them a place of sure Defense against
them, and preserves their Souls; Their place of defense is on high, a place of
the munition of rocks, Isa. 33.16. and they dwell safely, so as they may be
also quiet from the fear of evil, Prove. 1.33. being and dwelling in him who is
the most High, and in his secret place they dwell, under the shadow and
Protection of the Almighty, saying of him, Who is the Lord? He is my rock and
my fortress, my God in whom I will trust, surely He will deliver them from the
snare of the Fowler, and from the truly noisome Pestilence. He will cover them
with his feathers, and under his wings shall they trust, his truth shall be
their shield and buckler, so as they shall not be afraid of the terror by
night, nor of the arrow that flies by day. Yea dwelling in the Lord, as in
their refuge, and having him, the most High, for their habitation there shall
no evil befall them, nor any Plague come nigh their dwelling, Psalm. 91.1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 9, 10.

2. Positively happy, in the enjoyment of, and interest (at least) in all
that is good for as the Lord is a strong house or house of defense to them that
are in him, Psalm. 31.2. and 71.3, so he is also to them a house of feasting or
sacrifices, Prove. 9.1, 2, 3. and they that trust in him and under the shadow of
his wings shall abundantly be satisfied with the fatness of his house; and he
will make them drink of the rivers of his pleasures, Psalm. 36.7, 8, 9. He is to
them a fountain of life and living waters, both quickening, purifying and
satisfing them. He is to them a sun; and shield, and will give them grace and
glory and no good thing will he withhold from them that are upright with him,
Psalm. 84.11. in him they have, and from him derive that heavenly wisdom, that
brings with it to them, Riches, and Honor, and Life, in him they have, and
from him receive that holy Spirit whose fruit is Love, Joy, Peace, and in a
word, all Goodness; Righteousness and Truth, Gal. 5.22. Joh 7.38, 39. and 4.14.
Ephs. 5 8. yea, in him they have the Adoption of Sons, and are honored with
that near relation to God, where through they become his Heirs joynt-heirs with
Christ, Romans 8.17. And if the Lord being their shepherd they shall not want,
Psalm. 23.1. How shall they want then, God being their Father, Christ their
Brother, and they joynt-heirs with him? these are the fearers of the Lord that
are blessed, and the very fear of the Lord is such a Blessing to them as
tends to life, so as they shall abide satisfied with it, and shall not be
visited of evil, Psalm. 112.1. Prove. 19.23. Well may it be said of every such
one, as is said of Asher, whose name signified Blessed, that his bread or
portion is fat, Genesis 49.20. or as of Nepthali, that he is, and shall be
satisfied with favor, Deuteronomy. 33.23. and of them all as is said of Israel, Happy
art thou, O Israel, saved by the Lord, the Eternal God is thy refuge, or
mansions, and underneath thee (even when thou fallest lowest) are the
everlasting arms, who is like unto thee! who have the Lord for the shield of
thy help and whose sword is thy excellency, etc. Deuteronomy. 33.17.29.

Object. If it be said, This is indeed the portion of them that are in Chirst,
while alive here: but here we are to speak of those that are Dead dying in
Christ; I answer:

1. This is the Portion of men in Christ at all times, whether alive or dead,
as to the Body or Flesh; yea, it is rather their Portion that Dye in Christ,
then of others; for if men be in Christ when they live here, and before they
dye turn out from him, and so dye not in him, they loose and forfeit all this
Blessedness; for Blessedness is so the Portion of Christ (who only has
purchased and obtained it into himself by his only perfect, and most
acceptable righteousness) that though he have it not for himself only, but for
us, yet there is no interest in it, nor enjoyment of it to be had out of, or
apart from him; that being also true, that he that has the Son has life, and
he that has not the Son has not life, 1 John 5.11, 12. He therefore that
transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God, and so
not life; for God there answers to Father and Son in the next Clause, which Son
is the life, and has the life given of God to us in himself, 2 John 9. The
just shall live by Faith; but if (he or) any man draw back my Soul shall have
no pleasure in him: Nay he that draws back, draws back to perdition, Heb.
37.38, 39. so as to loose all this Portion, and his Soul in the loss of it. But
while any man is in Christ alive or dead, he is in a full and most accomplished
treasury of all bliss and happiness; and in the dispose and favor of one
perfectly Faithful, to communicate and give forth of his fullness according to
his Promises; all the Promises of God are in him; yea, and Amen. And he that is
in him, is in him an heir of them, and abiding in him, shall not fail to
inherit them, though they as to the body dye, 2 Cor. 1.20. Gal 3.29.: For

2. Death, this bodily death, does not make any alteration as to men's being in
him, it is not the going of the Soul out of the Body, that is, its going out of
Christ, they that dye in the Lord, are in the Lord in the time and act of his
dying, laying down their lives, or breathing out their Spirits in the Faith and
in the Spirit of him; they are yet in him enclosed in his Arms, in his favor,
and love, and Covenant with him, whence he is still, even in Death, as we noted
before, styled their God, for though Dead men, and as to bodily life, yet they
live to him, and in respect of their spirits see no Death, Prove. 12.28. Joh.
8.51. their hearts shall live for ever, Psalm. 22.26. this Death is called a
sleep; they that sleep in Jesus shall God bring with him, 1 These. 4.14. And as
the bodily sleep makes no alteration in relation or Covenant-engagements: no
more does the bodily Death in relation to God and Christ, and interest in the
Covenant and Promises of his blessing; a Child is the Fathers Child as well
when asleep as when awake, and is nevertheless an Heir to an Estate given by
deed of gift, or by the Fathers Will and Testament. Nor is a Wife the less the
Wife, and in the marriage-covenant when she lies fast asleep in her Husbands
bosom, then when she is most awake and active; and therefore is in as happy a
condition (if happy in her Marriage) then, as at other times; yea, we may say
of the man asleep in Christ, or (which is all one) Dead in the Lord, that his
state is better then before, as we shall show God willing, in what follows; for
as the Dead that dye in the Lord are blessed both privatively as they are
exempted from, and secured against evil: and positively, as they are interested
in Christ, and in all, the good that is in him, and to be communicated by him:
So also they are

3. Comparatively Blessed, more blessed in diverse respects then diverse others,
or then themselves in former times.

1. Comparatively to other men they be happy, whether they be

1. Those that Dye, and are dead out of the Lord, they are happy in respect of
them howsoever they dye; it may be in the appearance of men sinners that dye in
their sins are happier in their Death then they, as having no bands in their
death, as is said, Ps. 73.4 they may lie and dye in stately Rooms, and soft
Beds, encompassed about with their Friends and Kindred, feel little pain,
dispose of great estates to their Children and friends; they may possibly
express no fear of Hell, but hope they shall go to heaven, Mat. 7.22, 23. They
may, when dead, have costly Funerals, and stately Monuments, etc. when as those
that dye in Christ may dye grievous Deaths in the sight of men, of sharp
Diseases, full of Sores and Boyles, in Prisons, Dungeons, yea, on Racks or
Gibbets, as it is said of those Saints of whom the world was not worthy; that
they were some Tortured, others Stoned, others Sawn asunder, others slain with
the Sword; that they were destitute (of succor, namely, Friends, means of
helpfulness, and the like) Afflicted, Tormented, Heb. 11.37, 38. and yet for
all this great difference, as to the way and outward manner of Dying; Yea,
though we add also, that they being tempted may cry out, as forsaken of God (as
our Lord Jesus on the Cross) yet these that dye in the Lord are infinitely
Blessed above the other; nay, rather, Blessed, and not at all the other, let
them dye as desirably otherwise they can, yea, though also they, when Dead,
have their Names cried up of men, as if they were Worthy, Gallant, Honorable
persons; and those that dye in the Lord, be accounted (as our Lord was by the
Pharisees, Matthew. 27.62, 63) as Deceivers; or (as the Papists called diverse of
our English martyrs) stinking martyrs, mad men, Heretics, etc. Yet these
latter, they that dye in the Lord, are far happier then the other.

We may compare those two mentioned in Luke 16.19. the Rich man and Lazarus,
they both dyed. But oh how great a difference to appearance in their dying! the
one in a Rich state, and therefore no doubt but had or might have Friends, and
Physicians about him, and want no Attendance; and after Death had a Burial;
which we find not said of the poor Lazarus, he might dye of his Sores, and in
some ditch, and his body might be exposed to the Birds or Beasts of prey (as
those Saints mentioned in Psalm. 79.2, 3, 4.) But yet the differerce in the
goodness of their state when dead, was far more for the advantage on Lazarus
side, then the goodness of the way of their outward dying was on the Rich man's
side: For after Death the poor Lazarus was carried of Angels into Abraham's
bosom, and was comforted and refreshed with everlasting Consolations, not to
be lost again: When the Rich man was in Hell, tormented without ease, or end;
not having either possibility of escape from thence, or of enjoying there so
much as one drop of Water to cool the tip of his tongue. Who would choose to
dye as the Rich man, with such a state after death, rather then as the poor
man, or any of the most cruelly Martyred good man, having the poor man's
after-state? who would not rather go through any difficult and dirty way from a
Prison, to a Throne, then to slide down from some stately, Throne, or off some
pleasant Hill bestrawed with sweetest Flowers in his descent; or attended also
with the most melodious Music into a dark Dungeon, to lie and rot there in the
midst of noisome stenches, pinched and pined away with Famine, or made a prey
to venomous Snakes and Serpents. The righteous has hope his Death, but the
wicked is driven away in his wickedness, Prove. 14.32. and the hope of the
Hypocrite shall perish, and be as the giving up of the ghost, Job 18.13, 14.
and 11.20. but the hope of the righteous shall be gladness, Prove. 10.28.

2. Those that live in the greatest pomp and splendour in the world, enjoying
the greatest fullness of Riches, Honor, and Glory; or the most delightful
continuing pleasures, for these in the midst of their enjoyments are in a state
of incertainty. Their Riches are uncertain riches, they may take them wings and
fly away, the Thief may steal them, or the Moth and rust corrupt them: Their
Honors like Hamans may end upon a Gallows, or as Ahithophels in a Halter; and
all their pleasures in a moment vanish, and they may come with Craesus the
Lydian King, to learn the uncertainty of all things here by sad Experience,
falling into the hand and Power of their Enemies; The pleasures of sin are but
for a season, and the reproaches of Christ are far greater Riches, than all the
treasures of Egypt, or of the World, Heb. 11.25, 26. The Wealthiest and most
Honored persons here must dye, and then they shall carry nothing away with
them, nor their pomp and glory descend after them, Psalm. 49.17. though while
they live they bless their souls and men praise them as doing well for
themselves; yet when Death comes, then all their felicity in these enjoyments
vanish like pleasant dreams when one awaketh, and ing out of Christ, they go to
the generation of their Fathers, and shall never see light, Psalm. 49.18, 19.
yea, then how are they brought into desolation as in a moment, and utterly
consumed with terrors, Psalm. 73.19. then begin their miseries never to end,
when the miseries of the others, and all their griefs and sorrows are at an
end, never more to return, and then end the worldlings Joys for ever; when the
dead in Christ have more increase of Joy, or enter into those Joys that never
shall end. And though it is true, that the prosperous sinner living yet at ease
and in fullness, is in a possibility of Repentance, and so in a far better
state, then he that dies in his sins, and is dead out of Christ: Yet
considering what snares there are in such enjoyments, and how hard it is for a
Rich man to enter into Gods Kingdom, and how usually the prosperity of fools
(that is, evil men, for all such are very fools in Gods reckoning, whose
judgment is according to truth) destroy them; that they are persons standing
high, but in slippery places, and are in very great danger of being every hour
cast from their height into destruction, Psalm. 73.18. and considering on the
other hand, that the man dead in Christ, is out of all danger of any
miscarriage, in present possession in their spirits, of that presence of
Christ, where is that fullness of Joy which infinitely transcends all the
enjoyments of this world how great soever, and that they are sure, and certain
of Eternal Happiness for ever; their state must needs be concluded infinitely
better then the others. Yea, on that account also Blessed.

2. Comparatively to themselves, while living in the world, more blessed now,
than then, as the Apostle implies when he says, that though living in the
Flesh, he had this fruit of his labor, that he lived to Christ, viz. to the
magnifying of him: Yet he had a desire to depart, and to be with Christ as a
thing to him far better, Phil. 122, 23. for now they are absolutely blessed and
happy though not yet fully and superlatively in the highest and greatest
possession of Happiness and Glory; the Resurrection of the Body must be waited
for, for that when Body and Soul reunited, shall be glorified, and all the
Saints completely brought together, shall receive the full of the Glory
promised, and have to each ones particular enjoyment the accession of the glory
of all the rest with them.

And if Cicero an Heathen Orator, could fancy a wonderful Happiness in the
deceased Moralists, enjoying the fellowship of each others Souls O proeclarum
illum diem, etc.
so as to cry out, O that gallant day! When shall I go to the Council and
Company of Souls, etc. What may the Christian judge of the revealed and assured
Society of happy, renewed and raised persons, together with Christ for ever?
But now they are absolutely Blessed, their happiness hangs no longer upon any
Condition that may possibly fail in, as before it did upon an If ye continue.
And though that If was of no great burden so as to imply so much danger as to
fill them with disquieting fears to hinder their rejoicing in assured hope,
having so many engagements to abide, and so great encouragements in Christ to
trust in him for his delivering them from all evil, and preserving them to his
heavenly kingdom: Yet there is both a possibility yet remaining, of their
sailing, and other Considerations also; as of their possibility and danger of
sinning and dishonouring Christ, their being exposed to griefs, pains,
temptations, and the like; from which they shall then be for ever freed, that
add a Pre-eminence to the state of their Death, as also that they shall be so
at home with the Lord, as before they were not, nor could be; as is implied 2
Cor. 5.8. Philip. 1.23. indeed as to usefulness to others they are not in so
good a state, they perish from among the Children of men, Psalm. 12.1 Isa. 57.1.
They have no more opportunity of doing good to, or receiving good from them;
they they are as to that, in a place and state of silence, whence its wisdom to
be doing good to all while alive, and we have thereto opportunity, and to let
our hand do what is finds to do with all our diligence to that purpose, because
in the Grave whither we go, there is no Work which we can do, nor nothing we
can devise for them, as for that cause, Saint Paul was in a strait, and knew
not whether to choose Death or Life, because for him to continue in the Flesh
would be better for his Brethren, Philip. 1.22, 24. but yet in respect of the
Saints state of freedom from evils both of Sin and Suffering and enjoyment of
the Lord, they are much better then in the state of this Life; as much better,
as it is better for a poor Pilgrim and Forreiner exposed to variety of vexations
and hazzards, to be at home in his own Country, and in some safe and quiet
possession of a settled comfortable condition, or for a poor tossed
weather-beaten Seaman to be safely harbored in the Port he is bound for; and
that may be also one reason of the addition of the other word Henceforth. And
so we come to the next Inquiry,

4. What is this Henceforth? or why is that added? Were they not blessed
before? Surely yes, Ye are the Blessed of the Lord (says the Holy Ghost to
persons yet or then alive, that feared the Lord) you, and your Children, Psalm.
115.13, 15. and blessed is the man (whether alive or dead as to the body) that
trusts in the Lord or that keeps his Commandments, Psalm. 34.8. and 112.1.
But this word Henceforth, may be two ways referred, as was signified before;
namely, either

1. To the word Blessed, the thing asserted of those that dye in the Lord, as
if they that dye at any time in the Lord are thenceforth Blessed, even from the
time of their Death, and then it is not said so to imply, they were not in a
blessed way before, or in the way to Blessedness; But to imply that blessedness
may rather, or more properly from that time be styled theirs, as more actually
and absolutely the subjects of it, they were rather but in the way to it before
then injoyers of it, though being upright and perfect in the way they had the
Blessing of God with and upon them, and were blessed therein; but yet, as we
said before, there was an If upon them, If they continue to the end, Col. 1.23.
If ye continue in the Faith grounded and settled, and not be moved away from
the hope of the Gospel. He that endures to the end shall be saved, Matthew.
24.13. be thou faithful to the death, and I will give thee a crown of life,
Rev. 2.10. but if the righteous man (how long soever he has been righteous,
and how near soever to the prize he be come) turn from his righteousness and
commit iniquity he shall dye. Ezekiel. 33.13, 18. There were some of the
Israelites that held out till they were close by the borders of Canaan, till
the Fortieth year of their March, and till they had seen the Conquest over the
Amorites, and yet then committing Fornication with the Daughters of Moab, and
eating the Sacrifices of the Dead, they perished and went not over Jordan; To
admonish us, that though there is no fear or danger to the diligent and
circumspect; yet it is dangerous at any time to grow remiss because a
possibility at any time of a miscarriage till the field be won, the warfare
be accomplished. And therefore our Savior says to his Disciples, Take heed
least at any time (how near soever you be come to the Gaol) your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that
day come upon you unawares, for as a snare shall it come upon all those that
dwell upon the face of the earth, watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye
may be accounted worthy to escape all these things, and to stand before the Son
of man, Luke 21.34, 35, 36. Sometimes a Ship that has escaped the dangers of
the Sea, may through carelessness sink and be lost at the entrance into the
Harbor; but when in the Harbor then it is safe. It is so however here, after
Death there is no miscarriage. Henceforth (says the Apostle, when ready to be
offered up, and his departure was at hand) is laid up for me the crown of
righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. then their state is fixed; no passing or falling
from Paradise again; when that is attained, no going thence to the place of
Torment, Luke 16.26. Yea, they are thenceforth not only more absolutely and
assuredly blessed, but also, more fully as to attainment being then at home
with Christ, as we said before, from the time of their Death and before the
Resurrection. Though the fullness of their Blessedness is not till then, yet
both a more full enjoyment is had from the time of their death then before
(they go not to Purgatory then surely, for then after death their case would be
sadder then before) and also a certainty of the enjoyment of that fullness in
the time thereof. It is laid up in a sure and safe Custody to be given forth by
a most faithful and righteous hand, yea, the word there in 2 Timothy 4.8. rendered,
laid up, is the same that is used of Death and Judgment in Heb. 9.27. and there
translated, Appointed, so as we may say, that it is not more certainly Decreed
that men Dye once and come to Judgment, then it is, that they who finish their
Course in the Lord and keep the Faith, shall receive the full and final reward
of the Crown of Righteousness.

2. Or else the word (Henceforth) may have a peculiar respect to the times
before mentioned, and to the Subject those that Dye in the Lord, with reference
to the times in the rage of the Beast; when the greatest exercise shall be of
the Saints patience, when their patience shall be admirable patience indeed,
and they that then abide will be eminently and to purpose keepers of Gods
Commandments, and of the Faith of Jesus; from that time Blessed are the Dead
that dye in the Lord, not as if they that indeed Dye in the Lord before! were
not Blessed, but to signify either,

1. The great miseries that will attend those times through the oppression of
Antichrist, that it will be a wonderful perilous and calamitous time, so that
it will be a great mercy to be well gone out of it, so as but to be and Dye in
the Lord; yea, the sooner the better, like that in Eccles. 4.13 where the
Wiseman considering the oppressions done under the Sun, and beholding the tears
of the oppressed, and that they had no Comforter, that on the oppressors side
is Power, but the oppressed have no Comforter; He praised the Dead that were
already dead more then the living which were yet alive. This sense of the words
suits well also with that reading, or Translation of the word that some judge
the righter here, viz. that dye in the Lord speedily. And this may also be so,
because of what results from those Calamities. viz.

2. The great difficulty of holding fast the Faith and profession of it, and
danger of falling from it that will then be, as our Savior says, When the Son
of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? Luke 18.8. truly in a sense,
at other times men may dye in the Lord, that is, in an external Profession and
acknowledgment of him according to truth, crying, Lord, Lord, and yet not be
blessed, not enter the Kingdom, being not indeed and heartily doers of Gods
will; but it may be signified that Henceforth, from the time of the Beasts sore
Rage, and the sad Persecutions thence ensuing, none shall be able to make a
right profession of the Faith, so as to persevere to Death in it, but such as
be indeed Saints and persons endued with singular patience, real and hearty
keepers of Gods Commandments, and therefore all that dye in the profession of
the Faith then really Blessed and Happy. Or else also,

3: To signify a more eminent degree of Blessedness to be the portion of those
that then shall hold out so as to Dye in the Lord, a blessedness proportionable
to that very sad woe and misery threatened to to the Beast-worshippers, verse. 9,
10, 11. after the Preaching of the Everlasting Gospel and downfall of Babylon
declared, as those Beast-worshippers shall drink of the wine of the Wrath of
God, poured out without mixture into the Cup of his Indignation, and shall be
tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in
the presence of the Lamb, and the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever
and ever. And they have no rest day nor night. A most dreadful Sentence, able
to deter any one from Worshipping him: On the other side here is a like
excellent manner of Blessedness signified to be the portion of those that dye
in the Lord, to allure the Servants of God, or any of the People to whom the
Gospel is Preached to the worship of God, and constancy to Christ, against the
Beast; that they that dye in the Lord shall upon their Death be blessed with a
witness, more abundantly blessed, as the word Blessed, sometimes seems to
signify; as in Rev. 20.6. for as it is an aggravation of sin when it is against
light and warning, and brings the greater and severer judgment; whereas the
times of ignoran^^ God winks at, Acts 17.30, 31. Heb. 23; and 10.20, 29. So
it is an augmentation of Virtue to be good in the worst of times, and to cleave
to God and Christ against the greatest discouragements and oppositions; and
they that so do, shall receive the greater blessedness as their reward.

But we shall have occasion to Consider wherein they may be said to be more
chiefly blessed, in speaking to the other part of the Text, viz.

2. The Confirmation of this truth asserted, which is twofold, 1. By Authority.
2. By Argument and Evidence.


1. By Authority; The testimony of authentic Witnesses is a good evidence of
any matter of fact asserted, or of any matter whereof they have sufficient
cognizance. Now here we have the Authority and Testimony of one that is as good
as, yea better then ten thousand, even the Spirit, which is the Truth: Yea,
says the Spirit.

By the Spirit, is meant the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Truth; for He is
Emphatically The Spirit; and is diverse times so called in this Book, as in Rev.
2. and 3. He is so called seven times, viz. in the close of every Epistle where
it is said, Let him that has an ear hear what the Spirit says to the
Churches. And in Chap 22.17. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And that he is
a sufficient Witness to any thing he Says and Testifies to, is evident in that

1. He is perfect in understanding and knowledge, being the Spirit of Wisdom,
Understanding, Counsel and Knowledge, Isa. 11.2. He that searches all things
even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. Therefore He cannot err or mistake.
And then

2. He the Spirit of Truth, Joh. 14.16, 17. yea, The truth; and therefore it is
He that bears witness to Christ and the things of him, 1 John 5, 6. therefore
he neither will nor can lie; for he is one with the Father, and with the Son,
one God. And God cannot lie, deceive or falsify; wickedness and falsehood are
an abomination to him and to his lips, Prove. 8.7, 8. therefore every one that
has an ear may well hear, as he is bid, what he says. And he says to this
Assertion, Yea; did men only say it, it might be questioned, and if they say
otherwise now, it is no matter. All men are too prone to lie; but the Holy
Spirit is to be firmly believed, because what ever he says is pure and true.
Now he in testifying of Christ in the Gospel witnesses nothing but Life to be
in Christ, and to be the portion of those that believe in him, that the
believer in him shall not perish whatever death come upon him, or whatever
trouble; but shall have everlasting life; yea, in a sort he has it, for he
that has the Son has life, says the Record which God gives us of his Son, 1 John 5.11, 12. and in testifying of such as are righteous men and merciful,
taken away and perishing from among men in such an evil day when all the Beasts
come to devour, he says they enter into peace, and rest in their beds, each
one walking in his uprighteousness, Isa. 56.9. and 57.1.2. that testimony the
Holy Ghost that spoke in the Prophets (and particularlarly in Isaiah, Acts
28.25) bears.

2. By Demonstration, Argument and Evidence, evidencing in what they are
blessed, viz. That they may rest from their labors and their works do follow
them. Wherein are two particulars.

First, that they may Rest from their Labors. Secondly, And their Works do
follow them, or, follow with them.
Wherein is implied,

Note 1. That they that dye in the Lord (and especially from the time of the
Beasts rage, and the great exercise of the Saints patience) have Labors and
Services, that in the time of their life they are employed in, indeed all
things are full of Labor, man cannot utter it, Eccles. 1.8. and the Saints
have their portion of Labors more especially in or in more especial manner of
labors. There is a man whose Labor is in Wisdom, and in Knowledge, and
Equity, Eccles. 2.21. and in such things the Saints and holy men do labor too,
they labor in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. But here the word used, signifies a
toilsome labor; yea, as some note of it, a painful, wearisome, spending
labor: Yea, sometimes variety of Tribulations, Calamities, and Crosses; so as
sometimes to threaten Death. And so we find the word Labor often joined with
Toil, or words of Affliction, as in Genesis 5.19. the Work and Toil of our hands,
are joined together, as Work and Labor here; and toil of the hands may well
answer to labor here, in Genesis 31.42. Jacob says, God has seen my affliction
and the labor of my hands; when he speaks of that troublesome labor, in which
the Drought by day consumed him, and the Frost by night, and the sleep departed
from his eyes, verse. 40. And the like is used of the rigorous and afflictive
Service and Labor which the Israelites were put to in Egypt, when they were
made to groan under their Burdens, so as their lives were bitter with hard
bondage in mortar and brick, and in all manner of service in the field; when
all their Service that they served was with rigor, Exodus 1.13, 14. with 2.24.
Of this Moses instructs them to say, the Lord looked on our affliction, and on
our labor and oppression, Deuteronomy. 26.7. and in Psalm. 90.10. it is joined with
sorrows when it is said of men, that if by reason of strength we attain to
fourscore years, yet then is our strength labor and sorrow; where Labor
cannot so properly signify work and service, for alas then men are past that;
but rather toil, and exercise as Solomon joins together, Labor and vexation of
heart, Eccles. 2.22. and Jeremiah complains. Wherefore came I out of the womb
to see Labor and sorrow? Jer 20.18. And that which we read in the Text,
Trouble, is in the Margin, according to the Hebrew, Labor, Job 5.7. And
surely, especially in times of great Persecution, there is labor and sorrow
more abundantly to exercise them, as both in Jeremiah's, and the time here
spoken of. Yea, labor and business is generally, with exercise, grief, and
trouble, the portion here of them that will live godly in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy
3.12. both in respect of civil and outward concerns for the body; weaknesses,
infirmities, sickness, pain: and in respect of the labors, griefs, and
travails of the Soul for themselves and others; (temptations also from Satan,
persecutions from men, and much care and exercise of spirit) that they might
obtain the grace and favor of God, with Christ and be found in him, and serve
their generation according to his will. In which sense also,

2. Labor first goes before and then Eating, Rest or Reward follows after; no
enjoyment of the blessed state of Rest, but for the laborers, 1 Cor. 9.10. The
husbandman first laboring must be partaker of the fruits, 2 Timothy 2.6. Six days
shall thou labor, goes before the seventh is the Salbath of the Lord thy God;
the rest appointed by him, namely, for thee to rest in, Exodus 20.9.10. there is
Labor that we may be found in Christ, or be accepted of him whether present or
absent, 2 Cor. 5.9. and labor in the Lord to be performed and undergone 1 Cor.
15.58. Through much affliction we must enter the Kingdom of God, Acts 14.22.
Service to God, and sufferings to be undergone both for and from God; and the
will of God in all to be done before we receive the Promise, the recompense of
reward, Heb. 10.35, 36. yea, and there must be faithfulness in this too to the
Death, else no blessedness; they that endure temptation, and patiently continue
in well doing, are the blessed that shall have Everlasting life, and receive
the crown and kingdom, Luke 22.28, 29, 30. Jam. 1.12. Romans 2.7. But then it is
spoken out plainly, that

3. They that endure and are faithful to the Death (and especially in such sad
times of trial) so as to dye in the Lord, they are blessed in this, that they
Rest from their Labors God is a merciful and righteous God, and he has
prepared, and there remains a rest for his people, Heb. 4.9. He that would have
a Sabbath or day of rest for Servants and Cattle now, one in every seven days,
that they might rest, Deuteronomy 5.14. He will certainly give rest to his wearied,
tired, toild People, Children and Servants that have labored and had no rest
here. He calls us to himself to give us rest for our Souls, and to give us rest
too with himself from our Labors, Matthew. 11.28, 29. and his rest is glorious,
Isa. 11.10 Rest from their sorrow and fear and hard Bondage wherein they were
made to serve, says Isaiah 14.3. Rest with the Apostles, when they that are at
rest and ease here shall be disquieted, even the Inhabitants of Babylon and the
Persecutors, 2 These. 1.5, 6, 7. with Jer. 50.34. then shall they receive their
sad things in tribulation, that now trouble Sion, when the Beast-worshippers
shall have no rest day nor night, then shall Christ's faithful worshippers have
perfect and perpetual rest with Christ, Rev. 14.11, 13. yea, they that dye in
the Lord thenceforth shall be herein especially blessed, as their labors and
troubles thenceforth are greater and sharper, their dangers, fears, and griefs
more abundant, now they shall be eased of them all, and by how much their
Sufferings were sharper, and their Labor more toilsome and grievous, by so
much will their Rest be more sweet and welcome, and the greater the blessing.

Death in general puts an end to the exercises of this life, as well as to its
enjoyments to men whether they be good or bad, as they be properly the
exercises of this life, though not always as to the kind in general; they that
joy in God here shall joy much more then, as to their spirits; and they that
fear and grieve in their consciences for fear of Hell here; dying in their sins
shall much more fear, and feel horror in their Consciences then. But as to
bodily Pains, and the Fears and Labors of this Life and pertaining thereto,
Death puts an end to them, both to good and bad; but yet not so to the Wicked
as to give them rest, or make them therein blessed, they being reserved by it
as in a Prison unto far worse miseries afterward; and tormented at the present
with restlessness and fears or horror not having Christ to be their rest: But
they that dye in the Lord are generally at rest. And as to be out of and at
rest from greater sorrows and sufferings is more desirable, welcome, and
beneficial, then to be out of smaller: so they that from that time dye in the
Lord, shall be in their resting from their labors more happy and blessed then
others. But all that dye in the Lord, in the proper sense before explicated,
enter into this rest: for they are at home in Gods presence, and his presence
will give them rest, Philip. 1.23. 2 Cor. 5.8. Exodus 33.14. then the Soul shall
have rest in its Husbands house, as was prayed for, for Ruth, Ruth 2.9. then
the Body rests in the dust from its Pains Weaknesses, and Afflictions, and
Labors Job 3.13, 17. and 17.16. and the spirit enters more fully into peace,
Isa. 57.2. and it is said to these Souls, That they must rest a little while
till the time of their Brethrens sufferings also be accomplished, Rev. 6.11.
Yea the whole man, though parted asunder Soul from Body, rests in safety not
hearing any more the voice of the oppressor, nor assaulted by the tempter, Job
3.18. and 11.18. the small and the great rest there, and the Servant is free
from his Master, Job 3.19. Yea, the end of the Adversity and Affliction they
have here, is, that they may rest then from it till the pit be dug for the
ungodly, Psalm. 94.12, 13.

They rest from their Labors.

2. And their works follow them, or, follow with them.

These Works are something distinct from their Labors; their Labors had Pain,
Sorrow, and soil, like to the Labor of a Woman in Travail, that has sorrow
because her hour is come, Joh. 16 21. and their toil and pain proceeds partly
from their own infirmity, partly from the bondage to corruption under which the
whole Creation groans, the Curse upon the Earth, Genesis 5.29. Romans 8 20, 21, 22,
23. 2 Cor. 5.2, 4. partly from the Badness, Wickedness, and Oppressiveness of
the World, and malice of Satan, Gal. 1.4. Exodus 1.13, 14. Rev. 2.10. But their
works are as the fruits of those Labors, the Man-child brought forth as it
were, the things done by them in the body, the fruits or works meet for
repentance, 2 Cor. 5.10. Philip. 1.22. Matthew. 3.8. with Acts 26.20. and these
they have (with all their strength and courage to endure the labor attending
them) from Jesus Christ, that root of David, in whom they are ingraffed,
rooted, and grow, Rev. 22.16. Col. 2.7. He is the green Fir Tree from whom all
their fruits are found, Hos. 14.8. the true Vine of whom they are Branches, and
from whom (they abiding in him and his Word in them) they derived such sap and
juice, virtue and spirit as made them bring forth much good fruit, so as the
Father (the good Husbandman) is therein glorified, Joh. 15.1, 4, 5, 8. being
and trusting in him, and making him their hope, they were like trees planted by
the waters side, bringing forth their fruit in season, Jer. 15, 7, 8. though we
are justified by Faith without the works of the Law, yet we are justified too
by Works and not by Faith only, Gal. 2.16. Jam. 2.24. not by a Faith without
works, but by a Faith that works by Love, Gal. 5.6. the believing, in which
we receive the forgiveness of sins and are justified to life, is not a bare
speculation of, or assent to, the Opinion or Doctrine of Truth resting in the
brain; nor so far only affecting the Heart as to ease it of, and quiet it
from, its griefs and fears; but it is such a believing as is to the saving of
the Soul, Heb. 10.39. even to the saving it from the power of sin and Satan,
as well as in other respects. Such a persuasion of the truth of Gods testimony,
and so that Jesus is the Son of God and Savior of the World, and that all that
the Prophets and Apostles have delivered concerning him, and the grace in and
by him is true; as wherein the heart is so affected with him, and drawn to him,
as that it says of him, He is my rock, and my fortress, my God in whom I will
trust: So as it comes to him for all direction and guidance, Grace and
blessing, and yield up it self to him, to obey and follow him in a confident
expectation therein of meeting with his promised Salvation and Blessing. And
where with the heart a man so believes it is to righteousness, and will not be
barren and destitute of the fruits of righteousness; or of the works of
righteousness, piety, charity, and all goodness, Heb. 11.13. Psalm. 91 2. Joh.
6.35, 37. Romans 10.9, 10 2 Pet. 1.9, 10, 11.

And these works, in Death and when dead follow them, or follow with them, so
as they shall be rewarded of God, for God is not unrighteous to forget their
work and labor of love, Heb. 6.10. neither labor nor work shall be forgotten,
their labor shall not be in vain in the Lord who tells their wanderings, puts
their tears in his Bottle, and keeps account of them in his Book, 1 Cor. 15.58.
Psalm. 56.8. and their work shall be rewarded, Jer. 31.16. And that

1. In some sort at the time of their departure hence, and in their separated
state, in that they have in their Consciences the joy and comfort of their
Works, and comfortable assurance of further reward in the day of the glorious
Appearance of the Lord Jesus; their works are now estimated of God and laid up
in his treasures: laid up, as it were, with them, and together with them to be
brought forth to open view in the day of Christ's glorious appearing. And the
Reward is also laid up, reserved and unalterably appointed for them; as was
before noted from 2 Timothy 4.8. so that they not only have hope in their Death,
but also after their Death there is a Separation of them from others according
to their Works; so as that whereas others are cast into Prison; and reserved,
as it were, in Chains of Darkness against the Judgment of the great Day, the
wicked is reserved to the day of Destruction, and they shall be brought forth
to the day of Wrath, when the Heavens shall reveal his iniquity, and the Earth
shall rise up against him, and his way shall be declared to his face and he
shall be repayed what he has done. Job 21.30, 31. and 20.27. these that dye in
the Lord are at rest and safe for ever quiet from the fear of evil, being out
of the reach henceforth of Satan and all his instruments, and whatsoever may
trouble or disquiet them; they that can kill the Body, and it may be have
killed theirs, have no more now that they can do to them, their sorrow and
sighing is for ever past; and they are comforted in Paradise and in Abraham's
bosom while others are tormented, Luke 16.25. for they are in Paradise with
Christ, as Christ said to the Malefactor that confessed him, This day thou
shall be with me in Paradise, Luke 23 43 Their Soul or Spirit dies not (as some
hold) with the Body, but returns to God, into whose hands they commit it, as
they pray him to receive it, so he does receive it too, Eccles. 12.7. Psalm.
31.5. and 49 15. Acts 7.59. Philip. 1.23. Yea, they may be understood to be
those that stand with the Lamb upon mount Sion, and that sing the new song with
the melody of Harps unto God, which no man else can learn, they being in a more
full and proper sense redeemed from the Earth and from among men then any yet
here living, and as to those that suffer and dye in the Lord from henceforth;
from the time of the Beasts rage when there will be the most remarkable time of
the Saints patience, at the time (probably) when the Beast that ascends out of
the bottomless Pit slays the Witnesses which is his last act, his parting blow,
the ending part of his Rage, Chap. 11.7. (which Chapter takes in all the time
from the first to the last) that singing with Harps may denote their special
triumphant Blessedness; which agrees with what is said in Chap. 7. where there
is the same number of the Sealed; and where it is said, that they that came out
of great (or as the words may be rendered the great) tribulation were arrayed in
white robes, having washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the
Lamb; where the white Robes doubtless are emblems of some Great Priestly or
Kingly dignity, as is implied in Chap. 3.4.5. such as is mentioned Chap. 5.10.
and 20.6. and as is implied in what follows, when it is said, Therefore are
they before the Throne of God night and day in his Temple (as the
Beast-worshippers are tormented and have no rest day nor night, Chap. 18.11)
and he that sits on the Throne dwells among them, they shall hunger no
more, nor thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, or any heat;
for the Lamb who is in the midst of them shall feed them, and shall lead them
to the Fountains of living waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes, Chap. 7.13, 17. Let me add this upon this quotation that it may appear
that those Learned and Reverend men that appointed that seventh Chapter or part
of it, to be read on the day dedicated to the Memory of All Saints, surely
understood those things to be applicable to the Deceased Saints that dyed in
the Lord: But yet their great and proper reward is,

2. Fully at the day of the Appearing again of the Lord Jesus, at that day the
Crown of Righteousness henceforth from the time of Departure laid up, shall be
given to all that love and look for that his Appearance, 2 Timothy 4.8. The Son of
man our Lord Jesus shall then when he comes in the glory of his Father with all
his holy Angels, reward every man according to his works, Matthew. 16 27. Rev.
22.12. and then their Reward shall be great and glorious indeed, and gloriously
manifested; for then them that sleep in him will God bring with him, the Dead
in Christ shall rise first, 1 These. 4.14, 16. not in mortal bodies to labor
and travail again, but their mortal then shall put on immortality, and their
corruptible shall put on incorruption, and what was sown in dishonor shall
rise in glory, and what in weakness shall rise in power: and what was sown a
natural body shall rise a spiritual body, fashioned into the likeness of
Christ's glorious body, 1 Cor. 15.43, 44, 53. Phil. 3.21. and then they shall
have no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying nor pain, for all those former
things shall be wholly past, Rev. 21.4. no nor shall they have any thing of
error, ignorance, or corruption, nor of fear or grief in their mind, or inward
man, but they shall then know as they are known, and see face to face, and be
made like to Christ seeing him as he is. 1 Cor. 13.9, 12. 1 John 3.2. Then they
shall appear in glory with Christ, Col. 3. 3, 4. having fellowship with him,
and him ever amongst and with them, and God i^ and with him, 1 Cor. 1.9. 2
These. 2.14 and 1 These. 4.16. Rev. 21.3. enjoying the new Heavens and the new
Earth wherei^ dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.14. and the new Jerusalems glory
which comes down from out of heaven, having the glory of God and her light like
to a stone most precious, like a Jasper stone clear as Crystal, Rev. 21.10,
11. eating and drinking with Christ at his Table in his Kingdom, Luke 22.29,
30. enjoying the incorruptible Inheritance that is undefiled and fades not
away, 1 Pet. 1^ 4. and the incorruptible Crown of Life, Righteousness and Glory
which he has promised to them that love him, 1 Cor. 9.25. 2 Timothy 4.8. James
1.12. even the Kingdom and glory of God and of Christ, wherein they shall have
the fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore at his right hand; and see his
face and have his Name in their foreheads, and have an everlasting happy day
without any night the Lord himself and the Lamb being their everlasting Light,
and they shall reign for ever and ever, Matthew. 25.35. Dan. 7.27. 1 Pet. 5.10
Psalm. 16.11. and 36.8, 9, 10. Isa. 60.19, 20. Rev. 22.3, 4, 5.

Which thing I only here mention, having more particularly spoken something to
them in my Book called Balaam's wish. O Happy, happy, and thrice happy portion
of those that be so dead!

So much for the Explication and opening of the words. Let us now Apply it
briefly.

Application.
1. ANd first, it tends wonderfully to commend and magnify the Lord Jesus to
us, who makes those that are in him even so happy in Death; He being the Root
and wellspring of all the Happiness and Blessedness enjoyed, or injoyable by
the Saints and holy ones either in this Life or in and after Death; or at and
after the Resurrection of the Dead: Well may we then join our assent to that
Song of or in the kingdom, that Song of the Elders (mentioned by our Deceased
Sister on her Deathbed) and say, [ Thou art worthy to open the Book, and
unloose the Seals of it; for thou wast slain and have Redeemed us to God by thy
Blood, etc] as also to that of the Angels that follows, Worthy is the Lamb that
was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom and strength and honor,
and glory, and blessing, Rev. 5.9, 12. magnifying also the Riches of the love
and grace of God, even the Father in appointing and giving him forth to us, and
so filling him through Death and Sufferings, with all his own unspeakable
fullness, that he might be the Author of such Blessedness to us; and so we may
also join our assent to that of every Creature in Heaven and Earth, and under
the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that is in them, saying,
Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power be to him that sits upon the Throne and to
the Lamb for ever and ever, Rev. 5.13. and to that of the innumerable number
out of all Nations, Kindreds, Peoples and Tongues standing before the Throne,
and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and having Palms in their hands,
viz. Salvation to our God which sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, Chap.
7.9.10.

2. To commend and set forth the excellency and desireableness of the state of
those that are in Christ Jesus and abide in him, that they however despised and
abused of men, are the happiest men in the world, their portion better than any
other men's, the Heritage of Jacob to be preferred before all the enjoyments of
the great Princes of the Earth, Isa. 58.14. So as it may well be said, the
righteous (they that are in Christ Jesus, walking not after the Flesh but after
the Spirit) are more excellent then their neighbors, Prove. 12.26. however
Poor, Mean, Illiterate, Afflicted and Despised the Righteous be; And however
Rich, Learned, Honored, or otherwise adorned and qualified their neighbors,
that be not righteous, are. Yea, well it may be said, Happy art thou O Israel,
a People saved by the Lord the shield of their help, and sword of their
Excellency; thine enemies shall be found liars to thee, and thou shall tread
upon (as despising) their high place, Deuteronomy. 33.29. O Lord of hosts: blessed is
the man that puts his trust in thee, Psalm. 84.12: Blessed at all times,
blessed in Life, more blessed in Death, but most blessed in and after the
Resurrection of the Dead.

3. To commend Piety and Godliness, and the exercise thereof to us, which has
the Promise of all this great blessedness, both of the life that now is, and
that that is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. and 6.6.

4. To condemn the blind judgment and practice of the world, that slight,
hate, and persecute these things, accounting those that are and that dye in
Christ (especially in a way of persecution) to be unhappy and their portion
despicable; which things I only mention: But besides

5. It directs us whither to flee for shelter and refuge against the fears, and
feelings, horrors, and harms of Death the King of Terrors, namely to Christ
Jesus our Lord, who has both abolished or destroyed its destructive power by
his Death, and destroyed him that had the power of it, the Devil, 2 Timothy 1.10.
Heb. 2.14. and also has the keys of Hell and Death, Power, and full Authority
over it, and over the dead, having dyed, rose and revived that he might be Lord
both of the dead and of the living, Romans 14.19. as he has that sharp Sickle in
his hand, so he can cut off with it high or low, rich or poor; and he can keep
it off or back during his pleasure, and order the state of it, and the persons
in it as seems good in his sight. And in him there is deliverance from the
horror and harms of it; as he is the forgiver of the sins, both that
occasioned it, and that might render it as an inlet into a worser state then it
simply of it self contains, and has both Authority (and proclaims himself
ready graciously to do it) even both to raise out of it, and in the interim to
secure from harm and mischiefs by it; yea, and to make it greatly useful and
advantageous to us, to make the day of it better then the day wherein we were
born, Eccles. 7.1. a Chamber of ease, rest and safety to us from the evils
either fore-afflicting us, or further threatening, and abiding the yet dwellers
on the Earth, or abiders in the land of the living, Isa. 26.20. and 57.2. an
outlet to our cares, fears, labors and temptations to sin, or toils by such
temptations; and an inlet, safe Port, or entrance into peace, and security the
end of our exile and banishment, and beginning of our actual admission in our
spirits into our Fathers presence, and glorious fruition of our blessed Savior
that wonderful one, the unparall'd lover of our Souls; and Paragon and Pattern
of all divine and heavenly virtue and excellency; the Lamb that had mercy on
us, and dyed, rose again and lives for ever for us, the Lord Jesus. He is that
Sun that shining into our hearts the light of the knowledge of himself, and of
the glory of God in him; and being believingly beheld by us, will drive out and
expel all that darkness of our ignorance and error that in the night of our
unbelief obscures our minds and fills us with frightful fears of Death and its
consequents, and chases away all those mists and vapors arising out of the
muddines, of our hearts, to the sadding us at the thoughts of its approches;
and by his warming influences (as streaming forth by his Holy Spirit in the
Gospel the beams of his love and favor in the forgiveness of our sins, and
interesting us in his Righteousness, and precious promises of blessing and
everlasting Life and Happ^ness, and so the lively hope of his Salvation and
Glory to be enjoyed by us) he can and will so cheer and comfort us, as to make
the grim visage of Death amiable to us, and the passage through it very
desirable. Philip. 1.21, 22, 23. yea and give us hope and joy in Death, as the
best hour that ever came upon us. And he is that (and such a) shield too, that
encompassing us about with his favor and defense, interposing himself between
us and our enemies, even Death and all its train and power, secures us against
their fiercest assaults and sharpest darts, being the Death of Death, the
Destruction of the Grave and Hell, Hos. 13.14. we being in him, and encompassed
about with his arms of love, nothing shall be able to approach us to hurt or
harm us. He is such a Fountain of living waters that whosoever drinks of him
(receiving his Doctrine into his heart, and retaining and keeping it there)
shall not die of thirst; Such a Heavenly Medicine (being Gods Salvation or
saving health) that whosoever takes him down and tastes the sweetness of his
Love, and Grace, and keeps it, or the relish of it upon his palace, shall not
taste Death, Joh. 4.14. and 8.51, 52. Yea, those Waters he gives, and the
Medicine he affords, will spring up and effect in the receiver and taker down
thereof, Life in Death, even Eternal Life. The Tree of Life that was in the
first Paradise, and which being eaten of, would have preserved the life of Man
for ever is lost, and there is no recovering it again, Genesis 3.22, 23, 24. Nor
can all the Physicians in the world find out or compose a Medicine that can
keep us from Dying. But our Lord Jesus Christ, and his heavenly Wisdom and
Doctrine is that Tree of Life in the midst of the Paradise of God; that
Sovereign Antidote of Gods own finding out, making, and propounding, which
being eaten and taken down, will secure us against all the Poison of the old
Serpent; the evil of this natural Death, and carry us safely through it, and
bring us certainly out of it to immortality and eternal Life, Prove. 3.18. Rev.
22.2, 3, 14. He will both make the Soul live and be happy in Death and raise up
the Body to an immortal state of bliss, Isa 55.3. Joh. 11.25, 26. 2 Cor. 4.14.

In vain do men weary themselves and spend their Estates to find out a
Philosophers stone that may turn all things into Gold. Here is that true Elixir
that will turn all to Good; and as he has reconciled all things in himself
that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, Col. 1.20. so will he reconcile all
things to us, and make them ours and for us, destroying that in all things, and
all those things and persons that are inflexibly against us. Thence the Apostle
says, We know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to
them that are his called according to purpose, Romans 8.28. and all things are
yours (for your use, service or benefit) whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas,
or World, or Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come, all are
yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. Death is
in the Believers Inventory as a parcel of his Goods, as one of his Servants or
Friends; yea, and all things too that shall follow after it: For all the ways
or paths of the Lord are mercy and truth to them that keep his testimonies and
his Covenants, Psalm. 25.10. There shall no evil happen to the just, Prove.
12.21. He that keeps the Commandments shall feel no evil thing. Eccles. 8.5.
O infinitely precious Jewel and Pearl of great price, the Bread which came down
from heaven, which whosoever eats of, shall live for ever, Joh. 6.50, 51.

But yet the being of this Refuge does not of it self simply secure us against
the hurts of Death, they that neglect it shall perish without escape, however
good, safe, and sure a Defense it is, and affords. Heb. 2.3. Death will do them
this hurt (as we have forenoted) that it will shut them out from all ways and
passages to the after-life; it will cut off all further opportunities of
seeking for safety in, or enjoying safety by or from this refuge. This Antidote
will not preserve from fears or harms of Death, unless both taken and kept
within our hearts. This Elixir will not turn all to gold or good, unless
enjoyed by us or duly applied. This Sun will not shine on us to expel our
darkness, and refresh and cheer us, unless we be and walk in the light and
virtue of it; nor this Shield defend and secure us against Deaths harmful
darts, no nor from (what is indeed the Dreadful thing) the second Death, unless
it be about us, and we, as it were, within its compass; no, nor will any thing
or person else do it besides him: For God the Father is in him, and not to be
approached to, or his favor enjoyed, but in and by him, Joh. 14.6, 7. Nor is
the Spirit but upon him, or any other ways to be enjoyed, then by turning at
his Reproofs to believe in and obey him, Prove. 1.23. Joh. 14.15, 16, 17. Acts
5.32. neither is there Salvation in any other Name beside, his that was
Crucified for us and Dyed for our sins, and Rose again for our justification,
under heaven, whereby we may be saved. Acts 4.11.12. The Law and its deeds
cannot justify and save us; for by it is the knowledge, not the forgiveness of
sins, Romans 3.20. Riches profit not in the day of wrath, it is only
righteousness delivers from death, Prove. 11.4. nor will our works or
righteousness that are not of the Faith of him profit us, Isa. 57.12. Philip.
3.8, 9. for they that are of the works of the Law are also under the curse,
Gal. 3.10, 11, 12. and works of our own devising are of no worth with God,
Matthew. 15, 9.10. Nay, Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, cannot save us, because not
Crucified for us; nor have they that Name into which we may be Baptized for the
Remission of our sins and receipt of the Holy Ghost, to renew and regenerate
us, and so by consequence, not any other man. 1 Cor. 1.12, 13. the wise Virgins
Oil will not relieve the foolish Virgins that have none of their own, Matthew.
25.8, 9. The just shall live by his, not another man's faith, Hab. 2.4. and
therefore there is (as we have also showed before) an absolure necessity of our
being in Christ, that we may have this blessedness by him in and after Death.
Unless we be in Christ Jesus, He is not made to us of God, as to our enjoyment
thereof, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. 1 Cor. 1.30.
The Ark saved none from perishing by the Flood, but those that were in it; nor
will Christ save from the second Death or, give blessing in this to any out of
him, He that has not the Son has not Life, though that Life be given us in
him that it might in receiving him be received with him. 1 John 5.11, 12. The
Feast, though prepared and invited to, satisfied not its refusers; but they
were excluded and cut off from all they had beside, for refusing it, Luke
14.24. Matthew. 22.4, 7. yea, and being come into, he must be abide in too, so as
to Death and in Death, else we yet perish. He that draws back, Gods Soul will
have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. A Castle though never so strong will not
secure from the potent and vigilant enemy, him that either comes not into it,
or after he has been in it, upon any terms forsakes it. And this is useful
further,

6. To invite and provoke us all with all earnestness and diligence to betake
our selves to Christ this refuge, and being in him, to abide in him; to live
and dye in him, and by no means neglect or forsake him. Enter into this rock
and hide our selves in the dust of the earth, even in the dust of his Death,
for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, Isa. 2.10. Psalm. 22.14.
Death will come upon us sooner or later, that cannot be avoided, nothing more
certain; yea, it may come suddenly upon the youngest and strongest of us; for
nothing more uncertain then the time of its coming, for surely every man in his
best state is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5. and though of it self it will not
hurt us, nor shall we perish in it, but be raised up again from thence: Yet our
retaining our sins, and refusing or neglecting to be washed and renewed, and so
to be partakers of Gods Salvation, that will expose us to, and pull upon as a
second Death; yea, and this Death will put an end to all possibility of
escaping that, and be an entrance into that dreadful Prison, in which the
Debtor and Malefactor will be kept safe till the great Assizes, and then the
Execution of the Eternal Judgment will succeed. Now is the accepted time; now
the time of escape, and this the way to escape; to be found in Christ. O then
how does it behove and concern every man to look about him, and give diligence
with the Apostle, to win Christ, and be found in him, not having our own
righteousness, but that which is by the Faith of him.

Object. But may some say, Can we make our selves in Christ? can we enter into
him as we will? can any come to Christ except the Father that sent him, draw
him? Is it not of God that any man is in Christ Jesus and not of himself? why
then do you call upon us to this, as if in our power?

Answ. We do not suppose that any man can of himself come to, or make himself
in Christ Jesus. Nor do we call upon any to do so of himself; they that make
Salvation and Damnation the most absolutely matters of mere Destiny; do not
they also (yea who more) call upon men to get into Christ; labor to be found
in Christ; And yet they tell men, that only a certain number that must come
and be irresistably brought into him, can possibly come into him. Others (say
some of them) are as much necessitated to perish through the defects of Gods
actings, or his non-actings, as those that must come are necessitated to live
through his effects; witness Dr. K. answer to Mr. Goodwin. These indeed are
harsh Taskmasters like Pharaoh, that required the tale of Brick, but gave them
not materials necessary for their performance; Nay, worse then he, for there
was Straw to be had for their seeking it and gathering it; only they had not
time enough to do that and fulfill their tale of Brick too. But these tell them
there is no sufficient Grace for them; not because the grace in Christ is not
sufficient, but because it is not for them. So another known Author that I
forbear to name, and yet these say too, men must be condemned for not coming to
Christ and believing in him.

But to the Objection I say, Both that the way into Christ is open for all (
Psalm. 100.1, 4.) and that it is the work of God to make a man in Christ, and it
is a work he is ready and desirous to work; and to that purpose he calls men to
Christ in and by his voice in his Gospel, in and with which he is both
preventing men with grace bringing Salvation, and is drawing them and taking
off the yoke from their jaws, and laying meat before them, that they might come
to him, Hos. 11.4. Tit. 2.11. and in their yielding up to him he works thereby
in them, and brings them into him, and makes them in him Does not wisdom cry!
does not understanding put forth her voice, Prove. 8.1. Can that be denied? and
to whom? she cries without, and utters her voice in the streets, she cries in
the chief places of concourses, in the opening of the gates, coming in at the
doors, and in the city she utters her voice, Turn ye at my reproofs, Prove.
1.20, 21, 22, 23. and 8, 2, 3. To you, O men (says she) I call, and my voice
is to the sons of men, indefinitely; yea, to the simple, and those that have no
understanding, verse. 4. and Chap. 94. she bids Look to me and be ye saved all
the ends of the earth, Isa. 45.22. The mighty God, the Lord calls and has
called the earth from the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same,
Psalm. 50.1. And what says Wisdom, or the Lord by her, O ye simple, understand
wisdom, and ye fools be ye of an understanding heart, Prove. 8.5. She says not,
Make your selves wise and understanding, but as one only able and furnished
for doing it, she bids them only be made so by her, and to that purpose, Hear
and receive her instruction, etc. verse. 6.10, 32, 33. as elsewhere, Be ye
converted. Acts 3.21. Be ye reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20. and diverse the like. And
by her Voice and Instruction (which is originally Gods Voice and Instruction,
the Father is drawing men to Christ, and every one that hears and learns of the
Father comes unto him) Joh. 6.44, 45. there he is putting forth his hand, and
that not an empty or idle hand, but operative and graciously bountiful, as
knowing our weakness and poverty, Prove. 1.24. Isa. 65.2. and thence calls to us
to give our hands to him; yield our selves to, and comply with him, by the help
of his hand to enter into his Sanctuary and serve him; as Hezekiah said, 2 Chronicles. 30.8. comparing the marginal (which is after the Hebrew) reading with
the Text. And thence the Prophet complains, There is none that stirs up
himself to take hold of thee, Isa. 64.7. as implying Gods nighness and
preventing us with strength; but man's laziness and stubbornness in refusing to
use the Talent given, or put forth the strength afforded, putting his hand into
his bosom, and refusing to pull it out, and give or yield it to in compliance
with the Lord. The same nighness of God to us and his graciousness is employed
in our Saviors saying, Behold, I stand at the door and knock, If any man hear
my voice and open to me, I will come in to him, etc. Rev. 3.20. And in the
Apostles exhorting not to receive the grace of God in vain, because he says,
in an accepted time have I heard thee, in the day of salvation I have succored
thee, now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation. 2 Cor. 6.1, 2.
thence God faults men's wills, Ye will not come to me, says Christ, that ye
might have life. Joh. 5.40. and Why will ye dye. Ezekiel. 33.11. and I would have
gathered, but ye would not, Matthew. 23.37. Now which shall we believe, God, or
man? God lays fault on man's will, for their wilfulness when he prevents them,
and is at hand to help them, that they might come to Christ; and men, too many,
lay the fault on Gods will, and say in effect, God will not, and merely because
he will not give them grace that they might; the Lord puts the fault in men,
and says their destruction is of themselves, Hos. 23.9. and men put the fault
in God, and say in effect, their destruction is of him, as it is said, The
foolishness of a man perverts his way, and then his heart frets against the
Lord, Prove. 19.3. The slothful man says, There is a Lion in the way, I shall
be slain in the streets, Prove. 22.13. not because there is much danger indeed,
but as an excuse for his sloth, he ingages his heart to some corrupt interest,
and then says for excuse, I have married a wife, I cannot come. Luke 14.20. It
is true the Apostle says, It is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs; but of God that shows mercy, Rom 9.16. and the same have I said in
this that I have here said; but he says not, it is not to him that wills,
nor to him that runs in the strength and encouragement given of God in his
mercy; for that would cross what our Savior in effect says in Matthew. 7 ^ 7,
8. when he says, Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find, knock and
it shall be opened to you: for every one that asks receives, and he that
seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened.

Enq. But what shall or must I do then that God may bring me into Christ, and
make him to me, Wisdom, Righteousness, etc.

Answer. Comply with his Calls and Counsels turning at his Reproofs. Prove.
1.23. and 4.10. Hear, and thy soul shall live. Isa. 55.3. He bids repent and
believe the Gospel. Mark 1.15. And I say so too, repent of these vain excuses
and put them away, repent of minding other things and neglecting the Gospel,
and Gods salvation therein, that God having given Christ for thee and holding
him forth to thee; and Christ having giving himself for thee (for it was for
all men. 1 Timothy 2.6.) and made peace and atonement through his Blood, and being
filled with all the fullness of God, and calling thee by his Gospel, and
standing ready upon thy compliance to help and save thee, to pardon thee and
give thee his holy Spirit, admit thee into his favor and protection, and make
an everlasting Covenant with thee; yet thou let him stand without knocking,
and do not take him into thee, nor yield thy hand to him to be taken in to
him, but runnest away from God thy Savior after lying vanities; after the
World, and the Flesh, and the Devil; after pride and Covetousness, and the
like; labourest for the bread that perishes, and refusest to seek and labor
in listening to, and following thy Savior, for that bread that endures to
everlasting life that he would give thee. Repent of this thy carriage, and so
also of seeking Gods favor by any works or ways of thine own or other men's
proposing, and not by and in listening to him. Repent of these and all other
like things, and believe and obey the Gospel. But be sure it be the Gospel thou
believe, not what any (though an Angel) says contrary to or beside the
Gospel. Gal. 1.6, 9. Not those doctrines of men, That God has rejected the
most men absolutely before they were born, and is not willing they should be
saved, contrary to 1 Timothy 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.9. that Christ Dyed not for all, but
only an Elect number, contrary to 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. 1 Timothy 2 6. Heb. 2.9. 1 John
2, 2. and the like doctrines, and so all such as deny the Person, Satisfaction,
Resurrection or Mediation of Christ, his Personal appearance, the Resurrection
of the Dead, the last Judgment, and the like.

Repent, and believe the Gospel. If thou say, How can thou believe? Is not
Faith the gift of God? I answer. Yes; and he gives it in a sober and diligent
hearing of his Word, not wilfully closing the eye and stopping the ear, and
hardening the heart against him, Romans 10.17. Gal. 3.2. Incline thine ear then
and hearken unto him, Hear and thy soul shall live. Isa. 55.3. yea, while it is
said, (or called) to day, if thou will hear his voice, harden not thy heart,
and thou shall hear and live, only obey in hearing as he enables thee and is
in the power of his light and truth by his Spirit working in thee to will and
to do of good pleasure. Work thou out in his working thine own salvation with
fear and trembling, Philip. 2.12, 13. doing all things without murmuring or
disputing. verse. 14. putting away and not wilfully retaining what he reproves,
and yielding thy self to God to follow his counsels and instructions; waiting
upon him is his ways, and looking to him and calling upon him as he enables
thee for his help; and thou shall be saved. Be but willing to this, Consent and
Obey; and though thou have been, or hitherto art as bad as one of the Rulers of
Sodom, or as the people of Gomorrha, thou shall eat the fruit of the land, the
promised land. Thy scarlet sins shall be white like snow, and thy crimson sins
like wool, Isa. 1.10, 18, 19. Be but as industrious in minding and following
after the Gospel and after God and Christ as drawing, instructing, and
strengthening thee, as thou have been, and others are for the World, and for
their corrupt desires and lusts, and thou may lay hold on Eternal life,
Prove. 2.1, 5. 1 Timothy 6.11, 12. This is the sum of the instructions given by the
Apostle James, when having affirmed that every good gift, and every perfect
giving, comes from above, from the Father of Lights with whom there is no
variableness or shadow of turning, and that of his own will begat he them by
the word of truth, that they might be a kind of first fruits of his creatures.
He adds and infers, Wherefore, my beloved Brethren, let every man be swift to
hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath, and laying apart all filthiness and
superfluity of naughtiness, receive with meekness the ingraffed word which is
able to save our souls; but be ye doers of the word and not hearers only,
James 1.17, 18, 21, 22.

But then it is to be minded too, that having begun to do thus, it in
neccesary to go on and to continue in so doing; abiding in Christ, minding and
believing the Gospel, and obeying it and him in and by it; and exercising our
selves to believe on him, and following after him that we may know him more and
more, and so be more rooted and grounded in and united with him, walking in him
according to our receipt of him, and taking heed of what might turn us out of
the way of understanding. As of

1. High-mindedness, as if we were rich enough, and knew and had attained
enough already. Prove 16.18.

2. Sloth, and what principles tend to that, and to high mindedness, Such as
That, that if we have once believed aright we cannot, whatever we may do,
totally and finally miscarry, Prove. 19.15. 1 Cor. 10.12.

3. Taking offense at either Gods ways and providence, Psalm. 73.2, 3, 12, 13,
14. Or at those that fear God, so as to break Communion with them, lest
forsaking the Assemblies and sitting alone we grow hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin, and for want of right exhortation and provocation to
cleave to God, withdraw from him through an evil heart of unbelief. Heb. 3.12,
13. and 10, 24, 26, 29. or else we fall into the snares of such as would seduce
us: against which things the minding and delighting in Gods Law will secure us,
Psalm. 119.165. and hereto also it is good and needful to pluck out the right eye
where it offends and cast it from us; for in fellowship and unity with the
fearers of God, God does command his blessing and life for evermore, Psalm
133.13.4. Eccles. 4.9.10, 11. Take heed too

4. Of the Love of the World and of the things in the world, and of whatsoever
doctrine or practice may corrupt us from the simplicity in and single cleaving
to Christ Jesus, 1 John 2.15, 18. 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. I enlarge not to these
things, nor add any other lest I be volumnious.

7. Whereas we may be tempted to grow Weary, by reason of the many Afflictions,
Troubles, Temptations, and Toilsomness to the Flesh that we may meet with in
the way of God and of godliness, and especially in times and cases of
Persecutions; here it also encouragement to patience, not only because Christ
has faithfully promised to be with his followers in their sufferings and
services to help them, as is said, Isa. 41.10, 13, 14 and that in the taking
courage and not cowardly desponding and laying down our resolutions and
endeavors to walk with God, but waiting upon him, he will strengthen our
hearts, Psalm. 27.14. and 31.24. Yea, and is faithful and will not suffer us to
be tempted above what we are able, but will with the temptation give an issue
that we may be able to bear it. 1 Cor. 10.13. but also from this here proposed
after the mention of the patience and constancy of the Saints in faith and
obedience. viz. The Blessed state of the dead that dye in the Lord, that they
then rest from their Labors, and shall receive a good Reward, Hold we fast
therefore the profession of the Faith without wavering; knowing that we shall
have such a Rest and Recompense; and that we have need of patience, that after
we have done the will of God we may receive the Promise And yet a little while
and He that shall come will come and will not tarry. Heb. 10.23, 35, 36, 37.
let us not for want of a little longer holding on our way, and enduring
Affliction, loose so sweet a Rest and so wondrous a Blessedness as is in Christ
Jesus set before us. Remember we, and be warned by Saul's example, who for want
of a little more patience, an hour or two longer tarrying for Samuel, lost his
Kingdom, 1 Samuel 10 8. and 13.8, 9, 10, 12, 13. Behold we and learn of the
Husbandman, who waits for the precious fruits of the earth and has long
patience for it until be receive the former and the latter rain; and be we also
patient in seeking and waiting for the blessing of Heaven: stablish we our
hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh, James 5.7, 8. O that our eye
may be so upon the blessed and glorious Rest to be enjoyed by us at Night, as
that we may endure the heat, and burden of the Day, or of that little small
part of it that yet remains

8. And then here is a motive and Encouragement too, to diligence in the work
and service of the Lord, and an Admonition to take heed of loytering and
idleness, or of doing badly; because our works follow us. Our Wealth will not
follow us, nor any Places or Dignities, men's Honors shall not descend with
them, only their Works that they may be disposed of, and in the great day
receive Rewards fully according thereunto; let us then give diligence in good
works to the full assurance of hope to the end, and not be slothful, but
followers of those who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises, seeing
God is not unrighteous to forget any work or labor of love showed unto his
Name. Heb 6.9, 10, 11, 12. The sleep of the laboring man is sweet whether he
eat little or much. Eccles. 5.12. let us labor and be industrious in the work
of the Lord and then whether we have much or little in this world, we shall
have a sweet comfortable rest and sleep when we go out of it unto God; for he
will so satiate the weary Soul, and replenish every sorrowful Soul, as that
when it awakes it shall be able to say with Jeremiah, My sleep was sweet unto
me, Jer. 31.25, 26. to this end let us look diligently to our Lord Jesus,
cleave closely to him, and abide in the believing views and remembrance of him,
who as He gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Tit. 2.14. so he
also is the root from whence we may derive all grace and virtue, to make us
fruitful, Rev 22.16. Avoid we the counsel of the ungodly, the way of sinners,
and the seat of the scorns, and exercise, our selves diligently day and night
in the Law of the Lord, the Gospel of our Salvation, that so we may be as the
Trees of the Lord full of Sap, even filled with the fruits of Righteousness
that are by him. Psalm. 1.2, 3. and 104.16. Be we always steadfast, unmovable,
from the hope of the Gospel and ways of Righteousness, abounding in the work of
the Lord, forasmuch as we know that our labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord, our works shall follow us to be gloriously rewarded by him, when we shall
Rest from the pain, labor and exercise attending them, 1 Cor. 15.58.

9. Lastly, it affords Comfort also to us in behalf of such as Dye in the Lord,
that we may not immoderately Mourn for them as those that have no hope. 1 These.
4.16, 17. Death takes them not away so as they perish from their Hope, they
shall Rise again, yea, God will bring them with Christ, and they shall Rise
First, as is there said; in the mean time they are at Rest, and their good
works are not lost, but follow with them and they are Blessed.

Comfort we our selves, and one another with these words, yea, Comfort we our
selves in behalf of this our Sister deceased, with them, whose Decease
occasioned (as She also before it requested it) our Consideration of these
words.

Truly though she had here Weaknesses and Infirmities common to humane fallen
nature, and was not without all such defilements as spring from Passions, and
lesser sins, for which God was pleased also to chasten her for ours, and others
admonition, yet we may through the grace of God afforded to and received by
her, not doubt to say, That she was a good Woman, and God humbling her by his
corrections and chastisements did her much good in the latter end, and she
showed good proof of her profiting thereby, her heart being much taken with,
and set for the knowledge of God and Christ in his Gospel, as we might in some
good measure perceive in that she was very attentive to it, and desirous to
have her Children (though but Mother in-law to them) mindful thereof also,
walking soberly and harmlesly; as also in both her former Lying-in, when she
had a very weak time (so as there was little hope of recovery for a great
while) she gave very good proof and evidence of her Faith and Patience, so as
to sing in her very great Weakness to God and his praises. And in this last
Lying-in, whereof she dyed (as in all her languishings and great weaknesses
before it) she behaved herself with so good hope in God, and desires of being
dissolved and being with him; and with diverse such Christian and gracious
speeches and demeanours, as gives us good hope comfortably to judge her one of
those Dead that have dyed in the Lord; and therefore to be Blessed, as being at
Rest from all her Labors, Weaknesses, Languishings and whatever Toyls,
Troubles or Temptations she here encountered with, and that what good fruits are
Works she brought forth and acted, (as she was not without such) follow with
her into Gods presence, so as that, through Christ and his Blood washing both
her and them, she shall receive for them a good Reward in the Kingdom and
Inheritance to be revealed.

Bless we God, That there is such a way made for us to be made good, and to
obtain through Christ so good hope for our selves and others, that we may live
and dye in the Lord and be ever Blessed: And Bless we him for the good wrought
in her and the good hope she expressed in Christ and God, and that we have
concerning her: And let it be our great care so to believe on and abide in
Christ, that we living in and unto him while we are here, may also Dye in him
and enjoy the Blessing here pronounced by this Voice from Heaven that said,
Write, Blessed are the Dead that dye in the Lord from henceforth. Yea, says
the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow
them.

Blessed be God.

Epitaphium in Amicam suam Dam. REBECCAM JACKLER.
IMbecille fuit corpus, quod terra repostum
Jam tenet in gremio non temeranda suo.
Men's fuit and variis curis obnoxia, quare
Hospitio fragili fessa domum petiit;
Quam proprio nostrum miserescens sanguine Christus
Omnibus aptavit, constituitq bonis.
Et nunc quam foelix! cui nec jam corpus onustum
Morbis, nec curis men's agitata suis.
Men's etenim athereas per Christum ascensa cathedras
Omnibus impetibus libera tuta manet.
Gaudia percipiens ibi talia, qualia nullus,
Quantumcunque sciens, hic habitans capiat.
Queis and ei everso Christo veniente sepulchro
Aeterno socius foedere corpus erit.
An Epitaph Upon his Deceased Friend Mrs. R. J.
WEak was the Body which within its womb
The consecrated ground does now intomb.
Her mind exposed to cares, lothing at last
So bad a lodging to that Home made have,
Which Christ through his own Blood of grace prepared
And gives to all good men as their reward.
And now how well in mind and body she
This from Diseases, That from cares being free!
Her mind the heavenly Seats through Christ her guide
Ascended, free from passions does abide.
Such joys enjoying, as none here below
However knowing, perfectly can know.
Wherein when Christ has quite or'e-turn'd the Grave
It shall its Body partner ever have.

