A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, ON THE Fifth of November,
1681.

By GEORGE HOOPER, D. D.

Printed by his Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed for Mark Pardoe at the Sign of the Black-Raven over against
Bedford House in the Strand, 1682.

S. MATTHEW 22.21. Render therefore unto Caesar, the Things that are Caesar's;
and unto God, the Things that are God's.


THe Pharisees and the Sadduces, though divided in their Opinions and their
Interests, yet both looking upon our Savior as their common enemy (he equally
opposing the Impiety of the one, and the Hypocrisy of the other) conspire
together to entangle him in his talk; and make here in this Chapter their
successive attempts upon him.

THe first, that of the Pharisees, and which gave an occasion to the reply of
the Text, was managed with address and design: they had so laid their Ambush,
that which way soever he took, he might fall into the Snare and perish; the
answer he gave, they expected, would certainly offend either the Zeal of the
Jew, or the Power of the Roman.

For the Jews, although they had now for a long while been under subjection to
the uncircumcised; although their Great City had been ruined by the Babylonian,
and their whole Nation transplanted, hardly a Stone left upon a Stone, nor a
Jew in Judea; though, after their return from their Captivity, they were still
Vassals to the Persian Empire, then part of the Conquest of Alexander the
Great, after under the Syrian Kings, then reduced to the Roman Obedience by
Pompey; (for their Chiefs, whether Princes or Priests, were still tributary and
dependant;) yet they still retained their high Spirit, a peculiar sense of
their Native Liberty and Sacred Prerogatives. But when afterward the Romans
took the Government into their own hands, removed their Tetrarch, and brought
them into the condition of a Province, to be commanded now by one sent from
Rome, who should have the Power of Life and Death, and Tax them at his will;
this seemed insupportable to the greatest part of them, and was esteemed as
unlawful as it was burdensome: that they were a holy People; their Persons and
Estates sacred to God; and to give Obedience to any Forreigner, was to withdraw
it from the Lord of Hosts. Nor shall we think it was any hard matter, to
persuade a People so well satisfied of their National Privileges, and of so
stubborn a temper, that it was an ungodly thing to suffer Impositions, to pay
Taxes was Irreligion. He then that resisted this Heathen Authority, was the
truest Israelite; the truest to the Liberty of his Nation, and the honor of
his God; and as Moses had delivered them from the Egyptian Bondage, so they
expected a Messiah, who should redeem them from the Roman: and if our Savior
pretended to be that great Person; he was, they thought, obliged to take this
Yoke from off their Necks, and declare against the Roman Government.

On the other side the Romans knowing what People they had to deal with; that
they were a rebellious City, hurtful unto Kings, and unto Provinces, which
would pay neither Toll, Tribute, nor Custom; for so they stand of old described
to Artaxerxes; had a very watchful Eye over them, and were jealous of every
Motion: They had their Spies, the Herodians here in the Text; and restrained
their unquiet tumultuous Spirits, with severe exemplary Executions. So that to
accuse one of a Crime against the State, as an Enemy to Caesar, was the
greatest Revenge the most malicious Enemy could take; it was to expose him to
certain Ruin, to an ignominious cruel Death. For so we find the Chief Priests,
when they had taken Counsel together, to put Jesus to Death for Crimes, as they
thought, against their Law; yet presenting him to Pilate with this Accusation.
We found this Man perverting the People, forbidding to give Tribute to Caesar,
saying that he himself, is Christ a King. We have them therefore here preparing
that Article, whereby hereafter they intend to murder him. They endeavor now,
by the Question they maliciously propose, to take such hold of his Words, that
they may deliver him over to the Power and Authority of the Governor.

The Disciples therefore of the Pharisees, who possibly were against the
payment of Tribute, and the Herodians who were for it, being both here met
together, the one to tempt, and the other to inform; begin their Discourse to
him with this flattering treacherous Insinuation: Master, We know that thou art
true, and teach the Word of God in Truth, neither carest thou for any Man;
for thou regardest not the Person of Men: thou art not afraid of the
Government, and wilt not for fear disguise the Truth, as our Scribes and our
Doctors do. Tell us therefore, what think thou? Is it lawful to give Tribute
to Caesar or not? But Jesus, as the Text proceeds, perceived their Wickedness,
and said, why tempt ye me Hypocrites? Show me the Tribute Money, and they
brought unto him a Penny; and he says unto them, whose is this Image and
Superscription? And they say unto him Caesar 's; then says he unto them,
returning them a precise distinct Answer, and no other than what they
themselves had produced: Render therefore unto Caesar, the things which are
Caesar 's; and unto God, the things that are God's. The Sovereignty of Caesar
over you appears by his Prerogative of coining your Money: You know your
Governor, for you see his Face; and in the Inscription, you read his
Authority. Why therefore should you deny him the Testimony of your Subjection,
and refuse to pay him Tribute? His Stamp I see is current with you, is the
regulation of your Contract, the Standard of your civil Commerce: And, as in
Payments, you cannot refuse to accept it, so here you are obliged to give it. If
Caesar be your King, this Payment he asks, is as due as any you demand: and
that he is your Prince, the Money, you would withhold, of it self testifies
against you. God does not here interpose any particular Claim; nor will he lend
his Name to countenance your Disobedience against your King, and his
Vicegerent. If indeed he sets up his Image in the Temple, you are not to suffer
it for God's sake; and if he commands you to worship This, you are not to obey
him: but to give It in Tribute is your Duty; it is that which God does so far
not forbid, that he does command: Give therefore unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar 's, and unto God, the things that are God's.

The Words of our Savior relate indeed to a particular Question, and chiefly
there concern the giving of Tribute; but they are too the Foundation of a
general Rule, and determine alike in all matters, that can come in dispute
betwixt God's Supreme Authority, and that which is delegated to the Sons of
Men. They importing, that some things there are peculiarly belonging to God,
and some things belonging to the King; and, whose they are, we may know by the
Inscription.

And this Determination we shall crave leave to prosecute, that way the
occasion of the Day leads: by representing, First, the Rights of God, and of
Caesar. Secondly, the Usurpations of the Pope upon both; and Thirdly, the
Redress and Reform.

The Rights of God, and the King, and the Robbery the Sea of Rome has committed
upon both, have been made so evident by others, that they will need here but a
very brief Recapitulation.

First, If we enquire what is God's, we are to consider him as Lord in chief,
and sole Proprietor, whose is the World, and all that dwell therein. Part
indeed of his Dominion, he has been pleased to bestow on the Sons of Men; but
so as to be held of him, by such Laws, with such Services, and under such
Reservations, as it shall have pleased the Almighty Donor.

1. He has therefore reserved to himself the power of declaring Laws, and those
not to be overrul'd, nor superseded, but by himself; to bind every where, and
for ever; to pass through all Countries, and continue to all Ages. And those
you may read: he has delivered them in Writing.

2. He has accordingly prescribed the Worship that shall be paid him, and the
Services he expects. Those that are peculiar to him have his Image, his Mark
set upon them, and are Incommunicable. For he is a jealous God, and will not
give his Honor to another.

3. And for this peculiar Service, he has chosen to be waited upon by a
distinct peculiar People; that the Homage and Worship of the World may be
presented to him in public, by proper hallowed Hands. And these Men, they too
have their Character; you may know them whose they are, and to whom they belong.

4. In the last place we may mention as proper to God, not what he has
primarily reserved, but what afterward his pious Servants out of Zeal and
Gratitude have offered to him. Such are all Donations sacred to his Name, and
appropriated to his Service. These Possessions and Revenues, whose they are,
you will find too by their Inscription; look into the Charters of their
Foundations, and you will see: they belong to God.

In the next place consider we what is Caesar's: and if we look upon him, we
shall know his Quality and his Value. Whose Image bears he? And whom does he
represent? Is he not the Vicegerent of God?

1. Wherever therefore his Sovereign, the Almighty, has not prevented him by
any precedent Commands, there he has right and liberty to put forth his: in
those cases to expect an active cheerful Obedience; and that we should in no
case, and for no reason, resist.

2. Be this Civil Government, Heretic or Infidel, we are not discharged of our
Allegiance. We are obliged by the same Divine Authority to preserve our
Religion under it, and to continue to it our Subjection. Nor are any Modern
Governors of the Church greater than their Fathers the Apostles; who obeyed
patiently the worst of Heathen Emperors; submitting either to their Edicts, or
Persecutions.

3. The Duty of the Christian Emperor being to restrain Vice and Irreligion, to
promote Holiness, and the Worship of God; to him it belongs to order and direct
the Church, the way he shall think most proper for those ends; to be its
Temporal Overseer.

These are the unquestionable Rights of the Civil Power, affirmed in our
Articles, and asserted at large by others; and to be given up to it, by those
that will render to Caesar, what is Caesar's.

II. Neither are the Rights of God and the King more evident, than that the
Pope has invaded both. His Usurpations are now grown as conspicuous as his
Greatness; and to recount them all, would be to give a particular of his whole
Authority.

Every one knows, his Principality over the other Churches of the World, what
an unjust Claim it is, and how meanly founded. How his Authority at first was
no greater than that of his Neighbor Bishops; the Style the same, and his
Holiness in common: His Precedence not in the Right of Saint Peter, but of a
Capital City; and Addresses first made to him, not because he was next to God,
but to the Imperial Court. How from the civility of a Precedence they claimed a
Superiority; because they had been consulted with, they would afterward
command: from arbitrating of difference referred to them by their Brethren
concerned, they usurped a Judicature: and then, when none durst contradict
them, they could not err, and grew Infallible.

It is too as well known, how taking advantage of the weakness of an old
Empire, and making still conditions with the new; authorizing the usurpations
of others in countenance to their own; abusing to their private purposes the
zealous Devotion of new converted Barbarians, and imposing on their unlearned
Simplicity by the Authority of forged Donations and counterfeit Decretals; and
having before by various Arts, and thorough the connivence or assistance of
Princes, gained an absolute power over the Bishops of the West; They then, by
the aid of the enslaved Clergy, and their Garrisons of Monks, attempted openly
on the Princes themselves: confined their Jurisdiction; and forbid them to
meddle with the Persons or Revenues of Ecclesiastics: Authoritatively
interposed in all Differences, between Prince and Prince, or Prince and People;
with their Spiritual Thunder in their hands, commanded the World to lay down,
or take up Arms at their Pleasure: exercising every where by their Legates the
Sovereign Power of Peace and War; giving the Law, and disposing of Crowns and
Lands as they thought fit. He that disobeyed was first thrown out of the
Church, and then out of his Country; his Subjects absolved from their
Allegiance; and those justified that had a mind to rebel or to invade. They did
the Holy Church and Saint Peter Service, that seized upon his Estate or his
Person: He stood delivered up to Satan, to be Buffeted on Earth, and Tormented
in Hell.

These are the Steps to the Papal Throne; and when they were mounted, so have
they Lorded it; trampling imperiously on the Necks of Kings and Bishops in an
equal violation of all Authority Sacred and Civil. They are the first that
directed pretended Holy Orders of men, and Sons of Perfection, in Separate
Congregations, to despise their true Spiritual Governors: and first instructed
Traitorous Subjects, to rebel against their King, the sanctified way.

And these Injustices of their Growth, and violences of their grown Power, lie
so open in the successive Annals of the Christian Times; That, to secure their
Cause, they have reason to forbid the reading of all Histories, as well as of
the Holy Bible. There we may as easily discern the beginning, and gradual
advance of the aspiring Papacy, as of any other usurping Empire: and that this
new Rome has, by means, as humane as those the Old practiced, and with as
little of divine Right extended the narrowness of its original Territory, into
a Catholic Dominion. And there we shall find, as soon as it rises to its
plenitude of Power, nothing but Robbery and Cruelty; the World in a perpetual
Disturbance, by Interdicts and Excommunications; all the Wars and Confusions of
whole Ages, commanded and managed by this unchristian Authority: Emperors at
their Feet; kicked away; deposed by them, to be murdered by their Subjects, and
their Sons: The Crowns of England and France given away on any distaste; as if
those Princes had been only Vicars of the Church; and at best (what they forced
one of ours to own) but Homagers to the Holy See.

This Usage, on all occasions, Crowned Heads of their own Communion have felt
from their Holy Father. But, if the Crime the Pope charged bordered on Heresy;
Then the Thunderbolts flew, and the World was to Tremble: to invade that Prince
was like a Journey against Infidels; to stab him meritorious; and the Assassin
to be Canonized: and so in the last Age, on the Presumption of such a Sentence,
dyed Henry the Third of France: The villainous Murderer in open Consistory
recognized by the Pope for a Religious Hero; and the Relief of Paris, by such
an ungodly Fact, compared with the Redemption of Mankind. Under the same
Danger, by a more express Decree, lay Henry the Fourth his Successor: till he
suffered himself to be Instructed, how he might be safe from the Master of the
Assassins, the Old Man of the Mountains; and laid down his Conscience at the
Pope's Feet, to hold his Life and his Crown.

And, not to mention their impotent Fury against our Henry the Eighth, their
Former Defender; by the same Authority, and with as little effect, did four of
that See successively thunder against our late Glorious Queen; and solemnly
declare her deprived of her Kingdoms. As they had deprived her of those and her
Life; if God would have suffered private Treachery, open Rebellion, or a
Foreign Powerful Invasion to succeed. And in consequence of such a Declaration
made by the last of them, and with as much Justice, was the Traitorous Attempt
made, we this day remember; and King James of Blessed Memory, and the three
Estates of the Realm together, condemned to one Fire.

So do they give to Caesar his Due. And what then can Heretical Subjects
expect? they are to fall by thousands, self-condemned, and without the
Honorable Ceremony of a Bull: to be slaughtered, like Sheep abandoned by the
angry Shepherd; as in the Butchery of Paris, or by the Wolves of Ireland. For
Mercy is not the due of a Heretic; nor has he right to common Faith: his Life
belongs not to him.

But how is it that the great Spiritual Father deals with his obedient
Children? Does he not render them their due? He, like an Old Roman Father,
treats them with an unaccountable Power: allows them no Propriety; and denies
them the use of all that their good God had given them.

He takes out of their Hands the Holy Scriptures, the greatest Gift of the Holy
Ghost; their only Comfort, and Instruction. And instead of it puts a Legend;
for the Word of Life and Truth, unedifying fabulous Traditions: for Bread, a
Stone; for Fish a Serpent. If that See had pretended but a little earlier Power
over the Blessed Spirit, they might have commanded it not to write: however now
they forbid the People to read.

He keeps from them the Legacy of their dying Savior: one half, of the
spiritual Nourishment bequeathed them.

He denis them the use of their Understandings and Judgments, in almost all
the Articles of their Faith: of their Senses too, in that of Transubstantiation.

He takes from them the knowledge of the Prayers, offered in their Name: and
lets them not understand their own Desires. So are the People to appear before
God, dumb and Senseless; like one of their Idols. All is to be referred to the
Priest; The Pardon of their Sins, is to depend on his Discretion: and the
Efficacy of that part of the blessed Sacrament, that is left, on the Sincerity
of his Intention.

So is man robbed of his Spiritual Consolation: and the good God of his
gracious Purposes. But they are more bold yet with the Almighty.

That Princes may not complain of respect of Persons; they absolve, in some
Cases, from the Obedience of God himself; and avowedly allow, what he as
positively forbids: authorize incestuous Conjunctions, and license Perjury:
pass Pardons for all Sins, committed against the Divine Majesty.

They make the Authority of the Writings of God, to depend upon their own: and
add to them as they see cause; creating new Articles of Faith, and Instituting
almost a new Religion.

They give away his Worship: make their devoutest Addresses, and pay their most
humble acknowledgments, to the Virgin Mary; to Angels, to Favorite Saints.
And, that there may not be wanting Rivals with our God,

They create Saints; give Crowns above, as well as below: and dispose of Heaven
as their own.

They give Divine Honor to Bread; which they call a God: and to an Image;
which to the Eye they might better Transubstantiate.

And, to cover their Idolatry, they commit Sacrilege, steal away one of the ten
Commandments; and by their Index Expurgatorius blot the two Tables themselves.

So far has the Papal See been from observing the Rule of the Text; from giving
to Caesar, what is Caesar's; or to God, what is God's.

III. The Church, of which we have the Blessing to be Members, and whose
Preservation we more particularly acknowledge this Day, with Thanks to God
Almighty its Defendor, appears in its reformation, to have proposed to it self,
this Rule of our Savior's: to have had in it no other Design, than by a just
and equal distribution to give to God, what is God's; and to Man, what is
Man's. It has surveyed the several Claims in the name of God and of the King;
has considered whose peculiar Stamp and Character those things, that were
challenged, bore; and has restored them, by the direction of those Marks, to
their rightful Proprietors. In this disposal of Rights, and general
Restitution, it has not minded any Interest of its own; nor laid its Hands on
what belongs not to it: It has not had any private Design, to gain by what it
was to distribute: It has stood upright, and held the Balance steady; dealing
to each their own, ingenuously, and with an impartial Hand.

To God, as is most due, it renders first his own, to his Person, a Worship
entirely Divine; an Honor not before lessened on any rival part of his
Creation: to his Laws, an Obedience, which no other Command shall control, nor
Dispensation release.

To Princes next, and those that are in Authority, it has restored the full
exercise of their lawful Power: their Countries, and their People, again their
own; no place privileged, nor Person exempted; no forain Potentate sharing the
Authority, nor dividing the Revenue; their Subjects bound in an Allegiance, not
to be withdrawn on any Pretense, of Schism or Heresy; in the Power of no
Consistory to discharge.

And here we see no Politic reserve: that our Church has not provided for it
self any other Refuge, but in the Providence of God, and the Piety of the Civil
Power. What was not her own, she has given out of her Hands: where she cannot
communicate, yet there she will obey; and where she cannot obey, she is ready to
endure; expecting her Reward in Heaven. Not ignorant, how much she suffers now
from the Contradiction of disloyal Men, for the Truth of this Doctrine, and how
much by its meekness, she stands exposed to future Persecution; yet she
professes to know too, that her Savior's Kingdom is not of this World: that
the Rendezvous against a Prince is not protected by being in a Church: turns
not her Congregations into Armies. That the Sword is joined with the Keys; and
that Excommunication is armed with any civil Penalties; It acknowledges to be,
from the Care and Authority of the Civil Government: that thence it has its
temporal Power over Subjects; so far is it from assuming any over the Superiors
themselves. And, tho parties, seemingly opposite, agree in the contrary
Opinion; we take not that for an Argument of its Truth: equally detesting the
Holy League of the one, and, the Solemn League of the other.

If the Caesar be Heathen, and like him in the Text; so far our Church obeyes:
If he professes the Faith, and she finds him in her Assemblies; she gives him
as his own, the supreme Direction and Guidance of ecclesiastic Affairs, to
settle its outward Policy, and be its Moderator and Governor. And yet gives
not so much, as to take away from the Ordination of God. Her Ministers act
under his Protection: but in virtue of a Commission from above; of an Authority
spiritual, and derived by other Hands.

So far has the Church of England been from opposing, or flattering the Civil
Power; neither exalting its self against the Prince, nor the Prince against
God: in a constant Uniform Practice of this Rule of the Text: Giving to Caesar,
what is Caesar 's; and to God what is God's.

In the same temper, and with the same impartiality, she has endeavored to
reduce all things to their ancient Limits; and render to every one their Due.
Arrogates not to her self an Infallibility in her decrees: but permits to every
private Person to judge, and Consider: and yet authorizes not a wanton giddy
Spirit, a Judgment without Discretion; but advises the unlearned to attend to
those that are over them: Neither grossly to think, they cannot err, nor easily
to think, they do. Keeps a mean between a blind Obedience, an implicit Faith:
and betwixt a blind Disobedience, a froward contemptuous rejecting, of what a
Congregation of God's People shall Decree. She has restored to the People, the
one half of their Lord's Supper; the Blood, the Life of the Christian
Sacrifice; detained before by a sacrilegious Impropriation. Directs to discern
the Elements of the Communion, from the corporal Substance of Christ; and from
common Food: to receive them with Reverence, but not with Adoration. Renders
into their Hands the Holy Scriptures; intercepted by the Roman See. Hides them
not under the Cover of a strange Language; nor in the Closets of the Doctors:
but sets them on a Candlestick; that they which come in, may see the Light.
Takes not from them the Word of God, lest they should misenterpret it; but
labors that they may not: Admonishes, Interprets, and Explains. Lets them
understand their God, speaking to them; and themselves, speaking to God:
returns them their Prayers in their own Tongue: returns them I say. For neither
was it thought fit, to depart from those old Forms of Supplication, which God
had been pleased to accept from Holy Men of the first Ages, which had been
Consecrated by the Mouths of the best Christians; neither was it to be
imagined, that God was to be pleased with the variety of a new Phrase, or
surprised by an extempore Petition. In like manner she prays not to Saints;
but mentions their Names with Honor: uses not the intercession of their
Merits; but thanks God, for their Example. And as the Substance of our Worship
is not oppressed and overcharged with Ceremony and Circumstance; so neither is
it left neglected, and unattended: We wait upon our God, with the whole Man; in
composure of Mind and Body.

And thus has the English Church rendered to every one their own: purged from
Superstition, and free from Novelty; reformed from Abuse and Corruption on all
Hands; it deservedly takes place of those of the last Ages; and may be ranked
with the first, and best Centuries. The primitive Christians, if they could be
supposed to return upon the Earth, would profess our Faith; for it is theirs:
and would certainly be of our Communion, for here they would find their own
Doctrine, and their own Government. An Universal Infallible Bishop, they had
never been acquainted with: and, of a Church without a Bishop, they had never
heard.

So stands our Church, upon a Rock; beaten upon by Waves on all sides: and,
were the strength of its Adversaries, only in their Arguments; secure enough.
It stands firm, and upright: leans on neither side; and by its Frame, is in no
danger of falling. But the Malice of its Enemies is restless: they assault
openly, and privately undermine; no way left unattempted; not by Men above, nor
by Hell beneath: if they cannot throw down; they blow up.

And, amidst all the Antichristian Variety of Ruin, which the Contrivance of
those of Rome has designed against this Church and Nation; None, so unlikely to
be prevented, so sure and speedy in the Execution, so like themselves, and of
so Catholic a Destruction, as that of this Day. When the Invention of a Monk,
applied by the Malice of a Jesuit, had well nigh gratified their Roman Master,
with the Wish, of one of his Heathen Predecessors, another vice-God; and
dispatched a Nation, at a Blow. Neither have we had any Reason to think, that
the same sort of Men, are now more quiet, or grown more Merciful: their
frequent Disappointments may have only enraged them; and the memory of this Day
they are to blot out, with the success of another.

They have always acted, with the greatest Violence against this Kingdom, and
against this Church: and for the same reason. Our Country, for it is natural
Strength, great Riches, and Courage of its Inhabitants, is the firmest Support
of the other Protestants: and, as soon as this Island were reduced; the
Conquest of the other Heretics, as they call us, might be easy; weak as they
are, and divided. With the same Prospect are their Designs, within this
Kingdom, levelled against our Church, as it stands here established. That is
their great, and considerable Enemy. A Church regularly founded, by full
Authority, Temporal, and Spiritual; not tumultuously Collected. Its Doctrine
bottomed on the sure Basis of the Scripture; Apostolical in its Government, and
its Ministers; having on its side, all that true Antiquity, which they
themselves vainly pretend. A Church they are not able to reproach, either with
Novelty, or Sedition: whose Learning has been eminent to their Confusion; and
whose Interest, by the Grace of God, has yet been well enough United, to
withstand their continued Attempts: against this Body, and this Constitution,
they direct all their Aim: apply their open Force, and their secret Practices.
This (which God forbid) if they should ruin; they may think, it would be no
difficult thing, to destroy the other ill grounded, disunited Societies that
are among us, tied together by no Government, consenting in no form of
Doctrine, met together upon Fancy and Humor, holding they know not what, and
agreeing they know not how.

Neither are they so barren of mischievous Invention, as to be at a loss if
Poison, Dagger, or Powder fails: they can work on other Mines; and lay other
Trains, than those of this Day. It is indifferent to them, by what sort of
Artifice, the Frame of our Government flies asunder: what it is, that Tears,
and Rends, and breaks in pieces our Church and State: whether the matter, that
is to scatter us, be under the places of our Assemblies, or in them: whether
Houses are burned by their Wildfire; or Men's Minds inflamed, and our Cities in
a more dangerous Combustion: whether our Religion be ruined by them; or by
their friends, Debauchees, Atheists, or Enthusiasts. They thankfully accept the
Pains, those of the Separation take to divide and distract us: the liberal
Present they make, of our whole Church into their Bosom: contentedly allow all
their Clamor against Popery, if they will but serve them so far, as to fasten
that odious Popery upon us: glad to see the Papal Designs executed, at the
Expense and Scandal, of those that bear a Protestant Name: to see their
Brethren of the Recusancy as vigilant and vigorous at it, as if they were some
new Order of the Popes, and had a General at Rome; so well agreed, that we are
never in more Danger from the one, than when we are threatened by the other:
Then our Church is not capacious enough, and should be rebuilt, say those that
would pull it down; then its Gates are not broad enough, and Breaches to be
made, wide enough for an Enemy to come in. On this side the Papist Mines, on
that the Dissenter Countermines: till by both the Foundation is sapped, and the
Fabric sinks. Our growing Schisms giving our common Enemy certain Hopes of our
future Ruin; and furnishing them now with the best Argument, for a Head of
Unity, and an Infallible Judge.

Other Plots and Designs, which those of the Church of Rome may have, it may
not be in the Power of private Persons to encounter: To oppose them there, may
be the Work of other Hands; and the proper Business of Authority; (for we are
to give to Caesar, what is Caesar's.) But to oppose their most dangerous
Designs, and that without which no other can prevail, that is in our own Power.
It is every particular Man that is to hinder his being disunited; to prevent
and disappoint the Advantages expected from our Divisions. And to exhort and
beseech Men to lay aside private Animosities, humorous and fanciful Distasts,
in matters of Religion; to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace;
is a fit and necessary Duty at all times, in an Age that wants Charity so much,
and has so little of Christian Condescension: but at this time more eminently
seasonable, and absolutely necessary. To agree now in the Service of God, as it
is the Duty of each in private; so it is the Interest of the public. The House
of God its self, if divided against it self, cannot stand. Whatever other
Instruments of our Ruin, those of Rome may have; let no Protestant suffer his
Zeal to be made one.

To be truly opposite to the Church of Rome, to prevent their future Designs,
and in gratitude for our past Deliverances; let us, in obedience to the
direction of the Text, and in imitation of our Church, render to every one
their Due. To the Constitution of the Church, that just and thankful Testimony,
that nothing can be more contrary to the Falsehoods, Usurpations, and
Corruptions of the Romish See: nothing more agreeable to the Peace, good Order,
and Government of the Kingdom. In the head of this Church, to Caesar, what is
Caesar's; a grateful loyal Resentment of the great Blessings, we enjoy under
his Gracious Government: no half-Subjection nor Popish Conformity to his Laws;
an Obedience, clear of Roman Shifts, and Jesuitical Evasions: not setting up a
private Antipapal Authority, to absolve our selves in some cases, from our
Allegiance; and deny his Majesty's Supremacy, in favor of our own.

To God, particularly on this Occasion, all Honor, Thanks, and Acknowledgment.
That he was first pleased to shine early upon this Nation, in the returning
Light of the Gospel, the Doctrine of the Reformation: discovering to us, as it
were by a new Revelation, his true Religion, freed from the Corruptions, and
Impostures of Men; from a Burden of Ceremonies, almost Jewish; and an Idolatry,
almost Pagan. That he was pleased, during the Reign of the succeeding Princess,
to continue this his blessed Gift to us; to the Confusion of all the Enemies of
our Faith, and Country, both at home and abroad. And particularly under her
Successor King, that the Divine Majesty was pleased, by a singular
extraordinary Providence, to disappoint a Treason, unexampled in its Malice,
and of an unheard Design: The Prince of Darkness himself contriving and
laboring the horrid Plot beneath; God watching from above, and confounding the
accursed Work, by a Miracle almost as great, as if the Train had took, and he
had stopped the Blow: that he has been pleased since still to defeat, by a
constant jealous Care, the restless Enemies of our Peace and Religion;
preserving from their Malice and Treachery that Sacred Head, next and immediate
under God, our Governor and Defendor: preserving us all to his true Worship,
from Confusion and War: whose Grace it is, that we assemble, as at this time,
in Peace and Safety; worship him, as here, in Purity.

Neither is this all, on this Occasion, we owe our God: We are to continue our
Thanks beyond the Day; and express our selves sensible of the Divine Favor, by
improving it to the most Advantage. We stand still obliged to a farther
Justice, to give our Protestant Religion its Due, and let It have its proper
blessed Effects.

That the Purity and Reformation of our Religion, be not only read in our
Articles, and Liturgy; and those framed by the Piety of our Ancestors: but seen
on our own Persons, exemplified in our Lives. That our Worship of God, discover
by the Intenseness of the Devotion; that it is not distracted by any other
Object, nor diverted on Saints and Angels. That it appear not, by our slackness
at the Holy Communion; that we could have been without the Use of Both Kinds.
That it be visible, by our zealous attention to our Prayers; that we Understand
them: and, by our Obedience to God's Word; that we have Read it: not from
impious Allusions, and such Profanations; as may almost justify the Papal
Prohibition. Let us show, by the frequency of our own Charities, and Devotions,
now; that we think those of Others for us, after our Death, of no avail: by our
abhorrence of all Sin; that we account none Venial: and, by the religious
Carefulness of our Lives, that we trust not to Indulgences, or easy
Absolutions. They, that doubt of a Possibility of Salvation for those of the
Other Communion, in This, let them secure their own: and, while we profess, by
good Works we cannot Merit Heaven; let us not, by bad, Deserve a greater
Damnation.

These are the proper* Tests of a true Protestant; and signs of a holy Zeal*
Other noisy Clamours, and angry Heats against Rome, have no more of Religion in
them; than is in the loud sounds on that occasion we hear from the tops of our
Churches; or in the Fire, that burns in the Streets. If we would entirely
banish Popery; let none of its Corruption be retained in our Manners; let our
Lives, and our Conversations Protest. So shall we best thank God for the Mercy
of this Day; and engage his Protection for the future.

FINIS.

