THE Almost Christian DISCOVERED, In some SERMONS on Acts 26.28. With a Blow at
Profaneness.

By the R. R. Ezekiel Hopkins, late Lord Bishop of Londonderry.

To which is added, The Upright CHRISTIAN DISCOVERED: Gathered out of the
judicious Treatises of William Bates, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman at the King's Arms in the Poultrey, Jonathan
Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Church Yard, and Tho. Cockeril at the
Three Legs in the Poultrey, 1693.

TO THE READER.
THE Excellent Preacher of these Sermons, was one that sought out acceptable
Words; not to tickle the Fancy, but to affect the Consciences, in order to
better the Hearts and Lives of his Auditors. He was a Person truly great and
good; well known, not only in the Kingdom of Ireland (where he shined in a
higher Orb) but in this of England also, especially in the two Renowned Cities
(not only for Trade, but Religion) of London and Exeter, where Multitudes sat
under his Ministry with great Delight and Profit. I need not trouble my self or
the Reader to make solemn Protestations, or to insert Certificates under the
Hands of several Persons concerning the Authentickness of these Sermons: All
those that have heard him, or have read his other excellent and useful
Treatises (a large Account of which, is here annexed) will easily be convinced
by the Spirituality of the Matter, and Beauty of the Style, that these are the
genuine Offspring of Bishop Hopkins.

That these Discourses may be so blessed to all that shall read them, that they
may be not only Almost, but Altogether Christians, is the hearty Prayer of the
Publisher.

A CATALOGUE OF THE Works of Bishop Hopkins already Published.
THE Vanity of the World; in several Sermons, from Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of
Vanities, says the Preacher; Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity. To which is
added Two other Sermons; one at the Funeral of the Honorable Algernoon Grevil
Esquire from Eccles. 9.5. For the Living know that they shall die. The other, on
the 30th. of January, from St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.13.14. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake whether it be to the King as
supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them who are sent by him, for the
punishment o^ evil doers, and the praise of them that do wel^ In Octavo.

Discourses, or Sermons on several Scriptures, Vol. I. Containing these
following Subjects;

The Folly of Sinners in making a mock of Sin; from Prove. 14.19. Fools make a
mock at Sin.

The Resurrection of Jesus Christ; Demonstrated from Acts 2.24. Whom God has
raised up, having loosed the pains of Death, because it was not possible that
he should be holden of it.

True Happiness; from Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments,
that they may have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the
Gates into the City.

Brotherly Admonition; from Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy
heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him.

The Dreadfulness of God's Wrath against Sinners; Demonstrated from Heb. 10.30,
31. For we know him that has said, Vengeance belongs unto me, I will
recompense, says the Lord: And again the Lord shall judge his People. It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. In Octavo.

An Exposition on the Ten Commandments; To which is added two Sermons; one on
St. John 7.19. Did not Moses give you the Law, and yet none of you keeps the
Law. The other, on Gal. 3.3 10. For as many as are of the works of the Law, are
under the Curse of the Law; for it is written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to do
them. In Quarto.

An Exposition on the Lord's Prayer, with a Catechistical Explication thereof,
by way of Question and Answer for the instructing of Youth: To which is added,
A Discourse upon Providence; from St. Mat. 10.29, 30. Are not two Sparrows sold
for a farthing, and one of them shall not fall to the ground without your
Father? But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. As also, A Discourse
demonstrating the excellent Advantages of reading and studying the Holy
Scriptures; from Col. 3.16. Le^ the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all
Wisdom. In Quarto.

A Second Volume of Discourses or Sermons on several Scriptures; containing
these following Subjects, viz. A Discourse on Man's Mortality; from Heb. 9.27.
It is appointed unto Men once to die, and after this the Judgment. The great
Evil and Danger of little Sins; from St. Matthew. 5.19. Whosoever therefore shall
break any one of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so, shall be
called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. Of Abstaining from the Appearance of
Evil, from 1 These. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil.

The Nature, Danger, Aggravations and Cure of presumptuous Sinning, with the
difference between Restraining and sanctifying Grace; from Presumptuous Sins;
from Psalm. 19.13. Keep back thy Servant from presumptuous Sins, let them not
have dominion over me.

Of Pardon and Forgiveness of Sin; from Isaiah 43.25. I, even I am he that
blotteth out thy Transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy
Sins. In Octavo.

Several other Discourses of this Reverend Bishop's are designed shortly to be
Printed.

SERMON I.
Acts 26.28. Then Agrippa said unto Paul ALMOST thou persuadest me to be a
CHRISTIAN.


IN this Chapter we have St. Paul in his Fetters pleading before that
Honorable Sessions of Festus and Agrippa; his Plea we have largely set down
from the 1st. to the 24th. Verse, in which he opens his Commission, that he had
received in an extraordinary manner from Heaven, for preaching of that Doctrine
which was every where spoken against, and for worshipping God in that way which
was called Heresy. I shall not at all enter into the consideration of the
Apology; but let us look only at the different Effects that it wrought upon the
Hearers: Festus and Agrippa they we^ both of them Unbelievers, the one an (...)
believing Heathen, the other an unbeli^ving Jew, and thus they both continue
yet St. Paul's Speech works very different^ upon them. In the 24th. Verse you
have Festus raving; he said with a loud voic^ Paul, thou art besides^ thy self,
much learni^^ has made thee mad. Thy Thoughts of Vision and an Apparition, of
a Man dea^^ and buried, lying safe under ground that he should rise again and
appear from Heaven to thee, being the Savior of t^ World, is a mere Fancy,
proceeding from a strong Phrenzy: Thus he scoffs an^ raves. But this very
Sermon which see^ed Madness and an idle Tale to unbeliving Festus, carries a
strong Convicti^ in it to Agrippa, who was an Unbeliev^ too; Almost thou
persuadest me to be Christian.

Hence observe That the Word of God h^ a far different effect, even upon those,
up^ whom it has no saving effect; one raves a^ rages against it, is seared
and stupisie by it; another is convinced and terrisi^ by it. Festus he scoffs
and mocks, go^ away laughing at the Doctrine, and (...) viling the Preacher:
But Agrippa is co^vinced, and half persuaded, to believe and practice that very
Doctrine, and highly to esteem the Preacher of it. And is it not so even among
us? Are there not many who may come to the Ordinances in a natural and sinful
Estate and Condition, the same Word of God is cast among them all; yea, but
what is the Success? The Sword of the Spirit when it is brandished amongst a
great Crowd of Consciences, it is not likely that it should miss all, and
strike none of them; one perhaps goes away slighting and contemning; another
goes away scoffing and railing against it; and another half-persuaded by it to
become a Christian, to be almost a Christian. If every Man's Breast had a
Casement in it by which we might see the inward Estuations and Boilings of
their Hearts, how they work after a powerful and terrifying Sermon; should we
not behold and see some shifting, and shuffling their Sins out of the way; some
holding up the Bucklers of prejudicate Opinions, to ward and fence off the
stroke of the Spirit; some fretting and storming at the lancing of their
Consciences; some scorning and scoffing with Festus, that it is no better than
Folly and Madness; some trembling with Felix; some convinced and wrought upon
as Agrippa to faint resolutions, and half purposes; and yet all these remain
under the Power of Unbelief and Unregeneracy. It is indeed a wonder among such
diversity of Operations that the Word has upon the Souls and Consciences of
Men, it could be possible that such a multitude should go away without any
saving Operation by it; some blinded and hardened, some terrified, some
stupefied; ^e exasperated and enraged; some convinced and half-persuaded, and
such are those that we now speak of: Such as are, as it were, half of one
Complexion, and half of another, that stick in the New Birth, whose Hearts have
been warmed with good Motions; who have entertained approving and admiring
Thoughts concerning the ways of Holiness, who have taken up some resolutions of
doing better, and of being better; and yet do not come off roundly and speedily
from their Sins, nor close fully with Christ. These are the half-Christians
which the Text speaks of.

The Words they are plain in themselves; and therefore do not require much
Explication. Only the Word translated Almost thou persuadest me, etc. if
accurately rendered according to the Original, it is a little thou persuadest
me, etc. So in the Reply St. Paul makes with a holy kind of Gallantry in the
ensuing Verse you find there it is opposed to much, which we render altogether;
but the Grammatical Construction is, Would to God they were both all and in
much such as I am except these Bonds. So then in a little thou persuadest me;
that is, I could methinks be contented to be a Christian in a little, in some
few things; some part of the Way I could willingly go, says Agrippa: But St.
Paul concludes, it must not be only in a little, but in much, in all. If we
follow this Sense and Interpretation of the Words; then observe,

Doct. 1. There goes much to the making of a true Christian, a little will not
serve.

It is not a little will serve; for many precious Ingredients go to the making
of a true Christian; and much of each Ingredient goes to the making of a strong
Christian. There must be Profession, Faith, Obedience, Self-denial, Patience,
Humility, outward Preparation and inward Graces, outward Imbellishments and
inward Ornaments, and a little of it is but little worth. There are many that
are persuaded to be Christians in Name and Profession, to be Christians in
outward participation of Ordinances and Communion with Saints and the like;
yea, but this is to be a Christian but only in a little. Are you persuaded to
obey Christ in all, to take up his Cross, and deny your selves, to oppose and
mortify your Lusts, and to perform the harshest and severest part of Religion:
This is indeed to be a Christian not only in a little but in much; yea, in all,
to be such as St. Paul himself was. But then if you take the Words according to
our Translation, which the Original also will very well bear. So it is within a
little or almost thou persuadest me; for King Agrippa was fully convinced of
the Truth of those things which Paul related, as you may see, v. 26. He knew
these things, and was ignorant of none of them, they were not hidden from him;
for these things were not done in a corner. He could not be ignorant of the
miraculous Conversion of him, who had been so furious and notorious a
Persecutor of Christians: He, who was expert in all the Customs that were among
the Jews, ver. 3. could not be ignorant of what the Apostle affirms, ver. 22,
23. This that Moses and the Prophets foretold that Christ should suffer and be
raised from the dead, and should give life to the Gentiles: Of all this King
Agrippa was fully convinced; and yet when Paul so insinuatingly presses upon
him, Believe thou the Prophets? I know thou believe. The result of all is
this, That he was but almost persuaded, not fully persuaded of the Truth of
what St. Paul speaks concerning Christ, concerning himself, and concerning
Christians; yet for all that he was but almost persuaded to be a Christian.
Hence likewise observe,

Doct. 2. That Persons who are fully and truly convinced, are many times but
almost and half-persuaded.

There may be a powerful persuasion in the Judgment and the Conscience
concerning Christ and his ways, when there is but half a persuasion in the Will
and Affections to close with him. These Observations I gather up as they lie
strewed in my passage. I shall not insist upon them but only as they are
subservient to the fuller Prosecution of the General Doctrine, which you may
take thus.

Doct. 3. That those who never were in CHRIST; yet may be almost Christians.

I need not here stand to tell you, that Christianity may be taken either,

First, For an outward Profession of Christ, as it is opposed to all other
Religions in the World, whether Heathenish Idolatry, Mohammedan Stupidity, or
Jewish Ceremony: Or,

Secondly, For an inward and cordial embracing of Jesus Christ, thus professed,
as it stands opposed, either to the Profaneness or Hypocrisy of carnal
Gospellers.

Evident it is, that the Christianity that Agrippa was almost persuaded into,
was of the first sort, not excluding the second. Nay, it was seldom seen that
in those Primitive Times, wherein no carnal Respect or outward Advantage could
commend the Gospel to the Interests of Men. When the reward of professing
Christ was Persecution and Martyrdom; then I say it was seldom seen that any
would take Christ by Profession, who would not also take him by Faith and
Adherence. Few there were that would take up Religion, even upon this
Condition, to lay down their Lives for Christ, who yet through their own
Profaneness or Hypocrisy, were to receive no Benefit from the Death of Christ.
So that to persuade Men then to be Christians in Profession, it was the same
with persuading them to be Christians in reality. But now when the Name of
Christ is so much courted, when the denying of Christ would be repaid with the
same punishment, that formerly the owning of Christ underwent, you need not so
much persuasion to take upon you the outward Profession of Christianity. For
you are not only almost, but altogether Christians in the external Garb; but
our persuasion to you, must be, that as you own Christ in an outward Profession
of him, so that you would cleave to him by a true Faith in him, and Obedience
to him.

We are not then to speak to Pagans, to convert them to a new Religion; but (if
I may so say) we are to speak to Christian Infidels, to convert them to a new
Life and Conversation. Nor yet among these does my Subject lead me to the
profane and looser sort, whose being called Christians does not more honor
them, than they disgrace and reproach that holy Name; but to those who are more
elevated, and more refined, who go far in Christianity so as to be near the
Kingdom of God. In a word, such as are Almost Christians, and yet are Strangers
to Christ, and remain in their sinful State and unregenerate Condition.

Now in the Prosecution of this Point, I shall enquire into these following
Particulars in this Method.

1. What Progress Men may make toward Christianity, and yet fall short of it.
2. Whence they are enabled to proceed so far, and what it is that carries them
out to all their Seize. 3. What it is that hinders them from proceeding
further; and when they are almost Christians, what keeps them from being such
altogether? 4. To show you the folly and misery of those who proceed thus far
only, as to be almost Christians, and no farther.
First, Let us see what Progress a natural. Man may make toward Grace and
Christianity, and yet remain in a sinful state. Before I can come in particular
to determine this, I must premise these two or three Particulars:

First, That when we enquire what Progress an unregenerate man may make toward
Grace, this supposes that there is a tendency in what such a man does, or may
do toward the obtaining of Grace. Or how else can he make any progress toward
it, if that which he does has no tendency to it? Let us therefore enquire what
kind of tendency this is. There may be a two-sold tendency supposed in the
Actions of an unregenerate man, toward the acquisition of Grace.

1. Effective, Tendency. 2. Subjective, Tendency.
I. Actions may be said to have an effective tendency, when they do by their
own efficiency and causalty produce that which they tend to; and in this sense
it must be denied that the Actions of an unregenerate man, have any tendency
toward Grace, be their progress what it will; thereby he cannot efficiently
produce or cause Grace in himself; and therefore Grace is called the new
Creature, as being the effect only of creating Power, which is the sole
Prerogative of God, and it is as utterly impossible for a Man to create Grace
in the Soul, as to create the Soul it self. Take but this one demonstration to
evince it: If an unregenerate Man by his own Power and Efficiency can produce
Grace in himself, then one of these two gross Absurdities must needs follow,
either. 1. that there are still left holy Habits and Principles in the Will,
which were never lost by the Fall of Man: Or, 2. That a Man may make himself
truly holy by a Will that is totally corrupt and sinful; but either of these
are very gross.

First, There are no holy nor divine Habits left in the Will of a carnal man,
whereby he should be able to regenerate, and convert himself; for what holy
Habit can there be in the Will of one that is wholly corrupted? if any such be
supposed, it may also be supposed that it is true Grace; and to affirm that a
Man in a state of Nature has true Grace inherent in him, whereby he is able to
convert and regenerate himself, is double nonsense and a flat contradiction;
for it is to affirm that he has Grace before he has it.

Secondly, A Will totally corrupted, cannot make an holy Man, cannot produce
Grace, nor make a Man holy, Grace is beyond and above its Sphere, all the
motions of the Will in its fallen Estate, what through defect of a right
Principle from whence they flow, and a right end to which they tend, they are
all evil and sinful. And it is very strange to affirm that a gracious Habit may
be wrought in us by sinful Actions. And besides the Will of a Man by the Fall,
it is a fleshly Will; but in Regeneration it is made spiritual. Now it were a
strange kind of Production, if fleshly could beget spiritual; nor would it any
longer hold true what our Savior says in John 3.35. That which is born of the
flesh, is flesh: So that I think it is very evident, that all that a Man can do
by the power of Nature cannot tend efficiently to produce Grace in him.

Secondly, There is a subjective tendency toward Grace; and this lies in those
moral preparations, and those dispositions of the heart which fit it for the
receiving of Grace, though it be wrought there only by the Holy Ghost. And thus
we affirm that while Men are in an unregenerate state, they may have and do
somewhat that has a tendency in it to Grace; that is, one unregenerate Man may
have more of these previous dispositions, and of these preparations for the
receiving of Grace, than another has: For though it be not in it self singly
necessary that such previous dispositions should be wrought in the Soul before
the implantation of divine Grace; since such a Subject as the Soul is in
respect of Grace, does not, as the Schoolmen determine, require its previous
dispositions for the production of its Form; yet this (...) the usual common
way of the Spirit's work,

1. To prepare the heart by some common Works of Conviction, legal Terrors, and
remorse of Conscience, first to prepare the heart by these before it works any
saving and real work of Grace in it: And therefore when any unregenerate man
has much of these previous preparations, we say that he goes very far toward
Grace, and he may be said to be almost a Christian. And this is all that
tendency that an unregenerate Man has, or can possibly do toward it; viz. a
preparatory, and not an effective operative tendency unto saving Grace and
Regeneration.

2. Another thing premised is this, That what through wilful sloth and wretched
negligence, no unregenerate Man does make so great a progress toward Grace as
he is able and can possibly do. None go so far as they can do in those previous
preparations and dispositions toward it. When they find difficulty in opposing
Temptation, in crucifying their Lusts, in performing of Duties, in denying
their sinful Delights and Pleasures, having nothing supernatural within them to
naturalize and facilitate these things, and carry them on resolutely through
all, they never keep up to the utmost of that Power which they have; but as
they yield to those Temptations that they might resist, and commit those Sins
that they might reject, and neglect those Duties which for Matter and Substance
of them they might perform; so none of them goes so far as they have a natural
power to do: No Man goes so far in the work of Grace as he might, if he would
improve that power which he has by Nature.

3. Did they make as great a progress toward Grace as they might, they would
not fall so far short of Grace as they do. I say if a wicked unregenerate Man
did but as much as he is able by the power of Nature to do, without the special
Assistance of the Holy Ghost, they would not fall so far short of Grace as they
do. I would not enter into that Dispute whether God be engaged to bestow Grace
upon the right Improvement of their natural power; yet it is certain, and
agreed on by all, that he does certainly do so. God usually bestows true and
saving Grace upon those who do rightly, and to their utmost, improve their
natural power and ability for their acquiring of it. If God be not obliged by
promise to assist them; yet through his Goodness and Mercy he is not wont to
desert them. Let them but labor to improve their natural ability to the utmost
strain and pitch that their own capacity can elevate, God will (according to
his usual method and wonted Goodness) come in by supernatural Grace, and enable
them to do that which by Nature they are not able to do; for no instance can be
given to the contrary. So then we may conclude that wicked Men never go so far
as they can; and did they, yet they could not efficiently work Grace in
themselves, but nevertheless they would be disposed and prepared for the
receipt of Grace, which God upon such preparations would undoubtedly bestow
upon them. For although he be not obliged to give it them, yet usually he is
wont to work it in them merely through his own natural Goodness, free Grace and
Mercy to them, pitying the weakness of their lapsed and fallen Nature.

I shall proceed to the Answer of the first Question in the general. 1.
Unregenerate Men may make a great progress, and may go very far toward Grace,
and yet fall short of it; that in general is to be Almost a Chrstian. This I
laid down in the Method propounded to you. Although though I say not they go as
far as they can by the power of Nature, and yet fall short of Grace; for that
can never be instanced in any; yet the sad and wretched Apostasy of those who
have been eminent Professors, shining, yea, and glaring Lights, exceeding, and
also despising common seize of others; their Apostasy has too evidently
confirmed it to us, that Men may go very far toward Grace, and yet fall short
of it. See what Christ says Mark. 12.24. of that young Man, that forward young
Man, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God; that is, thou art not far from
Grace; for so the Kingdom of God is oftentimes taken in Scripture for the
Kingdom of Grace, so that we may say of such Men, they were not far from the
Kingdom of God, not far from Grace, not far from Heaven, climbing up almost
thither, within view and ken of it, having one foot, as it were, upon the
Threshold of the Heavenly Gate; and yet even these tumble headlong, and never
rest until they have plunged themselves to the bottom of Hell. It is with such
Men as it is with the Vapors that are drawn up into the Air, they shine with
the same Light, with the same apparent Magnitude as the fixed Stars themselves
do, and we may think them moving in the very same Sphere with them; but when we
see them dart down to the Earth, and spilling all that Light and Glory, which
they glistered with by the way, and fall into a filthy Jelly, thicker and more
loathsome Substance than when they were first exhaled, we then conclude that
all that Elevation of those false and blazing Lights, was vastly short of that
Heaven in which they seemed sometime to be fixed. So is it with many
unregenerate Men; you cannot tell with what they are fraught till you see them
shipwracked; then it is a sign, that though they were never right and true
Treasure, yet they are something very like it: When we see them tumbling down
off a glorious Profession through fatal Precipices of great, gross, and
desperate Sins, we may sadly conclude that that Man was not far from the
Kingdom of God, though he was never yet there. Indeed every unregenerate Man,
when he winds up himself to the highest pitch and strain, he may be said to be
far from the Kingdom of God, in respect of his total deprivation of Grace;
though his Actions be never so fair and specious, yet they are very far from
being gracious, as far as Darkness is from Light; yet he may be said not to be
far from the Kingdom of God likewise in a fourfold respect.

First, In that he is far from that which is furthest from Grace; and that is,
gross, flagitious, and notorious Sins, which are farthest off from Grace of all
others; and these a natural Man may be very far and free from; and therefore
not far from Grace.

Secondly, He may have that which very much resembles and counterfeits Grace,
so that as to outward appearance there is but very little Dissimilitude
discernable between them. Now that which is like another, may be said not to be
far from that which it is like.

Thirdly, He may be said not to be far from Grace, because (as I told you
before) in the ordinary Works of the Spirit upon his Soul, he may have those
preparations and dispositions laid in them, which usually are previous and
antecedent to Grace, because these are wrought usually before Grace; and
therefore the person that has these wrought upon him may be said not to be far
from Grace.

Fourthly, He may be said not to be far from Grace, because if he did proceed
but a little farther, he would possibly attain to true Grace. Had such but
improved their natural power to such a degree farther, God would have come in
with power supernatural, and have wrought that true and saving Principle in
their lives, which would have been sure to have brought them to eternal Life.
Grace indeed has such a kind of dependence upon that which is natural; and
that dependence is not so much of Causalty, as of Order and Consequence, which
though it be not necessary, yet it is commonly granted on all Hands. Thus then
in the general I have shown you that unregenerate Men may go far, yea very far
toward. A Man may be Almost a Christian, and yet be out of Christ; be near the
Kingdom of Heaven, and yet not in it; and, possibly, be for ever excluded and
shut out of it.

SERMON II.
Progress a natural Man may make toward Grace; and that I shall do, by
considering the several steps and degrees by which they may arise up to a great
height and glory of outward Profession: And this we cannot better do, than by
showing, 1. What Grace is. 2. What resemblance that which is wrought by a mere
carnal Man may carry in it like true Grace; by comparing these together, we may
see how near an unregenerate, carnal Man may come to true and saving Grace.

First, What Grace is. I need not tell you that I speak not now of an Objective
Grace inherent in God; but terminated on us, whereby a change is wrought in our
relation to him. And this Objective Grace is nothing else but the divine Love,
Favor, and good Will of God expressed in us. But I speak of a Subjective Grace
inherent in us; whereby a real change is made in our Lives and Natures. And in
brief you may take this Description of subjective or inherent Grace: It is a
supernatural Habit immediately infused into the Soul by the Holy Ghost,
residing in every Power and Faculty of the Soul as a Principle of holy and
spiritual Operation. And there is a five-fold change wrought by it.

1. Upon the Judgment, or the direct Understanding, by informing and
enlightening it. 2. Upon the Conscience in the reflex Understanding, by
awakening and pacifying it. 3. Upon the Affections, by spiritualizing them. 4.
Upon the Will, by converting it. 5. Upon the Life and Conversation, by
reforming it.
This five-fold change is wrought upon the whole Soul by true and sanctifying
Grace.

Now in the next place I shall show how far a natural Man may attain to these,
so as to be Almost a Christian.

First, As for his Mind or Understanding, he may be irradiated with a clear and
sparkling knowledge of divine and spiritual Objects, when yet the Soul is not
truly converted to God. It is true as in the Creation of the World, the Light
is numbered and reckoned amongst the first of God's Works: So likewise in this
new Creation, the first work of the Spirit of God is to shed abroad his
heavenly Light it the Understanding; and therefore we have this first in order,
in that Commission which our Savior Jesus Christ gives to St. Paul, Acts
26.18. He sent him to the Gentiles, to open their eyes, and to turn then from
darkness to light; and then it follows, from the power of Satan to God. But yet
notwithstanding, there is an Illumination about spiritual Things, which may
gil^ and beautify the Understanding of a natural Man, who like a Toad may be
full of Poison, though he has a precious Stone in his Head. The Apostle, he
lays down this as one of those Seize that an unregenerate Man may have,
and yet be an Apostate, Heb. 6.4. he may not only have a deep knowledge of
Gospel-Mysteries, so as to see the whole Compages and concatenation of the
Doctrine of Christ, and to unfold them to others; but may have also particular
discoveries of the Glory and Beauty that there is in these things. We may see
it clearly by Balaam's Ecstasie, Numb. 24. Such discoveries carnal hearts may
have made to them, and see their Luster and Beauty. Nay further, a carnal Man
may be convinced, that there is no other way of Recovery but by the Grace of
God through the Merits of Christ, and of the suitableness of Christ to his
Soul, of the Freeness of God's Love, of the Riches of his Grace, of the
Readiness of his Heart to receive them; of the Desirableness of Happiness, of
the Beauty of Holiness, and yet for all this remain in a natural State: But
now, not to leave you under doubts and perplexities, such an Illumination of a
carnal Man, falls far short of true Grace in these Two Particulars.

First, In that it is but Lumen sterile, a barren light; Illumination that is
saving, is not only Light, but influence too.

As the Light of the Sun does not serve only to paint the World, and varnish
over the Beauty and Variety of several Creatures that are in it; but carries in
it a grateful heat and cherishing influence, which operates into them, and
refreshes them; and as the Light discovers their Beauty, so these Influences
increase it: So saving Illumination, not only illustrates the Soul by its
Light; but likewise, by the Congenialness of its Influences, nourishes the
Soul, draws Sap into it, and Fruit from it. Such is not the Illumination of an
unregenerate Man; it is but a barren Light, and only serves to paint his
Understanding, and has no influence on it to make the Soul grow in Grace, and
bring forth the Fruits of Holiness, to the Praise of God.

That Illumination that is saving is transforming, 2 Cor. 3.18. We all, as in a
Glass, behold the Glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same Image, etc.
If a Beam of the Sun falls upon a Looking-Glass, it not only makes it glitter
with a glorious Light, but it represents the very Image of the Sun in the
Glass; but let it beat never so clearly and strongly upon a Mud-Wall, though it
enlightens it, yet it does not thereby leave its Image upon it. So truly
Illumination, that is saving, does not only irradiate, but transform. If you
look upon the Sun, when shining in its strength, the Light thereof will imprint
the very Shape and Image of the Sun upon your Eye; and look where you will,
still you retain the appearance of the Sun before you: So every sight that a
true Christian has of the Sun of Righteousness, will make as it were another
Sun in his Soul. But now the Illumination of wicked Men does only enlighten,
not change them; their Understandings may be irradiated with glorious
Discoveries of God, Christ, and the Things of Heaven; but this does not
transform them into the Image and Likeness of those Things. The Illumination of
godly Men and true Christians, is like the Light which breaks through the Air,
and turns every vast Body throughout the World all into Light. It is with
wicked, unregenerate Men, as with those that lie long in the Sunshine; which
though it inlightens them, yet does but afterward make them more black and
swarthy. So thou may have as much notional Knowledge of God, Christ, and the
Mysteries of the Gospel as any Child of God has, and possibly much more, yet
this is no true Sign of Grace; for this Knowledge is not therefore saving,
because it is clear and comprehensive, but because it is influential and
transforming. And usually we perceive that where the Light of Knowledge shines
into a wicked Heart, it does but tann and make the Person more black and
swarthy, more sinful than before: Thus, as to the direct Understanding of the
Judgment, a natural Man may have a bright, clear, and glittering Light
concerning Heavenly and spiritual Objects.

Secondly, As for the Reflex Understanding of the Conscience. Neither yet the
Peace nor the Trouble of Conscience, is such an Attainment to which a natural
Mar cannot reach.

First, A natural Man may have a quiet and peaceable Conscience. Indeed when
this Peace is true, it is always an effect of Grace; and therefore we thus find
the^ coupled together, Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.3. Yet there is that which looks very
like Peace of Conscience though it be not such, and that is a supine
Presumption and a carnal Stupidity and Oscitancy: Their Consciences are never
troubled at the sight of Sin, or sense of Wrath; but are like those
presumptuous Sinners spoken of, Deuteronomy. 29.19. And it come to pass when he
hears the words of this Curse, that he bless himself in his Heart, saying, I
shall have peace, tho I walk in the Imagination of mine Heart, etc. Now this
Peace is founded only upon bold and confident Persuasions of God's infinite
Mercy, and gracious Disposition; and because God will exalt his Mercy above all
his Name, therefore they conclude; that as God has exalted his Power in
creating and sustaining them, so he will much more exalt his Mercy in saving
them. Thus as Madmen often fancy themselves Kings or some great Personage,
when indeed they are but wretched and miserable Spectacles, so do these
spiritual Madmen; and as the Devil appropriates to himself all the Glory of
the Earth, so these look upon Heaven, and all the Glory of it, and boldly call
it all their own; yea, and through their wretched Security, are bold to cry out
with Thomas, My Lord, and my God. To such I may say with our Savior in another
Case, God is not the God of the dead, but the God of the living. God is not the
God of such as love, and live in their Sins and Lusts; and that call him
Father, whom yet they dishonor by a lewd and dissolute Life: This is but is
Father one of the Devil's Offspring upon the holy God. Indeed Men by enormous
and flagitious Crimes have so wounded and wasted their Consciences, that now
they retain not strength enough to accuse, molest, and trouble them; and this
they call Peace of Conscience: Such a Peace as Gallious (in Tacitus)
exprobrates the Romans with, when they have laid all waste. This they call
Peace; but this Peace is rather deadness of Conscience, and is far from that
which arises from the true Grace of God; and that that is the work of the Holy
Ghost in Conviction, which destroys this ill-grounded Peace; and it works in
the Soul Horrors and Terrors, and affrights the secure Soul when it shows it
how it slept upon the Top of the Mast, and lay on the very Brink of the
Infernal Pit. As therefore we must not discourage a broken Spirit, but embolden
it to appropriate Christ, and all the Promises of the Gospel to it self in
particular; so we must let wicked Men know, that when they presume to call God,
their God and their Father, and yet continue in their Sins and Wickedness, they
will find that instead of being their Father, he will only be their Judge.

Now it will appear that this Peace of a carnal Man is only from deep Security,
and the Spirit of Slumber that has seized upon them; because when we come to
examine the grounds of it, they plead only the goodness of their Hearts, and
there is nothing more familiar and frequent than this they boast of; and though
they live in a constant neglect of holy Duties, and wallow in the Filth of
customary Sins, yet still they boast of this, that they have very good Hearts,
upright Intentions. This is a mere delusion; for it is as utterly impossible
that the Heart should be good when the Life is wicked and profane, as for a
good Root to bring forth evil and corrupt Fruit.

Secondly, As Peace of Conscience may be attained by natural Men, so many times
such may lie under the Regrets and Troubles of Conscience. It is not Trouble of
Conscience that is the Attainment wherein true Grace does consist: A dull and a
lethargick Conscience that has long lain under the customary Commission of
gross Sins, may at length, by strong Convictions, be startled and awakened to a
sense of Sin, and be afraid at the sight of it; but yet may retain an impure
and defiled Conscience: God may (even in this Life) kindle in their Breasts
some Sparks of the unquenchable Fire, and may give them some fore-tasts of that
Cup of Trembling that they must for ever drink of. As he has made himself a
Devil incarnate by his Sin, so God may make his Conscience a Hell incarnate. By
his Conscience you hear Cain, that Primitive Reprobate, crying out, my
Punishment is greater than I can bear; nor could Judas find any other way to
check his Conscience but with an Halter: These Regrets of Conscience may
proceed from a preparatory work of Conviction, which because of Men's wilful
deserting them, often vanish away without any saving effect; and fall as far
short of true Grace, as the Region of the Air where Storms and Tempests,
Thunderings and Lightnings are ingendered, falls short of the Heaven of the
Blessed, and that Eternal calmness and serenity: And as Worms usually are the
offspring of corruption and putrefaction; so this never dying Worm, that must
ever sting them, oftentimes in this life, is bred out of a rotten and corrupted
Conscience, the Conscience therefore may be defiled, when it is not seared; it
may be awakened, when it is not sanctified; a filthy puddle may be stirred as
well as a clear running stream, the Conscience may work terrors and horrors,
where the Spirit of God never wrought true saving Grace.

Thirdly, As to the Affections: There may be Affections and sweet Motions of
the Heart, which are oftentimes relied on us certain evidences of true Grace;
yet also may be in a carnal and natural Man, Mat. 13.20. Some received the word
with joy, etc. So John. 5. Christ tells the Jews, they did for a season rejoice
in the Doctrine and Preaching of John the Baptist. Thus Herod is said to hear
John gladly, so that you see the Affections in holy Duties and Ordinances may
be with joy, even in those that have no true Grace at all in them. As there may
be those affections of joy and delight, so likewise of sorrow for sin, so we
have it 27. Matthew. 3. It is said of Judas, he repented himself, and Ahab's
humiliation was so great, that God takes special notice of him, 1 Kings 21.
Behold, how Ahab humbles himself, etc. How all these affections are but
temporary and vanishing, which may be excited, even in carnal Men, from several
advantages that things have to commend themselves, to their judgments and to
their hearts.

First, Sometimes the very novelty, and the strangeness of them may affect
them: Novelty usually breeds delight, which longer custom and acquaintance does
abate, and this may be given as a reason, why soon after conversion the new
Converts affections are drawn forth more strongly in the ways of God, more than
afterward when they grow settled and stable Christians; the reason is, because
of the very novelty of that course and way they have now entered into, which
affects them with delight, besides the real desirableness which is in those
ways themselves; the very novelty does affect them, and this too may satisfy
us, that though many are turned aside from the truth as it is in Jesus Christ,
and from the way of Worship which God has appointed us, that have boasted,
that they have found more comfort, and more sweet affections than ever, in
those new ways after which they have gone; yet it is not because those ways
have any thing in them, that might yield them more comfort and delight, but
only because they are new ways, and all new things will for the present stir up
the affections, but after some continuance in those ways, they find their joy
and their delight to slag; then they seek out other new ways, and commend them
as much; and no wonder, for new ways will stir up new affections; that may be
one Reason, why affections may be stirred up, even in the unregenerate and mere
carnal Men, as to the things of God, even from the mere novelty of them.

Secondly, Good affections may be stirred up in Men, from the very affecting
nature of spiritual Objects themselves; for spiritual Objects may affect us in
this natural way. Who can read the History of Christ's Passion, without being
affected with sorrow, for all the sorrow he underwent; he has a heart harder
than Rocks, that can hear of the Agonies, and Scourges, and cruel Indignities
offered to so innocent and excellent a Person, as Christ was, that suffered
even for Sinners, and not be moved thereby to grief and compassion; and yet
possibly these affections may be no other than such as would be excited from
us, at the reading of some Tragedy in a Romance or feigned Story.

Thirdly, Affections may be moved by the Artificial Rhetoric of others, by the
great abilities of the Ministers whom we hear. God tells the Prophet Ezekiel
Cap. 33.32. Thou art to them as a very lovely song; they may sometimes have
their judgments pleased, with the Learning shown in a Sermon, and their
affections excited by the Oratory, and powerful utterance of it; but these
though they are very good helps to excite our affections, yet they are not true
tests of spiritual affections in us.

Fourthly, Pride and self-seeking may in the performance of duties excite our
affections. Men may be much deceived in this particular, for instance, in
Prayer, they may think they are affected with the things they pray for, when
possibly their affections may be moved only with the words themselves speak,
with the copious, free and admirable inventive way that they pray in: Whereas
the contrite broken Spirit, who is only moved with truly spiritual affections,
may not be so large, and so copious in his expressions of them. A true
Christian may groan out a Prayer, that cannot compose and make a Prayer, that
has a sententious Coherence one part with another. As the Ground that is
fullest of precious Mines has least grass growing upon it; so sometimes in
holy Duties, when the heart is most full of Grace, there may be least
flourishing of expressions: You cannot gather the truth of saving Grace, from
strong workings of the affections, which may sometimes upon these accounts be
deceitful and wicked, and unregenerate Men may have Affections stirred up in
them upon these grounds, but then they are always vanishing and fleeting, and
are only permanent while the violence of some external cause does excite them,
and they are always unfruitful, though their affections may stir within them,
yet they are not efficacious to put them upon a holy Life and Conversation.

SERMON III.
Will, is no certain evidence of the truth of Grace; a Man may fall short of
true saving Grace, when there is yet a great change wrought upon the Will; it
is true, it is the through change of the Will, wherein Grace does principally
consist; this is the first principal Act from the Spirit of Life, without
which, whatsoever other change is wrought upon us, it is no more than to set
the hand of the Watch to the right hour when the Spring is broken. The
Philosophers call the Will, the commanding, swaying faculty of the Soul, that
controuls all the Inferior faculties, and makes them obey its inclinations; so
that such as the Will is, such is the whole Man: And therefore the Scripture in
setting forth the twofold State of Men, does it by showing the temper of their
Wills; unregenerate Men are described by their willfulness, Ye will not come to
me that ye might have Life, 2 John 4. The People of God are described by their
willingness, Psalm. 116.3. They shall be a willing People in the Day of thy
Power. And here I shall endeavor two things,

First, To show you after what manner the Spirit of God does work this renewing
change upon the Will.

Secondly, What other change is wrought upon it which falls short of true
Grace, though oftentimes it is taken for it.

For the first, We must know that there are two ways, whereby God does
effectually change the Heart and Will of a Sinner: And these are Moral
Swasions, and Physical Determinations, which is nothing else, but God's All
powerful Grace, whereby he does immediately turn the bent and inclination of
the Will toward himself, and both these do always concur and accrue to this
great change. He does first convince a Sinner, and persuade him of the
rationality of the ways of God, of the vileness and emptiness of those vain
things, which his desires so eagerly pursue: And on the other hand, he clearly
represents the Glory and Excellency of himself and his ways, that he is the
greatest good that we can enjoy; and yet there is no other way to enjoy him,
but by loving and serving of him: To do this he makes use of moral Swasions,
and works upon our reason, by cogent and prevailing Arguments, which at last
diffuseth such Heavenly sweetness through the heart of a Christian, which makes
him disrelish those fulsome delights of sin, that separate from that infinite
Good, with which it holds comparison, so that he finds more true delight in God
and his ways, and more alluring and charming joy in them, than ever he did
before in sensual pleasure; more are thereby carried forth unto them, by an
infallible, yet altogether free, voluntary and amorous motion; and this is done
by the real efficiency likewise of the Spirit of God upon the Will, and this
efficiency, is so sweetly attempered to the native Liberty of the Will, that it
will be a pain and a torment to the Soul, to be separated from that God, whom
now his understanding does apprehend, and whom his Will does clasp about, as
the real and chiefest good. Here you see are both moral Swasions, and Physical
Determinations, of the Will to the Work of Grace; God does really determine it
by the efficacious touch of his Grace, whereby he powerfully turns the bent and
inclination of it to himself, which before stood toward sin and vanity; and
that this might not infringe the Wills Prerogative of acting freely, he does at
the same time morally persuade it, by representing himself as the best and most
satisfying object of it; notwithstanding the irresistableness of God's working
upon the Will; yet still Man's Will is free in God's working of Grace, which
some have thought to be an irreconcilable difference.

For the freedom of the Will does not consist in redoubled pure Acts, for
otherwise the Saints and Angels themselves, that are under that blessed
necessity, that they cannot but love and serve God, would not love him and
serve him freely: The liberty of the Will, consists in an acting upon rational
grounds and motives, which by how much stronger they are, by so much more they
turn the necessity of the Will to him, and yet by so much the more the Will is
free in acting: So that here the liberty of the Will may not violate the
causality of God's purpose, he changes it by the power of his irresistible
Grace. And yet that this irresistible Grace, may not violate the liberty of the
Will, which is its natural privilege, he persuades it by such natural
Arguments, that it could not act freely if it should dissent from them, though
God uses infinite power, yet he uses no violence, he subdues the Will, but
does not compel it. This is that victorious Grace, that does not more overcome
a Sinner's resistance, than it does his prejudice; it overcomes all opposition
by its own irresistible Power, and overcomes all its prejudices by its
attractive sweetness: And whenever it brings him to submit to God, it makes him
to apprehend, that his chiefest happiness and joy is to do so. And it is the
same that does afterward preserve a Christian from total Apostasy, for though
there be such a constant supply of Grace to keep them, that they shall never
draw back to Perdition; yet withal, their own freedom is such, that they may if
they will, but when the Will cease its freedom, it never inclines but to that
which is most pleasing, and nothing is pleasing to a renewed, sanctified Will,
so much as that Sovereign good, which comprehends in it all other good. Thus
you see, how God disposes of the Will of Man, changing it without constraining
of it, turning it not forcibly, but infallibly to himself, when he draws it by
the sweet and efficacious operation of his Grace; Thus I have dispatched the
first thing, and showed how God works the renewing change upon the Will of a
Sinner.

The second particular is to show you, what other Change may be wrought upon
the Will; which yet falls short of true Grace, and may bring a Man almost to
Christianity, and yet leave him in a natural state and condition.

First, an unregenerate Man may have many faint velleities, and wishings, and
wouldings after Grace; when he hears so much spoken of the Beauty and
excellency of Holiness, he is convinced in his judgment that those things are
true, that without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord; and that though while he
is carnal, spiritual duties are tedious and a burden to him; yet were he
spiritualized, they would become more delightful to him than those very
pleasures of sin, which keep him from closing with Grace: Were he renewed those
very pleasures of sin would become unsavory to him, that which now he is
afraid to lose if he would turn to Conscience he would not value the loss of
it. When an unregenerate Man, I say, is thus convinced of this, it will make
him to break out into pangs of Affection wishing for Grace. O that I were holy
and gracious! I wish my heart were changed and renewed: I wish I were better
and could do better; I appeal to every Man's Conscience, when he has been
convinced of the excellency and desirableness of holiness, whether they have
not breathed forth such wishes as these are. When you have seen a Christian
that is eminent and exemplary for piety; have not you wished your selves in his
condition, not only in respect of his future reward and glory, but also in
respect of his present Grace. Have you not wished that such had been your
comeliness and beauty, have you not wished not only with Balaam, to die the
death of the righteous, and that your last end might be like his; but also your
Life by living righteously; and yet still continue in the same course and
sinful state as formerly? Why now such empty Velleities, and idle Wishes an
unregenerate man may possibly have; he may wish he were a Saint, even as a fond
foolish man, according to his idle fancy, may wish that he were an Angel; but
such wishes do not put them upon a constant attempt and use of the Means
whereby they might become such, their wishes and their sighs vanish away
together, the one retaining no longer an impression upon their hearts, than the
other in the Air; he runs into the commission of that sin, which with his mouth
he wishes he might not commit, and lives in the neglect of holy duties, and yet
can wish that he had performed them; such contradictory wishes have
unregenerate men; they wish themselves holy, and yet are wilfully sinful; they
wish that they were better, and yet will not endeavor their own amendment.

Secondly, An unregenerate man, he may not rest in these Wishes, but he may
rise to a Resolution; I say, to some degree of Resolution: They resolve many
things; That their Lusts shall no longer enslave them; That the Pleasures of
the World shall no longer bewitch them; That the Difficulties of Religion shall
no longer affright them; but that they will break through all, and act like
Men: And such generous and ingenuous Resolutions as these a man in his natural
estate may fortify himself with. Grace they know they must have, else they are
eternally undone; they know that God has not been wanting to their endeavors,
and they peremptorily resolve that they will not be wanting to themselves. We
may see the same strong resolutions of those that came to enquire of Jeremy,
chap. 42.5, 6. They said, the Lord be a true and faithful witness between us,
if we do not according to all things for which the Lord thy God shall send thee
to us, etc. And yet none more rebellious and disobedient against God than these
men that make this Remonstrance. And now notwithstanding these Wishes, and
these Resolutions, the Will of a Natural Man falls short of a saving Change,
and that usually in these Particulars.

First, In that it is a fickle and unconstant Will; their Desires may be
sometimes violent and passionate, as if they would take Heaven by force, and
wrest Mercy out of the hands of God: their Prayers may be importunate and
earnest, as if they would take no denial; but this violent Spirit is soon
spent, and this full Bent of their Souls soon flaggs, and returns again, as
formerly, ever and anon into the commission of some foul and gross Sins. Such a
Will as this is, though at first it hurries them apace, yet it is soon tired,
and leaves them short of Grace and Heaven. The Christian Race is not to be run
by so many fits, but by a constant course and progress, still getting ground
upon our Lusts, still approaching nearer to the Kingdom of Heaven: But it is
with such men as it is with the Sea when a springtide covers all the shore;
when it ebbs, it discovers nothing but Sands, which before was nothing but deep
Water; so these affected and flowing Christians, they discover that there is
nothing but barren Sands at the bottom, that they are as unstable as Water. A
Christian is not made in a Fit, neither is the Work of Grace wrought in a
Passion; but it is a settled, solemn, and constant frame of Heart that brings a
man to Christ and Salvation.

Secondly, The Will of an unregenerate man is never universally changed; still
they reserve to themselves some Lust or other, that they will not part withal,
and their Resolutions concerning their sins, are such as the Resolution of
Naaman the Assyrian, 2 Kings 5.18. In this thing the Lord pardon thy Servant,
that when my Master goes into the house of Rimmon, to worship there, and he
leans on my hand, and I how my self in the house of Rimmon, etc. The Lord
pardon thy Servant in this thing. So men may be peremptory in their resolutions
to forsake their Sins, yet still there may be some one dear Lust or other that
makes them cry with Naaman, Lord, pardon thy Servant in this thing. Now they
will be willing to receive Christ if they may be allowed in one Darling-Sin;
now the partition that any one Sin makes between Christ and the Soul, must
needs hinder the soul from closing with Christ; as, if you throw but any little
thing between the branch and the stock that it is ingrafted into, the Sap will
never be communicated to it, and so it will never grow up to be a Plant.

Thirdly, The Will of an unregenerate Man is usually irrational; it would
obtain the End, and yet not use the Means. Grace possibly they would have, but
they cannot bring their averse Wills to close with the performance of those
unpleasing and irksome Duties wherein God usually bestows Grace, and by which
he conveys Grace to the Soul. Could they be holy with a wish, and a sudden
fancy that inflames them, then none should be better Christians than
themselves; could they enter into Heaven by being willing, there is none then
should shine above them in Glory; but when there is so much hard and unpleasing
work, first that they must be born of God, and after they are true Christians
they must exercise every Grace, and perform every Duty that may sit and prepare
them for Glory, they look upon these things as too difficult, which makes them
sit down with idle Wishes short both of Grace and Glory; their Wills are very
irrational; they would have Heaven, but they slight Grace, the way to it; and
possibly they would have Grace, but they cannot bring themselves to the
performance of those irksome and unpleasing Duties in and by which Grace is
usually bestowed and conveyed.

Fourthly, The Will of an unregenerate Man is usually general, not a particular
Will. If God should ask them, Sinner, what would you do to be saved? They would
answer, Any thing, every thing. But let God bid them leave such and such a Sin,
perform such and such a Duty, they answer with Naaman, Any Sin but that; any
Duty but that. So it is with these Men; Oh any thing in the general; but when
God brings them down to Particulars to do this or that, then they are willing
to do just nothing.

Now I have showed you how far the Will it self may be changed in unregenerate
persons; they may wish after Grace, and resolve to be better, and to do better,
and yet fall short of saving Grace; and also what it is that hinders this
change from being a through work of Grace, what it is that obstructs them when
they are almost, that they are not altogether Christians.

Fifthly, As for the Life and Conversation.

There may be a great change wrought in the Lives of unregenerate persons who
yet fall short of Christianity. The Apostle, 2 Pet. 2.20. speaks of such who
having escaped the pollutions of the world, through Lust were again entangled
therein, and overcome, etc. It seems to escape the pollutions of the world, is
no Argument of true Grace, unless they be also cleansed from the pollutions of
the Heart; for sin may be left merely from external and forced Principles, such
as Terrors of Conscience for the heavy Judgments of God. When God sets up a
flaming sword between a sinner and those sins which he accounts his Paradise
here; now to leave sin upon such a strait as this is, is to leave it with a
great deal of reluctance; as when a Mariner in a storm casts his goods
overboard into the sea, it is with his will indeed; but it is with an
unwilling willingness; he is frighted and terrified to it: so when the soul is
tossed with the Tempest of divine wrath, and when ready to be split upon the
Rock of Ages, and sunk and be swallowed up in a Sea of Fire and Brimstone, he
is forced to light himself, and to cast this and that dear Lust overboard;
this he does from his will; but it is such a forced will as that of Mariners,
who throw their Treasure overboard, and as soon as the Tempest is over, the
one gathers up his floating wrecks, and the other his sins. These men leave
their sins as Lot's Wise left Sodom; they dare no longer continue in it lest
Fire and Brimstone rain upon them, and yet when they do leave them, they give
many a wishly look back again, and have strong and vehement desires after them.
That Reformation of Life that only frees us from debauchedness, that falls far
short of true Christianity, and of making us altogether Christians; this is
that with which many sooth up themselves when they they reflect back upon the
wild extravagances of their former time, how outrageously wicked they have
been, riotous, drunkards, unclean, blasphemers, and now they find themselves
deadned to these sins, and grown men of staid and sober lives, they straightway
conclude, Certainly this great change could never be made on them otherwise
than by the renewing work of the Holy Ghost; and yet (...) this amendment there
may be no work of Regeneration; for men may gather up their loose and dissolute
Lives within some compass of Civility and Morality, and yet be utterly
strangers to this Work. Much of this may be ascribed partly to convictions of
God's Spirit, awakening natural Conscience to see the horror and danger of
such daring and outrageous sins, and partly too from Prudence, gotten from
frequent experience of manifold inconveniences that they brought upon
themselves by such sins; and both these Convictions and moral Prudence are
Principles that fall very far short of true Christianity. Usually all the
specious Reformation and Amendment of these men's Lives, is in effect either a
changing of the Sin, or a tiring out the Sinner.

First, The Life may seem to be reformed, when men exchange their rude and
boisterous sins for such as are more demure and sober; from riotous, they grow
worldly; from profane and irreligious, they grow superstitious and
hypocritical; from Atheists, they grow Heretics; from sins of Practice, to
sins of Contemplation: They are apt to think, certainly this change must needs
be the change of their Nature, when indeed it is but the change of their sins;
and usually it is such a change too, though it render the Life more
inoffensive, yet it makes the Soul more incurable. Austin, in his 29th.
Epistle, tells us, That Vices may give place, when Vert^e or Grace do not take
it.

Secondly, The Life may seem to be reformed, when men are only tired out; when
they have out-grown their sins. There are sins which are proper and peculiar to
such a state and season of a man's Life, upon the alteration of which they
vanish and disappear: Sins of Youth drop off from declining Age, as misbecoming
them. Now this deceives men, when they look (...) to the Vanities which they
have for^aken; how deadned are they to those sinful ways which before they much
delighted in? They conclude certainly this great change must needs proceed from
true Grace, when they do not leave their sins so much as their sins leave them,
and drop off from them as rotten fruit from a Tree; the faculties of their
minds, and members of their bodies, which before were Instruments of sin and
unrighteousness, are now become Instruments of Morality and seeming Virtues;
this sets them not free from the service of sin, but only restrains them from
breaking out into notorious and scandalous Vices.

Thirdly, A Civil and harmless demeanor does not render a man altogether a
Christian; there be many ingenuous spirits, who lived blamelesly in the world,
their good Natures nearly resembling Grace; and such was Paul's before his
conversion: For he tells us, As touching the Law, he was blameless: So the
young man that came to Christ to know what Lesson he had further to take out.
This only argues a sweet Disposition, but not a gracious Heart. Thus you see
how dissolute men may mistake themselves in this Work, upon which their e^ernal
happiness depends. It is to be seared that many may rest upon these, and think
the great discriminating change to be wrought, only because they are morally
honest, or gained over to a profession of Truth, or to such a Party or Sect of
Professors; when indeed true Christianity consists not in these things.

This shall suffice for the first General propounded; What Change may be
wrought upon a man so as to bring him almost to Christianity, and yet leave him
short of being a Christian: I shall close up this Branch with some Practical
Considerations.

Use 1. What then shall become of such as fall short of those that fall short
of Grace, that arenot so much as Almost Christians? What will become of carnal,
loose, and profane Sinners? If those that have been gazed at and admired for
burning and shining Lights, yet have fallen into the blackness of darkness,
even into the Dungeon of eternal darkness, were we but serious in this
Reflection, it would make all our faces gather blackness, and fill all our
hearts with astonishment, to consider that we are not gone so far in
Christianity as those may go, who yet fall short of Heaven. Have we all been
enlightened? Have we all tasted of the heavenly gift, and of the powers of the
world to come? Have we all been made partakers of the Holy Ghost? Are there not
many among us possibly whose hearts have never yet been touched with the sense
of sin, never affected with any of the ways of God, that give themselves up to
all wickedness with greediness, who never have given so much as one serious
wish toward Holiness, when those that seemed to shine as Stars in Heaven,
shall be at last found burning in Hell; Oh, in what a dismal case shall these
Firebrands be?

Use 2. Hence likewise, see what a difficult thing it is to be a true
Christian. May a natural Man attain to all this that I have spoken of before?
We may then take up that same Question, which the Disciples asked Christ, (when
he had told them, that it was as case for a Camel to go through a needles Eye,
as for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven) Lord, who then shall be
saved? What, may those whose profession has been eminent, who have been
Sainted in every Man's Calendar, may they at last miscarry and perish? Who then
shall be saved? If such be not Christians, Christianity seems to be rather some
fansied notion, than any thing real and attainable. To this we may make the
same answer that Christ gave to the Disciples, With Men indeed these things are
impossible, but with God all things are possible: It is impossible for Men by
their own strength and natural ability to become Christians, but it is possible
for God to make them Christians; It is possible as Miracles themselves are
possible, only possible to the Almighty Power of God: There is not any Soul can
be persuaded to be a Christian, but he has a Miracle wrought upon him, and he
himself must do that, which is little less than a Miracle, he must act beyond
the power of nature, and do more than a mere Man can do; therefore well may you
suspect your Christianity, who find it so easy a matter to be a Christian.
Even natural Men find it a difficult task to attain to that height and pitch,
where they shine in moral virtues, though far short of Heaven, and it is easy
for you to mount far higher than they, far beyond them; indeed it is an easy
matter for any to make a slight formal profession, to run in a round of
Hypocritical Duties, and live a moral civil Life, this is easy, there is
nothing miraculous in this: But is it casie to pluck out the right Eye, and to
cut off the right Hand? It is not easy to cruci^ie a darling Lust, to cut off
the right hand, when it lifts up it self to plead for mercy, and to be spared a
little longer, to pluck out the right eye, when it drops tears to beg
compassion, and a little favor to be granted to it? Is it casie to combat with
Principalities and Powers, to bassle Devils, and despise the scorns and
affronts of the whole World? Is it easy to live like an Angel? Nay to live
like Christ, to live like God himself? Is this easy, when we see so many
tottering Professors aspiring toward Christianity, some mounting till they are
giddy and brainsick with their most damnable errors, others tumbling down from
the Precipices of great and dangerous sins.

We may well wonder that any are saved, when such as these miscarry: Well then,
to consider what it is that is wrought upon you, even that the Omnipotent God
has wrought, (and what it is that is wrought by you,) that that is beyond the
Power of Nature: we may well conclude, what a difficult matter it is to become
a true and serious Christian altogether.

Use 3. May natural Men go thus far in Christianity, O be you then persuaded to
go much further! Do not rest in any attainment short of Heaven and Glory. Rest
not in any present attainment; and this indeed is the most natural Use that can
be made of this Subject, when you hear how great a progress wicked Men may
make. I know that the hearts of the best Christians are ready to suggest to
them, and they will be apt to conclude against themselves: All that is wrought
upon them is but the common work of the Spirit; therefore their Graces are but
Counterfeit, and that themselves yet are short of Christianity; I know that
this subject may cause such jealousies and suspicions to arise in the hearts of
some; but the genuine use of this Doctrine is not so much to pore upon our
present condition, as to stir you up to make a future progress.

May a natural Man make so great a progress, as to be almost a Christian, then
certainly I must never rest any where short of Heaven. Well therefore, the
Apostle in Heb. 6.11, 12. After he had shown them at large what a height a
natural Man may arrive to, he presses them to be earnest in their endeavors
after perfection. Why, this will be the best evidence to you, that you are
indeed Christians, that you have the truth of Christianity.

Though natural Men may possibly glister in a glorious Profession, and shine
like the Sun in its radiant splendour; yet like it they have their Zenith, their
highest degree, which when they have climbed to, they fall down again. But a
true Christians course has not any declension, he may proceed infinitely from
one degree of Grace to another, he may ascend and reach higher and higher till
he has reached Heaven, where all his infirmities shall be swallowed up, and
abolished in consummated Glory. And indeed this is the greatest evidence of the
truth of Grace; a natural Man's motion to Heaven, it is violent and unnatural,
it is forced from him, by some external impressions upon the Conscience,
Illumination, and common Works of the Holy Ghost, which as soon as this
external force is spent, he falls naturally back again to his former course of
sin. As a Stone may be carried a great height toward Heaven, by an outward
violent impression upon it, but when that force is worn off, it falls naturally
back again to the earth. Now a Christian mounts naturally to Heaven, which by
reason of that dull mixture of Earth that is in him, his course tends to the
Earth again; But the true Christian still mounts upward from the principle that
carries him up, which indeed never totally spends it self; therefore if thou
would prove thy self to be not almost, but altogether a Christian, continue
thy progress, still gain ground toward Heaven, rest not satisfied with any
present seize, but be still rising and soaring, until thou have gotten
the World and them too under thy feet.

Fifthly, When you see any who have been forward in a Profession, and gone far
in Christianity, to forsake their Station, and fall back to their former course
of Profaneness: Take heed that you do not reproach, that you do not scandalize
Religion with their Apostasy; this is that which opens the mouths and hardens
the hearts of wicked Men, when they see such Glorious, but yet Temporary
Professors to return with the Dog to the Vomit; they indeed first bless
themselves in their own ways, as being better than the ways of God, as being
better than the Profession of Religion; otherwise why should those that so long
have forsaken them, and with a great deal of pomp, made such a Glorious show
and Ostentation of Religion, and of Conscientiousness, why should such return
back again to their old ways.

Secondly, It makes them think, that all Professors are but Hypocrites, that it
is but a solemn cheat put upon the World, since such forward Professors of it
are found forsakers of it. Some Men please themselves with a few idle conceits
of Grace, and the New Birth Communion with God, and the like unintelligible
notions, when there is no other difference between them and others, but what
only their fancies make. O take heed therefore, that you do not blaspheme the
ways of God, when you see the Apostasy of Professors: No, these Men were never
in those ways. Had they been Christians in deed, they would never have deserted
those holy ways; their natures were never changed, and it is no wonder, that
they are relapsed and fallen back again into their old Customs; to see the
Swine that is cleansed to return back again to the mire, it is nothing strange.
Had Christ changed the nature of these Swine, and made them his Sheep, then as
they had first escaped the pollutions of the World, so they would have kept
themselves from ever being entangled by them. But this makes highly for the
honor of Christianity, and proves it to be a thing so excellent, that it
cannot be long counterfeited; Hypocrisy shall certainly betray it self by its
Apostasy, that it had never any thing of true and saving Grace, although it
carried far in a show and pretense of it. Thus much for the first thing
propounded, how far a Man may attain toward Christianity, and yet be in a
natural sinful State.

SERMON IV.
THE next thing is to show you, whence it is that natural Men are enabled to
make so great a progress toward Christianity. I shall give you a brief
Resolution to this Question, and that shall be drawn, First, from the
consideration of the Subject, and that is a natural Man himself. Secondly, from
the consideration of the Object, and that is Holiness or Christianity to which
it tends. First, if you look into the Subject the natural Man himself; And so
you shall find that Man, and that which is wrought upon him, which may carry
him out possibly to a very great progress in Religion, and that may be twofold.
(1) the Power of Nature. (2) The Elevation and recruit which that power may
receive from a common work of the Holy Ghost, much helping nature, quickening
Conscience, and reforming the Life.

First, The Carnal Man may be carried very far toward Christianity, from the
mere strength and power of Nature; for the mere power of corrupt nature; is of
it self sufficient to raise a Man to any attainment that is short of true
saving Grace. A natural Man may so prepare and dispose his heart, as that the
very next thing to be wrought upon him should be Grace; It may carry him out to
the externals of Christianity, and it may be with more pomp and grandeur than
sometimes the power of Grace does carry out a Child of God. When the Power of
Nature takes on it the form of Godliness, it will make bright and glittering
Professors; now these externals of Christianity they lie in two things, the
performance of Duties, and the avoiding of Sin: As for Duties they may so far
outstrip and outshine a Child of God, in the pomp and gaudiness of them, as
to be their emulation and example. And for sin there is not any one particular
sin, setting aside those common and unavoidable infirmities, which are
inseparable from the frailty of humane Nature; but a carnal Man may keep
himself from the Commission of it, by the mere Power of Nature: And there is
scarce any sin, that is branded remarkably in the World, but some wicked Man or
other does abstain from it, and that merely from the Power of Nature; there are
some that by this Power abstain from this Sin, another from that, and a third
from another Sin: And each of these have Power to abstain likewise from all
these Sins, because what Power the one has, it may (possibly) be found in the
other, since in nature there is nothing partial for a Man naturally is not so.

Secondly again, The Devil when he tempts, he does not force and constrain
them; he does not forcibly move the black Tongue of the Swearer to curse and
blaspheme, nor does he scrue open the Drunkard's mouth by force, to pour down
intemperate Cups, nor force the Murderer's hand to sheath his Sword in his
Brother's Bowels whether he will or no, but he sollicites the Wills, and
insinuates into the Affections by his Temptations, and make these freely move
the Engine to that which his design tends; and therefore all his Triumphs are
but for Beggarly Victories; he could not prevail over us, did not we prove
Traitors to our own Souls? did not we surrender up our selves, by the consent
of our own Wills? else we could never be distressed, much less taken by the
violence of the Tempter.

Secondly, As Men may proceed far toward Christianity by the Power of Nature,
so they may have common and ordinary Works of the Holy Ghost upon them, that
may carry them out to a very great progress, they may be made says the
Apostle, partakers of the Holy Ghost. Heb. 6.4. and that is, of its common
Gifts and Operations; it is the Spirit of God that inlightens their
Understandings, that awakens their Consciences, that excites their Affections,
it is the Spirit that works Conviction, that works Reformation; yea, and
Sanctification, in wicked and unregenerate Men. For we have that expression
concerning them: There is a twofold Sanctification, (1) Of the Flesh,
consisting in the removal of all carnal and external filthiness, called by the
Apostle an escaping of the pollutions of the World through lust, 2 Pet. 2.20.
And that consists in a separation from all those gross and vile Sins, wherein
the flagitious and debauched World do wallow. (2) There is likewise a
Sanctification of the Spirit consisting in a separation from a State of Nature
to a State of Grace, the one is external by Reformation, the other is internal
by Renovation; the former Sanctification a natural Man may be made partaker of
by the Holy Ghost, so as to have his Life and Actions stand at a greater
distance from, and a greater opposition to carnal gross Sins, which the World
is generally desiled with, but this is no more than a common and ordinary Work
of the Holy Ghost, they may account the blood, whereby they are sanctified an
unholy thing: There is a far different force and energy, that the Holy Spirit
puts forth, when it works Conversion, and when it works only outward
Sanctification, in both it may work upon the heart, but in Conversion it works
upon the heart so as to change it and renew it, but in the reformation of a
natural Man, he works upon the heart indeed, but it is only to change and amend
the life, the Spirit may persuade the one to change his heart, but then he
changes the heart of the other: He may persuade the Will of the one to submit
to Christ, but then he subdues the Will of the other, he persuades the one to
become a Christian, but he makes the other a Christian. Now there is a very
wide difference between these two ways of working, by the one he only excites
Men to use somewhat of the Power they have, but by the other he gives them the
Power they want; And thus you see, what there is in Man considered, both in
nature and with the help of the common Work of the Holy Ghost, that may carry
him so far toward Christianity.

Secondly, There is also something considerable in the Object, viz. Religion
and Christianity it self, whence it is natural Men may make so great a progress
toward it, and that is twofold, (1) The Attractiveness of Religion. (2) The
Subserviency of Religion to it self. (1) The Attractiveness of Religion, and
this consists not only in the inward and spiritual beauty of Holiness, which
these Men have not Eyes to discern, but also in that happiness which is annexed
to Religion and Christianity. This is that which draws out natural Men to all
their Seize, Happiness is the great bait of Men's desires, and that which
sweetens the means tending to it, though they be in themselves very difficult
and burdensome; yet leading to happiness they close with it; and therefore, as
the apprehensions of Heaven and Hell work upon a natural Man, more or less,
forcibly, than the thoughts of the difficulty or tediousness of holy Duties;
such is his progress, more or less, strong and vigorous toward Christianity.
Secondly, Another thing in Christianity or Religion, that advances some to so
great a progress, is the Subserviency of Religion to it self. Religion does
mightily promote and advance it self. (1) First, in that the performance of one
part, and of one duty of Religion, it obliges and engages to the performance
of another: As one Sin draws on another, by consequence likewise does one Duty
draw on another. There is a connection and dependence between them, Hearing
engages to Meditation, and Meditation to Prayer, and Prayer for Grace to
endeavor after it a glorious Profession, it obliges to something at least
that may be answerable to that Profession. Thus one Duty of Religion, it hands
a Man over to another, and when he is passed through one, another stands ready
to receive him.

Secondly, A little progress in Religion it does facilitate, it is hard at
first to begin, then having begun to continue, because use and custom in any
thing makes it easy. How! is this subserviency of Religion to it self, that
may carry Men very far in it, when they have begun Profession, and entered upon
one Duty, that Duty delivers them over to another, and makes it more facile and
easy to them, because the precedent Duty as it does engage him to, so it
prepares him for the subsequent Duty, as well as engage him to the present
Duty: One Duty does as it were perform half the task, and bear half the burden
of the other. Thus then you see, whence it is that natural Men may make so
great a progress toward Christianity, so as to be almost Christians, from the
Power of Nature, and from the attractiveness of Religion: Now here if you ask
me, how shall I know, whether it be the Power of nature helped by the common
workings of the Spirit, or the Power of supernatural Grace, that carries Men
out to all their Profession?

I shall give you but this one discriminating Character of it: See whether your
abilities be greater in the things that belong to Grace and Holiness, than they
are to natural things. A Child of God who is but of weak parts as to the things
of the World, that can scarce give you a rational account of such affairs, when
propounded to him. Why, bring him but to the things of God, and how admirably
will he be able to unfold, even the very mysteries that are hid from the wise
and prudent of the World, but put him upon any common discourse, how broken and
incoherent is he, but engage him in Prayer, how does he expatiate and enlarge,
and what a Torrent of Divine Rhetoric will he then pour into the Bosom of God;
Is this from nature that he is able to exceed and go beyond himself? No
certainly; It is very observable concerning the ways of God what the Prophet
speaks, Isa 53.8. A high way shall be there, and it shall be called a way of
holiness, the unclean shall not pass over it.

Though they wander and err in every other way, though they do not take the
right way to be rich, and great, and honorable in the World; yet these that
are fools in every thing else they shall not err from the way of Holiness, and
therein lies the only Wisdom. But now take a mere ^arnal Man, that has eminent
abilities in earthly things; usually, he is never weaker than when he is
engaged in that which is holy and spiritual; at least his chiefest excellency
does not lie there, though he does perform the Duty well, yet he does not do it
beyond what he does in ordinary and natural things. Now how is it with you? Do
you find your selves carried much beyond the rate and size of your natural
abilities, that you never so much exceed your selves, nor do so well as when
you are about some holy and spiritual employment, that you are not so
artificial in any thing as in holy performances; this is a good sign, that it
is from the Power of Grace, and not only the Power of Nature, that carries you
forth to the Profession of Religion you make. I take the extraordinary gifts
bestowed upon unregenerate Men in a vast disproportion from their natural
abilities, to be long ago ceased.

Thus you see what inables a natural Man to go so far toward Christianity.

The third general propounded, was to show what it is that hinders these
proficients from making further progress, that when they are Almost what keeps
them from being altogether Christians: I answer to this in general; It is only
through a wilful and wretched neglect of what they might do, that any of them
do fall short of Grace here, and Glory hereafter. It is not from our want of
Power, but our want of Will, or rather indeed our willingness that makes us
miscarry to our Eternal Perdition. I shall illustrate this by a plain and
obvious Similitude: Suppose that God should promise to bestow Heaven upon us,
if we would but reach forth and touch it with our hands: Now although we can
never reach so high; yet if we do not stretch forth our hands, and reach as
high as we are able to do, the fault of losing Heaven will not lie upon the
inability and impossibility, that was in us to touch it, but it lies in our
willful neglect of striving to our utmost to do what we are able to do; why,
the reason why we fall short, would not be because our Arm is not long enough,
but because we do not stretch it forth to the utmost length.

The instance is somewhat plain and familiar, but yet it holds an exact
proportion to the case in hand, God promises Heaven to us if we will but touch
it, that is, if we will lay hold on Christ by Faith, which Faith we can no more
work in our selves by our own proper efficiency, than touch Heaven with our
Finger; yet howsoever, if we do not do our utmost, our falling short of Heaven
and Faith cannot be imputed to the impossibility that we lay under, but to our
willful sloth and neglect. It is not Men's cannots but their will nots, not
their Impotency but their Obstinacy, that destroys them; Ye will not come to me
that ye might have life, John 5.40. Ye will not. Does not Christ himself tell
us, that no Man can come to him, except the Father draw him? True, but the
fault lies in the stubbornness of your wills; though you could come, you would
not; therefore it is not your weakness but your willfulness, that keeps you
from coming to Christ. Let me here appeal to your selves; Does not he deserve
Eternal Death, who had a Power in his hand to make himself a Christian, and yet
would not; certainly you will all conclude, this Man is very equally and justly
dealt with, if sentenced to Eternal Misery, since he had a Power to avoid that
misery, and to lay hold on Eternal Life and Happiness; his condemnation lies on
his own head for his willful contempt of Salvation, which he had a Power to
work out, and by a diligent improvement of the means tendered to him, to make
sure of it; every carnal Man if he had power to convert himself, yet through
his willful neglect and obstinacy he would not do it; and this appears, because
there is not one of us that does as much as he might do.

There is not one natural Man that does as much as he might do: Will not he now
do what he can do to prepare and dispose his heart for Grace, then much less
would he work Grace in his heart, though he had a Power to do it; and therefore
the whole default of Men's falling short of Grace, lies in their willful
neglects. Men indulge themselves in carnal sloth, and if they can but maintain
the pace and rate of common ordinary Professors in a formal course of Duty, or
abstain from gross Sins; O then they are contented! and will be drawn on no
further. Could not they command their thoughts to dwell more fixedly, and more
abidingly upon Spiritual Objects? Cannot they be oftener in Meditation, and
meditate more fervently, and with more affection? In both had they not Power to
refuse temptations and sinful motions? Does the Devil use any force or violence
upon them? Did they ever find, when they threw themselves upon their Knees in
Prayer, that he stiffened them that they could not bend? or that the Devil
stopped their mouths from speaking, or their hearts from thinking? had he a
Power to strike Men lame when they should come to the Ordinances, or strike
them deaf when they should hear, or Dumb when they should speak, then there
were some show and color of reason, why Men attended no more frequently, why
they heard no more attentively, why they did not ponder more considerately, why
they prayed so seldom and heartlesly; did but the Devil compel them to this,
the Sinner might have some excuse; but when he must woo their consent and
allowance, and wait their pleasure and leisure, it is merely a wretched neglect
or willfulness, that they yield to the Commission of any Sin: Can you do all
this and more, and yet will you not? Know that if you perish, it is only your
own fault, you your selves are the bloody Murderers of your own Souls. It will
be in vain for you to plead, that you had no Power to make your selves
Christians; why, you never went so far as to make a trial, whether you had a
Power or no; for a Man not to do the utmost that he might do toward
Christianity, though he has no Power to make himself a Christian; yet it is
the same as if he had a Power, and yet will not make use of it. O let this that
I have said prevail with you, to be not only Almost, but altogether Christians,
and to put forth all the power and might, and ability, that you have in the
working out your own Salvation. Is there not infinite Reason, why you should
speedily set about this important Work, while you have time and opportunity for
the doing of it? Is it a matter of the greatest moment in the World, and not to
be delayed one moment? Be persuaded then to the speedy practice of it.

Object. Some desperate Wretches may think indeed, that Arguments to persuade
Men to work out their Salvation, may be of weighty import to enforce the Duty
upon those that do expect Salvation; but for my part I pretend not so high; let
me but enjoy now the Sins which I serve, and the pleasures which I pursue, and
for the State of my Soul hereafter, I commend that to the mercy of God, and if
I must perish, I will perish with as much ease and content as I may. It is hard
to alter an irreversible doom, and if it be to Perdition, it is but folly to
hang down the head, and blubber the eyes, and break the heart for that which
cannot be altered. If I must go to Hell I may as soon be carried down thither
in a flood of tears, as in doing ungodly Actions: Why should I conspire with
God's Decree to make my self miserable. If he has sentenced me to Hell
hereafter, I may as well sentence my self to an Heaven here; my future torments
are in his Hands, but my present delights are in my own; therefore if Salvation
and Happiness be such nice points I forego them, and will embrace my more easy
and more obvious pleasures.

Answ. I know no pious heart here, but shivers with horror at such Language,
though it be but personated; methinks rather it represents the Speech of a
Devil, who is without all possibility of Happiness, than of Men who are in the
way to it. Indeed it is the Speech of the Devil, but it is likewise in the
hearts of Men, when they storm and bluster at the difficulties of Salvation,
and narrowness of the Way, and straitness of the Gate: The Devil interposeth
this suggestion, It is as good to perish with case, as to be saved with so much
labor and pains; but what, shall we leave Men to such desperate resolutions as
these, and suffer them to go dreaming to Hell and Destruction? Certainly
Religion has Arguments enough to prevail, even with these, if they would but
show themselves to be Men, and but ponder how much Reason can speak.

First consider, Thou that wilt rather perish than make thy Life a trouble to
thee by Obedience, God may under thy Disobedience make thy Life a trouble, yea
a Hell to thee by his Terrors. Thou think that thy Garment of Sin and
Pollution, will sit more loose and easy about thee, than the Garments of
Holiness that are too strait-laced and troublesome: Yea, but what if God should
roll these thy filthy Garments in Brimstone, and fire them about thee? How
dreadfully would thou be disappointed, when instead of that ease which thou
seek in the service of Sin, God should make thee thine own Tormentor, and
make thy Conscience an Hell incarnate? Believe it, the wrath of God can fry the
marrow in thy Bones, and reduce thy Soul to Ashes. Read Psalm. 88. and you will
think it a doleful and sad description of the State of the Damned. While I
suffer thy Terrors I am distracted: And if the Wrath of the Almighty lay thus
sore upon an Holy Man, how fretting and corroding will it be upon the leprous
Soul, and upon an ulcerated Conscience? If it burns up the Green Tree, what
will become of the Dry Tree, which is but as prepared fuel for it to prey upon?

No Man has his present delights and contentments in his own Power, because no
Man has his own Conscience in his own Power; it will speak, yea, and that
terrible things, even then, when a Sinner has done all he can to fear and
stupifie it. Consider again, how is it with you after the rage of your Sinning
is over? are you not haunted with fearful reflections and ghastly thoughts of
despair and horror? Could we but unbowel a Sinner, we should find those
Conscience-Worms, gnawing and knotting about him, and devouring his heart. And
are these wont to resolve into trouble, for fear Religion and Holiness should
trouble them? Are they content to buy ease and quiet at such a rate, as the
loss of Heaven and Eternal Torments amount to? And is this the ease and quiet
that they purchase with it? The Devil puts a gloss cheat upon these Men, he
changes not the trouble but the time of it, only they shun the work of God,
because it is troublesome in doing, though it does leave behind it the blessed
fruits of Peace, Joy, and Satisfaction; and they do engage in the Work of the
Devil, which as soon as the heat and fury of it is a little over, leaves in
their sober thoughts, nothing but Anguish, Stings, and Torments; and therefore
be not deceived, suffer not the Devil any longer to abuse you, and impose his
drudgery upon you, under the notion of ease and quiet: If your Consciences were
once awakened, I know the Work of the Devil must needs bring you more vexation,
besides the shame, than ever you would have from the work of God; yea, the very
omission and neglect of God's Work is a far greater trouble than the
performance of it would be; therefore if you look no farther than your present
Content and Satisfaction, if you would go to your final estate the easiest way
whatever it be, think not to attain this by giving up your selves to a way of
Sin, nor by wounding your own Consciences, which with trouble afterward will
be sure to be avenged upon you, but in a way of Duty and laborious working, you
only can find present content, and shall certainly find future Happiness?

SERMON V.
Object. 2.
TRue, may some say, Possibly the Work of God might be more pleasing and
satisfactory to us than the Work of the Devil, if we could work it; but to what
end is it that God requires from us to work, to what purpose does he command
us? Does not he himself know that we have no power? Does not he himself say
that we are dead in Trespasses and Sins? Is it rational, is it just to bid a
dead Man work? Or does it become that God who would be thought by us to be
infinitely gracious and merciful, to mock and deride humane misery, when he
commands those things from us which he knows to be impossible? Had he bid us
blend Light and Darkness together, or to bend the Axle-tree of the World till
both Poles meet; had he bid us fling the Stars out of their Orbs, or with our
hands stop the Sun in the midst of his course; all these great impossibilities
are as easily achieved, as by our own power to work any part of divine and
acceptable obedience without gracious assistance from God: We can as soon
glorify as sanctify our selves. What should we then do, but only sit still
and expect, till efficacious Grace should move and act us, and we not able to
gainsay and resist it? till God so draw us as that we must run, and so call us
as that we must answer? till then our Obedience is an impossibility, and all
our Attempts are vain and fruitless. This now is a slothful Sinner's pretense
why he will not work; and no doubt but that too often it does flash into the
thoughts of most men, whereby their hearts are discouraged, and their hands
weakened in the service of God.

Answ. In Answering this, I shall not enter into that great Debate of the power
of nature to do what is good and acceptable to God; but proceed in a plain and
accommodated way to Practice, and that which will be most convictive to the
Conscience.

First, Men will not plead thus in Matters of far less concernment than the
Salvation of their Souls. Would a Master, when he commands his Servant to work,
take this, think you, for a sufficient excuse, That he has no power to work
till God act and move him? It may as well be objected by your Servants to you,
as by you to God. Tell me, what power have I to speak, or you to hear one word,
unless God do concur to it? Nay, we are not sufficient to think one good
thought, 2 Cor. 3.5. And do we make this an excuse to forbear those Actions
that are necessary and convenient! Do we therefore resolve to do nothing,
because it is impossible for us to do any thing unless God concurs with it?
What stupid, dull Folly were this, and we put it daily and hourly to trial, and
produce me that man that can say God was wanting to him in his concurrence.
What a miserable and ridiculous task would it be, if in every Action of our
Lives that we cannot do without God, yet should sit still, and question God's
concurrence? Do you sit down to try whether God will enable you to rise when
you are down? Or, do you question whether God will concur to another step,
though it is impossible you should stir and move, unless God act and move you?
yet this hinders not men's endeavors: In him we live, and move, and have our
being. Why do not you do so in spiritual matters? We can do nothing without
God. True; yet put it to the trial, whether or no God will concur with you.
Certainly that man must be nameless that can say, I was truly willing, and
endeavored to do any spiritual good, but God was wanting to me in his
concurrence.

Secondly, Those men who thus make Impotence a pretense for their Sloth, do not
indeed believe what they themselves pretend. No, it is the inward and secret
thought of them all, that they have a power to work out their own Salvation,
and therefore whether they have or no, still they are inexcusable, while they
think they have this power, yet they sit still. Although a man be chained fast
down that he cannot go, yet he thinks himself at liberty, and notwithstanding
sits still, you may soon tell where the fault lies; it may be imputed for want
of Will, and not for want of Power: So here; Wicked men think they have power
to work, however they speak otherwise; therefore they are utterly inexcusable
if they do not work. It is as clear as the light, that their Sloth proceeds not
from their Impotence, but from their own wilfulness. I shall endeavor by a few
Arguments to convince you, that you do indeed think that you have power to work
out your own Salvation; therefore if you do it not, you are altogether
inexcusable, whether you have that power or no.

First, Did you never, when God has shaken his Rod and Whip over you,
seriously promise and resolve to work; his Rod, I mean, either of Conviction or
Affliction? Have not these made you enter into an engagement with God, that you
would serve and obey him for the future? Did you not really thus resolve? There
are few here, but sometimes at least in a Fit and Pang of Conscience have so
done. And why did you resolve all this, and yet at the same time think and
believe you could do nothing? Did you only mock God, and play with your own
Consciences? Certainly your Consciences then were too much provoked, and too
much awakened to be thus jested and dallied with. We find this Temper in the
Israelites, when they were frighted at the terrible glory from Mount Sinai,
Exodus 24.3. See how confidently they promise and resolve. And all the People
answered with one voice, and said, All the Words which the Lord has said will
we do. So the Jews in their great distress, Jer. 42.6. Whether it be good, or
whether it be evil, we will obey the voice of the Lord our God, etc. that it
may be well with us.

Alas, how many pious Purposes and holy Resolutions have your Dangers, your
Fears, and your Sick-Beds been witness to? Have they not heard you breath out,
Spare, O Lord, spare a little longer; give some space; try us yet once more,
and O Lord, we will reform, we will amend our sinful Lives, we will perform
neglected Duties, and never more again return to folly? Are not these
Resolutions an evident Conviction? Certainly you thought you had a power so to
do, and therefore if you do not endeavor to perform, you are altogether
inexcusable.

Secondly, Did you never in your whole Lives perform a Duty unto God? Did you
never pray? Is there any here so desperately profane, so lost to all show of
goodness, that has not done this? And to what end have you prayed? For what
did you perform your Duty? Was it not for Salvation? And did you work for
Salvation, and yet think you had no power to work for it? It is impossible;
Men's very Works do plainly show, that they do think that they have a power;
something still must be done, though it be but formally, slightly, and coldly;
a mere Lord have mercy upon me, a customary Lord forgive me; yet something
Conscience will require which men reckon upon, and make account to be working
out their Salvation.

Thirdly, Wherefore is it that you trust unto, and rely upon your good Works,
if you think you have no power to work out your Salvation? Would it be so hard
and difficult a matter to take men off from leaning so much upon their Works,
if they did not think that they had power to work out their own Salvation? Men
do apprehend a worth and sufficiency in what themselves do in order to
Eternity, and bid them forgo their Works, and renounce their own Righteousness,
and this is a hard Saying; you may almost persuade them as soon to renounce all
their hopes of Heaven. This is an evident Conviction, whatever Notions men may
entertain to stop the mouth of a clamorous Conscience, when it calls on them
for working and laboring, yet they do not believe what they themselves speak
concerning their Impotence.

Fourthly, Did you never when the Spirit of God was dealing with your Hearts,
persuading you to enter upon a course of Duty and Obedience? Did you never
procrastinate, and use delays? Did you never stifle the Breathings, nor quench
the Motions of the Holy Spirit, by thinking it was time enough to do it
hereafter? What need I begin so soon, or vex my flesh, or deny my self the Joys
and Pleasures of this Life, even as soon as I am come to relish them? When
Sickness, or gray Hairs admonish me, and tell me, I am near unto Eternity; when
old Age promises me that the Severities of Religion shall be no long trouble,
then will I look after the Concernments of my Soul; then it will be time
enough; then I will repent, believe, obey, and work out that Salvation that
will be then hastening upon me. Tell me truly, Have not these been the foolish
Reasonings of your Hearts? Have you not thus often promised God and your own
Consciences? And does not this plainly imply, you thought you had power to do
it? Wherefore thou art inexcusable, O Man, whoever thou art: it is in vain to
plead want of Power, God will confute thee by thy very thoughts. Had thou no
Power? Although thou had not, yet thou thoughtest thou had, yet would
not endeavor to work; therefore thy Ruin is as wilful, and thy Condemnation
as just as if thou had a power, and would not work; for thou perishest
merely through the default of thine own Will.

Answ. 3. Whether wicked men have this power or no to work out their own
Salvation, I shall not now stand to enquire; but if they had it, yet they would
not work with it; and therefore it is a most vain and insufficient Plea to
pretend they wanted power. Now this appears evidently, because there is no
wicked man, that ever did so much as he was able to do by the mere strength of
Nature, without the assistance of supernatural Grace; and therefore it is not
their Inability, but their wilful Sloth that does destroy them. Do but answer
your own Consciences, Was there not one Duty more which you could have
performed, nor one Temptation, nor one Corruption more which you could have
resisted? Could not you have prayed, read, or meditated upon heavenly things,
then when your Hearts and Thoughts have been vain, worldly, and sinful, and
devilish? Might not that Time have been spent in holy Converse, which you
trifled away in idle, impertinent Discourse, or in doing nothing, or that which
was much worse than nothing? What force, what constraint is laid upon you? Can
you think? And if you can, Cannot you think of God as well as of the World? as
well concerning fulfilling God's Will, and working out your Salvation, as
fulfilling your Lusts? Can you not speak? And if you can, Can you not speak to
God in holy Prayer, and of the things of God in holy Discourse, as well as of
your Trades and Bargains, those low and trivial Matters that are not worthy of
Men, much less of Christians? What force is there upon you? Does the Devil
screw open the Drunkard's Mouth, and pour down his excessive and intemperate
Cups whether he will or no? Does the Devil violently move the Tongue of the
Swearer and Blasphemer to revile the holy and reverend Name of God? Does he
strike men dumb when they should pray, or deaf when they should hear, or
senseless when they should understand? Is there any such force or constraint
laid upon you? May you not avoid the one, and do the other if you your selves
please? Yes, you can, but you will not; therefore neither would you work out
your own Salvation if you could. Is there any hope that you that will not do
the less that God requires from you, that you should ever be induced to perform
the greater? Let your Weakness and Impotence be what it will, yet your
Condemnation will lie upon you so long as your Wilfulness is much greater than
your Weakness. No, Sinners, your precious and immortal Souls will eternally
perish now for want of Will to save them. Pity your selves; will you lose your
selves for ever only out of Sloth? Will you sleep your selves into Hell, and go
drowzily into destruction? Shall one end of your Souls lie already burning as a
Brand of Hellfire, and you not put forth a hand to snatch it out? Is it more
painful to work the Works of God, than it is to perish for ever under
insupportable Torments? Therefore do you what you possibly can, labor and
sweat at Salvation, rather than fail of it: Let this never grate nor fret your
Consciences in Hell, that they lie there burning for ever, merely for your
wilful Neglects.

SERMON VI.
When a man is gone far toward Christianity, there are several things that
make him neglect a further progress: As,

First, His groundless fancying of Difficulties and hard Encounters in the Ways
of God. Oh, were it but as easy to be holy as sinful, he were wretched that
would refuse to be a Christian; or were Christianity but one hard pull, or
difficult pang, that would soon be over, there were some encouragement for
them; but when they have already struggled, and wrestled, and waited against
the stream, thus far, and yet see no end, Duty to be performed upon Duty, and
Temptation upon Temptation to be resisted, still to be combating with Devils,
still to be crossing and vexing of our selves, no respite, no breathing-time
allowed them. This takes off their Wheels, and though they are able to do this,
yet they will rather sit down quite short of Grace, than run through such
hardships to attain it, and so they come up in the midway, neither holy, nor
profane; but please themselves with a mediocrity, and middle rank of Religion,
and dare not go further for fear of difficulties; nor yet they dare not fall
further back for fear of Conscience; and so they lie hovering between Heaven
and Hell. Now this is merely from wilful Sloth. Prove. 26.13. The slothful man
says there is a Lion in the way, a Lion in the streets. Here the Wise Man
brings in a drowsy Sluggard dreaming of dangers and difficulties, to excuse
his Sloth; I dare not stir abroad, for there is a Lion in the streets: A likely
matter that there should be a Lion in the streets; but yet see how this Fancy
works with him: Any thing is an excuse for the Sluggard. In ver. 14. As the
door turns upon the hinges, so does the Slothful upon his Bed. A Door is
often in motion to and fro, but it gains no ground, makes no progress, still
hangs where it did; so it is with slothful Professors; that which they have
already attained to, is that they move to and fro like a door upon the hinges,
still the same motion over and over again, no new progress, no new attainment,
and that merely because they are sluggish and lazy, and fancy difficulties to
themselves, and strange apparitions in the Ways of God, that make them stand at
a stay where they are, and dare not make one step forward. As it was with the
Israelites, who came to the very Borders of the Land of Canaan, Numb. 13.32,
33. When the Searchers had brought reports to them, that the Land indeed was
good and fruitful, but the Walls of the City were built up to heaven, and that
there were many Giants; and that they should be beaten and eaten: They were not
so much allured with the goodness of the Land, as they were deterred by the
thoughts of the difficulties; and though God himself bid them arise, and enter,
and take possession, they would not venture upon so hazardous an exercise, and
so difficult an enterprise: So there are many forward Professors who are come
to the very Borders of the Land of Canaan, to the very entrance into the
Kingdom of Heaven, who, when they see what strong holds of Iniquity they must
cast down, what Principalities and Powers they must fight with, and what
gigantick Lusts, as the Sons of Anak, they must subdue and destroy, this
frights them from attempting any further.

Secondly, To be almost a Christian, carries in it those advantages and those
accommodations, which, were they altogether such, they must lose; and therefore
this is one Reason why so many stick in the New Birth: Such a one is no Saint,
and therefore the men of the World embrace him; such an one is no profane and
scandalous person, and therefore the Children of God embrace him, and think
well of him too; and thus he does hold a correspondency with both of them;
which were he altogether either, one or the other, he must break off; and
therefore finding the convenience of this neutral estate, he stops where he is,
short of true Grace. Were he a profane Wretch, then those that are truly godly
would avoid his company; or were he truly godly, then the World would reject
and scorn him; the ^odly esteem and love him, and from their ready Charity they
look upon him to be truly gracious. Those that are true Christians (thinks the
almost Christian) look upon me as such as themselves, and what need I begin by
a forward Zeal to disoblige the World? And the wicked and profane respect me
too, because I go a little before them (though not quite cross and contrary to
them) and so I enjoy the good opinion of both sorts, which were I fully one or
the other, I should hardly attain. This man can (as it were) hold Heaven with
one hand, and yet hold the World with the other, not lose his interest in the
one, and yet retain his interest in the other; he can enjoy the delights and
pleasures of the one, and then hope for the rewards and happiness of the other.
Were we lodged in a Star, then the Earth would appear very small, and almost
nothing, as the Stars do now to us; so were we more above, the Earth would
appear either as very small, or as nothing. Thus it is with a Child of God; he
soars up by the wings of Faith and Love to the heavenly Jerusalem, and the
Earth appears very inconsiderable to him; but now an unregenerate man, when he
mounts highest, yet still will be sure to keep Earth in his eye; he will not
lose the sight of that; and therefore when he has got to such a pitch that he
is able to discover something of Heaven, and yet not lose the sight of Earth,
there he hangs in aquilibrio, and will be drawn no further; he keeps something
of the Earth in his eye, and will not lose nor diminish his sight or share of
it for the Hopes and Joys of Heaven.

Thirdly, False Opinions and Conceits that they are already Christians, hinder
these forward Professors from being true Christians. It may be they would be
Christians indeed, did they not think they were already such. When men are gone
far, then they are apt to think they are got home, and so they have taken up
their rest, and will be driven on no further; they think that what they have
already gotten, is enough to bear their charges to Heaven, and so they grow
careless of getting more; they are persuaded that they are Christians, and that
keeps them from being persuaded to be such. I do not intend to forbid eminent
Professors to think they are indeed Christians; but let them look how this
persuasion works with them: Does it tend to make them more careless, negligent
and remiss? When they have been under Troubles of Conscience for their Sins,
then they saw themselves in a lost and undone condition, and had hot and
scalding apprehensions of the Wrath of God; then they were laborious to
frequent Duties, conscientious in their walking, and fearful lest they should
sin; but since their Troubles have been worn off, they have entertained better
Hopes, and better Opinions of their state. Are they not grown more loose and
more regardless? They do not take so much pains with their hearts, nor are they
so strict and holy, and severe in their Lives; I must tell such what the
Apostle tells the Galatians, chapter 5.7, 8. Ye did run well; who hindered you?
This persuasion comes not of him that calls you. This persuasion that you
are Christians, comes not of him that calls you; possibly it would be well
with them if they did not think they were so. Sirs, if so be that thoughts of
your being Christians, and in a state of Grace, did encourage you to walk
worthy of that holy Calling; if the hopes of your good and holy estate, do
engage you to purify your selves as God is pure, as they will work if they be
right and genuine, then still entertain and cherish them; but if they turn to
looseness, remissness or presumption, here suspect them to be the overweening
Conceits and Elevations of a carnal heart, and such as will certainly hinder
you of what you thus fondly imagine your selves to be, hinder you from making
further progress in the Ways of Christianity, in regard you take up false
conceits that you are Christians already.

Fourthly, Another Ground whence it is that forward Professors many times fall
short of true Christianity; It may be when they are already gotten far, then,
the Devil especially does all he can to hinder them; when they have gone far
toward Grace and Christianity, then he unites all his Force and Subtilty to
stop them from proceeding further, lest they get from under his power and
jurisdiction; he knows if they once become Christians, they are then almost out
of his reach; and therefore whatever lust be in the Soul, he will then
especially stir it up; whatsoever reserve of Temptations there be, he will then
send them upon the Soul: For none are more assaulted with Horrors and
multiplied Temptations, than those who make a great progress toward the Ways
of God, and are near to the Borders of true Christianity; because then the
Devil suspects that he shall lose them, and that they are even revolting from
him. When they begin to move toward Heaven, and labor after true Grace and
Holiness, the Devil sees that ordinary Temptations are not then sufficient to
secure them; that those Lusts that before hampered and captivated them at his
pleasure, will not now so easily prevail; for he finds them too resolute, too
rough, and untractable to deal with; he begins then to fear to what a Rebellion
this may grow, and therefore he sets upon them with all his power, way-lays
them with all Ambushments, circumvents them with all his Wiles and Stratagems;
and though these be only Armies and Musters of Shadows, which a man might break
through without any danger, would he but arm himself with noble and undaunted
Resolutions; yet with these the Devil assaults and undermines them, and that
incessantly, and does at last stop them in their course toward Grace, if not
beat them back again to their former course of Profaneness. Luke 11.24, 25.
When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a Man, he walks through dry places,
seeking rest, and finding none, he says, I will return to mine house whence I
came out, and when he comes he finds it swept and garnished. V. 26. Then
goes he, and takes seven other Spirits more wicked than himself, and they
enter in and dwell there, and the last state of that Man is worse than the
first, i, e. When men have cast out unclean, gross Lusts by an external
Sanctification, that the Devil seems to be dislodged, when he seeks to return
again to his ancient feat and possession, he finds the Heart swept and
garnished; swept from the filth of common Sins, and garnished with common
Graces, as its ornaments; so that there seems no readmission or re-entrance of
this unclean Spirit; and then he goes and takes to himself seven other Spirits
worse than himself, that is, as I conceive, stronger Temptations, and more
prevailing Lusts, and by them he enters, and dwells there, and defiles that
clean-swept house, and not only keeps the Sinner from being better, but, makes
his latter end worse than his beginning.

Fifthly, When Men have gone far toward Christianity, natural Conscience then
leaves them, and cease to excite and provoke them to a further proficiency.
Conscience is the Spur that quickens wicked men to make that progress which
they make. Now when it has brought them past common Sins to known and common
Duties, then it leaves them, and urges them no further, and so they sit down
far short of true Grace and Christianity, which they endeavored after. Well
then, let me say to such men, as St. Paul to the Galatians, chap. 5.7. You did
run well; who hindered you? Was it the difficulty of Religion, or the strength
of Temptation, the Flatteries and Allurements of the World, the Violence and
Rage of your own Lusts? But might you not nevertheless have armed your selves
with peremptory Resolutions? Might you not undauntedly and victoriously have
broke through all these? Were you not able when you stood still, or when you
gave back as frighted and terrified at these things, to make one step, and
another step still forwards? Could you not proceed still further, and press
onwards through all these? Yes, you might have gone much further if you would;
you might have made a further progress, though all Hell had armed it self
against you; therefore if you perish, there will be cause and reason to blame
your selves; you can only charge your damnation on your own wilful sloth and
negligence.

This may suffice for an Answer to the Third General; Whence it is that
Professors that have gone far toward Christianity, yet fall short of Grace,
and of being true Christians: They were too nice to encounter Difficulties;
they were apt and forward to think well of themselves; they were too
faint-hearted to cope with Temptations, loath to disoblige the World, and would
not proceed further than spurred on by a natural Conscience, and therefore
wilfully fell short through their own Sloth and Negligence, of Grace here, and
of Glory hereafter.

Fourthly, The last General propounded, was to show you the Folly and extreme
Miscry of those who proceed thus far as to be Almost Christians, and yet will
not be persuaded to be such Altogether. The Apostle seems to be very
passionate, Gal. 3.1, 3. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you
should not obey the Truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently
set forth, crucified among you? etc. Verse 3. Are ye so foolish, having begun
in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the Flesh? What are you mad? Are you
besotted? Are you bewitched out of your common Reason and Understanding; that
having begun in the Spirit, and made so far progress in the Ways and Knowledge
of Christ, that after all this, you should fall back again to carnal, fleshly
Rudiments? Why, the same may I say to many: You that are Professors, Why, who
has bewitched you? Why are you so foolish, as when you have not only begun,
but proceeded far toward Holiness and true Grace, that yet you should give
over and sit down in a state of Nature and Unregeneracy short of it; Consider
but your folly and misery in these particulars.

First, consider, Is is not extreme folly, madness, and misery, wilfully to
fall short of that which you have already taken so much pains to attain? What,
after all the labor and hardships, and difficulties that you have already gone
through to obtain Grace, now to sit down short of it, and lose all? Will you
wilfully lose all your Prayers and all your Tears? all your Convictions and
all your Conflicts? Shall all these be so much labor in vain? Is not this much
below the ingenuousness of your Resolutions in inferior matters? Do not you use
to quicken your endeavors by such Arguments as these, I have spent so much
upon it, I have taken so much pains about it, therefore I will see the end of
it, and go through with it. Do you think much to lose your labor in any thing
but Salvation, but in working out the Salvation of your precious Immortal
Souls? What though it be hard and difficult to go further: Consider, was it not
hard and difficult to arrive at that which you have already attained unto; and
are you so foolish as to be willing to lose the fruit and benefit of the
difficulties you have already past, only for fear of difficulties that are yet
to come? If Christianity be not worthy your pains, why did you ever engage in
it? And if it be, why do you sit still? You will be guilty of extreme folly
either in this or that. For you enter upon Christianity without sitting down,
and reckoning what it will cost you; Christ himself there brands you for Fools,
Luke 14.28, 29. For which of you intending to build a Tower, sits not down
first, and counts the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it, lest
happily after he has laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that
behold it begin to mock him, saying, This man began to build, and was not able
to finish it.

If it was not worth your pains, what a folly was it to attempt it? if you
thought it worth all and more, what a folly then was it to flag? And could you
before you came so nigh to Grace, and so nigh to Glory, could you see that
beauty, and that desirableness in it at so great a distance, as to persuade you
to come thus far, and now when you are much nearer, and can see much more of
its excellency and comeliness; Dare you now despise and contemn it? when you
have not only the promise of God to be your encouragement, but you have also
given earnest too for that Profession, and those endeavors, and those Duties
which you have already passed through, they are all (as it were) the earnest of
your further progress; this earnest you lose, Profession, Endeavors, and Duty,
and all comes to nothing, if after all you rest any where short of Grace, you
lose your earnest which you give, if you be but almost Christians, and rest any
where short of true Christianity. Well, what extreme folly is this for Men to
disquiet themselves in vain, and take so much pains to pray and hear, and to
keep themselves from many Sins, and perform many Duties; and yet because they
will do no more, they lose the Benefit of all this? Why, what is it that you do
all this for? Is it not to obtain Grace and Glory? And will you do so much for
such an excellent end, and yet wilfully fall short of it? You may remain
Graceless without all this Labor; if you are fully resolved for Hell, why do
you do any thing? to Hell you may go without Praying or Hearing, without
striving, or conflicting, or performing one Duty, or resisting one Sin as you
do; if you are resolved for Heaven, why do you not do more, all your praying,
hearing, striving, and wrestling, they will be lost and in vain, if you do not
hold on, if you do not continue. Well, what a folly is it for you to have gone
so far, and won every step of Ground by clear force, who have toiled in the
ways of Religion, with sweat and anguish, and disquieting to your Soul, and yet
at last to lose and frustrate all this pains through your cursed and wilful
sloth and negligence; to give all away, and fall wilfully short of Grace and
Salvation?

Consider Secondly, Is it not gross and inexcusable folly to desist after so
far progress, whereas for ought we know, had we but proceeded a little further,
we might have obtained that Grace which we fall short of? And how know you, but
that upon your further endeavors, God might have bestowed that Grace you
strive for, God is not wanting in this kind; to those who improve the Power of
nature which they have, he gives the Power of Grace which they have not; Yet
when Men arrive thus far, and come as it were to the very Porch of Heaven, what
thick and dull folly is it, when there is as it were but a step or two between
them and Glory, to break off their Progress and sit down short? What is it more
labor to go those few steps more you are to proceed to, than those which you
have already gone.

Were you willing and contented to do all that you have already done for that
which is but like Grace, and will you not be persuaded to do a little more for
that which is true Grace? It may be God may convert you by the very next Prayer
you make, he may convert you by the next Sermon you hear, he may give you true
Grace, when you next of all oppose any Temptation, or when you next of all
struggle against any lust, the very next step you take in his way may carry you
to Heaven for ought you know. Now the great probability of this, nay were it
only a bare possibility, it makes a Man guilty of the greatest folly, who has
gone thus far toward Holiness to neglect a further progress toward it.

Thirdly Consider, What a dangerous and dreadful thing is it, for Men to climb
so high, and yet to have no holdfast to depend upon, no foundation to support
them; yet thus it is with every elevated carnal Professor that falls short of
Grace; he is like a Man that stands upon the sharp top of a Towering Pinnacle,
where he has no other hold-fast but a handful of Air: But the standing of a
Child of God is firm, his feet are fixed upon an immovable Rock, even the Rock
of Ages, and God reaches out his hand from Heaven to support him. It is
disputed by some nice Inquisitors, whether a Man if he were lift up above the
Magnitude and attractive Virtue of the Earth, he may not stand as safely and
walk in the Air as he does now upon the Earth. It is true of a Child of God,
when he has got beyond the reach of earthly Attractions, he may walk safely in
that sublime way which leads to Heaven; but now for wicked Men, that have not
got beyond the Malignity of the Earth, it is exceeding dangerous, their earthly
Minds and Affections, and their earthly Conversations, will in the end bear
them down headlong, unless they climb still higher, until they have got beyond
these terrene Attractions.

Now would it not make you tremble, to see a Man born up in the Air, as the
Poets feign of Icarus, with waxen Wings that are subject to melt and fall off,
and betray their charge to certain ruin and perdition. Thus it is with every
one that have gone far in Christianity; and is it not you that fly only with
waxen Wings, I mean the Power of Nature, and the common Works of the Holy
Ghost, which may fall off and leave you in Eternal ruin.

And from hence it follows in the fourth place, that these Mountainous
Professors, who have attained to an high pitch, yet fall short of Grace,
because they want firm footing to assure their standing; they usually either
desperately tumble headlong into the Commission of some foul gross Sins, or
else they grow brainsick, and turn aside to the maintaining of some prodigious
error; this is usually the Issue of such lofty Professors, as we see a Cloud
that has been sucked up by the Sun, how it hovers a while in the Air, but anon
it is wrapped and whirled about with every Wind, and so it is utterly lost and
dissipated, or else it falls down again to the Earth in Storms, and is turned
only into mire and dirt; Even so fares it with many a Professor, he is drawn up
out of the Earth, and above the Pollutions of the World, by a common influence
of the Holy Spirit, and for a while he hangs and hovers in a lofty Profession,
but having no firm Basis to sustain him, he is either blown up by an empty
Cloud, and driven away by every Wind of Doctrine, and lost amongst various
Sects and Opinions; or else after a while, he falls back again into the filthy
conversation and worldly pollutions, that he had escaped and ends only in mire
and dirt, and this because they have not that incorruptible seed within them
that shall never die. Indeed true Grace is of it self Immortal, but it is from
that engagement, that God has laid upon himself to preserve it in those, who
are diligent in the use of those means, by which it may be maintained. But now
an unregenerate Man is left wholly to his own Power, to preserve him in that
Station in which he shines: And if the Angels themselves and Adam fell from
their first Estate, merely through the mutability of their own Will, who had
power to continue in it, how much more certainly then will these carnal
Professors fall from their high pitch, who have less Power to enable them to
stand, and greater Power against them to cast them down: To aggravate the
exceeding great Folly and Apostasy of these elevated break-neck Professors, see
that most dreadful place, 2 Pet. 2.21. For it had been better for them not to
have known the way of righteousness than after they have known it, to turn from
the holy commandment delivered to them. Why, is not the Wrath of God certainly
to be revealed against all those, who know not God, and obey not the Gospel of
the Lord Jesus.

It is better never to have known the Gospel, and never to have gone a step in
the ways of God, than afterward wilfully to desert them and apostatize from
them.

First consider, The Fall and Apostasy of those who are great and eminent
Professors, it carries much of malice and willfulness in it, which is the
highest rank that can be in any Sin. If there be any in the World that commit
the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost, it must be these Men. There is
indeed a great difference between sinning willingly and sinning wilfully;
Profane carnal Men they Sin willingly, but none but those who have been forward
Professors in the ways of God, and have utterly deserted those ways; none but
those can sin maliciously, and merely because they will provoke and offend God
by their Sins; Now see what the Apostle says of such, Heb. 10.26. For if we
sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more Sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for o^
judgment and siery indignation, etc. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. For it is impossible for
those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly Gift, and were
made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the
Powers of the World to come, if they shall fall away to renew them again unto
repentance, etc. This is the first aggravation of their Sin and Misery.

But then Secondly, When elevated and eminent Professors fall away they usually
fall lower than they were before, when they took their first rise toward
Christianity and true Religion; falling away from a Profession, is like the
falling down from a steep Precipice, where they can have nothing to stop them
till they come to the very bottom: And it is observed, that none prove more
notoriously wicked, and more desperate haters and revilers of the ways of God,
than Apostate Professors.

First, God does judicially give them up to commit all manner of Sin with
greediness; see that black Catalogue of the foulest Sins that can be imagined,
Romans 1. from 21. to 30. The Apostle speaks there concerning the Heathens, but
the case is parallel with our carnal Professors, who do not like to retain God
in their knowledge, therefore, God gives them over to a reprobate mind to do
those things that are not convenient, etc.

The Devil takes possession of such Men with stronger power and force than
ever; (as the unclean spirit re-entred with seven Spirits worse than himself
Luke 11.24.) to secure that Soul that has been so likely to revolt from him,
and therefore no wonder Christ says, the last estate of that man is worse than
the first. So that these eminent Professors when they fall away they usually
fall lower than they ever were before their first rise and motion toward
Religion.

Unregenerate Persons not only fall lower, but they seldom return to make a
Profession of their deserted Religion; it is impossible to renew such a one to
repentance again. Now how should these sad and dreadful Considerations, make
every one of us to do our utmost, that we are able to get true and saving
Grace. If we rest any where short of it. When the Winds of Temptation
tempestuously beat, and the Floods of Trial, Affliction, or Persecution rush in
upon us, we shall fall, because we have no Foundation, but have built merely
upon the Sands. If you stand not built upon the corner Stone, you will fall of
your selves, yea, that Stone will fall upon you, and crush and grind you to
powder. Nay you fall off from a steep and slippery Precipice, where there is
nothing at all to stop, nothing to receive you but Sin after Sin, and thus you
rebound from one wickedness to another, till at last you be plunged
irrecoverably into that Lake, which burns with Fire and Brimstone: And this is
the fourth consideration; discovering the folly and misery of those that go far
toward Christianity, and yet fall short.

Fifthly, Though these Professors may hover between Heaven and Earth in their
lives, yet they shall not hover between Heaven and Hell in their Deaths. No,
the half Christian shall be as infallibly and as certainly cast into Hell, as
those who were altogether wicked. Here it may be thou art neither Godly nor
Profane, but hereafter thou must be either saved or damned. There is none (as
the Papists Picture Erasmus) that hang between Heaven and Hell. Whoever thou
art, thou must be either in a State of Nature or of Grace, and accordingly
shall thy estate then be for ever, either a state of Salvation among the
Saints, or else a state of Damnation with the unregenerate. Though thou art
never so lofty and sublime a Professor, yet the same Hell that holds the
profane, must eternally hereafter hold thee too, if through thine own wilful
negligence thou stop any where short of true Grace. If the Almost Christians
could by their glittering Profession gain a cooler Hell, if they could get (I
say) but a cooler place in Hell, if their Profession could gain you this, if it
could procure you Purgatory for venial Sins, or the moderate punishment which
the Papists call Limbus Patrum, then you had some show of Reason to rest where
you are, but when the same Hell, and the same everlasting Fire must be the
Portion of these, who have proceeded so far (and yet (...) short) as well as
the portion of the vilest Wretch, whom they have now as far exceeded in
goodness, as the holiest Saint alive exceeds them; it is the very height of
folly and madness to sit down any where short of true Grace, unless they are
fully resolved to sit down no where short of Hell.

6thly. and Lastly, Consider, It will be the insupportable aggravation of these
Men's just and everlasting condemnation, for them, to lie grating upon this sad
reflection in Hell, that once they were near to Heaven, but lost it through
their own wilful default. It will he the aggravation, (I say) of these Men's
just and everlasting condemn^t^^, to make this doleful and furious reflection
upon themselves in Hell, that once they were in a very hopeful State, that they
were once near to Heaven, but lost it through their own wilful default; O when
they shall lie in Hell, and from thence give a sad and ghastly look up to the
Glory of the Saints in Heaven; O how will it pierce their Souls to think, that
they were once near to that blessed Estate, though now there be an infinite and
unpassable gulf between them and that blessed Inheritance, which the Saints
enjoy in Heaven! Thus will they reflect upon themselves, though now there be an
unpassable gulf between me and Heaven, yet once there was but a step or two
that parted us: Had I mortified but one lust more, had I opposed one temptation
more, had I put up but one fervent Prayer more; possibly I might now have been
in Heaven: But, O my cursed, cursed folly, when I was at the very Gate and
Threshold of Heaven, that even then I should stop, and after the relinquishment
of my Lusts, and after all my Progress in the ways of Holiness, to return again
to the commission of those Sins, in which I had formerly lived, when I had
already gone through the hardest and most difficult part of Religion, then to
break off my course! What is this but procuring for my self this damnation,
which I now suffer, and must suffer for ever? O that Light, that once I enjoyed
how it thickens this everlasting darkness! O those tastes I once had of the
Powers of the World to come, and relished so much sweetness in, how do they now
imbitter this Cup of fury, and trembling that I must for ever drink of! O those
Heavenly Gifts that once I had, do but now increase these Hellish torments, and
the sight of Heaven which I have had, now discovers to me what I have lost;
nay, what I have wilfully thrown away through mine own sloth and negligence. O
how strange is mine Apostasy! after I had gone so great a way toward
Christianity, rather than I would move one step further, I chose to lie here in
this Hell for ever burning and consuming? Oh what sad and tormenting thoughts
will these be! how will they fret and gnaw the Souls of those Wretches, with
Eternal anguish and insupportable Torments? Thus you have seen in these
Particulars somewhat discovered to you of the desperate folly and madness, (and
misery also) that Men are guilty of that do proceed so far as to be Almost, and
yet will not be persuaded to be Altogether Christians.

A Blow at Profaneness, taken out of Bishop Hopkins 's Exposition of the Ten
Commandments.
PR^faneness, is the slighting and neglecting of things Holy and Sacred.
Whosoever is guilty of this, let his outward Demeanor in the World, be as sair,
and as plausible as Morality and (...) can adorn it, yet he is a profane Person.

The Spirit^al Sacred things, are,

First, God in his Nature and Essence. Whom we profane when we entertain any
blasphemous or unworthy Thoughts of Him.

Secondly, God in his Name. Which we profane, when we rashly in our trivial
Discourses, boult out that great and terrible Name, at which all the Powers of
Heaven and Hell tremble. It does sadly fore-bode the growing Profaneness of the
next Age, that Children be (...) or Suffered to call upon God in their (...),
before they be taught to call on him in their (...).

^^^dly, God in his Attributes. Which we pro(...) when our Affections or
Actions are opposite or (...) e.g. Our Vni^liness prosaneth his Ho(...). Our
Despondence prosaneth his Ommpo^. Our Hypocrisy pros^neth his Ommscience. Our
Despair prosaneth his Mercy. Our Presumption (...) his Justice. Our sins^^
Po^^^ prosaneth his (...). Our Security notwithstanding his Threat(...), and
our S^^th^ulness notwithstanding his Pro^es, do prosane (...) Truth. Every Sin
is a kind of (...), a Contempt of (...) Ev^^encies of God. (...) that which is
^ed for nothing, and defieth his Wrath and Justice without a Temptation?

What should tempt the impious Buffoon to deride Religion? Travest the Holy
Scriptures? And turn whatsoever is Sacred and Venerable into Burlesque and
Drollery? And,

Fourthly, The Time God has set apart and consecrated for his Service. Unto
the holy observance whereof God has condescended to use three cogent
Arguments; viz. 1. His own Example in resting on it. 2. The liberal portion of
Time that He has allowed us for the Affairs of this present Life. 3. The
Ded^eation of this day unto his immediate Service. [ Vid. p. 207.] But we
profane it, when we do not rest from the common works of our ordinary Callings.
And do not diligently and conscientiously attend upon all God's Ordinances,
appointed to be performed on this day. And that whether in Public, Private, or
Secret. The Day is not done, when the Church dissolves. The whole of it is holy
to the Lord. Walks and Visits are not to be the Evening-Work of the Sabbath;
but holy and spiritual Conferences. Those who have Families to look after, be
best employed, in seeing them spend the vacant time of the Sabbath in Holy
Exercises; sc. Reading the Scripture, giving an account what Truths they have
been taught, joining with them in Praises and Prayer unto God. In all of these,
in their Courses and Order, till Night calls for Repose.

Fifthly, The Ordinances of Jesus Christ. Which we profane, when we neglect, or
are remiss in our attendance upon them.

Some particular Characters of a profane Person here follow.

First, He is a profane Person that thinks and speaks but slighly of Religion.
Religion, our chiefest Excellency, the Crown of our Beings.

But have we not many, who deride Piety, and make a scoff of Religion? Who take
up their Religion by chance, never examining it; Thinking that any may suffice
whatever it be; Secretly despising the holiness and strictness of others;
thinking they make more ado to get to Heaven than needs. But indeed, they are
not too precise; but these are too profane, who contemn Religion as unnecessary
and superfluous.

Secondly, He is a prafane Person who neglects the Public Worship of God, when
he has opportunity and ability to attend it. God's special Presence is in two
places, Heaven and the Church.

Thirdly, He is a profane Person who neglects the performance of religious
Duties in private. Every House ought to be a Temple, dedicated to God. And
every Master ought to be a Priest, to offer to God the daily Sacrifice of
Prayers and Praises. Such profane Families as those which are without them, God
ranks with Infidels and Heathens, and devotes them to the same common
Destruction. In the Morning Prayer is the Key that opens to us the Treasury of
God's Mercies and Blessings. In the Evening, it is the Key that shuts us up
safe under his Protection and Safeguard. Excuses are vain, and cannot take off
your Obligation.

Are you ignorant? Many are the helps that God has provided you. Are you
encumbered with your Worldly Affairs? The weightier they are, the more need you
have to ask Counsel and Direction of God. Are you bashful and modest? Alas, be
ashamed to sin, be ashamed to talk loosly, be ashamed to neglect thy Duty
before thy Family; but be not ashamed to pray, and do thy Duty. Our Savior
has told us, Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and (...) my words,
in this adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be
ashamed when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels, Mark
8.38. What will become of them who are ashamed of their Duty?

Fourthly, He is a profane Person that performs Holy Duties slightly and
superficially. Our whole Hearts must go into our Holy Duties. And the strength
and vigor of our Spirits must diffuse themselves into every part of them, to
animate and quicken them.

Sacrifices of old, were commanded to be offered up with Fire. And no other
Fire could sanctify them but that which shot it self down from Heaven. The
which was ever after to be kept burning for that use. Our Christian Sacrifices
of Praise and Prayer must be offered with Fire; and that Fire must be d^rted
down from Heaven. The Celestial Flame of Zeal and Love, which comes from
Heaven, and has a natural Tendency to carry up our Hearts and Souls thither.
But indeed commonly our Duties are either offered up with strange, unhallowed
Fire; some unruly Passion of Hatred, Self-love, and Pride: Or else they are
very cold and heartless. Our Prayers are dull and yawning, and drop over our
Lips without any Spirit or Life in them.

Fifthly, He is a prosane Person that performs Holy D^ties for Worldly Ends and
Advantages. For what greater contempt of God can there be than to make his
service truckle under base Designs? A Hypocri^e is the most profane Wretch that
lives. He entitles the Holy God unto the Wickedness he commits, and makes God
the Patron of his Sin. And the Wound that Religion receives from Hypocrites, is
far more dangerous than that which open (...) upon it. When he that speaks
(...) ^^^^, this tempts Men to think that all Religion is but Mockery.

Sixthly, He is a prosane Person who makes what God has sanctified, common and
unhallowed. And have we not many such prosane Persons? Many that abuse the Holy
and Reverend Name of God about ^ous Matters? Who make mention of him in their
^dle Chat. but are mute and dumb when any thing should be spoke to his Praise?
There are but two Ends that can warrant and justify the use of any of God's
Names, Titles, and Attributes. And they (...) 1. God's Glory, and, 2. The
Edisication of our ^es and others. God's terrible Name is so full of Glo^^ and
Majesty that it should never be uttered, but where the Discourse is serious and
weighty. Those who rend it with Oaths and Blasphemies, ought to be punished by
the Judges. And, would to God, Laws (...) put in severe Execution, to cramp the
(...) Wretches.

Others ^ill up their fan^har Tattles, with the Name of GOD and LORD, making
them to express some (...), and fill (...) their Discour^s. These. God will not
hold guiltless* He holds (...) contemned, and will revenge the Dishonor (...)
they do him by it What! Will you dare to (...) the great Name of God without
considering (...) it a Name to be sported with? To be tossed to and fro upon
every light and vain Tongue? Whenever we ^^ntion it, we ought to how our hearts
in the dee^est pr^stration before it; to which all the Powers an^ Heaven and
Earth bow down with most humble Veneration. Can thou in Duty easily compose
thy self to reverence the holy and dreadful Name, when thou have accustomed thy
self to name him without any respect in thy common Discourses? Let me beseech
you, O Christians, as you tender his Glory, of which He is jealous, whenever
you speak of God, or but mention his Name, do it with an holy Awe and Dread of
his Divine Majesty. And you, who are Masters of Families, and have Children,
beware that you stop in them the growing Sin of profaning God's Name: To attest
any thing by their Faith, or by their Truth, is a wicked Oath; more impious in
effect, than louder ones. The By word Marry, is no less than swearing by the
Virgin Mary. It is a notable Device of the Devil to bring foolish masked words
into common use. 1. That they may swear who use them, though they know it not.
And, 2. That by using unknown Oaths, they may be brought in time to take up
known ones. Vehement Asseverations, be also dangerous beginnings of Oaths. By
the customary use of them, we shall insensibly be tripping upon an Oath. [This,
and more, see p. 163. and up and down on the third Commandment.] To return,
Many profane God's Sabbaths, invade impiously the Time that be has set apart
for himself, his own Worship and Service. Many make the Bible their Jest-Book;
prostituting those Expressions which God has sanctified to convey to us the
knowledge of Himself, and of Eternal Life, unto the Laughter and Mirth of their
loose Companions. Those very words which the Holy Ghost inspired for the
Edification of the Church, the Devil inspires into these prosane Wretches for
their own Dammation, and the Damnation of those that have pleasure in such
horrid Profaneness.

Seventhly, He is a profane Person, who despises Spiritual Privileges and
E^ments. Upon this very account, the Scripture sets a black an^ li^le Brand
upon Esau, Left there be any For^^^or, or profane Person; as Esau, who for one
morsel of Meat sold his Birthright, Heb. 12.16. They are profane, who vilify
the Ministry in Themselves and in Others. Who dishonor God's Ambassadors. And
who despise his Children, whom God so highly honors as to adopt them into his
Family. He who despises him that is begotten, despises him likewise that
begets. Contempt of Children and Servants, argues secret contempt of the
Master and Father.

Now lay these things to your own Hearts, and bring them home to your own
Consciences, and see whether you are in none of these particulars guilty of
Profaneness.

Do none of you think slightly of Religion, accounting it a politic Design, or
a needless Preciseness?

Are none of you negligent in the Public Worship of God? Nor in Private and
Family Duties? Or, if you perform them, is it not very carelessly and
perfunctorily? Or, if you seem zealous in them, is not your Zeal excited by
some Temporal Advantages and Worldly Designs? Do you not make that Common and
Unholy, which God has made Holy? Either, by abusing his Name, polluting his
Sabbaths, or vilifying his Word in your ordinary Raillery?

Lastly, Do none of you despise Spiritual Privileges, and the Persons who are
invested with them? If you do, how fair soever your Lives and Actions may be;
although you may think the rude debauched Sinner at a vast distance from your
selves, and account him the only profane Person; yet certainly this black style
belongs as properly to you. And you are prosane Violaters of the First
Commandment; Which requires you to take the Lord for your God, and accordingly
to honor and reverence Him, and whatsoever appertains unto Him.

FINIS.

