ESSAYS, ABOUT General and Special GRACE: By way of Distinction between; or
distinct Consideration of 1. The Object of Divine Faith, or the Truth to be
Preached to, and believed by Men. And, 2. Gods Purposes for dispensing. And, 3.
His Dispensations of the said Truth, and the Knowledge of it to men. And, 4.
The Operations of God with it in men in the Dispensations of it.


By Jo. Horn, late of Lin-Allhallows.

2 Timothy 2.15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs
not to be ashamed, rightly Dividing the word of Truth. Eccles. 11.5, 6. As thou
know not what is the way of the spirit, or how the bones do grow in the
womb, etc Toll liberum arbitrium non erit quod salvetur: Toll gratiam, non
erit unde salvatur: opus hoc sine duobus effici nopotest, uno ei quo fit,
altero cui vel in quo fit, Deus Author est salutis: liberum arbitrium tantum
capax: nec dare illam nisi Deus, nec capere Valet nisi liberum arbitrium: quod
ergo a solo Deo and soli datur libero arbitrio tam absque consensu esse non
potest accipientis, quam absque gratia dantis.

Bernard, de Gra. and lib. d^bit. Deus non modo amans, sed amor est. and solam
amoris vicem requirit and sidem, quid ni ametur amans?

Id Sermon. 83. Sup. Cant Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. London,
Printed for S. Walsall at the Heart and Bible, on the West Side of the (...)

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
ZEnophon, in his Second Book of Memorable things, Records this Saying of
Socrates, to Entherus: That it is not easy for any man to do such a work, as
for which he shall not be subject to blame. For says he, It Is difficult for a
man to do any work in which he shall be without Sin, or fault; and it is
difficult, when a man does any thing faultless, not to meet with some unequal
Judge that will dislike what ^s rightly done. I cannot promise my ^elf freedom
in what I have here done: Good Reader, upon either account. For, neither can I
imagine, that in viewing, and speaking of things so high, and mysterious, there
should be nothing, in so much as I have written that might not have ^een far
better spoken to, or in which there may be nothing wrong, though my weakness
happily perceive not wherein. Nor can I think, that the World is grown so good
and charitable, and so void of its enmity to God, and his goodness, as that
there are none in it who will pick quarrels against what is rightly done. I
confess, the Greatness of the things treated on; as the person and works of
Christ; the nature of the Truth: the Faith, Hope, and Obedience of the Gospel,
the terrors of the Lord against evil doers, the Purposes, Dispensations, and
Operations of God, are all of that nature, and height, and weight, that each of
them may deserve a Volume worthily to unfold them, and require a far more able
head, and heart, to discuss them, then mine be; and more labor, and industry,
than I have bestowed, or was able to bestow about them: and on the other side,
that such is my weakness, and want of exercise of senses, to discern things
that differ, and of judgment rightly, and orderly to express them, that I may
seem not to have followed the advice of Socrates, given a little after the
sayings above recited, viz. Either to undertake such things as one can grapple
with, or forbear things that one cannot. However I may fear, that men of
greater understandings, will find some things defective, and not sufficiently
spoken to, and cleared; and other things too often repeated, or too unorderly
mentioned. I am a man (and a weak one too,) and therefore cannot rationally
think it strange, that humane Infirmities should be incident to me; amongst
which, it is one to be subject to mistakes; even sometimes an Homer, as the
Proverb says, may catch a nap; and acute Bernard, yet sees not all things: no
great wonder, in a long and tedious business, to see one grow drousie, and
sometimes to nod; besides, the Truth lies as it were in the deep, and is not so
easily brought to Light. I hope therefore, that the Ingenuous Readers
considering that of the Apostle James 3.1, 2. That in many things we offend
all. Will be ready also to take his advice, not to be many Masters; that is,
not to be censorious, but will take in good part, what I have endeavored, and
performed, and will bear with the infirmities of my style, and manner of
tractation, which are extrinsick from the matters handled. But from two sorts
of men, I can expect no such candid dealing: that is to say,

1. The proud and rich in conceit of themselves, and their Learning; and such
as are seeking after the worldly Wisdom: they I know will find no Savor in
what I have written, because nothing to satisfy their curiosity, and please
the daintiness of their finer Palates; they will slight what I have written
because I have not strewed the way of my Discourse, with the flowers of quaint
and smooth Rhetorications, elegant Phrases, and apt and witty Allusions; nor
fenced it with the Testimonies of the Ancient Doctors, and Learned Writers: nor
given the Reader here and there the comfit of a pleasant story, to quicken up
his dull and tired Spirits, and keep him from fainting: in a word, they will
say, Here is neither Artifice, nor any polite learning; the things they look
for, with the Ancient Grecians. 1 Cor. 1.22. To whom I say, had it been my
design to hunt after applause, that indeed had been my direct course to it:
Populo ut placerent quas fecisset fabulas Terent.
especially, had I turned aside from the Truth, to witty fables, for they are
the things the people are too usually pleased with: Yea, had I sought honor
with the Leaders of this Age, my way had been to have quitted the Truth, and
showed my self able to maintain the Ortho-Doct Opinions: or at least, to have
adorned my discourse with a rich Coat; for then it may be, so accouter'd, it
might have taken some men's more wanton affections, who would have courted it,
not for the Truth, so much as for its ornaments, (like some that love the
person, for the gay clothing;) and so they might have given me their good word
for a Scholar, or man of Parts: though yet some are so capricious upon the
account of their dislike of the Truth, that nothing will please them, that is
hearty for the Truth; be it never so Elegant, but even a Cyprian shall in
contempt be Capricianus with them, as Lactantius writes. But my design being to
find out, and set forth the Truth; and that for the helpfulness and profit of
many, and they of the meanner capacities, and not for the Learned only. I took
it to be best, to be plain; as believing that the Truth is then most beautiful
to a chaste Eye, when it is most naked of humane varnishing; and that they that
like not the Truth, but in a curious dress, love not the Truth but the Dress.
It Is Origens observation too, Orig. contr. Cells lib. 6.
that the ordinary way of Expression, which is common and plain, is the
likeliest way to profit the most. And that Plato's and other Philosophers (...)
Elegant and exquisite way of speaking, profited but a few, when as the
simplicity of the holy men accommodating themselves to vulgar capacity both in
their Doctrine, and way of delivering it, did profit very many. Thence
Epictetus has more Readers than Plato, because of his plainness, and as that
Physician is most to be esteemed, that prepares meats wholesome, and
Medicinable, for the most; and not he that prepares only some more curious
Compositions that are fit for none but the delicate Gallants; (it is his
comparison too:) So are they amongst the Souls Physicians most to be regarded,
that by plainer, and simpler Teaching, seek to Edify the Multitude, rather then
by pleasing the Palates, of a few that seek after wisdom of Words to affect,
and endeavor their own admiration. Besides, though I am not free from such
youthful Lusts of showing Wit and Learning (if I had them,) which (with the
rest of them) the man of God is to flee from, 2 Timothy 2.22. Yet I cannot forget
the Apostles intimation; That the Wisdom of Words though it procure Applause
to the Preacher, yet is unprofitable to the hearer, because it makes the Cross
of Christ of no effect to him, 1 Cor. 1.17. While instead of drawing his heart
to Christ, and his love, it is lost by the way in the Preachers Learning: and
while in stead of Killing, and Crucifying the Affections of the Flesh, which
are naturally alive to things of that nature, it does more animate and inflame
them. Well, I have provided what God has brought to my hand: and though I have
done therein, as plain Jacob at his Mothers advice, taken what I found in the
Flock nearer home, prepared by Free Grace the Mother of the Faithful: yet I
hope, it will meet with our Fathers acceptance, and obtain Jacob's Blessing;
which I esteem far better, than if I should have lost it by hunting more subtly
about with Esau for more delicate Venison that the sickly Palate might have
found more relish in. But,

2. They also who seek a Sign will not like the Doctrine this Treatise
delivers, but it will prove an offense unto them. I mean, they that believe not
the love of God to all men, as testified in the Cross of Christ, and declared
in the Scriptures to them; that like not to have the ground of their Faith in
Gods plain Assertions, nor to have their hope spring from, and be fed by, that
which is so common, the Flesh of Christ given for the life of the World: but
are slighting that as dry Manna, or unsound Doctrine; and are seeking some more
appropriate bottom for their Faith, which they may have rejoicing in themselves
from, and may serve a natural proud desire of conceiving themselves some-bodies
in themselves, or more personally, and as out of Christ respected then other
men, that say, Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.
Some private personal ground of hoping in God, to be preferred before what is
set on Wisdoms Table, for all to come and feed on. These will some of them be
more seriously offended, and cast out my Name, as they have done, amongst the
Evil Doers; the maintainers of corrupt and unwholsom Doctrine: because the
grace of God to All, throws down their impropriate Enclosures, and spoils the
pride of their Self-rejoycing; whom I shall not seek to satisfy, but shall
say, I desire so to go, as the Truth may be my leader, and companion: And
because I find it said, God is good to All. I dare not think him otherwise to
any; tho true it is, That most be bad to themselves, and abuse his goodness, to
their own Destruction. Though yet to take away prejudice from the more sober
minded, that differ from me, I have I hope, come as near them in Expression
too, as the Truth would lead me.

I shall Conclude, with some passages of St. Augustine, Aug. de Trin. lib. 1.
cap. 3.
in his Books of the Trinity; and say, Whosoever shall vouchsafe to read these
things, where he is certain with me, let him go on with me; where he doubts, as
I do, let him enquire with me, where he is convinced of his Error let him
return to me, (or to the Truth rather with me,) and where he finds me to Err
let him recall me. If he say, This is not well said, because I do not
understand it, let him fault my Expression, not my Faith. And possibly it might
have been more truly expressed, but none ever so spoke, as that in all things he
could be understood by All. If there be any that say, the same things more
plainly, let him lay me aside, and read what he can better understand: yet let
him not conclude, that I should have been silent, because I express not my self
so well as those, he better understands: for all things written by all, come
not into every man's hands; and some may understand these things, who may not
meet with what thou better understandest, and therefore it is good, that diverse
write of the same questions, in a diverse style, though not in a different
Faith, that the Truth may come to many; to some this way, and to others
otherwise. But if he that complains, that he understands not these things,
never could understand them, though dilligently discust by others; let him
endeavor with himself, by prayers, and studies, that he may attain to more
ability; and not by complaints and reproaches with me, that I should be silent.
But if he that reads these things say, I understand what is said, but it is not
Truth that is said, or it is not truly said; let him if he please deliver his
own mind, and reprove mine if he can, which if he shall do with charity and
verity, and acquaint me with it, if I live, I shall then be a gainer by this my
labor, but if he cannot do it to me, let him do it with my good leave, and
likeing, to whom he may, I shall yet meditate in the Law of God, if not day and
night, yet at what times I can. I fear not to deliver mine Opinion, which I
rather desire should be looked into by those that are right, then I fear to be
bitten by those that are perverse, Lib. 2. de Tri^ in prologo.
and I judge it better for me, to be reproved by any one, then either by one
that erreth, or that flattereth to be commended; for no reprover is to be
feared by him, that loves the Truth; for he that reproves, is either a Friend,
or an Enemy. If an Enemy insult, he is to be born: if a Friend, if he err, he
is to be taught; if he teach, he is to be heard: but he that praises, if he
Err, confirms the Error, if he flatter, he allures into Error: Let the
Righteous smite me, it shall be a favor; if he reprove me, it shall be an
excellent oil, it shall not break my head. Yet, as I would not have my Reader,
Lib. 3. de Tim. proemio.
(as he says) stiffly addicted to me; So neither would I have my Corrector, a
Correptory Corrector, so addicted to himself; let him not love me, more then
the Faith: let him not love himself, more than the Truth: as I say to him,
equalize not my Writings with the holy Scriptures, but when thou find in
them, what thou did not believe, believe without delay, or doubting: but in
these Writings, what thou art not sure of, be not stiff in, till thou
understandest the certain: so I say to him, do not Correct my Writings, either
by thine own Opinion, or out of contention, but by the holy Scriptures, and
most Solid Reason. In a Word, what I intend thee for thy good and profit do not
thou by thy curiosity, or pertinancy turn to thine own hurt: accept my service
in what I have been able, and have to my ability done rightly, and let me have
thy Prayers for further grace and ability to him that is the God of all grace;
in whom I bid thee Farewell: remaining,

Lin Sept. 28th. 1659. Thine to serve thee in the Truth of Christ to his
ability, John Horn.

THE CONTENTS.
This Treatise lays down, and explicates a Distinction between the Object of
Faith, or Doctrine to be Preached to men: And the Purposes of God about
Dispensing the Knowledge thereof to men, and his Dispensations of it
accordingly to men, and Operations with it in men: in 12 Chapters.

Chapter I. THe Distinction propounded, and something of the First Branch or
Member considered: in Three Sections p. 1 Sect. 1. The usefulness and
needfulness of rightly distinguishing things that differ, and particularly, of
the Distinction here propounded Ibid. Sect. 2. Of the Doctrine to be Preached
to men; its independency upon men's knowledge and faith of it; its Unity in its
self, and Truth to all men. p. 4 Sect. 3. Two Conclusions drawn from the
foresaid Considerations, touching the Heathens, and men dead, and in Hell,
before Christ's Passion. p. 6
Chap. II. Of the Doctrine, or Faith of the Gospel, both more implicitly, and
Generally, and more explicitly, and particularly: in six sections. Sect. 1. Of
the faith of the Gospel, more implicitly p. 9 Sect. 2. Of the Truths supposed,
and employed in the Gospel; yet not properly, and by themselves Gospel. p. 12
Sect. 3. Of Gospel Truths, properly such, touching God's affection, to, and
provision of a Savior, for fallen Mankind; his person, suffering, and
exaltation. p. 18 Sect. 4. Of God's love to fallen Man, in glorifying his Son
for him, and of the compleatness, and fitness of Christ for us, as now in
Heaven, etc. p. 23 Sect. 5. How Christ has broken, and is the breaker of the
Head of the Serpent, in what he has done, is become, and is further to do,
for, and to men. p. 32 Sect. 6. How Christ is set forth in the Gospel, as the
fulfilling, and fulfiller of the Promises, and Prophecies that fore-went of
him, and of all the types and shadows. p. 37
Chap. III. Of things further contained in the Gospel-Faith, and thence
observable, as therein employed, and signified, in four sections. p. 44 Sect. 1.
Of the hope of the Gospel. Ibid. Sect. 2. Of the obedience, and of the faith of
the Gospel. p. 53 Sect. 3. Of the Terrors of the Gospel. p. 57 Sect. 4. A
digression about the endlesness of the Punishment mentioned in the
Gospel-Terrors. p. 62
Chap. IV. Of some Distinctions, signified and contained in the Doctrine of the
Gospel, in eight sections p. 79 Sect. 1. Of the two Adams, the first, and the
last; the first, and the second Man. p. 80 Sect. 2. Of two Covenants, with
respect to the two Adams. p 85 Sect. 3. Of two kinds of Righteousness. p. 88
Sect. 4. Of two kinds of Sins. p. 90 Sect. 5. Of two General Judgments; besides
particular ones. p. 93 Sect. 6. Of two Worlds; the World that now is, and the
World to come p. 97 Sect. 7. Of two kinds of Life, and two Deaths. p. 100 Sect.
8. Of a twofold appearance of Christ, and the proper Works of them, and
therein; also of his comings, and of his saving men. p. 104
Chap. V. Enters upon the other Member of the Distinction, and speaks of the
Purposes of God, in seven sections. p. 111 Sect. 1. Of God's more General
Purposes, coincident with the Gospel-Doctrine; and therein occasionally of
God's permission. p. 112 Sect. 2. That the Purposes of God, concerning Men's
Ends in particular, as to their Salvation, and Damnation; are included in, and
result from, the General Purposes. p. 116 Sect. 3. That the great difference
between the Remonstrants, and Contra-Remonstrants, spring from their different
apprehensions of God's Purposes of Salvation, and Damnation, to particular
persons; and what the said apprehensions be. p. 120 Sect. 4. 1 Samuel 2.25. and 2 Chronicles. 25.16. About Eli 's Sons, and Amaziah considered; as also, about Act.
13.48. p. 126 Sect. 5. Of the distinction of God's Purposes, into Respective
and Irrespective, p. 132 Sect. 6. Of the Reversibility, or Irreversibility of
God's Purposes, p. 139 Sect. 7. Of God's Purposes, as they respect the
Dispensation of the means of Grace, or truth of God to men, that they might
know, and believe it. p. 143
Chap. VI. Of God's Dispensations of the knowledge of himself, and of his Truth
to men, in Nine sections. p. 154 Sect. 1. Of the means, or mediums made use of
by God, and vouchsafed to men, for making known his Truth to them, and leading
them to Repentance; viz. his Works, and Words. p. 155 Sect. 2. That the
Dispensation of the Word, or Revelation of his Mind by words, though vouchsafed
in all ages, yet was neither so universal, as that by his works; nor was in all
age^ the same, but different to diverse persons. p. 165 Sect. 3. Of the
Dispensation of the knowledge of God and Christ, by his words in Paradise; and
from thence to the Flood. p. 171 Sect. 4. Of the Ages after the Flood, till
Moses. p. 179 Sect. 5. Of the times of Moses, and after to David. p, 187 Sect.
6. Of David 's time, and the Ages that followed, till Isreal's Captivity. p. 190
Sect. 7. Of the times of the Prophets to the Restoration of the Temple, and so
on, till the Coming of Christ in the Flesh. p. 193 Sect. 8. Of the times of
Christ, his Incarnation, and being made manifest to men; and so to the
Destruction of Jerusalem, by Titus; and so on. p. 199 Sect. 9. That in the
former Ages, and so in all the Four Monarchies, there was something of the
Knowledge of God, by his people, and words vouchsafed to the Gentiles. p. 207
Chap. VII. Of the variety of the Dispensations of the knowledge of God, and
his Truth; in respect of certain added Appendages to his words in Ordinances,
and Miracles in sundry Ages, in ten sections. p. 220 Sect. 1. That God did
diversely, in sundry ages mind men of, and confirm them in his Truth by his
Ordinances, and Miracles, and therein what be the Ordinances, and Miracles here
to be treated of. Ibid. Sect. 2. That Christ was, and is the Foundation of all
Ordinances appointed to Fallen Man, for his worship of God; and that Christ,
and the grace in him, are the things mainly Witnessed to, by, and in them. p.
2^6 Sect. 3. Of the Ordinances appointed before Moses, and first of Sacrifice;
and therein also of God's clothing man; and of two several times before the
Law, in which the Gospel was revealed to all men p. 230 Sect. 4. Of
Circumcision given to Abraham, and his seed. p. 239 Sect. 5. Of the Passover,
and how that Typedout Christ. p. 247 Sect. 6. Of the Sabbaths Festivals,
Purifications, and other Ordinances of the Tabernacle and Temple. p. 256 Sect.
7. Of Baptism. p. 270 Sect. 8. Of the Lords Supper. p. 277 Sect. 9. Of the too
general mistake of the mind of God in his Ordinances, and the abuse of them in
all ages. 281 Sect. 10. Of Miracles confirming the Truth of God. p. 291
Chap. VIII. Of God's Operations, and first, of those that are in Mercy, and
directly his, in seven sections. p. 296 Sect. 1. That the operations of God are
many of them very secret, and not to be known, or discerned by us, but by his
Word concerning them; and therefore to be soberly treated of, Ibid. Sect. 2. Of
Gods merciful preventing Operations. p. 300 Sect. 3. That God afforded them to
the Gentiles also, with the lesser means. p. 304 Sect. 4. The same were
afforded also to the Jews, and those that have the greater means of Grace. p.
309 Sect. 5. Of the concomitant, or accompanying operations. p. 314 Sect. 6. Of
God's consequent, or subsequent operations p. 317 Sect. 7. The said gracious
operations otherwise distinguished into convincing, converting, renewing, etc.
p. 320
Chap. IX. Of the Operations in Wrath and Judgment Attributed to God; as
Hardening, Binding, Deceiving, men, etc. Sect. 1. That the Scriptures attribute
these kinds of operations to God; yet, we are to conceive of him in them, and
not to think him the Author of men's Sinnings. Ibid. Sect. 2. That those
operations as ascribed to God, are Judiciary acts, consequent both to God's
preventing grace and men's abuse of it. p. 338 Sect. 3. What that saying of the
Apostle, That God handens whom he will: imports, and how it is to be understood
by us. p. 343 Sect. 4. That God in hardening and blinding men, does it by
degrees, and with such mixture of mercy, that till they be totally hardened,
there may be a remedy. p. 357 Sect. 5. How, or in what sense the foresaid
operations are attributed to God, and how he works in, or unto them. Mr.
Mollers Judgment therein. p. 362
Chap. X. Of the manner of God's working in men, by his Grace, preventing,
accompanying, and following them, in Four sections p. 371 Sect. 1. That God's
gracious operations are according to the counsel of his own will; and in some
sense different, and unlike, Ibid. Sect. 2. That in this diversity of
operation, he observes in some sense, an Uniformity, and a likeness with men
generally. p. 374 Sect. 3. That God's operations in men, are neither properly
Physical, nor properly simply Moral; but Supernatural: having something like
either in them. 380 Sect. 4. That God so works in men, that they also are
rightly said, to work sometimes the same things, though with some formal
difference, between what is his, and what their working. p. 387
Chap. XI. Some Scriptures considered, whence some gather, either that God
works all things good, and bad in men; or so works, all that is good; as to
necessitate men's Willing, and Working irresistibly; and so, as to confound men's
Workings, with God's therein, in seven sections. p. 393 Sect. 1. Phil. 2.12,
13. Considered, and that God's working in men, the to will, and to do, does not
necessitate the working out exhorted to. Ibid. Sect. 2. How God works by
Exhortations; and whether the working in men to will, and to do; is by, and
through the Exhortation, to work out their Salvation. p. 400 Sect. 3. The
foresaid Scripture, Phil. 2.12, 13. briefly opened. p. 406 Sect. 4. Isa. 43.14.
considered, and what some collect therefrom. p. 414 Sect. 5. Psalm. 110 3.
considered, and what some conclude from it. p. 417 Sect. 6. 1 Cor. 4.7.
considered, and some men's Collections from it. p. 420 Sect. 7. 1 Cor. 12.6.
considered, and what some argue from that, in which also is touched, Whether
Sin be only a privation. p. 426
Chap. XII. Concludes this Treatise, by way of Conclusions, Positions, and
Heads of Uses; briefly laid down in Four Sections. p. 432 Sect. 1. Some brief
Conclusions drawn from the Premises, in this distinction here opened. p. Ibid
Sect. 2. Twelve Positions, concerning God's Grace, and Man's Will in the Work of
Conversion. p. 441 Sect. 3. Some brief hints of Uses of the foregoing Treatise;
and first of the first member of the Distinction. p. 449 Sect. 4. Brief hints
of usefulness of the other Branch, or Member about God's Purposes,
Dispensations, and Operations; and the Diversity in them p. 459

Laus Deo. Pax and gratia mihi a Deo and a Domino nostro Jesu Christo. Amen.
A Distinction between, or a Distinct consideration of the Object of Divine
Faith, or Truth to be Preached unto Men, and Believed by Men. The Dispensations
and Divine purposes for dispensing the knowledge and benefits of the said Truth
to Men, and the operations of God with it in Men to whom it is dispensed.

CHAP. I.
The Distinction propounded, and something of the first member of it
Considered.

SECT. 1.
The usefulness and needfulness of rightly distinguishing things that differ;
and particularly of the Distinction here propounded.

RIghtly to Distinguish between things that differ, Qui been distinguit been
docet.
is one property of a skilful Teacher, commended by the Apostle to Timothy,
when he wills him rightly to divide the word of Truth, 2 Timothy 2.15. A Point
needful to be duly practiced; for as some by distinguishing too curiously
things that differ not, run themselves into many Errors, and needless,
fruitless Disputes: [as the Papists, by their distinction of Douleia and
Latreia, Service and Worship, giving this to God; and the other to his, and
their own Creatures. And the Dominicans, between their next and remote power:)
So by not distinguishing things that do indeed differ, and that too according
to the difference between them: others do run into many, no less mistakes, and
great confusions; as they that distinguish not between Christ's coming in the
weakness of the Flesh, or his Spiritual manifestations of himself to men's
hearts and consciences; and his coming again Personally in the Power and Glory
of God. Or the Effects of the one, from the Effects of the other; or between
the Salvation wrought by Christ in his Personal Sufferings, Death, and
Resurrection for all men; as Sinners, and lost without difference: and that
Salvation he now works for, and in men, which is with difference, more
generally for, and on all men; and more especially, for, on, and in those that
believe; and the Salvation that he will work in his appearing again, which
shall be only upon those that believe, or that are graciously so reputed, and
accepted of him, and the like.

Amongst other things, I have often thought the Right Distinguishing between
the Doctrine or Truth-praedicable, or to be Preached to the World, and to be
believed by them, for bringing them to God: and the purposes and dispensations
of God respecting the said Truth, and his operations in, and with it, might be
of good use, if well and rightly explicated. For I apprehend, that the most
material differences between those commonly called Remonstrants, Arminians, or
Vniversalists, and those that style themselves, and one another, the Contra
Remonstrants: and Orthodox do mainly spring from a want of duly distinguishing
the said particulars, and of right apprehensions about them; and by
consequence, that the right distinguishing between them, and right
apprehensions of them, would expedite and deliver either the one, or the other,
or both of them from such mistakes as cause and maintain the said differences;
and tend much to an happy accommodation and agreement in the Truth. It being a
very usual thing with them, to argue either the Truth and extent of Gods love
to, and Christ's Death for men; from their apprehensions of the said
Dispensations, Purposes, and Operations in the said Distinction considerable,
and to measure the former by the latter: or on the contrary, to measure the
latter by the former, and argue them therefrom; which though righter than the
other, yet ought not but with good advisement to be done.

Now though I cannot arrogate to my self the Title of a skilful Teacher; being
as Agur said of himself, More brutish than man, and one that has not the
understanding of the man, Prove. 30.2, 3. Yet, according to the Talent given me
of God and through his gracious helpfulness, believing every word of God to be
true; I have here endeavored to say something hereabout, if but to give
occasion to such as deserve that Title to take it into their consideration, and
unfold it better.

SECT. 2.
Of the Doctrine to be Preached to men, its independency upon men's Knowledge
and Faith of it; its Unity in it self, and Truth for all men.

THe Doctrine to be preached to, and to be received by men in the Truth of God,
or his Word, which is but one in it self for all, true in it self, and so fit
to be declared to, and believed by all; whether they do actually know it or
not, believe it or not. Its Truth and fitness to be Preached to them, and
believed by them, depend not upon the Preaching and Believing of it, but is
Praecedaneous to, and in order of Nature and time before them. For it is not
therefore true, because declared; or false, because not: but therefore its fit
to be declared, and may as revealed and given forth be declared, because its
true: as therefore also its meet to be believed, when, where, and as declared;
and not therefore true, or untrue, because it is believed, or rejected: even as
a thing is not, therefore visible, because it is seen; but because its visible,
therefore it may be seen. Indeed the benefit the Doctrine brings to men, and
good its apt to effect in the believing heart, is not effected or met with
where rejected: yet it is a Doctrine worthy to be believed, and apt to effect
such good, before it be known, or believe: or whether it be known and believed,
or not. I say, it has an intrinsecal aptitude in it self to do good
independently upon its being known, (or believed; though it cannot actually
produce those effects but by being known,) and believed. Even as a good
Plaster has in it self an aptitude to heal, whether it be applied or no;
although it cannot actually heal unless applied: It gets no virtue by its
application, but the Sore to which it is applied, gets virtue from it to the
healing it; which if not applied, it could not have had from it.

This Doctrine also is but one in its substance, to, or for All: not one to
one, and another, to another; but the same Truth of God, and Object of Divine
Faith, which holds forth the ground of Men's believing, and Object to be
believed on, is one and the same for All; though this our Truth has in it many
particular branches and Contents, and all of this one Truth has not been
revealed at once to All; nor so much of it to one, as to another, nor to some
at all: yet the same is revealable in it self to all, and true for All. Though
this our Truth has not been at all times so much revealed, or in such form as
in some: as not so much, nor in such form before Christ's appearing in the
Flesh, Suffering for us, and Ascension from us, as since; as to say. It was not
true then, nor might be so affirmed, That Jesus Christ was already born of a
Virgin, had dyed, and rose again, etc. But that which is true now, and truly
declared as done, was then true, and might have been declared in the future,
That it should in due time be done, whether it was so declared, or not; yea, it
was true then, that it was accepted by Christ, to do, and suffer, as in due
time he has; and it was with God as virtually, though not actually done.

SECT. 3.
Two Conclusions drawn from the foresaid Considerations, touching the Heathen,
and persons dead, and in Hell, before Christ's Passion.

FRom what has been considered, we may gather these Two Conclusions.

1. From the Independency of the Truth or Doctrine of God upon men's Knowledge
of it, and Faith of it, it follows; That it is no valid or sound Consequence
for men to argue, because the Heathen had not, or in some parts have not the
things of Christ Published to them; and so had, or have not the Knowledge, or
Faith of them, therefore they are not true; for, or concerning them: as that
God sent Christ into the World to be the Savior of them, and that Christ has
now Suffered, and dyed for them, etc. Seeing the truth of these things depend
not upon their knowing, or believing them no more than that they were made
Righteous in Adam, and sinned, and fell in him: or that Christ is Lord over
them, and shall raise, and Judge them: which are no more declared to them, and
known, and believed by them, then the other; no more than that God loves no
Infants, or that Christ Dyed for, or is the Savior of none of them that die in
Infancy, because they have not the Knowledge, and Faith of these things on this
side Death: and what we say of Heathens may be extended to Idiots, and persons
born Deaf, etc. It may be said probably, that they have not that good and
comfort in their hearts that properly spring from the faith and knowledge of
these Truths, (unless by extraordinary inward Revelation,) and yet neither can
we say, they can have no benefit by those things truly asserted to Salvation:
seeing benefit by them to Salvation may accrue to persons; (I say, not that
reject the knowledge and faith of them when afforded, or neglected to seek
them, having opportunity thereto; but) that by the All-wise Providence of God,
are deprived of them; as is plain in the case of Infants, which have both evil
and good, by what they never had any capacity for the Knowledge and Faith of:
that is, the Sin of Adam, and the Death of Christ for them.

2. From the Unity of the Doctrine, and its Truth, though under different
degrees and forms of Expression; and the virtuous being of the things with God
as sure to be done in time, which in former Ages were not actually done; it
follows also, That it is no true, or good consequence to say, Because some were
actually Dead, and in Hell, before Christ's Incarnation, and Suffering;
therefore Christ was not Incarnate, or Dyed not for them. That he Dyed not for
them as in Hell may probably be said; but not that he dyed not for them, as
persons sometimes living on the Earth, capable of the Truths, being declared
to, and received by them: seeing they had the same Truth in substance
declarable, or declared to them, as a thing to be done in its time, that we
have now declared to us, as a thing already done; but if it was in their days
true, That God was so affected toward them, as to appoint his Son, in due time
to suffer for them; then was it also certainly in its time performed for them,
what ever in the mean time became of them: even as it was true for them that
were actually Saved, and in Paradise, or Abraham's bosom, before Christ came;
that Christ when he came, should Dye for them; not as Saved persons, and then
in Heaven, but as Sinners in their day, that needed his Death for their
Salvation; and accordingly in due time he did suffer for them. The Saved, being
saved through, and in belief of, and obedience to the same Truth and Grace, for
the contempt of, and disobedience to, which the Damned were Condemned: and the
Damned Condemned for Contempt of the same, by which the Believer was Saved. But
let us descend to a more full and particular account of the said Doctrine, and
see what it is, and what is in it.

CHAP. II.
Of the Doctrine, or Faith of the Gospel, both more implicitly and generally,
and more explicitly and particularly.

SECT. 1.
Of the Faith of the Gospel more implicitly.

THe Truth, or the Doctrine to be preached and believed, is the Doctrine or
Faith of the Gospel; the sum whereof more implicitly or generally is this. The
Being, and goodness of God, both more general to men, and more specially to men
seeking after, and trusting in him; as in that of the Apostle. He that comes
to God must believe, that God is, and that he is the Rewarder of them that see^
him out, or diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. Or that in 1 Timothy 4.10. That the
living God is the Savior of all men, and especially of those that believe. The
Doctrine contained in either of which sayings it is certain, is true Doctrine to
be Preached to any, or every man; nor does the truth of it, or any part of it,
depend upon any man's knowing, or believing it: for whether men know, or believe
that there is a God, or not, yet it is true, That God is. Or whether any man do
believe, or know, that God is a Rewarder of them, that diligently seek him, or
not; yea, and whether these, or those men do seek him, or not? yet this is
true, That God is a Rewarder of them that does diligently seek him. It is not
indeed true of All, That they do diligently seek him; but true it is to, and
for all that, God is a Rewarder of them that so do: the like may be said of the
other passage. It is true, That God is the Savior of all men; especially, of
them that Believe; whether any man do believe it or no, know it or no; though
men cannot believe in him unless they know him, yet such a one he is in
himself, and as such to be represented to men before they know, or believe in
him, that they may know and believe in him, and prove the truth of what he is
to them that seek, or believe in him, in being rewarded, and specially saved by
him. Men's faith or unbelief, knowledge or ignorance of this Doctrine may
further, or hinder their believing in God, and seeking after him, but neither
makes true, nor false the Doctrine it self. It is as true amongst the Indians
and Americans, that God is the Savior of All men; especially of them that
Believe in him; and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, as
it is amongst us Christians; and to be proved, by such of them as believe in
him, and seek him; as well as it is by such of us, as so do: though those
sayings of Truth be not so known amongst them, as amongst us. We know better
what is true for them, then they themselves do: but that which is true for
them, is as true for them, though they know it not, as for us that know it:
even as a seeing man sees, and knows better what is about a Blind man, than
himself may do, though its nevertheless truly about him for his not seeing it;
nor is any thing the more about us, because we see it to be about us, then the
same would be if we were blind, and could not see it. But let us see this
Doctrine, and what is in it more explicitly: true, for those that have not
that Doctrine opened to them, as we have it, though more known to be true by
us, and we there through better furnished for seeking after the benefit of tha^
Truth, and for making it known also to others: both in 1. What is supposed, and
taken for granted in the Gospel, and by it employed; tho not properly Gospel, or
glad tidings by it self considered. And in 2. What is properly and directly
Gospel, and more fully spoken to, and insisted on in it.


SECT. 2.
Of the Truths supposed, and employed in the Gospel; yet not properly, and by
themselves Gospel.

OF the former sort, are these Articles and Heads of Doctrine that follow, viz.

1. That there is a Glorious Divine Power and Being, Psalm. 58.11. and ^6.4, 5.
which is God, infinitely above and beyond all other Powers and Beings.

2. That this God is but One in himself, Tim. 2.5. Cor. 8.4, 6.
Essence and Being.

3. That in that One God, John 5.7.
there is a Trinity, in respect of the manner of his subsisting, and working;
the Father, the Son, or Word, and the Holy Ghost; or in other terms coming up
to the same Truth. ^th 3.17. and ^ 19.
That God even the Father has a Son and an holy Spirit, the spirit of the Son,
and of the Father, one in Essence and Godhead with himself.

4. That this One God is an eternal, 1 Tun. 1.17. 1 King. 8.27. Psalm. 135.5, 8.
and 139.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and 147.5. 1 Samuel 2.2. Psalm. 100.5. and 36.5, 6,
7. Isa. 44.6. and 59.6. 1 Cor. 8.6. and 2 Cor. 5.18. Mic. 2.7. 1 John 3.8.
infinite, and infinitely wise, powerful, holy, and good Spirit, who has his
Being of himself, and is the Author of all Beings: (Sin excepted, which has
its Being of, and from the Sinner, and Satan) whatsoever.

5. That this glorious God is only perfectly, and fully knowable by, and known
to himself; and cannot be known either perfectly, or in part, by us, or any
other Creature, but in his own Light and Manifestation of himself to us, Job.
11.7, 8, 9. Psalm. 139.6. and 36.9. John 1.18. Matthew. 11.27.

6. That this glorious God, Rev. 4.10.11. Isa. 40.28. Col. 1.16, 17. Heb. 1.2,
3. Job 34.13.
did for manifestation of himself, and his own Glory, Make, Create, give
Beginning and Being to the World, and all things therein visible and invisible,
by his Infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness; and is also the Upholder and
Governor thereof and of all things therein according to his own wisdom and
good-pleasure.

7. That amongst, Genesis 1.25, 26, 27. and 2.7, 21, 22. and 5.2.
and after all other things, Man also had his Being, and Beginning, of, or from
God; and was made by him as his choice visible Creature in one man, made of the
Dust of the Earth, and inspired, and inlivened with a living rational Soul; and
in one Woman, made of that Man, to be a Meet-help for him: Male and Female made
he them.

8. That man, Genesis 1.26.27. Eccles. 7.29. Psalm. 49.12, 20. Prove. 8.31. Act.
17.27, 28. Genesis 3.22. with 2.17.
was in that one Man, and one Woman made very honorable, happy, and glorious
in Gods own image and likeness; upright, and without sin, capable of knowing,
and having converse with God, and of serving and living to him: (in whom he
also lives, moves, and has his being:) and so of living for ever. The Ruler
over the rest of Gods Works, and the subordinate end of their Creation, they
being made for Man's use and service, so as nothing was wanting to man that
might make for his comfort and happiness: so good and bountiful was God to him;
only man was mutable, and so might if he would be so foolish to Sin and
forfeit all. And sure the Gospel supposes this, both as to the goodness of
man's condition; otherwise, Sin had not been man's, or chargeable upon him; much
less at so high a rate, as to deserve such a Penalty to be inflicted upon as
the Gospel also implies, if man had not been made Righteous, and without Sin;
and both in a capacity, and unspeakably obliged to have continued so: as also
to the mutability of his Condition, otherwise he could not have sinned, and
lost it all.

9. That God made also other intelligent Creatures besides Man, Col. 1.16.
invisible Spirits called Angels, made good, and excellent glorious Creatures;
1 Pet. 3.21.
of whom some fell from their Principality and glorious station and are become
Devils; 2 Pet. 2.4.
unclean, and wicked Spirits; Enemies to God and Men, Jude 6. Matthew. 8.28, 31.
and 12.24, 27, 43, 45. and 25.41. Mark 4.2.12. Genesis 3.1. with Rev. 20.1, 2, 3,
8. with 16.13, 14.
and to all goodness, of whom one is chief and Principal; and the rest his
Angels, who being for their voluntary sin and defection, thrust down from God:
enticed, and still endeavor to entice men, to revolt from God, and Rebel
against him, that they might by incurring his Wrath, become as miserable as
themselves: that is, endlesly and irrecoverably miserable: for such they are,
being forsaken of God, and bound over in Chains of Darkness to the Judgment of
the great Day, to be then for ever Tormented. 2 Pet. 2.4. Matt. 25.41. The rest
of the Angels keeping their places, are happy and glorious Spirits, 1 Timothy
5.21. Mark. 8.38. Psalm. 103.20.
beholding God's Face, rejoicing in his Presence, Glory, and Works; always
ready pressed to do his Commands, employed by him as Ministering Spirits for the
guard and helpfulness of Mankind; especially, such as are Heirs of his
Protection and Salvation. Matthew. 18.10. Heb. 1.7, 14.

10. That God, as it was but meet, Genesis 2.16, 17. and 3.23.
and as seemed good to his own infinite Wisdom, having made Man so good and
happy, and having put so great Engagements upon him, to Love, and Serve him,
did also give him a Law very reasonable and easy, being but to abstain from
one tree, or fruit; when he had all variety for necessity and delight besides,
freely given him; and a tree of life which had virtue in it, to have preserved
him from Dying. By which Law, Man had occasion and advantage given him, of
testifying his love and obedience to him, and to acknowledge his Sovereignty
over them: adding withal a Penalty, That in case he brake it, he should surely
die.

11. That Man having this Law given him, Genesis 3.1, 2, 6. with Rev. 20.1, 2.
Jam. 1.2, 3, 4. Eccles. 7.29.
and being wisely permitted of God to be Tempted, by the old Serpent the Devil,
and Satan, (that God might try his love and obedience to him, and prove his
thankful gratitude for so great goodness) did foolishly and needlessly, by his
own mere will incline to the Tempter, and break the Commandment given him:
although, such as might so easily have been obstructed by him.

12. That Man so Sinning, Defiled himself with the Poison of Satan's Temptation,
Romans 5.12, 18, 19. and 3.23. Genesis 3.22, 23. with Psalm. 30.5. Romans 3.9, 10, 11,
12, -- 19.23. Genesis 3.10, 11, 16, 17, 18.
and incurred the Penalty annexed to the Law, even Death upon Himself, and his
whole Posterity, Naturally to descend from him; in as much as they were all in
him, and he the public Head and Representative of them: what God did to him,
and gave to him, he did, and gave to us all in him; therefore also what he did,
concerned us all, by, and from him: and so He, and all his, fell under the
displeasure of our Great Creator, and thereby into woeful misery; to be cast out
of God's favor, and from his presence and fellowship, the spring and source of
all happiness and blessing, and so to be divested of his Image and Glory:
(inward Righteousness and Integrity, and outward Luster or Sanctity or
soundness;) Psalm. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. Ephesians. 2.1, 2. 1 John 3.8. Heb. 2.14.
and to be filled with sin, and sinfulness, as a loathsome Disease, apting us
to all vanity and wickedness; and to be filled with pain, Morality and
Affection to consume us from off the Earth, out of which he took us: yea, we
were hereby made obnoxious to the Wrath of God upon our Souls and Bodies; and
exposed our selves to the Devils rage and malice, to Tyranize over us.

13. Man being fallen into this misery was altogether helpless, 2 Samuel 14.14.
both in respect of himself, and of any, or all other Creatures. He could do
nothing to recover himself from it, or from any part of it; Psalm. 49.6, 7, 8,
9, 10.
nor could any one man help, or redeem his Brother; for tho God might, (as
afterward he did,) Gal. 2.21. and 3.10, 21.
propound some holy and righteous Law to him, yet could he not be made
Righteous, and live thereby. Psalm. 40.7, 8, 9, 10.
For neither could any such Sacrifice be propounded to Man, to offer to God, as
might countervail the demerit of his Sin and Offense: Heb. 10.1, 2, 6. and 7.19.
neither could any work or service be done by him that might be acceptable to
God. Isa. 64.6. Romans 3.10, 11, 19, 20. Psalm. 143.2. Romans 5.12, 18. Ephesians. 2.1,
2. John. 5.25.
He being fallen under a double Death, one by way of Penalty, as rendering him
dead at Law; and another in himself, and his own powers, rendering him like a
lifeless, breathless, stinking Carcass; unable to do, or think any thing holy,
spiritual, and acceptable unto God: which yet could he have done had been but
his duty, and could not satisfy for his former sin. Mic. 6.6, 7, 8
Nor could any other creature be able to give a price sufficient for him, being
too low and finite to satisfy the justice of an infinite Majesty offended, and
goodness abused.

All these things the Gospel-Faith supposes, and takes for granted, and often
intimately, and sometimes (occasionally) expressly mentions, and every of them
is true in it self, and concerns all men, so as they may be propounded as
Truths to them whither they be propounded or no) and are meet being propounded,
to be believed; being Truths, whether they to whom they are propounded, believe
them or no.

SECT. 3.
Of Gospel Truths properly such, touching Gods Affection to, and provision of a
Savior for fallen Mankind; and of his Person, and Sufferings for us, and
Exaltation from them.

BUt now these forementioned Truths are not Gospel or Glad tidings: nay, rather
taken by themselves, and were there nothing further of Truth to be declared to,
or for any men, they would be a very terrible Doctrine to such men, importing
nothing but Ruin and Misery to them. But Gods Doctrine which he has ordered
to be Preached to every Creature, Mark 16.15. Luke 2.10, 11. 1 Timothy 2.15.
or in the whole Creation, is Gospel, or Gladtidings, tidings of great joy to
all the people; true, and good for every one; and therefore to be believed by
every one to whom it is declared, 1 Timothy 4.10.
and worthy to be believed by every one to whom it is declarable, according to
Gods Form and Order; containing other Truths yet, which represent God, the
Savior of all men, especially of them that believe in, and diligently seek
him; As these that follow.

1. That God notwithstanding the great folly and Fall of Man, 2 Samuel 14.14.
Romans 3.19, 20, 21, 22.
and his own Law and displeasure against him, though such was his
Righteousness, Purity, and Holiness; such the stedfastness of his Word; and
such our sin, sinfulness, and filthiness that he could not admit us fellowship
with himself; approve, justify, or delight in us; but banished us from him,
Genesis 3.15. John 3.16, 17.
and condemn us to Death and misery: yet, such was his love and mercy, as he
did not yet cease to love us, and be graciously affected toward us; but even
without our seeking it of him: yea, when we ran from him, 1 Pet. 1.20. and 3.18.
he devised and found out (as upon foresight hereof, he had fore-provided, and
purposed) a way for our recovery, that we might be saved from this so miserable
a case; and might in listening to him, be brought again into his Presence.

2. That, that way devised by him, Genesis 3.15. Gal. 4.4, 5. 1 John 3.5, 8. and
4.9, 10, 1^.
He also revealed and promised from the Beginning, and has now actually
manifested to be, The sending forth his own only begotten Son, made of a
Woman; and so the seed of the Woman: and the delivering him up to suffer and
dye for our Sins, Romans 4.25. 1 Pet. 1.21. Heb. 5.9. and 7.25. Joh. 6.40.
and so to ransom and make atonement for our Souls, and the raising him up
for our Justification: and glorifying him in the Nature of Man, for our
Salvation to the utmost: so as that whosoever believe in, and obey him, might
not perish in that misery, that either has befaln him, or further may; but
have Everlasting Life.

3. That Jesus of Nazareth (who was born of the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.26, 27, 31,
32, 35. Romans 1.1, 2, 3, 4. Luke 2.1, 2, 3, 6, 7. Act. 2.22, 23, 24. Luke 3.1,
2, 21.22, 23, and 4, and 5, and 6, etc. Matthew. 27.18. and 16.15, 16. Act. 9.20.
John 20.31. 1 John 5.1-4.5.
of the Stock and Lineage of David after the Flesh, in the Town of Beth-lehem
in the Land of Judah, in the days of Augustus Caesar, and lived, and conversed
among the Jews, Preaching the Word of God his Father, and working many glorious
Miracles amongst them, for the manifestation of Himself, and confirmation of
his Doctrine to them; till they being moved with Envy, did according to God's
determinate counsel take him, and Crucify him, in the Days of Tiberius Caesar)
was, and is, that only Begotten Son of God, whom he had purposed, and promised
before, and did then accordingly in the fullness of time, raise up, and send
forth to be the Savior and Deliverer of poor fallen Man.

4. That, Joh. 1.1, 2, 3, 14
that Jesus of Nazareth, was in the Beginning with God, according to his Divine
Being. Heb. 1.1, 2, 3. Col. 1.16, 17. Philip. 2.6, 7.
The Word, and God, by whom God made all things in Heaven and Earth Visible,
and Invisible, in the Form of God, the brightness of his Glory, and the express
character of his Person before he was made man; And that Eternal Word was in
the fullness of time made Flesh, a very and real Man, Heb. 2.14, 15, 16. 2 Cor.
8.9. Isa. 53.1, 2, 3. Romans 8.3. Heb. 4.15.
in the form of a Servant, a poor and despicable man, that had no worldly form
or excellency amongst men to commend him to Men; but was found in the likeness
of sinful Flesh, in all points tempted and subject to weaknesses as other men,
sin only excepted, to which low and despicable form out of grace and love to
mankind, and obedience to his Father, he did willingly and readily yield, and
abase himself: making himself who was infinitely rich, to be poor for us, Isa.
1.14. Matthew. 1.21. Act 20.28. 1 John 3.16.
that we through his poverty might be made rich, being thereby made capable of
acting and Suffering for us, so as to procure our Salvation, being God and Man
in one person.

5. That in pursuance of our Redemption, he was also made under the Law, Gal.
4.4. and 3.13. Romans 3.19.
both as it was upon, and against all men; and as given to be observed by the
Jews; that He might Redeem us from the Law: that is, that being in Bond as it
were with us (as a clear man that enters Bond for a grear Debtor) he might be
liable to be called forth to the Payment of our Debt, and procure our discharge
from it.

6. And accordingly God called him forth to the Judgment, Joh. 12.31. Heb.
10.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 1 Pet. 2.24.
as the only responsible Person, and caused the Judgment of the World to pass
upon him: to which also he willingly, and desirously yielded himself, bearing
our sins in his own body on the Tree, and so gave himself a Ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. Romans 5.12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 15.17, 18, 21, 22. Joh.
1.29. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. with Genesis 3.5, 6. Psalm. 69.4. Gal. 3.10, 13. Phil. 2.8,
9. Matthew. 26.38, 39. and 27.46.
and by the grace of God tasted Death for every man: the Second Adam satisfying
for the sins of the First; and all in, and of him, as fallen in him, both for
root and Branch: the first Revolt from God in our First Parents, and all that
Naturally and necessarily spring up from it: giving, or laying down to that
purpose as much as the First Adam usurped, or aspired to, even the Form of God;
and enduring all that thereby that the First Adam incurred by way of penalty to
himself, and all his Posterity equivolently; even the Curse of the Law, to
Death; the Death of the Cross, in which he sustained and endured not only
great Pains and Torments in his Body, but also unspeakable Agonies and
Afflictions in his Soul, pouring it out to Death, John 12.27. Isa. 53.8, 9, 10,
11, 12. Psalm. 22.1, 2, 8, 9; 10-16, etc.

7. That in this his abasement and Death, His obedience and sufferings were so
wellpleasing, Isa. 53.10, 11, 12. Romans 4.25. and 1.3, 4. Act. 2.24. Romans 14.9.
1 Cor. 15.3, 4, 5. Matthew. 12.40.
and satisfactory to God, that He in Testimony thereof, raised him up from the
Dead the third day, taking him therein from Prison, and Judgment. Yea, he
himself was God-man, and so a person not to be swallowed up of Death (though to
manifest, that he was indeed Dead; and to sanctify the Grave to us, and Redeem
us from it; he was pleased to abide in it part of Three Days, and Three Nights;
rose again by his Divine Power, and after he had showed himself by diverse
infallible proofs to his Disciples, Act. 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 10. and 10.39, 40, 41.
Luke 24.9.10. -- 50.51. Heb. 9.14. Act. 2.33.36. Heb. 1.3. and 12.2. Act. 2.
and 3, and 4, 5.
by the space of forty Days after his Resurrection for a manifestation of the
Truth of it, and confirmation of their Faith in it. He in their sight, Ascended
up visibly into Heaven, and there presented his own Crucified, and raised Body
a spotless Sacrifice to God, being taken up thither, and there received of God
his Father, and set down at his Right hand, even upon the Throne of Majesty in
the Heavens: as his after sending forth his Spirit upon his Disciples,
according to his fore-promise to them, and Working many notable Miracles by
them also, did evidently declare.

SECT. 4.
Of the Love of God to fallen Man, in glorifying his Son for him; and of the
compleatness, and fitness of Christ, as now in Heaven, to be the Savior of all
Men, and especially of such as Believe.

SO that now the same Jesus, Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10. with Psalm. 68.18. 1 Pet. 3.18,
19. Gal. 3.13. Heb. 2.14. 2 Timothy 1.10.
the Son of God, who in love to us, was abased, and Suffered for us in the
weakness of the Flesh, and Descended into the lower parts of the Earth to
Ransom us from the Sin and Misery fore-come upon us; lives also being ascended
up on high, and having led captivity captive (even Sin, Death, Law, Devil, who
led us Captive) at Gods Right hand in the Glory and Power of God, thence to
succor and Save us in all our Danger, Act. 2.33. and 5, 30, 31. Matthew. 28.18,
19, 20. Col. 1.19. and 2.9.10.
and from all our Enemies: being made in the Name and Authority of the Father,
the Savior of all Men, and especially of those that Believe, unto which also
He is completely and fully furnished of the Father, in that He has there given
gifts in the man, for man; even for the Rebellious also, that the Lord God
might dwell amongst them, for he has there made him.

1. Lord, Act. 2.36. and 10.36. Phil. 2.10, 11. 1 Pet. 13.21. Ephesians. 1.20, 21.
Isa. 9.6. Joh. 5.22, 23.
Lord of all, giving him all power and all authority in Heaven and in Earth: a
Name above every Name, That at his Name every knee should bow, both of things
in heaven, and in earth, and under the earth. Angels, Men, Devils, and all
Creatures being given into his hand and dispose; the whole Government laid upon
his shoulders, and all Judgment committed into his hand. To enable and furnish
him, in which in the Nature of Man he is also made.

2. Christ, Act. 2, 36. Isa. 42.1. and 61.1.2. and 11.1, 2, 3. Act. 10.38.
the Anointed one of God, filled with the Spirit of God without measure; which
Spirit, is an infinite, wise, powerful, and gracious Spirit; inabling and
strengthening him to all such Offices, and the Works of them, as he is anointed
and designed to and are needful for, our further saving. That is to say,

1. To be the Great Prophet; Act. 3.21, 22.
the Light of the World, to give forth the Light, Truth, and Knowledge of God;
and what may concern us to know for our peace and welfare, as in his Wisdom he
sees fit; that whosoever believes in, Joh. 1.9. and 8.12. and 12.46. Isa. 42.1,
2, 3, 4. and 49.6, 7. 1 Cor. 15.45. John 5.22.23, 25. Isa. 55.2, 3, 5. Psalm.
25.8, 9, 12, 14. Matthew. 13.11. 1 Pet. 2.25. Joh. 10.2, 11.
and follows his Light might not abide in Darkness, but might see the Light of
Life. And being a quickening Spirit, he is in the Spirit fitted and able, so to
speak, in, and through the means he affords to the spirit of Men, as to cause
the Dead in Spirit to hear; and so, as that they, who in hearing, hear or
listen to him, may live for ever. He being more peculiarly ordained a further
Teacher and Leader to them, to show them the Mysteries of the Kingdom, the
Secrets of the Lord; and as a Shepherd, and Bishop of their Souls to feed them
with Knowledge and Understanding unto Eternal Life.

2. To be the Great, Psalm. 2.1. -- 6.7, 8, 9. Jer. 10.7. with Rev. 15.4. Isa.
33.22. Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. Psalm. 149.2. Rev. 3.21. John 1.49. Romans 1.7. 1
Cor. 1.3. Matthew. 28.20. Heb. 2.18. and 5.10. and 7.1, 2, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Luke
22.29, 30.
(not only Lord of all Men, and Creatures, but also King of the Nations
general, and of the Saints peculiarly; The Lawgiver to Men: and to take the
care of all, ordering the Kingdom of God amongst, and for them, as best stands
with his wisdom, and their good, while it is a Day of Salvation to them. But
especially, as a King over his Subjects, to take care of, protect, govern, and
defend them; supplying all grace to them, who hear his Voice as the Great
Prophet, and submit to his Kingdom. Support them in Temptations and
Afflictions, Subdue their Enemies, Fight their Battles, hear, and grant their
Petitions, subdue their Corruptions, sanctify them by his Spirit, raise them
from Death, and give them glorious Kingdom, and Inheritance.

3. To be the Great High Priest; Heb. 2.17. and 3.1. and 7. 1 Timothy 2.5. 1 John
2.2. Luke 24.46, 47, 48. Act. 17.30, 31. Heb. 10.19, 20, 21. Psa. 68.18, 19,
20. Isa. 53.12. Luke 23.34. Psalm. 119.4.
to which, by the offering up of his mo^ precious Body, a spotless Sacrifice,
and by the Oath of God he was Consecrated and therein to be the Great Mediator
(...) God and Men: the standing Propitiation for the Sins, both of those that
believe (...) him, and of the whole World. That so to the world in general
during the day of his Grace and Patience toward them respectively that door of
Life opened, and liberty for their Repenting, and going back to God; and
opportunity in so doing, of finding Mercy and Acceptance with him, with means,
mercy, and grace: preventing them to enable and lead the^ thereto, procured by
his Death and Sacrifice for them, might by his presentation of the same unto
God his Father, and Mediation, or Intercession for Transgresson in the Virtues
thereof made by him be kept open, and continued to them; so a^ that they not
speedily listening to hi^ Voice as the Great Prophet, and obeying him as the
King; and their sinning against the grace and goodness of God extended to them
by him, might not pull down Wrath upon them, to the Reprobating and destroying
of them. But God might yet be patient toward them, and be yet calling,
reproving, striving with them by his Spirit; using means, and waiting with much
long-suffering, and goodness for their Conversion: with respect to which, Psalm.
68.18.
he is said, having led captivity captive to have received gifts in the man;
not only for men, as men simply considered in their First Fallen Estate, but
for the Rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell amongst them. Whence
they also are yet laded with Benefits, and meet with manifold Salvations, and
Deliverances. He as the Propitiation for them, Genesis 6.3. Eccles. 3.1, 2, 3. 2
Cor. 6.1, 2. Romans 2.4, 5, 6. Psalm. 68.21.
covering them from the wrath of God, so as their sins are not so minded before
him as that he therefore casts them away, and destroys them: which Propitiation
I say he is for them so long as he pleases, that a day of Grace should be
afforded them, there being for every purpose an appointed time, A time to love,
and a time to hate; a day of grace, and a day of vengeance to those that go on
still in their trespasses, till the day of grace be expired. As appears in the
Parable of the barren Fig Tree, Luke 13.6, 7, 8, 9, etc. Let it alone, (says
the great Vine-dresser) this year also, till I dig about (with Chastisements,)
and dung it (with renewed benefits) and if it bring forth fruit well, but if
not, then afterward thou shall cut it down. For Believers, 1 John. 2.1, 2.
Col. 1.21, 22, 23. Heb. 7.25. Acts 10.43. 1 Pet. 2.5. Rev. 8.3, 4, 5. Heb. 5.1,
2, 3. and 9.15. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. 1 John 1.7, 9.
He is the Propitiation and Advocate to present them in himself, as Righteous,
and to make their persons acceptable unto God, obtaining for them the
Dispensation of the Forgiveness of their Sins; and whatever favor or Blessing
may be fit and good for them; even Grace and Glory. Perfuming their Prayers and
Praises with the odor of his own Sacrifice, and so offering up, Sanctifying,
and making acceptable their Gifts and Sacrifices, taking away the Iniquities of
their holy Things* so as that through his Mediation, no failings in their Faith
and Love; no mixtures cleaving to their Services; no follies or failings of
theirs through Temptation, repented of may deprive them of the promised
Inheritance.

4. He is also appointed Judge of Quick, Acts 10.42. 2 Cor. 5.10. John 5.21,
22, 23. Rev. 1.5. and 3.7.19.
and Dead. All Authority is given him to Execute Judgment also: both here to
Absolve, Acquit, and Justify from Sin, and Condemnation even due to Men, for,
and deserved by such Sins as they have committed against God's grace and
goodness extended to them. He has power to unloose upon their Repenting; such
Bonds, and take off such Punishments as they had brought upon themselves, by
their so sinning; as also, to bind, or retain their Sins, and order and inflict
what Punishments he pleases upon them until they Repent: and that both upon the
Unconverted World that Believe not, and upon his own Subjects that Sin against
him. Job 33.16, 17, 28, 29. Lam. 2.33. Psa. 75.8. Isa. 1.4, 5. and 9.13. and
27.9. 1 Pet. 4.16, 17. 1 Cor. 11.30, 31.
But the Judgments now ordered through, and by him, who is Mediator, are during
the day of Grace to all full of Mercy (the cup in his hand is full of mixture)
and tend to drive men home to God, and to keep back their Souls from going down
to the Pit; by breaking their Enterprises, and hideing Pride from them* though
yet some of them be smarter and sorer than others; Rev. 21.2. Luke 13.9, 24,
25, 26. 2 These. 2 10, 11, 12. Jam. 4.12. Romans 14.9. John 5.28.29. Matt. 25.31,
34, 41, 46. and 16. 27, 28. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14, 15, 16, 17. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. Rev.
20.11, 13, 14. and 21. and 22. 1, 6. Matthew. 8.29. Jud. 1.6.
for he has power to let loose Satan upon men, to bind, harden, or otherwise,
to buffet, or affright, and vex them; and to let out evil men too one against
another, or against his People that Believe; to judge, exercise, and try them.
Yea, he has Power for men's Rebellions persisted in to cease, mediating for
them, and so to turn the Keys of the Kingdom against them; put an end to his
Patience, give them up to strong Delusions, and to Destruction. For he is able
to Save, and to Destroy, as seems good to him. And so also Power as Lord and
Judge over the Dead too, to raise them up, and finally Judge them at the Last
Day; both by Pronouncing Sentence upon them, and Executing it also, when
Pronounced. To which purpose he is appointed to, and shall come again from
Heaven in the glory of the Father, with all his mighty Angels, to bring all
Men, even those that are in their Graves by Land or Sea, before him, and to
render to every man according to their Works: perfectly to free those that here
believe on him, and seek after God by him, from all sin, and sorrow; from the
malice of Satan, and all his Instruments: and from the Power and Dominion of
Death and Grave, and to give them a Glorious Kingdom, and Inheritance with
himself; and to execute Vengeance upon the Devil and his Angels, Eternally
plaguing and destroying them, and with them, all that have here taken part with
them against him* and persisted therein, till Reprobated by him; these to go
into everlasting Torments, and the Righteous into everlasting happiness, Matthew.
25.31, to the End.

9. That all this Infinite Power, Isa. 53.11, 12. Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. Romans 5.16.
Heb. 9.14, 15. 1 John 2.1.2.
as Lord, and Christ, Prophet, King, Priest* and Judge, (which dignity and
power of Judge, may also be referred to his Lordship, or Kingship, though I
have here distinctly mentioned it by it self; as Isa. 33.22) And more
observeably, his Power to Forgive Sins, and Rebellions, against the goodness
and grace of God, extended by, and through him, both to the World, and to his
own Servants. He has obtained, and acquired through the superabundancy of the
virtues and merits of his Obedience, Sufferings, and Sacrifice, above, and
beyond the demerit of Adam's Sin, and of our Sin, and Sinfulness, as in, and
from him; and the infinite acceptableness of them unto God. For he being such,
and so glorious a Person, his so loving and ready Obedience, Psa. 130.4, 5, 6,
7. Isa. 55.7. Acts 5.31. Rev. 5.11, 12.
and his so great Sufferings, were infinitely wellpleasing unto God, so as to
obtain Plenteousness of Redemption, even Forgiveness of Sins; the grace going
beyond the Offense, which was but of one to Condemnation; but the grace of many
Offenses, to Justification; yea, and so as that, both God, and all his Angels,
and Holy Ones judge him worthy to receive All Power, and Wisdom, and Riches,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing, as but a due Reward for his
foresaid Obedience, and Humiliation: and the shame, sorrow, and Sufferings
sustained therein. To which add,

10. That this Jesus Christ our Savior, Heb. 2.17, 18. and 3.1, 2. and 4.15,
16. Isa. 42.1, 2, 3. with Matthew. 12.18, 19.
is also a most Merciful, Compassionate, and Faithful High Priest, and Savior;
one that can be touched with our Infirmities; and succor those that are
Tempted in their temptations; and will not fail either his Father, or us, in
any of all those things committed to him, and required of him, but will
perform all the Counsel and Pleasure of his Will, in what ever may concern us,
or our Salvation.

And all these also are true in themselves, and of concernment to all, whether
they do know them or not, believe them or not, the Truth of them not depending
upon Men's Knowledge, and Faith of them: but therefore they are worthy to be
known and believed of Men, because true for them: and much good and benefit is
to be met with, in the hearty knowledge and belief of them.

SECT. 5.
How Christ has broken and is the Breaker of the Head of the Serpent in what
he has done, is become, and is further to do for and to men.

BY what has been hitherto said, it may appear, How Christ has in himself
Fundamentally broken the Head, overturned the Plot, and overthrown the
Principality of Satan the Old Serpent over Man: and how he is fitted further to
break his Designs, and destroy his Power against us. For,

1. Genesis 3.1, 2. etc.
Whereas it was Satan's design (his Head and Plot) to work an Everlasting
Separation between God and Man (whom God has made as an habitable part of his
Earth for Wisdom, Prove. 8.30, 31. Jude 6.2 2 Pet. 2.4. Genesis 2.17. with 3.1.
or his Son to delight in) and to that purpose incited and drew Man to Sin
against God; by which He knew (both by what he had proved from God, for his own
sin, and by what he heard, and knew was pronounced by God against Man in case
of his sinning) he should incur his displeasure to Death; and so he thought he
must have been for ever thrust out from God, and separated to Curse and Misery,
as himself is: through what Christ has done in his Death, Sufferings, and
Sacrifice for Man, in the Nature of Man; Man on the contrary, is more Exalted,
Honored, and brought nearer to God than before: Genesis 3.21. Matthew. 28.18,
19.20. 1 Cor. 15.45. Genesis 2.15. 1 Pet. 3.21. Genesis 2, 8, 9, 16, 18. Col. 1.19.
and 2.9. Psa. 16.11. Genesis 1.26, 27. Psalm. 8.3, 4, 5, 6. Heb. 1.3. and 12.2.
Ephesians. 1.20, 21. Matthew. 28.18. Phil. 2.10.11. Genesis 2.25. Romans 3.23. John 17.4,
5. Heb. 2.5, 6, 9. Phil. 3.21. Acts 26.13. Genesis 2.7. 1 Cor. 15, 45, 47. John
5.21, 25, 28. Genesis 2.18, 21, 22, 23. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27, 30, 31, 32.
for now he is become one with God, as one of the persons of the glorious
Trinity in the Person of Christ glorified, and made a quickening Spirit for us.
Man had before a Paradise. Man is now in Heaven, on the Throne of God. Man had
all necessaries, and delights in that Paradise, and fellowship with God. Man
has now all the delights and satisfactions of God, being the habitation of the
fullness of the glory of God: all the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him
bodily. Man had dominion over all the Visible Creatures, Beasts of the Field,
Fowls of the Air, and whatsoever passes through the paths of the Sea. Man is
now upon God's Throne of Majesty, and has all power in Heaven and Earth given
to him, Angels, Principallities, and Powers, even the Devils too put under, and
made subject to him. Man had great glory and comeliness in his Body, and needed
not to have been ashamed though Naked. Man has the glory of God upon him: yea,
is the brightness of his glory, and the express character of his Person; is
clothed with Majesty and Honor: his brightness greater than that of the Sun.
Man was made a living Soul: but Man is now a quickening Spirit, able to
transfuse Life into others, even into the Dead. Man had a Meet-help made him
there. Man had a Church and Spouse given him here, of his Flesh, and of his
Bones, for the Propogation of Children to him an holy Seed for him; a people
Espoused and brought to him, Romans 7.4. Genesis 1.26. Col. 1.14. Heb. 2.5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 15. Rev. 20.1, 2, 3, 10.
who is raised from the Dead, that they might bring forth Fruit unto God. Man
was made in the Image of God there. Man is the Image of the Invisible God here:
So that herein the Head and Plot of the Old Serpent is perfectly broken in
Christ. He is so far from having Dominion over Man, that now Man has it over
him for ever* so as he can never more be able to rise up against him. Yea,

2. His Design is broken for us men; 1 Timothy 2.5. and 2 Timothy 1.10.
even for Adam, and all his Posterity; inasmuch as through what Christ has
done, and Suffered for us: He has so abolished Death, (the Death that by that
Sin came upon us,) that it notwithstanding we may (or might any man in his
proper time during the Day of Grace,) Isa. 55.5, 6, 7. Ezekiel. 33.11. 2 Samuel
14.14. 2 Pet. 3.9. 1 Cor. 15.20, 21. Romans 5.18. John 5.28, 29, 25 and 11.25,
26. 2 Cor. 5.10. Rev. 20.12.
be Saved, and be brought back again to God; in that Judgment and Death, no man
shall Everlastingly Perish, but in a Second, they that do. Christ is the
Resurrection and the Life, out (...) the First; so speaking to the Dead in
Spirit, as to cause them to hear, so as they may in hearing and listening to
him, Live. And he will so speak to the Bodily Dead, as that out of that Death
All shall Live, so as to be brought before him as their Sovereign Lord, and
Judge, to be judged by him, according as in their lifetimes they have accepted,
or rejected him. So that notwithstanding their Sin Committed in Adam, or their
sinfulness thence contracted, or the Death therefore ordered to them, Prove.
1.22, 23. Psalm. 95.7, 8. Isa. 45.22. and 55. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7. Rev. 22.17. Eccles.
7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 90.11. and 39. 4, 5, 6. John 5.24. Prove. 1.23. Rev.
22.17. 2 Pet. 3.13. Rev. 22.3, 4.
any man in hearing the Voice of Christ (as while it is called to day, any man
may) Maugre, all that Plot of Satan may be brought back to an happy Estate,
through Jesus Christ. Yea, this Death as now ordered, through Jesus Christ,
affords exceeding great Motive, and is of singular use to awaken men, and
provoke them to seek the Lord, that they may live: and being Justified by
Christ, (as that is certainly to be met with, in obeying his Voice;) any man
may come to the enjoyment of Fellowship with him in the restoration and glory
of our Nature in him, so as to have a better Paradise, and Tree of Life, a
better Sabbath, a better World, (even new heavens and a new earth wherein
dwells righteousness, with freedom from temptation, and from danger of falling
from it,) then ever Adam had, or we in him.

3. Yea, 1 Pet. 5.8. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. Rev. 20.3. Joh. 8.44. with ver. 32, 33, 34,
36. Romans 10.11, 12, etc.
Whereas Satan is yet busily Plotting (though his Head be so broken in Christ,
as to his First Plot, and the Jurisdiction got thereby,) seeking to draw
particular persons into new Snares, and to bring them to a new Condemnation, by
their personal, voluntary, and unnecessitated slightings and refusings of the
Light, and Truth, or Voice of the Son of God; even then, when he is calling
them, and therein setting them free, and moving them to listen, and adhere to
him: and men are generally, being weak in themselves and through the sweetness
they feel, Jam. 3.2. Joh. 3.19, 20. 1 Timothy 2.5. 1 John 2.1, 2. Romans 5.16. Isa.
53.12. Luke 13.7, 8, 9. Isa. 55.7.
or fancy in their selfish, sinful ways, apt to listen to him; and in many
things we sin all: Christ is herein Preached, and represented as the Mediator
of God and Men, the Propitiation for the Sins of the World, in the
Superabundancy of the virtues of his Death and Sacrifice, in which He
infinitely out-did the Sin of Adam, and its demerit: by his Intercession,
pleading for, and obtaining patience, and forbearance for men, and forgiveness
ready to be given them for such Sins: also upon their letting them go, and
parting with them: whence its said, Let the wicked forsake his ways, Ezekiel.
33.16.
and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and turn to the Lord for he is gracious,
and to our God for he will multiply to pardon. And in the day that a man
turns, all his Iniquities shall be forgiven him, none of them shall be
mentioned unto him. Psalm. 103. 3, 4, 6.
And, with the Lord is plenteousness of Redemption. More then merely to free
from the old Score of Sin that came in upon our First account of our sinning in
Adam. So that he is represented by virtue of that his Mediation the Forgiver of
other Sins also; Joh. 3.18. and 5.24. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9, 10. 1 John 1.9, 10.
the Savior and Deliverer from the Second Death, the Wrath to come. Having
also Authority, and Power, and Commission to cleanse us from our
unrighteousness, we confessing our Sins before him, and turning to him, so that
Iniquity shall not prevail upon us, to bring us into Bondage again, and so to
pull upon on us the second Death: Luke 13.8.9, 25. Matt. 25.31.35, 41. Rev.
20.10, etc.
which yet he also has power to leave men to; and for their Rebellions against
his Grace, to Sentence them to, and execute upon them; and therein to Destroy
them for ever, with the Devil and his Angels. In which his Head shall be
forever broken too, both in himself, and all his Seed, as Plotting together
against Christ the Seed of the Woman, in himself, and his Members, so as never
more to be able to rise up against them.

SECT. 6.
How Christ is set forth in the Gospel, as the Fulfilling, and Fulfiller of the
Promises, and Prophecies that fore-went of him; and of all the Types and
Shadows.

YET, further to show, what a complete Savior Christ is, and how complete we
are in him: We may note, That he is as the Gospel sets him forth, The
Accomplishment, and the Accomplisher in their due time and way of all the other
Prophecies and Promises concerning our Salvation, Acts 13.32, 33. 1 Cor. 1.20.
Col. 2.16. Heb. 10.1.
and the body and truth of all Types, Figures, and Representations of him,
mentioned in the Scriptures. As He is,

1. That Seed of Abraham, Genesis 18.18, 26. Matthew. 1.1, 2.
and of Isaac, and of Jacob; in whom God Promised, That all the families and
nations of the earth should be blessed: which is accomplished in him: Acts
3.25.26 Gal. 3.8. 1 Timothy 4.10. 1 John 5.11, 12. Matthew. 22.4, 5, 8. Luke 24.19,
23, 24.
Dead and Risen for them, and become the Savior of all men; especially, of
those that believe: for God has in him, given us eternal life, even to us men;
so as in having, submitting to, and receiving Christ in his Light and Truth, we
may have it. Now in Eternal Life, is included, Remission of Sins,
Righteousness, and all things. And these are made ready for all, so as any in
turning at his Reproofs, may, and shall certainly receive them; none excluded
by him, till they exclude themselves: nor but for so doing, Prove. 1.22, 23, 24.
and 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 12.

2. He is the Shiloh or Peacemaker, Genesis 49.10. Ephesians. 2.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
Isa. 11.10, 11. Romans 15.6, 10, 11. Matthew. 25.31, 32.
who has made Peace, by the Blood of his Cross, and has Preached Peace to
them that were nigh, and to them that were afar off; and is the Peace between
God, and Men; and between Men, and Men, to them that accept him, and are found
in him; to whom is, and ought to be, the gathering of the People. To him
Believers are now gathered by his Grace; and they that are not gathered now,
shall hereafter be by his Power gathered to be Judged by him.

3. He is the Great Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18, 15, 18. Act. 3.21, 22, 23.
raised up out of the Jews; like to Moses: yea, above him, both in
immediateness of receipt of his Commands from his Father; and in giving Laws
and Doctrines, binding to all people: and in Meekness, Faithfulness, Miracles,
etc. yea, One Greater then He; Numb. 12.6, 7, 8. John 3.34. Matthew. 11.27. John
1.18. Heb. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. John 20.30, 31. and 21.25. Act. 2.22.
in as much as Moses was but a Servant in God's House: but Christ the Son in his
own House. To him therefore all ought to listen, and he that refuses him,
shall be destroyed by him.

4. He is the Great King and Shepherd of Israel, that God promised to raise up
to David, out of his Seed or Loins. To whom God has given the Everlasting
Kingdom, both over All Men, and over Israel, or Believing Men in special: which
he also is Anointed to Govern and Order, till he shall deliver it up to the
Father, and God become all in all. Psalm. 2.6, 7. John 10.11. and 1.49. with
Psalm. 89.2, 3, 19, 20, etc. Luke 1.33, 34, 35. 1 Cor. 15.24, Matthew. 3.17. and
17.5. Acts. 3.22, 23. Isa. 11.1, 10, 11. and 4.2. with Romans 15.9, 10, 11, 12,
13. Dan. 9.24, 25, 26. John 1.41.45.
25, 26, 27.

5. He is the Root of Jesse. The Branch of the Lord. The Fruit of the Earth.
The Ensign for the Nations to flock to, whose Rest is Glorious. The Messiah, or
Anointed One; who was the Messiah in Scripture, is found in him, Luke 24.27, 44.

6. Yea, all things in Heaven, Ephesians. 1.10. Rev. 3.14. Col. 3.8, 9, 10, 16.
Ephesians. 2.10.
or Earth by which God represented Himself, his Grace, or Salvation to Men, are
gathered together, and sum'd up in him, and in the Spirit of them, are to be
met with by men, in, and through him; as to instance. He is the Beginning of
the Creation of God: in, and by him, and his Truth, God Creates Men to be a
People for himself, as well as by him: He Created all things at the First, He
is the True Sabbath, bath or Rest, Isa. 28.12. Matthew. 11.28. Isa. 42.1. Romans
15.12, 13, 14. John 1.14, 16. Coll. 1.19. Prove. 3.15, 16, 17. Col. 2.8, 9, 10.
Rev. 22.1, 2, 14 1 Pet. 3.20. Acts. 4.11, 12. Isa. 28.14, 15, 16, 17. and 42.6.
and 49.6, 7. Col. 2.10, 11. Phil. 3.3. Gall. 5.24. Genesis 17.10, 13. Matthew.
16.24, 25. Luke 14.25, 26. Exodus 12.4, 5. with Joh. 1.29. Isa. 55.4. John 6.40.
and 14.1, 15, 16, 17, 25. Mat. 21.44. John 8.12. and 12.48. and 1.14. Heb.
9.11, 12. John 14.8, 9, 10.
in whom the weary laboring Souls have Rest given them, and may in coming to
him find it. The Garden of God's, and Man's delight, where man may meet with,
and converse with his Maker, and find all variety of Grace, Blessings, and
Satisfaction good for him. The Tree of Life giving Immortality to them that Eat
of Him. The River of living Waters, affording living Influences to them that
come, and Drink of Him, Joh. 4.14. and 7.37, 38. The Ark of safety, where alone
we may be preserved in the midst of the overflowing Deluge of Miseries, that
overtop all the Mountains of this World, and destroy those that stay thereon.
The Governant God has given to the People, in whom we may have him our God,
and become a people to him: in whom also we have the true Circumcision, or
cutting off of the foreskin of the Flesh: i. e. all confidences in the Flesh;
with the corrupt Affections, and Lusts thereof: which we must needs submit to,
if we will be in Covenant with God through Christ. He is the true Passover
slain, and sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.9. The cloud of God's Protection over
us, ( Isa. 4.4, 5, 6.) in our marchings after him, (our Leader and Commander
out of the Spiritual Egypt of the Worlds state and condition) in him God
Protects and guides us, and looks upon the Enemy to disperse and destroy them.
The Pillar of Fire to give us Light, in all our Marchings, and consume the
Rebels. The Tabernacle which God has pitched, Isa. 63.9. John 16, 33. Ephesians.
6.11.14, 15. Heb. 9.14, 15. Romans 3.25.1 John 2.1, 2. Isa. 56.7, 8, 9. Rev. 8.3,
4, 5.1 Pet. 2.5. John 1.4, 5, 9. and 12.46. and 6.32, 33, 43, 51.35. 1 Cor.
1.30, 31. Ephesians. 2.10. Isa. 56.8. with Heb. 10.5, 6, 10. and 2.17. and 5.1, 5,
10. Acts 3.22, 23. Isa. 55.4, 5. Matthew. 11.28, 29, 30. Heb. 12, 2. Rev. 1.11.
and 22.13. Heb. 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and 5, 4, 5, 10, and 4.6, 8, 9. Isa. 33.22.
and in which he dwells, and walks amongst his People. The Ark of his strength
and presence, in, and with which, he walks before us, divides the waters of
affliction, drives out our Enemies, and brings those that are faithful to him,
into the Possession of the Eternal Kingdom. The Mercy-seat or Propitiatory
through faith in his blood. The Altar of Incense, perfuming the services of
those that come to, and worship God by him. The Golden Candlestick, in whom the
true Light is held forth to us; yea, the true Light it self, lightning every
Man that comes into the World: but chiefly, those that believe in him. The
Bread of Life: the Laver of Regeneration: the Sanctification and true Washing,
by whom believed in, we are cleansed from our Sins. The Altar of
Burnt-offerings, and the Sacrifice it self, that makes the Atonement for the
Sins of the People, and obtains Peace and Reconciliation. Yea, the Priest of
God: the Great High Priest, that offers up Gifts and Sacrifices for us:
especially, for the Worshippers by him. The Prophet, and Leader of the People.
The Redeemer out of Bondage, and the Bringer of them into Rest, who faithfully
follow him. The Alpha, and Omega. The Beginning, and the End: the Author, and
Finisher of the Faith. Greater than Moses, or Aaron, or Joshua. Yea, answering
to all of them, being both the true Lawgiver, Act. 4.11.12, and 10.42. 1 Cor.
10.1, 2, 3. John 4.10.14. and 7.37, 38, 39.
Highpriest, Savior, and Judge; the Deliverer from Sin, World, and Satan: the
Preserver, Leader, and Guide in the way to Happiness, and the Possessour of us
to it. The Heavenly Manna or Bread from Heaven, John 6.48. The Water out of the
Rock: or rather, the Rock that being smitten for us, gives forth the Living
Waters of Life, even the knowledge, grace, and spirit of God to us, to refresh
and satisfy us. John 3.14, 15, 16, 17. and 6.40.
The Antitipe to the Brazen Serpent, in looking, to whom we may be healed: of
all our wounds; (even of those also which we have procured by our former
slightings of him, as the Spiritual Manna and food of Life: Psalm. 2.1.6. with
Act. 4.27. and 10.38. John 1.50. and 2.20, 21. Col. 2.9. Luke 4.18, 19. Isa.
61.1, 2, 3. Zech. 4.6, 7, 9. Ephesians. 4.5. and 5.25, 26. 1 Pet. 2.5.
) lifted up by God's Will, that whosoever believes in him might not perish, but
have everlasting life. Yea, He is the Anointed of the Lord, the King. The
Temple, the Restorer of our Breaches. The Returner of our Captivity. The
Builder of the House of God. His hands have laid the Foundation, and his hands
shall finish it; bringing up the Top-stone with shootings, and crying, grace,
grace, to it. Yea, He is the orderer of God's House and Service. The Master of
the Music; the tuner of our Hearts, that they might make sweet Melody in the
Ears of God, Coll. 3.16.
being filled with Grace. In a Word, He is All, and in All in the New Creature.

7. Nay, all the Excellencies of the Creatures, as well as All the Ordinances
of the Law, are but shadows to him. Col. 3.9, 10. Mal. 4.2, 3. Rev. 22.16.
Psalm. 84.11. Rev. 5.5, 6. Genesis 22.8. John 1.29. Psalm. 18.1, 2. Deuteronomy. 32.4. 1
Pet. 2.4, 5, 6. Isa. 28.16. Zech. 3.2. and Verse 8. and 6.12. Isa. 11.1, 10,
11. Jer. 23.5, 6. Cant. 2.2, 3, 4, 5. John 15.1. Psalm. 52.8. and 106.2.
He is the Son of Righteousness. The bright, and the Morning Star. A Sun and
Shield, that will give Grace and Glory, etc. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah.
The meek and Innocent Lamb, even the Lamb of God, which he has found, and
provided for himself, for a Burnt-offering, to take away the Sins of the World.
The Rock, the Fortress, the Stone of Strength graven by the Lord. The one Stone
upon which are seven Eyes graven, for the removing of the iniquity of the
Earth; and laid as a sure Foundation in Sion. The Branch, The Root of Jesse:
and Branch of Righteousness: and Plant of Renown. The Apple Tree amongst the
Trees of the Wood, full of Fruit, and fragrancy, and pleasant of Shadow. The
true Vine. The Olive Tree in the House of God, always green and flourishing,
etc. Yea, who can set forth all his Praises? which according to the Gospel, and
what it asserts as done, and suffered by him, and received as the reward of his
Sufferings to furnish him for our Salvation are to be ascribed to him! Isa.
55.1.2. Rev. 22.17.


Such things the Gospel declares of him as true in themselves, and the benefit
of them open and free to, and for all Men; so as that, whoever will, may come,
and partake of them, in submitting to, and believing on him.

CHAP. III.
Of things further contained in the Gospel-Faith, and thence observable as
employed and signified therein.

SECT. 1.
Of the Hope of the Gospel.

SUch is the Doctrine, or Faith of the Gospel, as has been said in the former
Chapter: and it is true in it self, and praedicable as truth to all Men. The
Everlasting Gospel of God: neither is (...) less true for men's not hearing, or
believing of it: nor the more true, for their heating, and believing it. But
besides, There is something contained in that Doctrine that is called, the hope
of the Gospel, Col. 1.23. As the Covenant and Promises of God, so far as yet
future to any man. Indeed, all that is declared in the Gospel, as done, and
accomplished in Christ, in his Personal Appearing, Sufferings, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension was to the Fathers before Christ, as to Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, David, (with whom he is said to have made his Covenant;) and so
to the Prophets, and Holy Men matter of Hope; because as then not actually
performed: but now as accomplished and declared to us, they are to us matter of
Faith only, and the Foundation of the things to be hoped for, which is that of
God's Covenant or Promises, as yet unaccomplished to any of us; which (as the
Promises) partly concern the time of this Life; partly, and most properly and
fully the Life to come. I shall instance God assisting, in either of them
briefly.

1. For this Life, The Gospel declares as matter of hope.
1. That God will so hear, and help Christ, and through him his Servants;
making him in their faithful Ministration of, and through all means of his
appointing, so a Light to the Gentiles, and God's Salvation to the ends of the
Earth, that through the dispensations of his Spirit, with the means to Men,
they may be put into a capacity of hearing, turning at his reproofs, and
seeking after him according to God's Promise to Christ, Isa. 49.7, 8, 9. And
Christ's Prayer for, and Promise to his Disciples, John 17.9, 18, Psalm. 95.8.
Heb. 3.7.
20, 21, 22, 23. Matthew. 28.19.20. Whence it is said, To day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts: as implying, That during the day of Grace, God
in Christ will not be wanting to speak to men, so as they may hear him, if they
will not stop their Ears and harden their Hearts. But this is a matter of daily
Dispensation from Christ, and as well matter of Faith to, as of the hope and
expectation of his Servants for men; therefore I wave it, and shall speak to
it, under that Head of Gods operations in Men.

2. That whosoever in Christ's preventing them with his Grace and Calling do
hear and turn at his reproofs, Prove. 1.22, 23. Ezekiel. 33.16. Act. 10.43, and
13.37, 38, 39. John 1.12. Ephesians. 2.14, 18, 19, 20. 1 Pet. 2.9.
and seek, and close with him; for them the Gospel Promises, and accordingly it
is matter of hope and expectation, by, and for them, that God will forgive and
pardon all former Iniquities and Trespasses to them, and graciously receive and
own them, and put them amongst his Children; give them the privileges and
favor of being a people nigh to him: of his Household, yea, his Sons, and
Daughters. As the Gospel Preaches, The forgiveness, or not imputation of Sins,
through Christ to men, as a thing verily true, and extended to them before
their Believing, so far as that them notwithstanding he is Administering his
Grace to call and enable them to listen to him, that they might Believe; 2 Cor.
5.19, 20. and 6.1, 2. Luke 24.45, 47.
so it also promises and gives well grounded and assured hope of the
forgiveness of them, in the further sense above mentioned, so as to the
justifying of them, from them, accepting and owning of them, and making them
his Sons, and Heirs, the Subjects of his special grace and favor in their
returning in that grace afforded and believing on him. Yea, and also, that he
will have more choice care of theirs, Acts 16.31. Genesis 17.5, 6, 7.
than of theirs that reject him, till any of them also do reject him.

3. To the Believer, Prove. 1.23, 33 and 2.1, 5, 6. Matthew. 13.11, 12, 13, 15.
yet further the Gospel propounds this as matter of hope and expectation. That
God in his owning him will further teach and lead him, pour out his Spirit to
him, make known his Words, show them the Mysteries of his Kingdom, which are
not for People one or other, till they turn at his Reproofs and be in some
measure Discipled to him. They that reject him, wink with the Eye, and will not
see, stop the Ear least they should hear, and understand, and be converted,
shall not have his Secrets and Mysteries opened to them: for them Christ prays
not the Father to give that Dispensation of Spirit for leading them into all
Truth; filling them with his Consolations, and Satisfactions, and fitting them
to be Lights to others, Joh. 17.9. Nor are they yet capable while unturned to
him, of receiving it of him, Psalm. 25.8, 9, 12, 14, Ezekiel. 43.10, 11. John 14,
15, 16, 17, 21, 23.
Joh. 14.17. But his Secret is promised to be with them that fear him, and that
he will show them his Covenant, guide them in Judgment, teach them his ways,
give them a farther and more exact knowledge of the Form of his House, and the
fashion thereof: the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, even a
more distinct and experimental knowledge: for he will manifest himself to them,
and give them the Spirit of Truth to abide, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. John 4.14.
and dwell with, and in them: and so will thereby dwell in them, and be a
spring of Living Waters by his Spirit, and Spiritual Understanding given them,
1 Cor. 12.7.
springing up in them unto Everlasting life. Filling them with his Virtues,
Matthew. 5.13, 14, 15, 16. 1 Pet. 2.10, 12. Ephesians. 4.7, 14, 15. John 10.2, 3, 4.
Levit. 26.11, 12. 2 Cor. 2.14, 15, 16.
and furnishing them with such useful Gifts as by which they may in some way or
other be profitable to others, both in the World and in the Church; as the Salt
of the Earth, as the Light of the World, and as Members in the Body of Christ,
in their places, and capacities: useful for the glorifying of God, and
provoking men to seek and glorify him too: and for furthering the growth of
them that believe, in their exercise of themselves in which gifts with sobriety
and faithfulness, and walking in his virtues, He also will go forth with them;
walk in, and amongst them, direct, guide, help, and bless them, in all their
outgoings toward God, in seeking him, praying to him, and praising of him,
trusting in, and submitting to him; and in all their walkings by his grace
amongst men: so to bless them, and render them a blessing to, and amongst them.

4. 1 John 1.7, 9. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. and 32.40, 41,
42. John 8.32, 36. 1 Timothy 4.18.
That He will cleanse them from their Corruptions, and Subdue them, in them, so
as they shall not have Dominion over them; nor shall they (unless they wilfully
choose it) Serve, and Obey them. Yea, in following on to seek, and know him, He
will so mould their wills into his will, and put his fear into their hearts as
to take away their will of sining, and enlarge them to run the ways of
righteousness with delight, according to the riches of his glorious grace and
wisdom, so keeping them to the Inheritance of the Heavenly Kingdom.

5. That to that end, Joh. 10.28, 29. Ezekiel. 34.24, 25. and 37.24, 25, 26. Genesis
15.1. Psalm. 84.11. and 48.3, 12, 13, 14. John 16.33. Isa. 43.1, 2.
He will take special care over them as a shepherd over his Flock, lead them
into Unity with all his Holy Ones, and therein also nourish and feed them with
Knowledge and Understanding; be a Shield to them against Satan and his
Temptations; and against the World, its fury, rage, and oppositions, be with
them in all Adversities, their God and Guide, to, and in Death: strengthening
and supporting them under all their Sufferings, and unto all their Services he
calls them to, Administering to them sweet and seasonable Consolations and
Deliverances.

6. Yea, Matthew. 6.33. Psalm. 34.9, 10. John 15.1, 3, 7, 2 Cor. 1.8, 9.
that He will also feed them with Food convenient for them, even with what he
sees good for them in the matters of this Life; and nurture them with
seasonable and faithful Reproofs, and Chastisements, and be wanting in nothing
to them, that may make for their good and happiness. Such things the Gospel
holds forth, as matter to be hoped for, in, and through Christ; in listening
to, and obeying him, in this Life.

2. For the Life to come, it holds forth wholly, as matter of Hope.
1. That Christ will himself in due time come again from Heaven, Coll. 3.4.
in the Glory of God, and of all his Holy Angels, to complete their Happiness.
To which end,

2. Tit. 2.13. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14, 15, 16. Romans 8.23. Phil. 3.21. Act. 3.19, 20. 1 Thessalonians. 4.15, 16.
That he will raise up all such at his Coming, as have dyed in the Faith of
him, and change the then living Believers, fashioning their now vile Body into
the likeness of his Glorious Body; free them from all their Sins, Sorrows,
Fears, Dangers, and Temptations, in a full and perfect Redemption and Salvation.

3. Rev. 11.17. Luke 22.28, 29, 30. 1 Cor. 6.2. Coll. 3.3, 4. Rev, 5.10. and
20.4, 5, 6.
That then he will make to himself his great Power and Reign. The Kingdoms of
this World shall become the Kingdoms of God and Christ: and then also they who
have owned, and believed on him, and followed him in Temptations, and
Sufferings, shall be glorified with him, and Reign in Glory, Judging the World
with Christ: and as Kings and Priests Reign with him upon Earth, a Thousand
Years, and Minister before him with unspeakable Happiness.

4. Isa. 66.14, 15. a Pet. 3.7, 10, 12. Act. 3.20, 21. Romans 8.19, 20, 21.22.
That to that end of his Coming, He shall destroy all the Wicked of the Earth,
take away their Power and Glory from them, and burn up the Earth, with the
Works thereof, and make all things New, A new heaven and a new earth in which
dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.7, 10, 11, 12, 13. Isa. 65.17. In which Christ,
and his Saints, and Servanss, which have been faithful to him, shall Reign
together. As in Rev. 21. and 22. 1 Cor. 13.10, 11, 12.


5. That then they shall enjoy Peace, and Joy without mixture of Sorrow,
Oppression, or Trouble, have a perfect Knowledge of Christ, and God in Christ;
so as not to need to be taught by one another: ever enjoy the presence, and see
the face of Christ, and God in Christ, that Lamb of God that was Slain for
them, Rev. 5.9, 10. Exodus 12. Rev. 21.4, 5, 6, 7. Jer. 31.33, 34. Heb. 8.10,
11, 12. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16, 17. Rev. 7.16, 17. and 22.1, 2, 3, 4.
and Redeemed them by his Blood unto God, from the Kindreds of the Earth, by
the sprinkling it upon them; also, (as in the Redemption of Israel out of
Egypt) that they might serve him, and be Kings and Priests unto God, and
himself. And he shall satisfy them with the fountains of living water, even of
even lasting life: pure, unmixed, and everlasting Consolations, which the
knowledge, favor, and presence of God and Christ with them, shall uncessantly
give them.

6. Rev. 20.5, 6, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Matthew. 25.31, 46. 1 Cor. 15.27.
That after that Reign of a Thousand Years, (whether properly taken, or
Figuratively, for a far greater time) the rest of the Dead shall be Raised, and
all whose Names are not found Written in the Lambs Book of Life, adjudged to a
Second Death: and they that there found, to Eternal Life and Happiness; and
Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, and then God shall be All in
All, fully, and immediately Reigning in the Son, and in the Saints for ever and
ever: in which also Eternal Peace, Joy, Satisfaction, unutterable, and
unalterable Glory shall be upon them, and be their Portion.

Such the Hope of the Gospel, in which are somethings hard to be understood,
Heb. 5.9. and 6.13, 14, 17, 18. Romans 8.17. Gal. 3.29. Tit. 2.13. Heb. 9.28.
and not so clearly to be apprehended, till seen, and enjoyed; and this is good
also to be propounded to all, and every man, as we have opportunity, and they
capacity of Understanding and bearing it, being true and certain for all that
believe in, and obey him; they being the Heirs of the Promises of God, and of
the Covenant made with the Fathers; a wonderful great, glorious, sure and
blessed Hope, worthy to be considered, and looked after by all men: and sure,
and certain to all that do look for him. John 3.16. Isa. 55.4. and 28.16. Romans
5.10. and 8.32, 33, 34, 35. Heb. 9.15.
The Ground Foundation, and sure Pledge, whereof i^ the love and faithfulness
of God, as already testified in Christ, in what he has done for us, to, and in
him: The love and grace of Christ to us. His Death, and Sacrifice, and
Mediation for all men, and Mediation of the New Testament more particularly,
for the Called that Believe or him; that they might have the Content thereof
performed, to, and in them; and the Dispensation and Inhabitation of the holy
Spirit of God and Christ, Ephesians. 1.14, 17, 18. 1 Pet. 1, 3, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 5.5.
to, and in all that obey him; to open the said Hope to them, and fill them
with the assurance and consolations thereof, and keep them by his Power to the
enjoyment of it in their Believing.

SECT. 2.
Of the Obedience of the Gospel.

WHat we have mentioned about the Faith of the Gospel, implies also, Romans 1.5.
something due from us, which we may call the obedience of the Gospel; or as
the Apostle calls it, the Obedience of Faith: which though it be not in the
Object of Faith, (otherwise then to believe such Obedience also to be required
of us, and due from us, as that in which we may meet with the good prepared for
us, and held forth to us in the Gospel, Heb. 5.9.
which represents Christ through his Sufferings perfected to be the Author of
Eternal Salvation, to them that obey him:) yet, forasmuch as the Gospel-Faith
mentions it, 1 Pet. 1.13, 14, 15, 16. Jam. 1.25, 26.
and represents it as one Great End of God's calling Men by his Grace, and as
the way in which we are to look for, and meet with the further Blessings of the
Gospel. We shall take a brief view of some general Heads of it: and so the
Gospel holds forth.

1. Prove. 1.20, 21, 22, 23.
That as God and Christ are by his Spirit calling Men; and in the
manifestations of his Truth and Goodness to them, preventing them with Light
and Power; in which he is reproving their ways, hopes, delights: so they ought
to listen to, and obey him, in falling down before the power of the said Truth,
and in the grace and strength therein afforded, according to the measure
thereof; let go such false and evil ways, hopes, and delights, as are
discovered to be evil to them, and turn to him that calls them; to the Light
that enlightens them, and the Power, and Spirit that works therein; seeking to
know the Truth more, Luke 24.47. Heb. 6.2.
and so to know God, and Christ, as represented to them therein; not preferring
their own thoughts, and ways before him, and his. This is that which is called
Repentance, and Repentance from dead works: in which also it is further
required;

2. Psalm. 100.1, 2. and 62.8. Isa. 55.1, 2, 6, 7. Prove. 2.1, 2, 3. etc. and
3.3, 4, 5.
That by the Light and Power of the Truth afforded them therein, and thereunto;
they yield up unto God to close with, Hope, Trust in, Worship, and Serve him,
according as in the pourings out of his Spirit, further his Words and Mind are
made known to them. So loving, and cleaving to God in their Hearts, and
Affections, and walking with him in their Conversations, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14.
2 Cor. 5.11, 19, 20, 21. and 6, 1, 2. 1 John 4.8, 11, 12. Gal. 5.22, 23. and 6,
7, 8.
as they are thereto directed, and help to perceive they ought: and as the
grace brought to them is saving, strengthening, and working in them, to enable
and frame them. And so also walking toward Men, with such love, pity, and
charity to All; Submission, and other duties toward Superiors, and Relations:
such affection toward Delight, in, and cleaving to those, that they discern the
Light, the Truth, and the Power of God, in, and with such sobriety, temperance,
Psalm. 2.11, 12. Luke 16.1, 10, 11. Matthew. 16.24, 25. 1 Pet. 2.4, 10, 11, 12,
etc. Prove. 4.20, 27.
and abstemiousness from the things of the World, and readiness to part with
them for God and Christ, and to serve God and Men with them; such low thoughts
of themselves in all their Wisdom, and Righteousness, Strength, and all
enjoyments here, as the grace of God, and his Truth appearing to them, does
instruct and strengthen them to; not turning aside therefrom to the Right Hand,
or to the Left; but walking in the Integrity of their Hearts before him.

3. 1 John 1.7, 8, 9. 1 Kings 8.33, 35, etc.
That wherein at any time they fail, and Sin, upon the appearance of it to
them; they acknowledge they said, Failings and Sins: and through the grace of
God, and by Jesus Christ their Advocate and Propitiation for their Sins turn
back again to God, and keep more close to him, and walk more steadfastly with
him.

4. That in all things they acknowledge, Psalm. 62.2, 8, 12. John. 1.7, 12. and
3.15, 16, 18. Psalm. 2.12. and 96.7, 8, 9, 10. and 105.1, 2, 3. and 50.15.
own, look to, and depend upon God, in, and through Christ, according to the
manifestations of God and Christ to them, for his help, light, grace, strength,
and all things needful for them: ascribing to him by Faith, the Glory of his
Name: believing, and holding for true and certain, that he is such a one, so
powerful, wise, holy, good, etc. as he manifests, and declares himself to be;
and so calling upon him in all their wants and needs; acknowledging,
confessing, and glorifying him in all things, by Jesus Christ; even in all his
goodness, 1 Thessalonians. 5.16, 17, 18. Philip. 4.6, 7. Ephesians. 5.18, 19, 20. Romans
6.11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17. 1 Cor. 6.20.
and gracious Dispensations to, and dealings with them, or others, as manifest
to them: yielding up themselves, and all their powers, and members to walk
with, obey, and serve him; as his grace afforded, instructs, and strengthens
them.

5. Matthew. 28.19, 20. and 26.26, 27, 28. 1 Cor. 11.25, 26, 27, 28. Acts 2.41,
42. Romans 15.9, 10. Col. 3.16. Heb. 3.12, 13. and 10.25. Ephesians. 6.17, 18.
Phillip 3.3. John 4.23, 24. Jude 20. Matthew. 16.24. Romans 6.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Gal.
2.19, 20, 21. and 3.25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
That they attend unto, and upon God and Christ in such ways, ordinances, and
appointments of his, as He has made known to them in his Doctrine, to be
enjoyed and appointed of God for them, in the present Administration of his
Grace, and Truth: according to his mind therein is manifested to them, and
perceived by them; As in times past they had the Observations of the New Moons,
Sabbaths, Sollemn meetings, appointed of God by Moses, where they had them
Revealed to them. So now we have the use of Baptism, the Supper, and Assemblies
of Believers in the Name of Christ, as may be warrantably enjoyed. And such an
hearty, spiritual and close obedience to God and Christ in the Spirit, denying
our Selves, and going out of all knowledge of our Selves, after, and confidence
in, and glorying of the Flesh, and being Baptized, or Planted into Christ, to
seek all our Life, Peace, and Righteousness, Wisdom, Strength, Salvation in
him, is required of us: and is to be held forth by us, as required of all Men,
according to their capacities of obeying, in, and by, the Gospel-Doctrine. And
this also is good and true in it self, and to be held forth with the Gospel, to
All men: not to be first required of men, to prepare them for the Gospel, nor
to be their Righteousness toward God. But upon, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9, 10. Romans 10.3.
and with the Preaching of the Gospel, this they are to be instructed to, and
admonished, That they refuse not the Gospel, taught to, and to be Believed by
them; nor refuse to obey it, in what it requires, and calls for, from them: as
the way in which sowing to the Spirit, they shall be more filled with the
Spirit, and so be more led into Christ; Gal. 6.7. Col. 2.9, 10. and 3.9, 10.
in whom God has given us a full, perfect, and abiding Righteousness; and all
things pertaining to Life, and Godliness. To further which, also the Gospel
further presents.

SECT. 3.
Gospel Terrors.

GOspel Terrors, Arguments of Fear, 2 Cor. 5.11.
to awaken, and quicken men to receive, and obey the Truth brought to them, in
what it says to, and requires of them. As to give some brief hints, as
resulting from, and presented in the Gospel-Faith, or Doctrine.

1. 1 Timothy 1.13, 14, 15. Tit. 2.3, 4.
It presents sin very loathsome and displeasing to God; especially willing and
careless sinnings against the light, truth and grace brought to men by him. The
presentation of what Christ has done to take away sin, Heb. 2.2, 3, 4. and
10.26, 29. and 7.19. and 9.19. and 9.22. and 10.1, -- 6, 7.
presents sin never a whit the less, but the more loathsome to God; in as much
as it was not, nor may be pardoned, but through the sufferings, death and
sacrifice of Christ for men. And if sin against God, as a Creator, was so
loathsome, how much more is sinning against him willingly, Heb. 10.29. and
12.21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Heb. 1. and 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
now he has done so much more for us! and put so much greater engagements upon
us to be his, and to obey and serve him? The more he has done for us, the more
reason we have to listen to him; and the more heinous our rebellions and sins
against him: and the more he loves his Son who suffered for us, the more is he
provoked by our disobedience to, and rebellions against his Son in his calls
and counsels to us for our salvation.

2. Matthew. 28.18, 19. Romans 14.9, 10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 5.10. Phil. 2.10, 11. Jam.
4.5, 12, 13.
It presents God and Christ armed with infinite power and authority to punish
the transgressors and rebels against him, all power in Heaven and upon Earth
being his, and all creatures at his beck, to be employed or made use of by him
at his pleasure; so as no ability in us by strength or wisdom to shift from
him, or from any the least part of the punishment or judgment that he will
inflict upon us, if we rebel against him, 1 Cor. 10.22. Ezekiel. 22.14.

3. Eccles. 9.10. 2 Cor. 6.1, 2. Heb. 3.15. Rev. 1.18, 19. and 3.7.
It presents the time of this life, the only time for hearing his voice and
obeying him, and seeking favor and acquaintance with him; yea it is his
pleasure whither to wait upon us so long; the Keys of Heaven and Hell are in
his hands, Luke 13.7, 8, 9, 25, 26, 27. Matthew. 10.38. Luke 10.5, 6.
and as he can open as he pleases, and keep open ^he door of life so long as he
pleases, so he can shut it when he will too; yea our ^ives also are in his
hand, and not in our own. He can take away our breath and spirit when he
pleases, and cast the Transgressors into Hell, and there is no withstanding of
him therein. None has power over the spirit to retain the spirit, neither is
there any power in the day of death, Eccles. 8.8.

4. That he can and may, 1 Cor. 10.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. with 9.26, 27. and 11.30.
Rev. 2.4, 5, 21, 22. Deuteronomy. 28.2 These. 2.9, 10. 11, 12. Act. 13.40, 41.
and by men's refusing his grace and truth, and therein his Son, and Spirit, and
Self, is provoked to inflict heavy judgments upon them here in their souls, or
bodies, or both; either denying them, or depriving them of the comfortable
enjoyments of such outward mercies and liberties, as otherwise he is ready to
give them, or else imbitter his gifts to them filling them with a curse, so as
to fill them with vexation and anguish of Spirit; or else to blast them in all,
and curse their spirits, as to give them up to delusions, lusts and ways of
their own, to run themselves to destruction.

5. Act. 10.42. and 17.30, 31. Romans 2.16. and 14.11, 12.2 Cor. 5.10, 11. Rev.
20.12, 13, 14.2 These. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. Jude 14, 15.
That (however) he has absolutely decreed and appointed a day in which he will
judge the world in righteousness by Christ Jesus; and then will raise all up
out of their graves: no darkness or shadow of death shall be able to hide or
keep them from his presence: but before him in their raised and immortalised
bodies they shall appear, Matthew. 13.40, 41, 42, 49, 50. and. 16.26, 27. and
25.41, 46. and 3.12.
when he shall appear in flaming fire, to render vengeance; even armed with the
power and wrath of God, in unspeakable unconceivable terror, with an
innumerable company of mighty Angels attending on him, ready to execute his
commands against them: and then shall he utterly destroy the Rebels; sentence
them to be everlastingly companions with the Devil and his Angels that seduced
them, Rev. 20.10, 12, 13, 14. Isa. 30.33. Mark. 9.44, 45, 46, 47, 48.
and whom they chose to adhere and cleave to, rather than to folfollow the Lamb
in his Light and Grace, wherewith he prevented and followed them: And then he
shall execute the Doom also upon them, Rev. 14.9, 10, 11, 12. Isa. 66.24.
thrusting them down with the Devil and his Angels, into an ever-burning Lake
of Fire and Brimstone, into the Rivers of the wrath of God, to be perpetually
kindled upon them, by the power of that Spirit that came to them and convinced
them; and being obeyed, would have saved them: which Spirit being infinite, and
eternally wise and powerful, Oh! how infinite, eternal, and unbearably great,
must needs be the wrath executed upon them, by him, when their bodies being
immortal and insepa^able from their souls again, they shall be capable of
enduring it endlesly: and being separated from God and all his
Creature Comforts too, they shall have pure wrath without mixture, no dram of
good, or ease, or comfort afforded with it. The fire of his wrath shall torment
them perpetually, and the Conscience of their own willing sinnings against him,
and despising their Savior and his salvation, when freely offered them, and
made attainable to them, shall perpetually grieve and confound them: and as a
Worm that dies not, for ever gnaw them. All the good they had from God, Luke
16.23, 24, 25.
and might have had for ever, had they hearkened to him, being evermore before
them on the one side; and the remembrance of it infinitely dolorous to them;
and on the other side the several wickednesses committed, contrived, thought
and acted by them in word and deed, Jonas 2.8.
with the aggravations of them; as for what foolish, trivial, sorry and vile
things; and against what checks, warnings, faithful means of preventing them,
they have made the forfeiture, and sustain the loss of that eternal glory, that
others have, and they might have had in their obeying Christ in the light and
truth offered them, shall add unconceivably to their everlasting, woe, and
horror, and lamentation: Rev. 14.8, 10, 11, 12.
and yet no ease after inconceivable times or duration, nor no way or
possibility of Redemption: such the terror of the Lord in that day, even such
as his goodness abused by men in this day, and the good, the grace, the glory
trampled under foot by them; the worth of the person and sufferings of Christ
sinned against, and the greatness of the glory and majesty of God contemned and
(...) at naught, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. Tit. 1.2. and 2.13. Matthew. 11.29, 30. 1 John
5.3. 2 Cor. 5.11.
and that for vile things in^nitely below them, deserves to be reve^ged with.
The faith exceeding true and precious. The hope firm and infinitely glorious.
The obedience required exceeding reasonable and not grievous, because he is
ready at hand to effect it in us; and therefore also the Terror and Torment
upon the refusers exceedingly and incomprehensibly Dolorous.

SECT. 4.
A Digression about the Endlesness of the punishments mentioned in the
Gospel-Terrors.

AGainst this Doctrine of the Terrors of the Gospel, and endlesness of the
torments or punishment to which Christ will at the Great Day adjudge his
enemies. Some may object, that sure it cannot be consistent with his love,
mercy and goodness, to adjudge his Creatures, for any cause whatsoever, to such
endless misery. Probably Mr. Hobbs.
Yea there is an Anonymous Author, that has put out a Discourse on purpose to
prove the the Doctrine of Hell torments false and fabulous. Therefore I shall
add some Considerations here briefly for confirmation of the truth already said
thereabout. Yet not by way of particular Answer to that Book (which I have also
otherwise answered to some Friends) for indeed it is so monstrous in its
assertion, and so self-contradictory, that I hope none that give credit to God,
and are able, in any measure, to judge of things, will be snared by it: for it
says, Sin is only punished in this life, no greater punishment of it than
death; quite contrary to the words of Christ, that tell us John 5.29. That some
shall be raised out of their Graves at the last day to condemnation, and Dan.
12.2. That some shall rise to shame and everlasting contempt; yea that after
the Resurrection some shall be adjudged to a second death, a lake that burns
with fire and brimstone, Rev. 20.13, 14, 15. True, the said Author also
confesses a second death, but he makes it but the same with the first, save
only as it is judicially executed: for he asserts that Adam, and all men should
have died, had they not sinned; but now the death that should have been
otherwise natural, is now judicially executed; and so a man that is hanged for
murder or the like, he makes to dye there in the second death. But how cross
this is to the Scripture, who is so blind as not to see? Seeing the Scriptures
plainly make the second death, to be a death adjudged to some men after their
Resurrection from the first, as in Rev. 20. before quoted: yea the same
nameless Author would persuade men, that God works in them their sins, wills
their sins, and falls before they will them: that Gods will is the womb in
which all the actings of men at first conceived; that he was never displeased
or unsatisfied with the Being o^sin, and diverse the like monstrous assertions,
that I suppose none but Atheis^ or Ranters can easily digest: and which indeed
(could they be proved true) would render it unreasonable to conceive, that God
can or will inflict any punishment upon men for sin at all, either in this life
or after it, much less endless. Though indeed it might as reasonably be thought
that God will punish his creature with endless torments, Psalm. 5.4, 5. Habbak.
1.12.
though their sins deserve them not; as that he can or will be the Author,
Willer and Worker of their sin; seeing sin is more directly contrary to his
purity and holiness, then the inflicting of Pain or Torments upon his Creature,
is or can be. But not to trouble our selves with the several reasonings of the
said Author in the said Book (which also broadly enough contradicts it self,
while sometime it represents God as a punisher of sin in this life only,
sometimes tell us the wicked shall be burnt up with the earth, and that shall
be their punishment; and sometimes that God was never unsatisfied with the
being of Sin, and so in reason should not punish men for it any where at all)
let us see what may be briefly noted for confirmation of what we have before
delivered about the said Doctrine.

And first let that be noted, Matthew. 11.27. 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.
That God is not to be known of and by us, and by consequence nor his will
concerning us, or purposes for rewarding or punishing us, but by his own
discoveries of himself to us. For as no man knows the things of a man, but the
spirit of man that is in him: even so the things of God (his nature, love,
goodness, and the things consistent therewith, his rewards and punishments that
he will adjudge men to) knows no man but the Spirit of God, and they to whom by
his Spirit they are revealed: whence it follows, that it is not safe for us,
waving his revelations of them to us by his Spirit, to conjecture, and rest in
our conjectures concerning them; and measure his love, hatred, rewards or
punishments by our narrow, shallow, finite and corrupt apprehensions about
them; Jer. 10.14.
especially we being all since our fall by our own knowledge brutish, and our
understandings not fit to be leaned upon and trusted to. Now God having by his
Spirit revealed himself and mind, as to these things most fully and plainly in
the Scriptures, it behooves us there to seek and receive our knowledge of, and
accordingly to believe and judge concerning them. The foresaid Author to take
off men from this, would persuade his Reader that the Scriptures are so
corrupted and uncertain, we having not the very Original Copies, written at
first by their holy Penmen, and because some Copies in some things, by the
ca^lesness and oversight of some Transcr^bers, have some misreading in them,
that there is no credit in this point to be given them. But in that, as in all
things else almost, he shows, his unreasonableness and Atheism: for by the same
argument we should not believe the Scriptures in any thing they say; as that
there was such a person as Jesus Christ; that he dyed, rose ascended, shall
come again, etc. seeing all Copies may as rationally be conceived to be
corrupted in all those matters too as in this in hand. Nay we should not
believe that in any Printed Books (...) read their Authors minds, for as much
as they be not their original Hand-writings. Matthew, 10.29, 30. and 5.17, 18.
But who that believes Gods providence, and his care over the good, and
salvation of men, or that considers how many Copies there are of the Scriptures
amongst the Churches of Christ in all parts of the world, and how dearly both
Jews and Christians, many of them in all ages have loved and carefully kept
their Scriptures, so that even those that disobey them, John 5.39.
have sought life in their respect to, and reverence of the Books of them (...)
who, I say, that considers these things, can believe either that God would
permit such an universal corruption of all Copies; or that it could possibly,
or at least probably, be effected, that so many persons in all parts of the
world should conspire together to alter the Copies of the Scriptures?
especially seeing the things about this point, as about many others, are
unanimously, by all Copies that I have either ever read or heard of delivered
to us. Luke 10.25, 26. John 5.39. Matthew. 22.29. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. 2 Pet.
3.2, 3. Heb. 3.3, 4.
To wave that conceit therefore as openly Atheistical and Impious, let it be
held fast by us, that it is out safest way to believe and hold for true in this,
and in all points of faith, what the words and sayings of God delivered in the
Scriptures, and formerly confirmed by many Miracles, Signs and Wonders wrought
by him to be his, propounds unto us; which being premised, let us nextly see,

1. What God in the Scriptures plainly asserts and implies touching this point,
and,

2. By and upon what grounds and reasons there also delivered. And so we find,

1. That the Scriptures mention in He^ew, a Sheol, in Greek, Hades, which
^metimes we translate Hell, though some^mes the Grave; because in its largest
use comprehends the whole disappearing ^ace of the dead, good and bad, and the
^aces of their receptacles, as Bishop Usher ^d others also have well noted; but
^ough the Scripture uses those words of^ of the Grave or Common State of (...)
Dead, yet sometimes they attribute it sorrows, pains and torments, and those
too most exquisite and bitter abo^^ all others, Job 3.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, etc.
which cannot agree to (...) Grave and the State of the Body there (which then
and there is at rest, bei^ void of sense) and therefore must need betoken some
worse state and place (...) the wicked deceased, as to their foul. That the
Scriptures do speak of sorrow and torments in Sheol, Hades, or Hell (...) clear
in those passages, Psalm 18.5. and 116.3. where David, either in his ow^
person, or with respect to Christ, does (...) express the greatness, bitterness
and d^stressingness of his sorrows, even urgin^ him in some measure to a kind
of despair as in Psalm 116.10, 11. call them the pangs and sorrows of Sheol or
Hell: an^ our Savior implies the same more expressly and significantly of Hades
or Hell in Luke 16.22, 23. where he says the wicked rich man after his death
was i^ Hell in torments, where he (though some what parabolically) informs us,
that me^ that live wickedly here in prosperity, shall after death go to
torments; of which h^ implies that Moses and the Prophets have admonished us in
their writings, that w^ might take heed of them: and surely such an Hell was
signified and meant b^ David, Psalm ^.17.
when he says, That the wicke^ shall be turned into Hell, end all the na^ons
that forget God. For if there he should mean but the Grave, that were to thre^
ten them with nothing worse than is als^ the portion of the righteous. The like
meant when David blesses God for delivering him from the lower Hell, Psalm
86.13. Yet it is to be minded, that the word Hell, as signified by those words
Sheol and Hades, is not used in the New Testament to signify the state of the
wicked, and place of their punishment after the Resurrection, but of that which
is between their Death and Resurrection. 1 Cor. 15.55. Act. 2.27, 31. Rev.
20.14. and 1.18.

2. The Scriptures do evidently speak of a punishment of the wicked, both in
bodies and souls after the resurrection, and sets it forth in diverse terms,
signifying the severity and endlesness thereof. As,

1. It is called Gehenna, and Gehenna ignis, translated also Hell, and
Hellfire, or a Hell of Fire. The word Gehenna is given it by way of allusion
to the Valley of the Son of Hinnom, a place near to the earthly Jerusalem, where
they used to cast out their unburied Carkases, Rubbish and Rags, and burn them
in a fire continually burning. But that it cannot signify in our Saviors use
of it, that very place and fire, or any such external punishment in this life
(as the abovementioned Author would insinuate) but a perpetual and everlasting
punishment of the damned is evident.

1. By our Saviors implying that God only can cast men into it, and that after
men have killed the body: whereas if it were that very punishment or such like
men might as well cast the body into it, Matthew. 10.28. Luke 12.5. Matthew. 18.8,
9. Mark 9.44, 45.
or the whole man, while alive, as kill the body.

2. And by his saying God is able to cast the soul also after the body is
killed, into it, as well as the body. As also,

3. By warning his Disciples and Hearers in general, to pluck out the right eye
where it offends, etc. rather than to be cast into that fire: but to be cast
into that Valley of Hinnom literally, or into any such like external
punishment in this life, we are not in any great danger of by retaining our
lusts and corruptions, Psa. 73.3, 4, 5, 6 Job 21.8, 9, 12, 13.
seeing we be very far remote from that place and many that live in their
lusts, live and dye in prosperity. No, nor yet does it signify any internal
punishment here both because it is a punishment after the body is killed, and
because it is perpetual and everlasting, as appears by other expressions joined
with it, by which also it is called, as

2. It Is called the fire that shall never be quenched, so Mark 9.43. to 49.

3. A Lake burning with fire and brimstone, which is the second Death. Re^.
20.15.

4. Everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25.41. those
expressions of the Worm not dying, an^ Fire that is not quenched, are borrowed
from Isa. 66.24. which speaks of the punishment of the wicked in the time (...)
the new Heavens and new Earth, ver. 22. which is the time after the
Resurrection and the Judgment, Rev. 20. and 21. and it is to be minded, that
not only that fire is said to be quenchable, which may be extinguished while
the combustable matter lasts, but also that which goes out of it self for
want of matter to feed it, it being all consumed, for so the word (...) that
signifies to be quenched, and of the which the word (...) that is translated
unquenchable is derived, is used of the lamps of the foolish Virgins which went
out for want of Oil to feed them, Matthew. 25.8. And therefore if the fire of
Gods wrath, in which the wicked shall be burned, shall end and go out as
wanting matter to work upon they being thereby annihilated, and their being
totally destroyed (as the said Author evades those sayings) then could it not
be called unquenchable. And if the wicked should be annihilated in that
Judgment, must not their Worm needs dye, having no subject to subsist in?
Those expressions therefore joined with Gehenna (as the others also which we
have mentioned, both signify the being of such severe torments and punishments
after the Resurrections, as the worst of punishments here imaginable are but
shadows of, and also their perpetuity and endless duration, which is also
expressed in other phrases. As,

5. Everlasting punishment, Matthew. 2.46. and everlasting destruction, 2 The^
1.7, 8. That in Matthew. 25.41. is with a^ Emphesis, (...) the everlasting fire.
The word (...) translated everlasting, is indeed used in the Old Testament to
signify of a long continuance and sometime of an age; but that is not its
usual, if ever its signification in the writings of the Evangelists and
Apostles but everlasting or never ending; Matthew. 25, 46.
it is the same word that is used to signify.

1. The lastingness of the life, glory and happiness of the righteous; and
everlasting punishment is opposed to everlasting life, as signifying a like
duration of the one as of the other, even as the fire of the Valley of Hinnom
probably burn^ perpetually so long as the old Jerusalem was standing, so those
torments shall be of equal duration with the new Jerusalem, the joy and glory
of the Righteous, even for ever.

2. The duration of the honor and power ascribed to God himself, that (...)
too, everlasting, 1 Timothy 6.16. Yea.

3. The everlastingness of the being o^ God and Christ, Romans 16.2^. Isa. 9.6.
than which what can be more significant of never ending? And yet not only that
word (...) everlasting, is used to this purpose, but,

4. It Is said the smoke of their torment ascends up (...) to ages o^ ages, even
for ever and over, Rev. 14 9, 10. an Expression used to, in the Glory and
Honor ascribed to God and Christ, and to set forth the Eternity of God, and of
his Living, Rev. 1.6, and 4.9. and 5.13, 14. So that the Scriptures are very
Pregnant in laying down this Assertion; and therefore it is to be believed, and
dreaded, and diligence is to be given in looking and yielding up to Christ to
be accounted worthy to be delivered therefrom.

2. As for the Reasons and Grounds of God's so Punishing, they are by the
Scriptures signified to be such as these,

1. The Greatness and Majesty of God sinned against, and despised. Deuteronomy. 10.17.
Matthew. 10.28. Luke 12.5. Isa. 27.31.
Men Punish Traitors against their Life and Majesty, with Bodily Death; but God
both Body, and Soul: in a Death as much beyond that of the Body, as He is
greater than Man that is sinned against, and despised. Such great Punishment is
but answerable to his Greatness, as his other Works be.

2. The Greatness, Unspeakableness, Deuteronomy. 32.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 21, 22. Isa. 1.2,
3, 4, 5, 24. Genesis 1.26, 27. Psalm. 8.3, 4, 3. and 49.12.
and Infiniteness of the Love, and Goodness of God, in, and by Christ toward
Men that Rebel against him, it notwithstanding, He not only inconceivably
honored us, in raising us up at the first out of the Dust of the Earth, and
making us in his own Image, Lords of his Works, and capable of knowing, and
having Fellowship with himself: but also when we were utterly lost, was pleased
so to set his heart upon us, Joh. 3.16, 17. Gal. 4.4, 5. and 3.13. 2 Cor. 5.21.
Rom 4.25. 1 Pet. 1.21, 24. Philip. 2.6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Timothy 2.6. Isa. 45.22. Psalm.
81.9, 10, and 50.1, 2. Prove. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. Joh. 16.7, 8, 9.10, 12, 13, 14,
15. Genesis 6.3. Romans 2.4, 5. Psalm. 68.18, 19, 20. Job. 33.16, 29, Psalm 68.21.
Romans 2.5. Heb. 6.6, 7. and 10.26, 29. Jonas 2.8.
as not to spare his ow^ Son, but give him up to the Death; the Death of the
Cross, to Redeem us again and empowered him to Save us: and bring us to endless,
and infinitely Glorious Happiness. His Son that was in his Form infinitely
Glorious with God, his Father was pleased also in Love to abase himself, and
lay aside all that Glory and Happiness, expose himself to, and bear upon
himself for us all that shame, and reproach, and sorrow, to Death and Curse
that was due to us, and needful for his Ransoming and Saving us, without
violation to God's Justice, and impeachment of his Holiness; and now is
infinitely ready to save Men in their listening to, and obeying him, to which
he is not wanting to call and empower them. The Holy Spirit comes forth in the
Name of God, and Christ, to reprove men for their Sins; set before them God and
Christ, and in, with, and from them, far greater and better things than they
are pursuing after and laboring for, and therewith strives and wrestles with
them for their Repentance, and turning to God to seek him and live to him. Yea,
God, Father, Son, and Spirit, are exerciseing wonderful forbearance, patience,
and long-suffering toward Sinners here, and lading them with variety of
benefits to lead them to Repentance; and corrects them in Mercy to break them
off from their purposes, and bring them to accept of Eternal Life, and
Happiness: and all this love and goodness Men do obstinately and impenitently
Sin, and Rebel against; hateing, and opposing themselves against God, his Son,
and Spirit, Government, Grace, Truth, etc. hardening themselves in their Sins,
refusing their own Mercies for lying Vanities, etc. and oh! What short of
Eternal, and Infinite Punishment can answer the Deserts of such Ingratitude and
Wickedness, against so great love and goodness? If they that sinned against the
despised Moses's Law, Dyed without Mercy: how much sorer Punishment does the
rejecting and despising such a love, and lover; and neglecting such, or so
great a Salvation expose us to? Psalm. 90.11.
According to his fear (both his Greatness, and Dreadfulness; and his Goodness,
and Mercy leading and ingageing us now to fear him) so will be his Terror and
his Wrath in that day.

3. That the hainousness of Men's sins against a God so Great, so Good, Isa.
1.3, 4, 5. etc. Heb. 1.12. Psalm. 5.4, 5. Deutr. 32.5, 6.15.16. Jon. 2.8. Jer.
2.13. Isa. 55.2, 3. Heb. 12.15, 16, 17. and 10.26, Prove. 1.24, 25, and 29.1.
Romans 2.5. Psalm. 58.2, 3, 4. Act. 28.27. Matthew. 13.14, 15.
so Gracious, together with his infinite Purity and perfect hatred of the least
Iniquity; they are foolish, and ungrateful in neglecting and slighting him;
despising his love, favor, and friendship, and preferring base, unworthy
Lusts, and Objects of Lust before him, a very morsel of Meat before his love
and favor who has done so much for us, and tenders such infinite love and
favor further to us; and therein such unspeakable and infinite happiness. They
are willful in Sinning, when no necessity in so doing. Yea, hold fast Sin, with
stubbornness, obstinacy, and impenitency against all light and warning though
often told, and convinced of the emptiness, vanity, and unworthiness of them;
and though such sweet charming allurements of Grace be afforded them, as (would
they but listen to them) would draw them off from their Sins, and make them
willing to part with them, bringing such power with them, as would Conver^ and
heal them: and these wilfully stopped, kept out, and shunned, lest by the power of
God in them they should be Converted, and be healed by him: and this persisted
in, Jer. 6.15, 16, 17, 28, 29, 30. and 8.5, 6, 7. Act. 7.51. and 13.40, 41.
with resolution to hold their Idols and Vain ways, and not to listen to any
counsel that should tend to win them off from them, rising up in all their
strength as it were, to withstand their own Salvation, when so forcibly tendered
to, and urged upon them, that they had much to do, to beat it off: even the
power of Gods words, reproofs, and Counsels, and the stretchings out of his
Hand therein, for their Salvation. Dent. 32.21, 22. Matthew. 3.12. Heb. 10.29, 30.
This, this is that, that is infinitely offensive to such an infinitely holy,
pure, and perfect Majesty, whose Eyes cannot look upon Iniquity: and kindles
such a fire of wrath in his Breast against the Sinners as shall burn for ever
upon them, and shall not be quenched. It Is Men's trampling under foot the Son of
God, and therein all God's love, and counting the Blood of the Covenant
wherewith they are Sanctified, and have all their liberty to God, an unholy
common thing; and therein slighting all Christ's Love and Sufferings for them,
and doing despite to the Spirit of Grace, that spoke graciously to them, and
let Gods infinite favor before them: it is this lays them open to the Vengeance
of the Almighty; and its a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living
God, without the Mediator to interpose, being rejected by them.

Indeed, those Men that believe not, but deny, That Christ died for any but his
Elect, and those that shall be saved: and, That he gives any sufficient grace
for their Conversion to him. And so put the stress of their Sining and
Suffering, upon Adam's Sin, and that also necessitated by God's Decree,
rendering them inthral'd to Sin; so as that, with that help afforded of God,
without any intention of their Salvation, they cannot but Sin, and Rebel; and
yet Assert an Eternal and Infinite Torment to be their Portion in their Persons
(though in their persons never so favored of God, or endued with any such
Grace, as that they were really engaged to live to him, or had any power or
capacity so to do) those men I say, render God exceeding harsh, and such as no
Christian heart may endure to think him: Clothing him rather with the Titles,
and Colors of Satan the Ab^ddon, and Manslayer, (things not fit to be
mentioned,) then with those Titles of Love, and Loveliness, that belong to him.
The unreasonableness of their Doctrine, and its contrariety to the Scriptures,
overthrows the Equity and Justness of such Torments, or Gospel-Terrours; and
its likely puts men upon seeking Evasions, to avoid the Belief of such a
Doctrine as renders God so unlovely to them. But upon the Considerations we
have mentioned, there appears so much Equity, as may silence, and vanquish
Reason it self, into subjection; and both provoke to Gospel-Obedience, and
persuade to believe and judge equitable, and so make Men endeavor to avoid,
and flee from the Gospel-Terrours forementioned. And such things also are held
forth in the Gospel, as true in themselves; and fit, and meet to be propounded
to all, and to be believed by them.

CHAP. IV.
Of some Distinctions signified and contained in the Doctrine of the Gospel; as
before declared.

THere are also diverse Distinctions with reference to Things and Persons
signified, and contained in the Gospel-Doctrin which we may briefly touch upon,
before we pass it, as to say. About Two Adams, or Men mentioned in the
Scripture, as opposed one to the other. Two kinds of Covenants, Righteousness,
Sins, Judgments, Worlds, Lives, and Deaths, A Twofold appearance of the Person
of Christ, with the distinct Works of them. A Twofold Personal Coming, and
Appearing in the World, besides his Spiritual and Providential Comings; all
spoken to, in the Doctrine of the Gospel: of which I shall hint something
briefly, and seve^ally, in order; as follows.

SECT. 1.
Of the Two Adams, the First, and La^ The First and Second Man.

FIrst, 1 Cor. 15.45, 47.
we have therein partly, in what it supposes, and takes for granted; and
partly, in what it more directly declares, the mention and consideration of
Two Adams; The First Adam, and the Last Adam. Genesis 1.26, 27.
The First Man, and the Second Man; set over against, and opposed the one, to
the other; because, none so answering one the other for Publikene^ of
Concernment to all Men as they. The First Adam, was the First Man; the first
and Natural Root of all Men, in whom God Made us, and Honored us: as (...)
said before. Eccles. 7.29. Psalm 49.12. Romans 3.23. and 5.12, 18.
The First Man, both in order of Being, as a Man; and in Dignity, and Glory, as
to his Appearance, State and Condition in the World; that He was Made and
Manifested in. He had (...) All, and our Privileges in his Hand, and keeping;
but he Sinned and lost himself and us all; with all the Honor, and Privileges
given us in him. Jer. 31.22. Genesis 3.15. Gal. 4.4, 5. Heb. 2.14. Romans 5.18. Heb.
3.1, 2.
Therefore God was pleased, to Make, and bring forth another, a Second Adam, to
rec^ver us; who is also the Last Adam, eve^ Jesus Christ: Called Adam, both
because a Man, that pertook with us in Flesh an^ Blood, and was of the First
Adam, as to his Flesh; and because a Public Man in whom were, and are the
Concernments of all Men put again. And He is Faithful, and has not, nor will
fail or loose Himself, or any Man. None shall Perish by any defect, or default
found in him. 1 John 5.11, 12. Col. 1.29. and 2.9, 10. Matthew. 22.4. 2 Cor.
5.14. Romans 14.9. Ephesians. 4.8, 9. Psalm. 68.18. Mar. 16.15, 16. Isa. 45.22.
In him, Man, even all Men, not after a Natural, but in a Spiritual way, and
manner, are Made as it were, and Provided for again, as fully, as in the First
Adam; and more surely as to him: inasmuch as having Dyed for All, He has
Redeemed All into his own dispose, and recovered into himself (in the Man for
men) what Adam forfeited or lost; or rather, greater, and better things so as
for All. Free for All, and to be had by any in coming in to him, in his
preventings, and drawings, or begettings of them. And he is called the Last
Adam, because never was there any other since the First Adam, besides him; nor
shall be after him, of such public capacity and concernment to Men: as also,
because He was Abased, Phil. 2.7, 8.
and made lower than that First Adam in his Innocent Condition: that I say, not
then All Men in their present State. Genesis 1.26, 27. and 2.7.
For though the First Man was Originally of a far Inferior and Viler Matter,
than the Being of the Second Adam was Originally: yet the First Man was Made,
and set in the World, in a far more honorable and glorious Form than the
Second. The First Man was something before he was a Man, but what was He? Dust
of the Earth. Whence he is Called, the (...) dusty or earthly man; but he was
made by Exaltation and Advancement into a better Form, even in the Image, and
likeness of God. God therein showing forth his great Power, Bounty, and
Goodness to him, and to us in him, in making so base a matter, of it self
incapable of knowing, Prove. 8.29, 30.
magnifying God, to be so glorious and honorable, capable of knowing,
praising, and having fellowship with his Maker; and to be an Habitable part of
Earth, for his word and wisdom to dwell and delight in. The Last Adam too, Joh.
1.1, 2. Phil. 2.6, 7. 1 Cor. 15.47. Coll. 1.15, 16, 17. Heb. 1.2, 3. and 2.7,
8, 9. Romans 8.3. Heb. 4.16.
was before he was made Man, but far better than Man. God with God, in the Form
of God. The Lord in Heaven by whom the Father made man and all things, the
brightness of God's glory, and the express Character of his Person, and He was
made a Man, by way of Diminution made lower than the Angels: yea, in a Form,
far below that of the First, Adam, in his Innocent Condition; for He was made
in the Image of Man, of fallen Man, in the likeness of sinful Flesh; in all
points Tempted like us, except Sin: that so, he that was Originally, and in
himself, as incapable of Suffering, and Dying, at the Dust was in it self, of
knowing, and praising God, might in the Form of Man Suffer, and Dye for us.
Through which also, He the Last, and lowest Adam is now again Exalted to the
Glory He had in his own proper Being before with God, Joh. 17.4. Psalm. 68, 18.
Ephesians. 4.8, 9. Phil. 2.10, 11. 1 Cor. 15.45.
even the Man, and is become far more Excellent, Honorable, and Glorious than
the First Adam ever was: Genesis 2.7. Joh. 5.21, 25, 28, 29.
and the Nature of Man is more Exalted and richly accommodated in him, then
ever in the First Adam: (...) we have above showed. For the First Adam was but
a Living Soul that had Life in himself, but could not quicken the Dead: But
this last Adam is Made now at God's Right Hand a quickening Spirit.

He is called also The Second Man: Genesis 3.15.
both because He was the Second and Last, so immediately Made of God, and in
such a public concernment for man: as also, as I conceive, because he was
provided, promised, stepped in, and became (as to his ^gagement and undertaking)
the Man for us, before any Second to Adam, John 8.58. Psalm. 75.2.3.
any Son or Child was born to him. And so even in that respect, He was as to
Revelation and usefulness to the World, before ^ain, or any Man was Born of the
First Adam: as a new Basis or Foundation to ^he World, that was meritoriously
Destroyed by the Sin of Adam. The Earth was Dissolved, and the Inhabitants
thereof, but he stepping in, bore up the Pillars thereof. So as in him ever
since, Col. 1.17. Heb. 1.3.
as the Son of Man, or Second Man, all things consist, and stand together. For
he was promised in Paradise to be the Seed of the Woman, and so to bruise the
Head of the Serpent, before any doom passed upon either Man or Woman; much more
before the Execution of the Sentences after ^assed. So as all the Providence,
Mer^es, Judgments of God toward, and upon Men are ordered to us, by, and
through him, and with respect to him. Whence Adam, before he was put out of
Paradise called his Wife Eve, Genesis 3.20.
the Mother of all Living; when as she otherwise, might deservedly have been
Named, The Mither of all Dying. Yea, and God, not Ironically, as most
understand that, but seriously, and according to Truth, (as Mr. Moor Sen' has
well observed; Verse. 22.
and was the first that I have ever heard of in that observation) said: Man was
now become like one of us, as one of the persons in the Trinity, as considered
in Christ who had stepped in, and vertually was become Man: and this to, before
Man was turned out of God's Presence, Isa. 28.16. Hab. 2.3, 4. Heb. 10.37. Genesis
3.15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
that so (...), and men generally might have him (Christ) in the Faith and
Knowledge o^ him as a Foundation under his Feet, to bear him up; and as a Staff
in his han^ for his support, that he might not sink under any of his after
Miseries, Temptations, Trials, or Deaths, that were (through him now) ordered
to him, and to be grappled with, and undergone by him. Yea, thence the goodness
of God is to All; and his tender Mercies upon a^ his Works: Psalm. 149.8, 9, 10,
17. Col. 1.23.
the Gospel Preached in every Creature under Heaven: yea, we may say in the
very Devils, in that they have not their will upon Man, to do to him what they
please; but are abridged, and bound up by him, Psalm. 75.8.
though by them (a^ by many men to) it is not Preached much less it is Preached
to them. Yea, thence his Judgments are full of mixture, though often with much
severity, and hereafter so infinitely heavy.

SECT. 2.
Of Two Covenants, with respect to the Two Adams.

2. WIth these Two Adams, we may find some hints of Two Covenants, or Two kind
of Laws: that is to say, With the First Adam, a Covenant of Works both as to
him and us, viz. That if He keep perfectly with God, and in nothing Sinned, or
disobeyed him, he should enjoy the Earthy Paradise, and the great goodness of
God conferred upon him in his Creation, his Favor and Fellowship, etc. and
transmit Righteousness, Innocence, and so the same Privileges with himself to
his Seed: who also walking in that their Righteousness, and Innocence, should
have continued in the same favor; but he Sinning, and Falling, all should be
Lost, and Condemned in him; as the Event declared: and as is signified in Romans
5.12, 15, 16, 18. He being set as it were, to keep Sin out of the World. And of
this Nature, in some respect is the Covenant or Law of Works that finds us all
Sinners. Now that the First Adam is Fallen, though as given since, Gal. 3.19,
20, 21. Romans 7.10.
it was given in the Hand of a Mediator, as other of God's Dispensations and
dealings now are) and so to gracious ends, Heb. 10.1.
even to Life (the in a killing convincing way) and with additions of Types and
Shadows, pointing to Christ, which were not of the Essence of the Covenant, or
any part of it as pertaining to Adam, considering in himself, and as the
Natural Root of (...) All; nor should have been in such a way given, or with
such additions, had not the Mediator stepped in. That Covenant as with Adam
requiring in him, and from him in us all personal, Gal. 3.10.
perfect, and uninterrupted obedience, and cursing Man, even all i^ Adam, in
case of his sinning; and any man in their persons, (had he stood) that should
in their persons have sinned as he did.

In the Second Adam, a Covenant of Grace to us is made. Though we may say, it
was a Covenant of Greater Works to, and with Christ as to himself, in
comparison of which, the Covenant with Adam was but as a Covenant of Grace, in
regard of the easiness of the things required of him, above what was put upon,
and required of Christ; the condition of it being as to him, Heb. 10.5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10. Psalm. 40.8, 9, 10. Isa. 58.10, 11, 12. and 42.6, 7, 8, 9. and 49.5,
6, 7, 8, 9.
That he should be made Flesh Suffer, and Dye for us, bear out Sins, d^ be made
a Curse for us, and offer up himself a spotless Sacrifice unto God for us: and
thereupon he should in the Nature of men, and for men, he Lord and Christ; and
have the power of Life, and Death; ^e the Savior of all Men, and especially,
of the^ that Believe; have all men in his own dispose Saved out of their former
Obligation, 2 Samuel 23.5. Isa. 49.7. and 55.4.
to Perish; and made now capable of further Salvation, Life, and Glory; so as
by, and through him. To which end, He should be their Light, and the Salvation
of God to the ends of the Earth. And through him there is this Covenant of
Grace, to, and with Men, firm, and sure in him; yea, He the very bond of it,
given for a Covenant to the People, and to be held forth, to, and by them. Viz.
That any of the Race of the Lost, Fallen Adam, (as all are) looking to God by
him, and Believing in, and through him, through the Light, Truth, and Grace
extended by him, shall be accepted of God, justified, and have all Grace
Administered to them, in and with Christ; for their coming to Christ, leading,
guiding, and preservation in Christ unto Eternal Life. Yea, an Everlasting
Kingdom to be given them with him: and that in case they sin against God, after
their Believing, yet not continuing in Sin, upon confessing it on convincement,
and returning to God from it, by him, they shall be forgiven, cleansed, and
healed; and through Christ's Mediation of the New Testament, be yet preserved in
the grace and favor of God, to the enjoyment of the Promised Inheritance, to
which He has called them, Heb. 9.15. 1 John 1.9.

SECT. 3.
Of two kinds of Righteousness.

3. SUitable to these two Adams also we have signified to us a twofold
Righteousness. In the first was a created righteousness, spotless and pure, and
such as should have been continued in a spotless obedience of works; Eccles.
7.29.
and so to have been propagated to his posterity by him, had he stood. But this
is now lost; and according to it, there is none righteous, no not one. In the
second Adam is a perfect Righteousness too, not only as to himself, but also
for us. To and in himself he had a Divine, Eternal, and Essential
Righteousness, as he was God; but besides that, 1 Pet. 3.18. and 2.22. 2 Cor.
5.21. Heb. 10.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
as the public man, he had, and has a perfect personal Righteousness standing
in his performing what God required of him, and perfectly fulfilling and
accomplishing his will, not only in his own personal conversation in the course
of his life on earth; but also, and more especially in his bearing, suffering
and enduring the Death and Curse imposed upon him, to the Fathers utmost
satisfaon, testified in his taking him in the Resurrection from Prison and
Judgment, and exalting him to, and at his own Right Hand. His Obedience was
his Righteousness; and by his presenting himself as one that had so obediently
performed his Fathers Will, Romans 5.18, 19. and 3.22, 23, 24. Jer. 23.6. 1 Cor.
1.30.
as a Lamb that was slain for us; he is become the Righteousness of God to, and
for men; and so is set forth in the Gospel of God, as he is therein declared to
be the forgiver of sins, and justifier of them that believe in him, upon the
account of the Righteousness wrought and completed in, and by him. And so he
is, or in him is held forth to us men the Righteousness of Faith, or the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith, as it is diversely termed; that is to
say, through, and by virtue of Christ, and the Righteousness performed by him;
whosoever gives credit to his Testimony, and believes (looks to and stays
upon) him are accepted for righteous in the presence of God, though in
themselves, and with respect to the Righteousness given them in Adam, they be
sinful and defiled creatures, and shall be dealt with as righteous persons in
abiding in him, and shall have the grace and spirit of God administered to them
also, both to justify them in their Consciences, and effect in them righteous
frames and affections, conforming them to God, and fitting them for his
Kingdom. All which also depend upon the Righteousness of Christ, to be
performed to, and in them. But this Righteousness comes not to, and upon men as
the righteousness of the first man should have done, had he stood: for that
should have been by Propagation, Romans 5.17.
but this by Spiritual Regeneration, free Gift and Imputation; and is received
by men in coming in to him, and being born to, and of him, of the faith and
knowledge of him, and of God as manifested in, and by him. The Righteousness
wrought by Christ, ^om. 3.22, 23, 24, 25. and 5.17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
and that is in Christ, is indeed for, and to all men to justification of life,
both so as to justify, exempt, or free them from being held under the first
judgment or condemnation, so as to perish therein, and so as to give them life
and righteousness in Christ, as a thing prepared for them, and ready to be in
their closing with him, imparted to them. But it come upon clothes, and makes
righteous, so as to gracious acceptance and title to the Kingdom and
Inheritance promised only those who receive and believe in him.

SECT. 4.
Of two kinds of Sin.

4. THere is also a twofold consideration of Sin, with reference to these two
men, and the Covenants made with men, in, and by them. The one is natural to
us; the root and original of which was voluntary to Adam, and this stood in the
breaking the Law he was under; and it is transmitted to us (as his
righteousness, had he stood, should have been) by propagation: so as we come
sinners into the world, and under the sentence of Death; Romans 5.13, 14, Romans
3.9, 10, 19, 23.
as is evident in Children that sin not after the similitude of Adams
transgression, and so not by imitation, and yet do dye. And this sin also
brings forth and necessitates men naturally to innumerable sins; actual sins
that stand in the breach of Gods law, according to which all have sinned, and
as they grow up do sin continually, till, and further then, by grace they be
prevented and enabled to do better. The second kind of sin was not found in the
second man, the Lord Jesus, 1 Pet. 2.22. 2 Cor. 5.21.
for he had no sin in him, nor on him, but other men's: he never did sin, nor
was guile found in his mouth; but it is found in particular men, against the
second man, and against God in him, and the law of grace held forth by him; not
in him against the law given to him, and imposed upon him for making atonement
for, and ransoming men from under the judgment of the former kind of sin, which
law he fulfilled to perfection. And it is a sinning after the similitude of
Adams transgression, Romans 5.14. Hos. 6.7.
though not simply against the first Covenant, but against the second too, viz.
that in Christ for men; hating the light when it comes, John 3.19, 20. and
5.40. and 8.44. Prove. 1.24, 25. Psalm. 81.11, 12.
and loving darkness rather, not coming to Christ for life when called: in a
word, the rejecting Christ and putting him away, that is the original and bottom
of it; preferring Satan, sin and the world before him, and refusing to be
healed and saved by him. And this is the condemning kind of sin; the retaining
natural corruption against the light and grace of Christ coming to save men
from it, and the choosing to do Satan's will rather than Christ's. And though this
kind of sin comes not to men, from any public root of mankind as the first
does, but is received from Satan, and committed by men in their particular
persons (to which through original corruption may apt, yet in the seasons of
Gods grace it necessitates not) yea, and though Christ did not primarily and
directly in his first stepping in to ransom us, come to take away this kind of
sin as the former (it being consequential to his coming to ransom us, and to
his bringing grace and salvation to us) yet from this sin also he has by the
superabundancy of his Merit, Romans 5.16.
and the worth of his Obedience and righteousness, received power and authority
to justify and save us, and does forgive it to men, and save them from it, if
upon convincement of it, during the day of Gods grace they be prevailed with to
own or confess it, and repent of it, turning in to him, with whom there is
plenteousness of Redemption for that purpose, as was before showed.

SECT. 5.
Of two General Judgments, besides Particular ones.

5. NOw answerable to those two kinds of sin we find mentioned too in the
Gospel Doctrine, two General Judgments passing upon all men, the first passing
upon all men in one man, before any man was born to him, of which the Apostle
says: Romans 5.16, 18.
the judgment was of one offense to condemnation, and was upon all men to
condemnation. And this was for sin of the first kind, Adams sin, and the sin of
all men as in him, and as made sinners, and so necessitated to sin by him, and
this was the judgment threatened before his sin, separation, and banishment
from the presence of God, and there through death in soul and body, though
after the fall pronounced, mitigatedly through the interposure of the second
man, and it was upon all men the same, not to some one way, to some another
way, but to all alike, and to condemnation, as in the Scriptures above quoted.
Now the weight of this judgment was executed upon Christ, John 12.31. the
judgment of this world was upon him, when he was sorrowful unto death. What is
through Christ ordered to men (...), is for testimony of Gods displeasure
against sin, indeed but in such a way as none shall perish everlastingly
therein, being for nurturing men to look to Christ, and God in Christ; and so
to lay hold of the everlasting life, prepared and promised from the beginning
of the world in him; and this is executed upon men in their natural
infirmities, weakness and death; and out of this judgment all shall be raised
and brought to a second: which second is that that shall be pronounced and
executed, Heb. 9.27, 28. John 5.22. ^ C^. 5.10.
after all are dead, in the resurrection of the dead, and that not by God
immediately, as the former was, but by the Son of man Jesus Christ. No^ shall
it be upon all in one man, but upon all in their several persons. Nor shall it
be upon all, one and the same, but differently, as men have been found in the
day of grace. Some doing good in accepting and submitting to Christ, John 5.28,
29. 2 Pet. 2.1.
and so are found in him, who shall be adjudged to life and happiness. And
others doing evil in rejecting Christ, and sinning against him; denying him
that bought them, and preferring sin and Satan before him; and they shall be
adjudged to everlasting condemnation. There are indeed several judgments in
this life and world, upon particular men, but clearly distinct from these two
before mentioned, because not general: they differ also from the first in this,
that that was in one, and one upon all, but these are diverse upon diverse
persons, as upon Pharaoh and his Host, destruction in the Red Sea, after diverse
judgments too before that. Upon Sodom and Gomorrha fire and brimstone from
Heaven. Upon David, Isa. 27.9. Heb. 12.10, 11.
that the sword departed not from his House; and that only to testify
displeasure against him for his sin, but also to humble him and cleanse him
from sin, as all the judgments executed upon Gods House or People be: yea, Job
33.28, 29.
and those upon the world too, are to occasion their repentance and seeking
after God, and to prevent their ruin and destruction; unless those that after
the Decree brings forth, and the day of grace is at an end, cuts any off, and
seals them up to the eternal judgment. These judgments also differ from the
first in this, that that was for the sin of one man, and of us all in him; but
these are for men's personal sins against the goodness and grace of God, and the
sins of our Fathers, as involving us in them, or as owned and continued by us.
And yet from the last judgment they differ too, as in time, and other
respects, so chiefly in this, that they are reversible, both the judgments of
his mouth, that is the condemnations to death, and the justifications to life,
as sententially pronounced upon men by God in his word; as the condemned are
led to repentance by their condemnations, or otherwise; Jer. 18.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
or the justified abuse their absolutions, and presume to turn Gods grace into
wantonness, as is clear in Ezekiel. 33.12, 13. as also the judgments of his hand,
or executions of judgment here, are but for a time usually, and such, as men
turning from their evil ways, God may, and is ready to turn from them. But that
last judgment is eternal and irreversible, Heb. 6.2. Matthew. 25.46. Yea, and
whereas these judgments are mixed with mercy, through the mediation of Christ
who is a propitiation for the sins of the whole world, and prays for sparing
and forbearance, during the day of Gods grace and patience; Psalm. 75.7, 8.
whence also they are said to be ordered or poured out of a Cup in Gods hand,
whose Wine is red but full of mixture, to signify that they are distributed in
measure, and with much mixture of mercy. That last judgment, as to the wrath
then to be executed, shall be without mixture of mercy, or abatement of what is
deserved (even as the mercy and good awarded to the good, shall be without
mixture of sorrow) and therefore is said to be poured out of the Cup of Gods
indignation (which is of an incomprehensible capacity) without mixture, Rev.
14.9, 10, 11.

SECT. 6.
Of two Worlds, the World that now is, and the World to come.

6. MMention also is made of two worlds; the one made for the first Adam and
his posterity to live in, and was given to him, and them in him; and that world
was, and is very large, great and glorious: and Adam was made, as it were, the
Lord-deputy of it: and this world we find too, mentioned, as under a double
condition.

1. In its created state, while not subjected to bondage, and before any sin in
it, or curse came upon the earth, and upon mankind; and this was its case in
man's innocensie, and so should have continued, hadnot man sinned: a case of
excellency and freedom from curse and corruption.

2. The second is its present state, Romans 8.21. Genesis 3.17, 18.
as subjected to vanity for man's sin, and filled with occasions of vexation of
spirit to him, being filled with much curse, and appointed (as to its present
state at least) to be destroyed and perish, as once already; as to the
generality of its Inhabitants (both men and beasts) it has, and shall again
more fully; with respect to which it is destructions, it is as to its corrupt
state also spoken of, as twofold. 1. The old world, or the world that was, 2
Pet. 2.5. and 3.6. namely that was before the flood, and was for its wickedness
destroyed by the flood, except eigh^ persons left to repeople it. And, 2. The
world that now is, which is reserved unto fire against the judgment of the
great day: 2 Pet. 3.7, 8, 10, 13.
when the Heavens also, that ar^ now, shall be wrapped up as a Scrol, be
disolved, and pass away with a great noise, the elements shall melt with
fervent heat and the earth, with the works that ar^ therein shall be burnt up.
Though then also, some probably conceive, a Remnant shall be left to People the
New Earth; and that of them is meant that in Rev. 21.24. The Nations of them
that are saved shall walk in the light of the New Jerusalem. Gal. 1.4. 2 Cor.
4.4. 1 Cor. 11.32.
Now this present world is an evil and wicked world, having Satan, as to the
people of it, and his power with them, the God of it; and thence it is, that
all that abide in its state and fellowship, and in confederacy with Satan,
shall be destroyed. But then there is,

2. A world to come, 2 Pet. 3.13. Act. 3.21, 22. Romans 8.19, 22.
Heb. 2.5. Matthew. 12.32. A new Heaven and new Earth, in which shall dwell
righteousness; when all things spoken of by the Prophets shall be restored; and
the Creature it self shall be freed from its bondage to corruption, into the
liberty of the Sons of God, to share of their good according to its capacity,
Heb. 2.5. 1 Cor. 6.2. Rev. 1.5, 6. Isa. 61.7.
and be only subject and serviceable to them. And this world shall be more
immediately put into subjection to Christ: and he and his people, 1 These. 4.16,
17. 1 Cor. 15.23, 24. Romans 8.20, 21, 22. Luke 20.35, 36.
the Saints shall judge and reign therein, receiving double for all their
sufferings here, yea everlasting roast, joy and glory. The Children of the
Resurrection who shall arise at Christ's appearing, even the just, and they that
surviving shall then be changed, shall be counted worthy of it, and shall be
equal to the Angels of God, Psalm. 49.14, 15. Isa. 66.22, 23, 24. Rev. 20.6, 7.
being manifested both in souls and bodies to be his Children; and they shall
have dominion over the wicked, beholding their torments, who here had tormented
them; and shall judge the world, (even the Nations of the saved or preserved)
being Kings and Priests unto God, beholding his face for evermore, and dwelling
in his presence, impassible, immortal, Rev. 21.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and 22.1, 2, 3,
4. 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44.
satisfied with joy and glory for ever: where also they shall have their
Paradise, their Tree of Life, their River of pure Water, clear as Crystal, in
a Spiritual and Heavenly manner; without any Serpent to tempt them, or curse to
afflict and exercise them, being fully and perfectly freed from all sin,
sorrow, pain, crying and Death: their raised and changed bodies being made
spiritual, powerful, nimble, agile, glorious: yea, they shall shine as Stars in
the Kingdom of God, ruling with Christ the Nations in righteousness: which
Nations, probably, shall consist, firstly of the preserved Jews, and then of
some remnant of the Gentiles miraculously preserved in that great day of
perdition of ungodly men; Isa. 65.17, 18, 19, 20, 24, 25. Psalm. 67, 4, 5, 6, 7.
and 96.10, 11, 12, 13. and 98.7, 8, 9.
and those, as so^ conceive, shall under the Governmen (...) the raised and
changed Saints, Till the Earth, build Houses, plant Vineyards beget Children
(though the Children (...) the Resurrection shall neither marry no^ be given in
marriage, nor dye any more, and the earth shall yield its increase i^
abundance, as it would have done before the curse came upon it. Discourse on
the New Heavens and New Earth.
But because many things therein are hard to be understood, and I have
otherwhere more fully delivered my thoughts thereabout, (...) shall say no more
here about them.

SECT. 7.
Of two kinds of Lives and Deaths.

THe Gospel-Doctrine also mentions two Lives, 1 Timothy 4.8.
and two Deaths, the one in this world, and the other in the world to come. The
Life that now is, that which we derive from the first Adam, Genesis 3.6. and 4.1.
or which God gives us, as propagated from him, who was made a living soul, and
begat in his own likeness; and because it was not propagated till after the
fall, Jam. 4.13, 14. Job 14.1. Psalm. 75.3. and 68.19, 20.
therefore it is a corrupt and sinful life, a vapor, a bubble, uncertain,
short, and full of misery: yet as this old world is upheld by Christ and his
mediation, that there might be space and opportunity to be born, live, seek
after God and glorify him in it; so is this life given and preserved through
him too in a great mixture of mercies, and manifold good things to the same
purposes. But the life that is to come is an Heavenly, Spiritual, and Eternal
Life; and it is said to be to come, because as to the whole man it is not yet
come. Joh. 5.24. and 1.13.
There is a seed of it here infused and put into the heart and spirit of the
Believer, by which he is begotten to God and made a spiritual man in some first
fruits; 2 Cor. 5.16, 17. Ephesians. 2.10.
a Son and Heir of God, a new creature created in Christ Jesus to good works,
etc. Romans 8.10.
But in as much as this is but the beginning of this life, and that only in
part, in the Spirit, the body yet must dye, and the soul be loosed from it,
till the resurrection of the just, in which the soul and body shall be
reunited; and the body be made a living spiritual body, and both live in the
favor of, and in fellowship with God: Rev. 21.4, 5.
and that is yet wholly to come, therefore it is called, the life to come, an
everlasting life in which shall be no affliction, sorrow, decay, or death, but
everlasting, uninterrupted health, welfare, prosperity and happiness. 1 John
5.11, 12.
This is the life which Christ has purchased for us, and which in him is given
us, to be enjoyed through the faith of him, Col. 3.3, 4. Act. 17.26, 27, 28. 1 John 5.12.
and in personal enjoyment of, and fellowship with him. The first life is
common to all men, as born into the world; the second though given in Christ to
all, yet is had and enjoyed only by them that have Christ; the rest that
rejecting him have him not, have not it neither, but incur the sentence of
death; the Death opposed to this Eternal Life, the sedond Death. For,

There is also a twofold Death answerable to this twofold Life. Rev. 20.13, 14.
Romans 5.12, 14, 18. Heb. 9.27. 2 Timothy 1.10. 2 Cor. 5.14. Gal. 3.13. Psalm. 23.4.
and 90.12. 2 Cor. 5.8, 9. 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. Eccles. 7.1. Prove. 27.1. Jam. 4.13,
14, 15. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. Isa. 57.1. Job 3.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Mat. 25, 41,
46. Rev. 2.11. and (...).6.14. with (...) Cor. 5.10, 11.
The first is that which came in by the first Adam, and is common to all in
their several times, but is broken and evacuated by Christ (as is before noted)
the punishment of our sins in Adam being sustained by Christ as to its weight
and curse, though some shadow and carcass of it is ordered to us, to be passed
through by us, that we might by the consideration of it be stirred up to apply
our hearts to wisdom, and seek and lay hold of that Eternal Life given us in
Christ, and be kept humble and low in our selves, and always watchful (the time
and way of it being secret, and kept from our foreknowledge, so as that we
cannot boast our selves of the morrow, not knowing what a day may bring forth)
as also that we might experiment the power and grace of Christ in supporting in
it, and raising us up out of it, and be taken from sorrow and oppression by it,
and that the wicked might be cut of from doing wickedly, and from vexing and
oppressing the poor and righteous. The second Death is that fearful punishment
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, forementioned; not prepared properly and
in Gods first intention for men, yet shall be the punishment too of these men
that persist in their sins, 2 These. 1.7, 8. Heb. 9.27, 28. Luke 14.14. 1 Cor.
15.23, 24. 1 These. 4.16, 17. Rev. 20.6, 7, 11, 12.
for their personal rejections of God and Christ, and persisting therein, to
prefer their sins before him. But it is not common to all men as the first
Death is. It is appointed for all men once to dye, and out of that all shall be
raised and brought to judgment, though not all at once, but the just at
Christ's coming, called therefore the resurrection of the Just; and the rest,
the wicked, and such as dye in the time of the personal Reign of Christ with
his Saints on the Earth, at the end of those thousand years, when he shall
deliver up the Kingdom to God his Father. Mat. 3.7, 8. Joh. 3.16, 17, 18, 19,
and 6.40. Ezekiel. 33.11.
The second Death, may through the Grace of God be avoided; men are not
necessitated of God to run into it; nay, he has said and sworn, as he lives,
he has no pleasure that the wicked should dye in it, but that rather they
should turn (from their taking part with Satan, and preferring his suggestions
before Christ and his Grace, Mat. 16.24, 25, 26, 27. and 25.41.46.
Calls, Counsels and Salvation) that they might live. For this is a very
dreadful Death, an everlasting punishment, out of which, if men be once cast
into it, shall be no release or redemption. But having spoken of this more
fully before, I here pass it with this brief mention of it.

SECT. 8.
Of the various appearances of Christ, and the Proper works of them, and ways
of his Saving men.

8. LAstly, there is mention of diverse Appearances and Comings of Christ, with
their diverse Works and Consequences. As there is a twofold Personal Appearance
of Christ mentioned upon Earth, and in Heaven; the former is twofold also,
which are his Personal Comings from Heaven, which with their consequents, are
distinctly mentioned in the Gospel-Doctrine; besides some spiritual and
providential comings, invisible to the eye of man. Of which (...) shall give a
brief touch.

1. Heb. 9.26.
He came and appeared in the flesh, in infirmity and we^kness here upon the
earth, being made partaker with us in flesh and blood; made like us, and in all
thinks tempted as we are, excepting sin. And this his Appearance was once, in
the end of the world, in the last ages, even in the time of the Roman Monarchy,
spoken of by Daniel the Propet. And the end of this his coming, and appearing
in so low and despicable a form; in which also he was poor, and without all
worldly glory and greatness, was that he might be the Savior of the world, by
suffering for it, and by revealing the truth of God to it, for the convincing
it, and calling it to himself, that through him it might be saved. Of this
coming it is said, This is a faithful saying, 1 Timothy 1.15.
and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners; and that he once appeared in the end of the world to put away sin by
the sacrifices of himself, Heb. 9.26. and so he came to be abased amongst men,
that he might minister to, and give his life a ransom for them: yea in this
his appearance, he suffered and died for all, and by the grace of God tasted
Death for every man, and that without limitation or distinction; as to the
first and most proper end of his death, Romans 5.18. and 3.19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
24. and 14.9.
viz. the ransoming men thereby from the curse and death forecome upon them,
and his making an atonement for them: for there was no difference of men, nor
distinction in to Righteous and Sinners, Good and Bad Believers and the world,
as he eyed them, and came into the world for them in his first undertaking and
intention. But he found all fallen, sinful, lost and helpless; and as such came
to dye for, Col. 2.10. Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. Phil. 2.10, 11.
and ransom them from that lost estate, into his own Lordship, and dispose, as
the Mediator and Savior of them; and obtained a perfect recovery of man's
nature in himself; and power and authority for his further saving and judging
work appointed to him, and needful for men. And this his coming and appearing,
and the work of it is perfectly past and done. 1 John 4.2, 3. Joh. 16.28. Heb.
10.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and 9.12, 14, 15. and 7.25.
He is thus come and gone again, and comes so, and in such a way, and to such
ends no more, though the virtues of that his so coming and appearing, and of
his works or sufferings for us therein, abide in him and with God, and come
down to, and upon men, and shall do for ever: for all he does and will do
further for, and to fallen mankind, is in the virtues of what he has done in
that his appearing.

2. He shall come and appear personally again on the earth a second time, Mat.
16.26, 27. and 26.64. 2 These. 1.7, 8.
as in Heb. 9.28. but then he shall not come and appear in such a mean and
despicable form as before, nor with sin upon him, imputed to him, and to be
suffered for by him; but in Glory and Majesty, even in the Power and Glory of
his Father, and with all his holy and mighty Angels, to raise all men indeed in
their times, and so actually to save them out of the first Death and Judgment,
and set them free of that, but so as to bring them to a second; 2 Cor. 5.10.
Heb. 9.28. Mat. 25.31, 35. and 13.43.
in which he who was judged for all, shall judge all. And he that came to save
all men from the first judgment, shall not save all men in this, or from the
death adjudged to in it: but only those who now believe and look for him,
giving them a total and full deliverance out of, and freedom from all sin,
sorrows, dangers, oppressions, death, and making them everlastingly happy and
glorious with himself: but shall execute judgment upon all the ungodly, who
throughout the day of grace have abiden so, and shall be then found so. Rev.
21.4, 5, 6, 7. Jude 14.15. 2 These. 1.7, 8. Mat. 24.31. Luke 18.8, 9. Col. 3.3,
4.1 John 3.2. Heb. 9.28.
That coming and appearing of his, indeed shall be to save his Elect only, such
as here believe in, and obey him. In his his first coming, and as men were the
objects of his undertaking to suffer for them, there was no such difference and
distinction. And this coming is yet wholly to come, and spoken off as future. He
shall appear the second time without sin to salvation to them that look for
him. And it shall be in the end of the world, properly so taken. 1 These. 4.14,
15, 16.
Then he shall descend from Heaven with a shout, and sound of the Trumpet, and
the voice of the Archangel of God. And that his appearing shall be visible to
more than his first; Rev. 1.7.
for that was but in one Country, but this shall be to all; every eye shall see
him, they also that perceived him. In his first appearing he laid the
foundation of the faith, in this he will bring up the Head. Zech. 4.7, 9.
stone, with shouting, and crying, grace, grace, and finish the building. Heb.
12.2. 1 These. 1.9, 10, Tit. 2.12, 13.
In that he was the Author, in this the Finisher of the Faith. And therefore
this is the Hope of the Gospel, and of the Saints, the thing looked and waited
for by them.

2. But between these Two Comings, Joh. 14.19. and 16.16, 17. Heb. 9.24. and
10.12, 13. and 12.2, 3.
and Appearings to Men in the World, there is a disappearance here of his
Person as to any outward discovery, and visibility of it; but yet in this mean
time, He appears in Heaven for us, in the presence of his Father, to whom he
is gon^ up, and where He abides, and is set down at his Right Hand; Invested
with, and Estated in all his Fullness of Glory and Power. Acts 5.31.
And his going up, and appearing there, 1 Timothy 4.10.
is for Salvation to. He is Exalted a Prince and Savior, to give Repentance to
Israel, (to Rebellious Ones) and Remission of Sins. And so he is the Savior of
all Men; especially, of them that Believe. He, and God in him, having saved all
Men, out of that Sentence of Condemnation; that by, and through Adam, fell upon
All, by his first appearing, is now to the Savior, upholder, preserver of all
Men, bringing his Salvation near to them; even the tenders of further Saveing
them, that so they might be led to Repentance, Psalm. 36.6, 7, 8, 9. and 68.19,
20. Romans 2.4, 5. 2 Pet. 3.9, 15.
and to trust under the shadow of his Wings, and be specially Saved. And those
that do therethrough trust, or believe in him, are Saved by a special
Protection; succouring, and delivering them from Sin and Satan; even so, as to
fit them for the Salvation ready to be Revealed at his Second Appearing. 1 Pet.
1.6, 7, 8, 9.


He Appears, 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. Isa. 53.12. Luke 13.7, 8, 9. and 23.34. Joh. 17.21,
23. 2 Pet. 3.15.
and Mediates with God, for All Men, for the means and Mercies He sees good;
for leading them to Repentance, and Faith, and for Patience, and Forbearance,
when they have forfeited former means, till He further dig about them, and dung
them: which forbearance also, is to be accounted Salvation. And these things He
obtains for, and dispenses to them to such ends: but for those that
therethrough do Believe, He mediates, 1 John 2.1, 2. Heb. 7.25. and 9.15. Psalm.
36.8, 9. and 65.4.
and obtains the Dispensation of choice Mercies, even the Blessings of Life,
and Righteousness; presenting them in himself, Just, and Righteous, before God:
feeds them with the Fat things of his House, even of his Holy Temple. His First
Comeing, and Appearing then amongst men, as to its main End, Joh. 3.17. and
12.47. 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. Isa. 28.16. Act. 5.31. 1 Timothy 4.10.
was for all Men to Save them, by way of Ransom, without limitation, or
difference of persons; as also, to obtain into himself Power for further Saving
them. His appearing now in Heaven with God, is for all to, and to be the
Savior of All in their several Ages respectively, but with difference, Heb.
9.28. Luke 19.27.
and specialty for Believers. His Second Coming, and appearing to Men is, for
the utmost Salvation, not of all Men, but of all his Elect, and that Believe on
him: the rest that here rejected him, finally, shall there be rejected of him.
1 Timothy 2.6.
In the first, He Saved by price, paid for Men; by which also he obtained his
Power of further Saving, in the other Two. In the Second, Luke 13.7, 8. Heb.
12.24. Phil. 3.21. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9.
by his improving the Virtues of that Price, (his most Precious Blood,) with
his Father, by way of Intercession, and by his Power, as exercised for, over,
and upon Men. In the Third only, by the exercise of his Power for, and in
behalf of those that were his, and looked for him, and so the Gospel teach^ us
to distinguish of his Appearings, and of his Saving.

3. Genesis 6.3. Prove. 1.20, 21, 22. 1 Pet. 3.19. Joh. 1.10, 11.
There are other Spiritual, and Providential Comings of Christ to Men, distinct
from those his Personal, and Visible Appearances. As,

1. His Addresses of Himself to Men, by his Spirit, in the means; as so He came
often to Jerusalem, and would have Gathered them: and came to his Own, and they
Received him not: even before he was made Flesh. And,

2. In his more gracious discoveries of Himself, to the Hearts of those that
Believe on him: of which is meant, Joh. 14.21, 23. He that has my
Commandments and keeps them, Rev. 3.20.
he it is that loves me^ and I will love him, and manifest mine own self to
him, and we will come unto him, etc. and, If any man hear my voice, and open to
me, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me.

3. In his taking more special view of, and executing Judgments upon men in
Afflictions and Death. As Repent, (says he,) Rev. 2.5. and 3.3.
and do thy first works, or I will come unto thee and take away thy
Candlestick, etc. And if thou watch not, I will come to thee as a thief, and
thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee. And so some understand
many things spoken about his Coming, in Matthew. 24. to aim at, and be meant of
his Coming to execute Judgment on Jerusalem. But because these things appertain
to his Dispensations to Men, and operations in Men, they mind me of applying my
self at length, to that other Branch of the Distinction at first mentioned; and
therefore I shall not further enlarge here on them.

CHAP. V.
Enters upon the other Branch of the Distinction, and speaks briefly of the
Purposes of God.

PAss we now to the Second Member of the Distinction. And therein let us first
take into Consideration, the Purposes of God; and see how they may be said to
agree with, or be distinguished from the Gospel-Doctrine, the Object of Divine
Faith to be Preached by us, to Men, that they may Believe, and to be believed
by Men, being Preached to them, that they may be Saved. About which purposes
this may be premised; That they are in themselves as such secret,
incomprehensible, and unknowable by us further, and otherwise, then they be in
God's Works, or Words, made manifest, and revealed to us. And therefore they
are with the more sobriety to be inquired into, and spoken of, by us: taking
heed to the Word of God, as our guide in all things. And because what is said in
the W^ about them, is in somethings more struse and hard to be understood; as a
because some others have spoken m^ largely to them, Tho. Moore Sen' in his
Testimony of Christ.
I intend the greater b^vity in what I shall say of them.

SECT. 1.
Of God's more General Purposes coincid^ with the Contents of the Gospel, and
the^ in by the way something of his Perm^ on.

COncerning the Purposes of God, (...) Ephesians. 1.9. and 3.11.
(...) may say in General: That as Go^ has wrought, and done for us, and ha^
declared, That he will assuredly do so, d^ he purpose to work and do; as to fa^
He purposed to make the World in su^ Space and Form, as he did make it. (...)
purposed to make Man Upright, and (...) his own Image, and give to him, as
(...) did; and do to him, as he did; and pe^mit, and suffer him to do, as he
did pemit, and suffer him. Yet by the way, w^ may distinguish of Permisson.
There (...) a Legal Permission, Genesis 2.16, 17. 1. Cor. 9.5, 6.
a giving leave by the Law to do things or not do them. S^ God permitted Adam,
to eat of ever^ Tree of the Garden, that of the Knowledge of Good and Evil
excepted: an^ to the Apostles, to Eat and Drink at other men's cost, and to
forbear Working: an^ nothing so permitted, is Sin and Evil in (...)

Thus God never purposed to per^t, nor did he permit Adam, To eat of ^e fruit
of the tree of knowledge of good ^d evil: for then had he not therein Sin^ed.
But there is a Providential Permissi^, a letting Men go at Liberty, free from
(...) violent Coaction, or Restraint, to, or ^om what is Commanded, or
Forbidden. ^s a Magistrate, that gives no leave by ^is Law to any, to Steal, or
commit Adultry; yet leaves Men at liberty not tying ^em up in Bonds, or Chains,
or setting ^uards upon them, to forde them to be ^onest; so as they may have
freedom of ^ction, and be capable of obeying, or ^obeying those Laws, in which
such ^ings are forbidden: and accordingly of ^ceiving Reward, or Punishment,
for ^beying, ordisobeying. In this sense, God ^urposed to give, and did
accordingly give (...) Adam liberty of choosing, or refusing; ^ting well, or
ill. And this distinction ^f Permission is useful, and to be minded, ^oth in
respect of Adams Sinning, and ^ther Men's. Yea, and the Permission, as ^od's
Act, and the Sinning as Man's Act, ^e to be distinguished too.

And so (to return to our Discourse about ^od's Purposes) as they respected
Man^ind, Fallen: We may say, He purposed ^o do for us, whatsoever the Gospel
says ^e has done, and will do for us, accor^ing as therein is declared. 2 Samuel 14.14. Job. 33.23.
And so he purposed to show us Mercy, and not to ^eal with us, and leave us
helpless, as the Devil, and his Angels: but to save m^ from the Death he would
plunge him^ into, and call him back to himself again and that not according to
Works of Rig^teousness to be done by us, but accordi^ to the good pleasure of
his Grace: whi^ purpose as the Apostle tells us, 2 Timothy 1.9, 10.
is manife^ed what it was, by the appearance (...) Christ Abolishing Death, and
bringin^ Life, and Immortality to light, by the Gospel: that is to say, He
purposed (...) Save us by the free and undeserved sen^ing forth of his Son, and
making hi^ Flesh, the Seed of the Woman, and ^der the Law, and by delivering
him (...) to Death for us all, to make an Atton^ment for our Sin, (...)
and so to evacuate, a^ take away, the Destructive power (...) Death; and by
raising him up again (...) our Justification, and giving us Etern^ Life in him.
And so he purposed to (...) Sinners by his Free Grace, to the Life an^
Immortality obtained by Christ, for them upon the account, Tit. 3.3, 4, 5.
Prove. 1.20.21, 22, 23. Isa. 61.1. and 42.1. Joh. 5.25.
not of any good Workfore-wrought by them: but of his So^ undertakings, and
performances for them and by preventing them, as with the ligh^ and power of
his Spirit, (which to tha^ end, he purposed to put upon his So^) while yet Dead
in Sins, and Trespasses so as there-through, they might hear, and obey him.
Isa. 49.12. and 53.10, 11. and 55.5.
And he purposed so to accompany, and bless his Son, in his Callin^ Men, and so
to glorify him, that many of them should actually, and eventually ^in after
him, and obey him. And that ^hey (whosoever) that listen to, and obey ^im, in
the grace and power in his Calls ^fforded them, should be Justified and ^aved
by him: but those that then stop their Ears against him, and reject him, and so
persist against all means and grace ^or their Repenting afforded them, should
^e left, and given up to themselves, to stumble at him, and fall against him to
Destruction. He purposed also, 1 Pet. 2.7.8.
That he would not only Glorify his Son to call Sinners, and empower, and
authorize him ^o Save the Believers, and to exercise Pa^ience, and Mercy mixed
with Judgment ^ere toward the disobedient, but also to ^end him again, to Raise
the Dead, and ^o Judge all Men, Believers, and Unbe^ievers, according to their
Works; according as in the Gospel-Doctrine is decla^ed.

And so the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.11.
is a Revelation of the Eternal purposes of God purposed in Christ Jesus, from
before the Foundations of the World: and the Preaching of it, is called, the
Preaching of the Decree: and his purposes as so Revealed and Preached, are all
sure, and certain, and meet, Psalm. 2.6, 7.
and good, to be known of Men. Yea, and are so far known, as the Gospel is
known, and believed by us; there being only this difference between those his
purposes, and the Gospel-Doctrine, as to the matter of them: That the
Gospel-Doctrine declares, partly as acted and accomplished; and partly, as
certain to be accomplished due time. What as only purposed and with God, was
neither accomplish^ nor made known; but hid, and secre^

SECT. 2.
That the purposes of God concerning Me^ Ends in particular, as to their
Salvat^ or Damnation; are included in, and (...) sult from God's General
purposes for mentioned.

NOW, as to God's purposes of de^ing with particular Persons as (...) his final
dispose of them, they are clea^ included in, and result from his fore^ General
purposes concerning Mankind Christ Jesus, and are in them only to sought
after, and discerned. As God ^posing to heal by the Brazen Serpent (...) that
being Stung would look up tow^ it: it followed, that it was his purpose, the
this, or that particular looking to it, sho^ be healed; and it being his
purpose, not heal any of them otherwise: it follow^ that it was not his
purpose, to heal this, (...) that person that neglected it. So it be^ the
purpose of God in General, so to g^ his Son in love to the World, that
wh^soever should Believe in him, should ha^ Eternal Life: it follows, as a
thing includ^ in it, and resulting from it, That Pet^ James, John, Paul, etc.
through God giving his Son to, and lifting him up (...) the Salvation of the
World; being prevailed with to Believe on him, shall have Everlasting Life. And
God having purposed, That those, who when Christ is lifted up, and Light, and
Grace are brought to them, by, and through him, shall be disobedient and reject
him, his Words, and Counsels should be left to stumble at him, and persisting
therein, to fall to Perdision. It was therein included, That Judas being then
Disobedient, should in, and for so doing, be left to take offense at him, and
persisting therein, against all light and warnings, run himself into Perdition.
So God having purposed, that those, who when the Grace of God comes to them,
bringing Salvation to them, do still remain ungodly, and turn it into
wantonness; shall as a Punishment, and fruit of that their Wickedness, be given
over to oppose the Truth, and exercise the Saints thereby; it follows, as
included therein, That Hymeneus, and Philetus, or any the like particular so
doing, was therein fore-written to that Judgment, or Condemnation of so
opposing themselves against the Truth, etc. Even, as God ordaining, That it
should rain Mannah six days, and not the seventh, on the Camp of Israel in the
Wilderness, and that whoever should go out, and gather on the six days, should
find enough; and on the sixth day, enough for that, and the seventh day; but on
the seventh day none: it followed, That this, or that Person neglecting to
gather on the sixth day, for Two days; and going (...) gather on the seventh,
should then b^ virtue of that general Ordination fin^ none. And all these
purposes, as to particular persons are respective purposes, an^ after a sort
Conditional; not absolute^ determining, and necessitating either the Faith, and
Salvation of this, or that Man precisely; or as a Man, or Sinner simply
considered: nor the disobedience, unbelief, or condemnation of this, or that
man as so precisesly, or simply as a man; or a^ a Man fallen in Adam,
considered: but they respect, Gal. 2.15, 16. Act. 15.11. and 4.11, 12.
or take in this, or that Man as under such a condition, or in such a way, as
to which God has generally appointed such Ends or Issues. So as if Peter or
Paul had not Believed, they had not been Saved, by force of any other precise
purpose of God toward them, as Personally considered. Psalm. 109.4, 5. with Act.
1.16, 17, 18. that in ver. 25. To go to his own place, respects not Judas but
the Apostle to be chosen. Act. 16.31. Joh. 6.40. and 3.14, 15.
And if Judas had obeyed Christ, and timely put away his Covetousness, he had
not taken Offense, and stumbled at Christ, and run himself into Perdition, by
force of any precise purpose of God, ordaining him as a Man precisely
considered, so to have done. And upon this account, it may be said to any man,
If thou will Believe on the Son of God, thou shall be Saved; not as
representing therein, the Believing, as a mark and token, That God fore-
purposed such a Man's Salvation, precisely considered, as that particular Man;
but as representing the Believing in Christ, as the way in which, and condition
unto which, he has absolutely purposed, Joh. 8.24. Ezekiel. 33.11. 1 Timothy 2.4. 2
Pet. 3.9. Act. 4.11, 12. 1 John 5.11, 12.
and promised his Salvation. And upon the like account, it may be said unto any
man; If thou will not Believe on the Son of God, thou shall Perish: not as
thereby signifying, That such a Man's not Believing, springs from, and is a
token of God's precise purpose, to Destroy such a Man, as that Man, personally
considered; but because of the General purpose of God; and to signify, the
firmness thereof, That God will Save no man out of Christ, but to Destroy those
that wilfully Reject, and Rebel against him. And this apprehension of God's
purposes of Salvation, and Damnation, to particular Men, as included in, and
springing from his General purposes; and respecting men, as beheld, or
considered, in such conditions, agrees well with the renour of the Gospel;
which says, Joh. 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. And not, That
God gave his only Son, that whosoever should have Everlasting Life, ( viz. by
force of some fore purpose, pricisely, and irrespectively, Decreeing such
particular persons to it,) should Believe in him, and so attain it: as some
make the Gospel to speak, making that Phrase (whosoever believe,) nothing but a
Collection of the several persons fore-appointed absolutely to Life, and their
Faith only an evidence of their being so fore-appointed; and not any general
inducement to All, to Believe, or signification of any desire on God's part
that they should believe, and be Saved.

SECT. 3.
That the Great differences between the Remonstrants, and Contra- Remonstrants
spring from their different Apprehensions about God's purposes of Salvation,
and Damnation to particular persons, what be their Apprehensions.

UPon this Hinge hangs all the Controversy, between the Remonstrants, and
Contra-remonstrants, even upon their Conceptions of God's purposes, Joh. 3.17.
1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Romans 5.12, 18. 1 Pet. 1.20, 21. with 1 Timothy
4.10. 2 Cor. 5.11. Prove. 1.20.21. and 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 31, 32, 33. and 9.1-7.
Romans 2.4, 5. 1 John 5.11, 12. Act. 10.34.
about Men's Final Estates. For the Remonstrants conceive and believe, That God
purposed (according as he has declared, he has done) to send his Son into the
World, to be the Savior of the World, to Dye for all Men, and to Ransom them
all thereby from the State of Misery, and Perdition that he foresee they would
come into in Adam: and through Sufferings to glorify him, to be the Savior of
All, giving Mankind in general Eternal Life in him; and to afford such means
to them through him, as he pleased, for their calling back to him, and leading
them to Repentance^ and that any one Believing in him, through the means
afforded, and by his Grace therein, and therewith given, should live by him,
and that any one finally rejecting him should perish. Romans 2.11, 16. 2 Cor.
5.10.
Not purposing this or that man's salvation or damnation, that have the means of
grace and capacity to use them, or seek God in them; but as rewards of their
works respectively, or of their entertainment, or rejection of that grace
afforded them; that is, as they should through grace afforded believe, in, and
obey him, or reject the grace afforded, not believing or obeying him.

The contrary Monster on the other side conceive, that God absolutely and
peremptorily purposed, that certain particular persons should have Eternal Life
and Glory, considered as men simply, or as fallen men; and that the rest of
men, particularly and personally considered, should be lest to sin and perish;
and no such grace should be afforded to them, as should be sufficient for their
salvation. And accordingly that he purposed to give Christ to dye; as some say,
only for those particular persons forepurposed to Glory, and not for the rest;
and that those particular persons should by, and through him be brought
infallibly and irresistibly to believe, and be preserved in believing, and
brought to glory: or as others say, that Christ should dye for all men, to
ransom them into his own dispose, but not intentionally, that all might be
saved by him, but only that those should absolutely and inevitably be saved, to
whom he had absolutely and particularly purpose life; and that the rest shou^
be left to themselves, and to the use o^ the means vouchsafed, and receipt of
the grace in, and with them insufficiently tendered; or the refusal of it so, as
that they cannot come to salvation. According to the former, not men as men, or
fallen men, simply considered, are the objects of Gods purposes of Life and
Glory to be estated upon them, but men as in Christ, or as believing on him
through the grace of God afforded to them: much less are men, as men simply
considered, or as only fallen in Adam, the object of his purpose of
Dereliction, Reprobation, or Destruction, but men considered as rejecting
Christ, or refusing to obey him, unbelieving and impenitent men. But according
to the latter, men considered, either as to be made, or as made innocent and
unfallen, or at most * Super Creatarians. Superlapsarians. Superlapsarians.
as fallen, are the objects of Gods purposes, of their eternal ends; however,
as to the purpose of Eternal Life, that is, represented as without, or in order
of nature before the consideration of a Mediator, much more without, or before
the consideration of their believing in him: and as to the purpose of
Everlasting Death; his purpose of not affording sufficient grace, such as might
be effectual to their Salvation is, at least conceived of by them, as, without
the consideration of their fore-rejecting Christ that dyed for them, and
offered his grace to them: and so in effect implies Gods absolute irrespective
purpose of leaving them to ineffectual Grace, that could not save them, and if
not, the dying of Christ for them rejected as a falsehood too, yet made to no
purpose for them: with which latter frame of conceptions of Gods purposes, many
things appear to clash; especially these.

1. That it makes Gods election of men to be out of Christ, as being in order
of nature before the consideration of him, and his death, and sufferings for
men; for in it Christ is considered afterward, not as the ground or root of
their election, but only as a means ordained to bring about that to which
before, and without the consideration of him they were supposed to have been
elected, whereas the Scripture speaks of Gods purpose of Election, as a thing
that was in Christ before the foundations of the world. Ephesians. 1.4.
And speaks of him in his sufferings and glory, Romans 8.29.
as the Prototype to which God had respect in his predestination of those that
were foreknown by him; for they were, says the Apostle, predestined to be
conformed to the image of his Son: which plainly implies, that his Son in that
Image or Estate (namely of sufferings and glory) was in Gods eye or
consideation, as a thing preordained, and so foreknown of him in his act of
predestination.

Object. To that in Ephesians. 1.4. it may possibly be objected, that the Apostle by
chosen in Christ, may mean in Christ, as the eternal word, or God only, as it is
said all things were created in, or by him, (...) Col. 1.16. Answ. But to that
it is considerable, that then we should be blessed too as in him, Ephesians. 1.3, 4.
as he is God only; for it is said, we are blessed in him according as we were
chosen in him: but now evident it is, that we are blessed in him, as he has
redeemed us from the curse, and is risen and ascended, Gal. 3.13, 14. and
therefore in him, as so considered, we were elected or purposed to be chosen of
God.

2. That frame also as was before hinted, infers a manifest change and
alteration from the Scripture Language, and more especially, as to those of
them that deny Christ to have dyed for all, or say that God purposed absolutely
to leave the greatest part of men, as fallen in Adam, without any serious
desires of vouchsafements of means for their salvation, to utter ruin and
destruction: for then should it rather have been said, That God so loved a few,
or some part of mankind, that he gave his only begotten Son, that they might
absolutely be brought to believe, and have eternal life: or, that those who
were precisely appointed to eternal life might believe, and so enjoy it; rather
than that he loved the world, and gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Nay, it might
as truly be said, according to their frame of thoughts, that God so hated the
world, that he would not have it saved; nor afford any such grace to it, as
whereby it might: in as much as they judge so concerning the far greater part
of it, which may rather challenge the denomination of the whole, than the far
lesser, even as they say it does; when Christ says, I pray not for the world.
Whence, John 17.9.
say they, sure much less would he die for the world; and what is that in
effect, but that God did not so love the world as to give his Son for, or to
it, etc.

3. In that frame also the greatness of Gods mercy to mankind, and the equity
of his justice and judgment is more obscured than in the former: while it both
carries in the bottom of it, no really merciful design in God toward the most;
and implies that he does, and will eternally punish men for what he never
vouchsafed them any sufficient and efficacious grace for their avoiding of; but
ordered his government over them so, as he knew must needs necessitate their
perdition.

4. It also drives the maintainers thereof inevitably upon making God so to
design the destruction of most, as to necessitate also their sins; of which
they stick not often, either in plain terms, or in words every way equivalent
thereto, to pronounce him the Author, Worker, Cause, etc. as Dr. Pierce has
also largely, and learnedly proved. Yea they, some of them (the
Supralapsarians) n^ only render him, as one that has pleasure in the death of
the wicked, rathe^ than that they should turn, and and live contrary to his own
Oath, Ezekiel. 33.11* as all of them do; but also as one tha^ had pleasure, that
the righteous should dye, and therefore sin; for all were righteous in innocent
Adam, where they represent God reprobating and purposing the damnation of the
most. To say nothing of their broad contradictions to many plain Scriptures
that they often run into: their patronage of men's slothfulness, in rendering it
either needless to strive to enter the strait gate, or impossible to do it to
any purpose; with many the like.

SECT. 4.
1 Samuel 2.25. and 2 Chronicles 25.16. About Elies Sons, and Amaziah, considered: as
also something to Act. 13.48.

IT is said in 1 Samuel 2.25. that the Sons of Eli hearkened not to the voice of
their Father, because the Lord would destroy them; and in 2 Chronicles 25.16. The
Prophet sent to Amaziah to reprove him for his Idolatry, being refused by him
in, and threatened by him for his message; tells him, that he knew God had
determined to destroy him, because he had done that, and had not hearkened to
his Counsel. Which may happily seem to some to imply, that Gods purposes of men's
ends are previous to the consideration of their ways; and that therefore some
are left to sinful ways, because foredetermined to such an end as destruction,
as others are therefore made to believe, because foreordained to Life
Everlasting, Act. 13.48. And so that men's disobedience, or obedience, are but
evidences, because effects, fruits, infallible and necessary consequents of
those fore-determinaons of their ends. To which instances it is to be noted,
that God indeed, who is the supreme Governor and Disposer of all things, is
able both to save and to destroy: and the power of ordering this Creature to
life by a^act of mercy, or that to destruction by an act of severity, is only
with him as the Sovereign Disposer and Judge of all. And he acts all his Acts
of Mercy or Judgment, not according to any Rule imposed upon him, or proposed
to him by any Creature, but according to the counsel of his own Will. And so as
he purposed to harden and destroy the Angels falling, but to show mercy to
fallen man; so to sinners for whom he gave his Son, and to whom he has made
known his Mind and Will in some measure, and they are disobedient thereto, and
deserve his anger again; he shows mercy in affording yet more grace for their
conversion, thereby encouraging sinners to repentance; or else gives them up
to, and hardens them in their sins and corruptions, that they might be
admonitions to others to stand in a we him, according to his pleasure; acco^ing
to that in Romans 9.16, 18. He (...) have mercy, on whom he will have me^ and
whom he will he hardens; and so a cording to his good pleasure he gave (...)
and hardened Pharaoh, sinning and do (...) evilly against his people, and had
mer^on sinning Israel, when they had man their molten Calf, and still showed
futher savor to them in the preservation (...) them, or many of them to the
land (...) Canaan, So he withdrew his mercy from Saul, rebelling against him;
and yet h^ mercy on David and Solomon sinning, an^ left them not to ^eir
hardness, but gav^ repentance to them. So he hardened the Jews when they had
crucified Christ, an^ rejected his Gospel, and showed merc^ to the sinful
Gentiles, in opening a do^ of Repentance and Conversion to them And doubtless,
as he did enact in time, (...) he purposed in the Counsel of his Will to act
and do toward them. And so w^ may say to the instances concerning Eli^ Sons,
and Amaziah, that God willed t^ destroy them, and therefore gave the^ up, and
hardened them against the re^proofs given them, that they might go on in the
ways of ruin. But then its to be noted too, that that was neither his purpose
concerning them, as simply considered, as either his creatures made in Adam, or
as only fallen in Adam, but as sinners against the grace of God, showed ^em
through Christ, as persons that re^sed to take his yoke upon them; and ^o Sons
of Belial, that knew not the Lord, though the Lord was so made known amongst
them, that he might have been made known by them. Yea, that concerning Amaziah
may be so read and understood, as rendering the reason not so much of the
Prophets, knowing that the Lord had determined to destroy him, as of the
determination it self; that God therefore determined to destroy him, because he
had done that, and had not hearkened to his Counsel. And such he has purposed
according to his pleasure, to give up, and harden, and destroy; and then their
refusing good Instructions and Counsels, that tend to their conversion and
escape from Judgment, may be, and is a consequent to, and sometime to some
discerning persons a discovery of Gods purpose to make those persons examples
of his Judgments and just severity: and so it agrees with what was said above,
Sect. 2. though to some such as deserve such judgments, sometimes he may give
repentance to the escaping the wiles of Satan, and recovering themselves out of
his snares, as 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. according to that prerogative and power in the
dispose of his creature, that he keeps in his own hand, and as in his wisdom he
sees fitting: for which cause the servants of God, unless they discern the mind
of God, as the Prophet did concerning Amaziah, that their sin is unto death,
are with meekness to instruct such, and patiently to wait to see Gods mind and
pleasure concerning them.

Those in Acts 13.48. ordained to eternal life and believing, were instances of
Gods mercy and grace afforded to sinful and undeserving persons after, and
notwithstanding their abuse of, and sinnings against former means and mercies
to whom yet God afforded such grace in his call of them that they were thereby
ordained, ordered, ranked, marshalled or disposed (as the word (...) signifies)
unto, or for eternal life; or else as some understand, they were worshippers of
God before (as such there were scattered up and down amongst the Gentiles) to
whom this further grace was therefore now afforded, that they believed also the
tidings of the Gospel; but however that says nothing of any ordination of them
to, or purpose of eternal life to them Previously to the consideration of
Christ appointed to dye for them: as if some were first purposed to life, and
then for them Christ was purposed to be sent forth; no, nor of any
fore-purpose, of causing them absolutely to believe, or to bestow eternal life
upon them infallibly and inevitably, considered simply as men, or fallen men:
for neither are the words fore-appointed or foreordained to eternal life. But
speaking of the efficacy the Gospel had in them, viz. that they believed, Verse.
46. Verse. 48.
that is, held fast the word of God in distinction from those, that either
rejected it as the Jews, or only rejoiced in it for a time, as diverse other
Gentiles; it shows the reason or ground of it, and says they were ordained,
ordered, set or disposed for eternal life; which may also be looked upon as the
efficacy of the word of God in them, making them as good ground, that therefore
received and retained the seed, and brought forth fruit to perfection. And
though God doubtless purposed to afford that grace to them, that he did then
actually afford for the enabling and bringing them eventually to believe,
according to the counsel and good pleasure of his will; yet that was purposed
in, through, and with respect to Christ, and their end, the having eternal
life, was no otherwise purposed to them, to be their portion, than as by that
grace purposed to be afforded to them, and accordingly in time afforded them
they were set for, disposed and ordered to it, and so believed, held fast and
retained the message sent them. So that these purposes (or rather dispensations
of the Providence and Government of God over, and toward these persons) no ways
clasht with his general purposes of men's ends according to their believing and
obeying, or disobedience to God in Christ, before mentioned. The two former
being particular purposes, perhaps only of temporal destructions for their
pers^ wickednesses; or at the highest judi^ purposes of their final estates,
upon (...) foresight or consideration of, and with ^^spect unto their abuses of
Gods grace a^ goodness, which yet he purposed acco^^ing to the counsel of his
Will to the^ because it was in his Power and Cho^ whether to make them examples
an^ instances of his severity in resolving the^ destruction upon the account of
their forepast sins, or to have purposed further patience and grace to them,
for the rescuing them from the ways of sin unto salvation, as the latter may
speak of it intimately: it being not so much a purpose of their end
peremptorily and absolutely decreed to those persons (I suppose as a purpose,
or rather a dispensation o^ grace to dispose and order them to, o^ for such an
end as he has purposed to those that believe.

SECT. 5.
Of the distinction of Gods Purposes into Respective and Irrespective.

GOds purposes of men's ends then appear to be not irrespective and previous to
the consideration of their way and works, but respective to them as rewards:
for of Gods purposes, some a^^ Irrespective, and some Respective. Respective, I
say, not only to men as their object, nor only to Christ in whom, Genesis 3.15,
16, 17, etc.
and with respect to whose undertakings some things, yea all that follow
thereupon are purposed: but with respect also to something veiwed or foreseen
in men to, Isa. 48.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
and concerning whom they are purposed: foreseen, I say, and so respected,
either as occasions of, or apt dispositions to, or meritorious causes of the
things purposed with respect to them. According to this distinction God did
absolutely and irrespectively purpose the Creation of the World, and all things
therein. The Creation of man in a good condition; the leaving him to his
liberty, to obey, or disobey his Law purposed also to be given him. So the
giving forth of Christ, and preparing him to be a meet Savior for us, and the
preventing men with his grace more or less clearly through him, according to
his good pleasure were purposed in some consideration irrespectively; for
though they had respect to the sin, and fall, and misery of man thereby, as
occasioning a need of those things, yet as to any works of righteousness found
in men, or to be found in men as deserving them, or as preparing and disposing
men to such salvation to be wrought in, and by Christ for them, and for grace
to call them, they were irrespective. But then Gods purposes of hardening,
rejecting and condemning this or that man, were respective and looked upon them
as sinning against his grace and truth, rejecting his Son, and refusing him as
dese^ving, and rendering them worthy su^ hardening, rejecting and condemning And
his purposes of giving more spec^ favor and salvation to such and such men
believing, as are properly consequent to, or rewards of faith respected Christ
not only as obtaining such grace, but also a received and believed in by those
men and so rendering them worthy, in a Gospe^ sense, of such grace to be
dispensed to them. Unto this branch of respective purposes, clearly appertain
purposes of punishing and rewarding as such, though most clearly it is seen in
purposes of punishing, either by giving up to sin, or inflicting destructive
vengeance upon men^ such doubtless was his purpose of casting Adam out of
Paradise; it had respect to his sin: sure he did not absolutely purpose to cast
him out whither he sinned or not; or to necessitate his sin that he might cast
him out. The like may be said of his purpose of drowning the World, destroying
Sodom, establishing the Kingdom to Saul, or taking it from him: and so that
such or such a man shall dye of such a death, as their wilful sinnings bring
upon them; in which, though it is true, that their days are determined, yet its
true also that they dye before their times, namely before the times they should
have lived to, had they not ran into such sins, Eccles. 7.17. As Ahitophel,
Haman, Judas, Pharaoh, though they must have dyed had they not sinned in such
wicked ways as they did; yet they should not have dyed such deaths, been given
up to, and destroyed in such a way of judgment, had they not been wicked, or
had they timely thereof repented. Such was the purpose of God for hardening
Pharaohs heart, it had respect to his stubbornness and wickedness foreseen. He
see he would oppress his people, and not let them go; Exodus 3.19, 20. and 4.21.
and with respect thereto purposed to harden him, that he should not, no not by
many mighty Signs and Judgments be willing to let them go. Such also the
purpose of God concerning the believers sufferings, of which it is said, 1 These.
3.3. That we were thereunto appointed; surely not as this or that man simply
considered, but as Believers in, and confessors of Christ, and so all such as
such were appointed to sufferings, especially in those times: Such surely was
Gods purpose and determination concerning Herod, Pontius Pilate, with the Jews
and Gentiles opposing, Acts 4.27, 28. with 2.23.
persecuting and crucifying, or rather of his delivering him up to them, and
determining, and fore-bounding ((...)) what they should do to him: his
determining counsel therein was joined with his foreknowledge; and with respect
to what he foreknew they would be, he determined to yield them up to them, and
what they should do to him. God did not purpose to make them wicked, and stir
them up, or impel them to crucify him (as some over-rashly speak, making God
the Cau^ Contriver, and Author of their sin) b^ foreseeing what they would be,
and do if permitted; he determined to permit them to do, what he pleased to
permit what should be done: Suffering their malice so far to break forth, as
might be to his praise, and restraining the remainder thereof, as Psalm. 76.10.
Not that he needed their crucifying him or Judas betraying him to work man's
redemption by; nor was it his dying, as the effect of their wickedness, that
did properly ransom us: nor did their betraying and crucifying him necessarily
bring forth his death. No man took his life from him, but he laid it down of
himself, Acts 2.23. and 3.15. and 5.30. and 7.52.
John 10.18. though yet they are truly and properly chargeable with killing,
and slaying him, and putting him to death, both as to their desire and
intention, and as to the consequent of what they did to him; but he yielded his
life voluntarily to his Father, who made his soul an offering for sin. And his
Death as needful for, and effectual to our ransoming and redemption, was that
which the Fathers wrath, or curse of the Law inflicted on him, brought him to
which began to come upon him to death, before his enemies came near him, as
Matthew. 26.38. Luke 22.41, 42, 43, 44. John 12.27, 28, 31. yea and that pressed
him too on the Cross, and brought him to the dust of death, as Matthew. 26.46,
50. with Psalm 22.15. seem to signify: thence also it is observable, that he
dyed sooner than the Malefactors that were crucified with him; yea so as Pilate
wondered that he was so soon dead, Mark 15.44, 45. 1 Pet. 2.21, 22, 23, 24.
Doubtless that wrath and curse that caused his so sore agonies might have
brought him to death, though his Enemies had had no such hand in it, or though
he had had no such Enemies; but to yield himself a more perfect exemplary
pattern of obedience and patience, and to make it manifest, that he was made a
curse for us (according to that Deuteronomy. 21.23. He that is hanged is cursed of
God) there being such Enemies foreseen of God, God also foreordained him to be
delivered up to them to be so put to death, the death of the Cross by them,
accordingly as he was. I might instance in many other particular purposes that
appear clearly to have been respective; yea even in purposes of dispensing
mercies when ever they were purposed as rewards, there must needs have been an
eye to the works purposed to be rewarded by them. 1 King. 21.29.
As the purpose of respiring the judgment on Ahabs Family till his Sons reign,
as a reward of Ahabs humiliation of himself, 2 King. 10.30.
and the giving Jehues seed to sit upon the Throne of Israel to the fourth
generation, as a reward of his executing judgment on Ahabs Family. For it
could not rightly be said that God would do, or did those things to them,
because of their so doing (as it is said of Ahab; Because he humbles himself
before me, I will not bring the evil in his days; and to Jehu, Because thou
have done well, in executing that which is right in mine eyes, etc. thy
Children of the fourth generation shall sit upon the Throne of Israel) if those
things were before absolutely and irrespectively to those things done by them,
purposed and doomed to them. As I cannot be properly said to give my Son a new
Suit for plying his Book well, which I, without any eye or respect to his so
doing, Matthew. 19.27, 28, 29.
intended absolutely to give him. The like might be said of setting the
Apostles on twelve Thrones, to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, as the reward
of their leaving all for him, and following him in the regeneration; the
purpose of that reward to them, took in doubtless the foreknowledge and
consideration of that their love and faithfulness to him (as also the
preparation of the Kingdom for the Sheep, Matthew. 25.35, 36, etc.
before the foundations of the World, was with respect to them as Sheep, and as
so demeaning themselves, as is represented as the reason of the possession of
it being adjudged to them.) But whereas Judas, one of the then Twelve, to whom
Christ promised the forementioned reward, by transgression and unfaithfulness
lost his share therein, it might seem as if there were a reversibility too in
Gods promises, if not in his purposes therein employed; let us take that
therefore next into consideration.

SECT. 6.
Of the Reversibility or Irreversibleness of God's Purposes.

REversibility of God's purposes, Psa. 33.11. Isa. 14.24. and 46.10.11. Numb.
22.19. 1 Samuel 15.29.
I know will sound somewhat harshly in some Men's Ears, as seeming to imply, a
changeableness in God; and to contradict such sayings as those: That God
purposes, and who can turn it back. And he will do, and perform all his
purposes. And, as he has purposed it shall stand. And, that he is not a Man
that he should lie, nor the Son of Man that he should Repent. Which Sayings are
without controversy most true: yet, in some sense and respect, and that also
according to the Language of the Scripture, in other passages which are as
true, being all the Language of one and the same Holy Spirit of Truth, it may
be affirmed, That Men do miss, and deprive themselves of what was in some sense
purposed of God to them: and that God repents him of his purpose, or of the
good, and evil purposed by him: though he Repents not as Men, through any
change of his Mind, by reason of ignorance, inadvertency, or mutability of his
Wi'l; but only changes his work and respects to Men, as Men being Changed fall
under different unchangeable purposes. His irrespective purposes according to
their Tenor; and so his Absolute and General purposes mentioned in the Gospel,
stand all firm and unalterable, as his purposes of what he would do for Men in
Christ, and to Christ for Men, as also, That he will Bless the Believer, do
good to those that are good, and walk uprightly with him; and reject the Wicked
Evil doer, etc. and so those purposes against particular Men, or Nations, that
are respective when the Decree brings forth, and the day is past, the day of
Grace and Patience expired toward any, in any respect they be then
irreversible too: As with Saul, 1 Samuel 15.29.
when he had disobeyed the Lord's Commandment concerning the Amalekites, with
respect to settling the Kingdom on him, and his House. But as to his respective
purposes, which respect some condition in Man, which may be changeably in this,
or that Person; and before such day past: with respect to the Change made in
such Persons, by which they pass from under one General Degree or purpose, to
be under another: God may be said to Repent of his purpose toward them; or
alter, or Reverse his purpose as to them: when as yet, the alteration is wholly
in them, coming under diverse Irreversible purposes; and not in God's purposes
themselves in the General, either as concerning them, or any man; as to give
some Instances to make the matter more evident and understandable: when an evil
Man or Unbeliever, who as such an Evil Man, is under the General purpose of
Evil and Punishment; (for God purposes to hide himself from, and stand against
Men that are Evil in their Evil ways, while Evil generally) shall, or does
through the grace of God, mixed with those Punishments, Repent him of, and turn
from his Evil way, then God Repents of the Evil purposed against him, (that is,
which his purpose against Evil Doers, contained in it against him, as, and
while an Evil Doer,) and does him good according to his purpose toward
Penitents, and well-doers, under which, by his Repentance, he is now brought:
for he is not the same man now, as to that formality of him, that rendered him
an Object of God's purpose, of Evil, but is another, a New Man, a Man in
Christ, with whom old things are past away, and all things become new; and so
the purposes of God concerning him are new purposes, 2 Cor. 5.17.
the purposes of blessing, and good, through Jesus Christ. And so on the
other-side, when a Righteous Man, or People (as the Believing Gallatians, while
they ran well, Ezekiel. 33.13. Gal. 3.4. and 4.11. and 5.3.4. with 4.8, 9.
and were known of God) were turned from their Righteousness, they miss, and
deprive themselves of the good purposed to Righteous Men; under which they
were, while Righteous. Christ shall now profit them nothing: God's purpose
toward them is Changed, without any Change in the purpose it self, for it is
not the same purpose they were under before, that now they are under; but
another, the purpose of Evil, which stands unalterably toward Evil Doers, to
which they be now changed. They now persisting in their Evil way, to which they
have turned, must expect to meet with the Evil, and Death purposed against such
as do Evil, and continue therein. Yea, this change of purpose proceeds from the
immutability of God's Counsels and purposes; and not from any changeableness in
his purposes, as in themselves; even as the unchangeable nature of the Sun, in
giving forth his Light, produces different Effects in the Eye that is changed,
refreshes the same being sound, which it Afflicts being sore: Men's changes from
Sin to Grace, or the contrary, bring them under different unchangeable
purposes; not God's different purposing toward them, as personally considered,
brings them into different States. In this Dialect the Lord speaks, in Jer.
18.7, 8, 9. if that Nation turns from their Evil, I will repent of the Evil
(...) which I thought, or purposed to do to them. So Jer. 26.3. If they will
hearken and turn every man from his evil way, that I have repented me of the
evil that I (...) purpose to do to them, because of the evil of their doings.
Where both his purpose of Evil against them is expresled, to respect their evil
doings, and is represented as reversible, because not absolutely against those
persons, as persons; but against evil doers, generally as such: and against
those particular evil Men, in such a particular way, only as such evil doers.
The like is in Jer. 36.3. also. Hitherto we might refer that notable passage of
God to Eli, 1 Samuel 2.30. And the Case of Nineveh. Yea, what is herein said, is
agreeable to, and confirmed by what is said of writing Men's Names in the Book
of Life, and Blotting them out, being but allusive Expressions, signifying the
same in substance with what I have here said; which being expressly and plainly
spoken to, in the former part, Chap. 5. Sect. 2. I shall thither refer the
Reader for it: as also, hither I might refer that Phrase of God's breaking,
Numb. 44.34. Which some render breach of Promise, or alteration of purpose: but
seeing neither the Word, Promise, nor Purpose, be in the Hebrew Text, I shall
pass it.

SECT. 7.
Of God's purposes, as they concern his Dispensations of the means of Grace, or
Truth of God, to Men, that they might know, and believe it.

WHat we have hitherto said, concerns for the most part, the contents of the
Gospel-Doctrine, and the things Asserted therein; and the Judiciary, and
Retributive Acts and Works of God. But the purposes of God, as mentioned in the
Distinction, were more properly such, as respect, or concern his Dispensations
of the knowledge of that Object, or Truth of God to Men, and h^ dealings with
them, in order to their knowledge and Faith of it, that they might be Saved
thereby; and so respect his Distributive Acts, as distinguished from
Retributive: and such Distributions too, as pertains to Men's Knowledge of, and
Faith in God; which are more clearly distinct from the Faith, Truth, or
Doctrine; the Knowledge and Faith whereof, is to be, and is distributed. Though
our knowledge of those purposes too, is to be ordered, or had, by what is said
of them in the Scriptures; (which also declare the Gospel-Doctrine; and by the
Gospel-Doctrine it self so as no apprehension of them that clashes with that,
can be right. Now those purposes, are more primarily, and properly
irrespective, and absolute, in regard of any previous dispositions found, eyed,
or considered in the persons, to whom such Dispensations are, or were purposed,
except of Sin, or misery, and helplesness; rendering such Dispensations needful
to them, in order to their Knowledge, Faith, Conversion, or usefulness to other
Men, except in some cases, when God gives, or dispenses more to them that have,
by way of use, or improvement of what was first, and before dispensed, merely
out of Mercy, and irrespectively to any such goodness found in them; and so
accordingly purposed to give to such havers, or improvers of Fore-given
Talents, according to that. Matthew. 13.12.
To him that has shall be given, and he shall have more abundance: and except
in other contrary cases when God takes away former Dispensations, or withholds
further Dispensations: and so purposed to take away, and withold in
consideration of Neglect, to receive, or improve former Dispensations according
to that; From him that has not shall be taken away, even what he has: as God
purposed in foresight of the Jews, not receiving the Gospel, to take away the
Gospel from them. Yea, Matthew. 21.43.
and what Mercies and Dispensations they enjoyed before the fuller coming forth
of the Gospel to them. Romans 1.21, 28. with 2.4, 5. Act. 14.17.
And purposed to give up the Gentiles; for not likeing to retain God in their
Knowledge, to a mind void of Judgment, or to walk in their own ways, though yet
not without mixture of Mercies, bearing Witness of Himself, his Being, Power,
and Goodness; provoking them to grope after Him, and leading them to
Repentance, during the day of his Patience, and purposed to send strong
delusions amongst Men that had his Gospel amongst them, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12.
but received not the love of it, that they might be Saved. These purposes for
dispensing to men his means of grace, and grace with the means; or withholding
his Dispensations from them, were indeed respective too; being concerning
Dispensations of a Retributive or rewarding nature. Otherwise, his purposes of
first preventing men with his grace, or the means of it, are irrespective as to
any good found in them, or evil rewarded, or punished by him; and therefore are
merely according to his good pleasure, both as to the manner and measure of his
Dispensations. And so are his purposes for dispensing and distributing to men
grace, or means of grace; together with, and during the time of his Retributing
Judgments and Punishments for their neglects and abuses of former means and
mercies: he usually dispensing (and so surely he purposed to dispense) much
mixture of grace and goodness leading to Repentance, Ephesians. 1.9, 11.
even with his Judgments, and with-holdings of some higher Dispensations from
them, while he is yet in Measure debating with men, and waiting to be gracious
to them. And his purposes concerning these Dispensations, both in the one
consideration, and the other, are very different. To some he purposing more and
more choice Dispensations; and to some, less and less choice: To some a longer,
and to some a shorter time of waiting upon them, for their turning to him; with
respect to the former of which it is, That the Apostle (as I understand) speaks
of some, sometimes as Elect, and chosen Persons, above others; namely, as to
God's making choice to dispense more special means and mercies to them, Romans
9.10, 12, 16. etc.
both for their own and others good: and others not so neglected but passed by,
as to such an Election, and that merely according to the good pleasure of his
Will without respect to Birth or Works; yea, or of good or evil found or
foreseen in them; as also that He has mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and
whom he will he hardens, as to his continuing his gracious Dispensations to
them, and Operations in them, and with them after they have sinned against
former Dispensations, and deserved Wrath from him* So we may say, He did
graciously purpose to prefer Isaac before Ishmael, as to his Dispensations of
choice Privileges to him for his own and others good; in choosing to have his
Son take Flesh of him, and betrusting his choice Oracles with him, and his
Seed. And of his Seed he freely purposed to dispense more favor and privilege
to Jacob, than to Esau, without respect to Good or Evil in them: but according
to his free Election of Jacob to be He of whom Christ should come, and so to be
exalted to more Honor, Exodus 19.5. Deuteronomy. 4.20, 37. and 7.6, 7, 8. and 14.1, 2.
Romans 3.1. and 9.3, 4, 5. Jer. 3.1. Luke 1.13, 14, 15.
He and his Seed with respect to Christ to come of them, that they should be to
him a peculiar People betrusted with his Oracles and Ordinances, and so to be
as a Kingdom of Priests, to, and amongst all the Nations about them. Yea, to be
betrusted with the Blessing of Abraham, that concerned all the Nations and
Families of the Earth. Thus God fore-knew, and sanctified Jeremy in the Womb,
and ordained him to be a Prophet to the Nations; and John the Baptist; and its
probable that Paul signifies the same of himself, in saying, That God separated
him from his Mothers Womb, Gall. 1.15. God in Christ as Lord and Governor of
his Creatures having that Power and Privilege to appoint and Design them, some
to more honorable uses, and employments, and others to less honorable or
dishonorable Services as pleases him, without any other reason, but because so
it seems good to his Wisdom. Isa. 45.9, 10.
Even as the Potter has power over the clay, (as the Apostle says, Romans 9.21.)
of the same, to make one a vessel of dishonor, and another a vessel of honor,
though this he does in, and through Christ; and in subordination to his Great
Design by Christ, of Glorifying himself to, and amongst men, and prosecuting
their good and Salvation. Even as a Lord or Master of a great household, who
purposes one to Office of Honor, near himself, and another to be in a lower
Rank, a Scullion, or Stable-Groom, and yet designs the public welfare of them
all, and reserves to himself a liberty of advancing the lowest higher, as he
shall judge fit; or of putting down the highest lower, Romans 9.15. 2 Timothy 2.19,
20, 21.
as he may find him demeaning himself unworthily in his greater honor: for
this is to be minded, That though God's purposes of dispensing his Grace and
favor to men, as to his honoring some above others, is altogether free, and
may be irrespective to good, or evil in them; yet neither is that Honor and
Excellency, to which he chooses them in his purpose, (and according to his
choice of them, to which he purposes to call them, and dispense to them;) for
themselves alone, but for the Public good and behoof of others, from amongst
whom he chooses them, and that are not so chosen by him. As Israel freely chosen
from other Nations, and so, as no other Nation was chosen, and in due time
called to be honored with the Blessings of God that pertained not to him
alone, but to all Nations, also even those not so chosen: both Christ who was
to come of him, and the Oracles concerning him, being not sent, nor speaking
good concerning them only, but for, and to all Men: thence that Prayer, God be
Merciful to us, Psalm. 67.1, 2, 3, 4.
and bless us, and cause thy face to shine upon us, that thy way may be known
upon earth, and thy saving health unto all Nations. Let the people praise thee,
O God, yea, let all the people praise thee; O let the Nations be glad and sing
for joy, etc. Even as Josiah singled out from the rest, to Execute Judgment on
the Idolaters: And Cyrus to restore Israel: And John Baptist, and Jeremy, and
Paul, to Preach the Truth of God to others, were not singled out for some
private Personal good to themselves only, but for the Public good and benefit
of all others; amongst whom, and for whom, they were so singled out. Such
purposes for Dispensation, and so the Dispensations according to those purposes
being not to prejudice, but to promote the Public good of Persons, Isa. 49.7,
8. Luke 2.30, 31.
not so chosen as they; even as Christ was chosen, out of, and from all other
men, so as none but He was chosen; yet not for the prejudice, but for the good
of all other Men, so a^ they might have good by him, did they not willingly
refuse, and put it from them. Nor was the good and honor purposed to them, [as
to Israel, Jeremy, John the Baptist, etc.] purposed to be so dispensed to them
and estated on them, as that they be Personally thereby necessitated to Eternal
Life; or to such use of them, as that they might not possibly forfeit them by
abusing them: but God left himself at liberty, to reject even those so purposed
to honor, they dishonouring him, and waxing wanton against him; and exalt to
honor those purposed to dishonorable stations, they therein submitting to
him, or otherwise as he pleased, to assay to bring them to submission to him,
by showing them more Mercy; as Jeremy fore-known, and Ordained to be a Prophet,
held that honor upon terms of Obedience, and Faithfulness to God; to which
also God prevented him, and afforded him sufficient Grace and Encouragement;
Jer. 1.5, 17. and 15.19, 20.
otherwise, he might be confounded before the People, and rejected of God; as
for some time, it seems, he was in way to have been. And Paul understood the
same concerning himself, that though a chosen Vessel to carry the name of
Christ amongst the Gentiles, yet unless faithful to God and Christ therein, woe
to him, God would reject him; as he implys, 1 Cor. 9.16.27. proving the
righteousness of his Apprehension therein from God's dealing, with the Fathers
honored by him; and yet with many of them abusing God's goodness: God not well
pleased, but they were destroyed from before him. 1 Cor. 10.1, -- 12. According
to that in Exodus 32.33. Whosoever has sinned against me, him will I blot out
of my Book. And that general Assersion to Israel, Ezod. 19.5, 6. If ye will
obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant etc. ye shall be a peculiar treasure
to me, a Kingdom of Priests, an holy Nation, etc. And that in Deuteronomy. 7.6, 12,
13. and 8. 19, 20. The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special people to
himself, etc. therefore thou shall keep the Commandments, and the Statutes; and
if ye harken to these judgments, and keep, and do them, the Lord thy God shall
keep with thee the Covenant and the mercy he swear to thy Fathers; and he will
love thee, and bless thee, etc. but if thou at all forget the Lord thy God, and
walk after other Gods, etc. I testify against you this day, that ye shall
surely perish, as the Nations which the Lord destroyed before your face, etc.
And so we find Israel Rebelling against God and Christ, and nor submitting to
him (not seeking righteousness by faith) after much striving of God with them,
and long-suffering toward them cast off from being his People, Romans 11.20, 21,
22. Matthew. 21.41, 42, 43, 44.
as to the body of them: the Kingdom taken from them and given to the Nations
that were Vessels of dishonor comparatively to them. The vessels of dishonor
being made vessels of Mercy; and the vessels of Honor, vessels of Wrath. Such
the Sovereignty of God, over both the Honored, and Dishonored;
notwithstanding his purposes of honoring the one above the other, and
dispensing that Honor freely to them according to his purpose: only in this,
the purpose of God toward them, (the Jews) seems Absolute, Romans 11.25, 28, 29.
Jer. 30.11. and 33.25, 26. and 46.27, 28.
and not to be Repented off; that a remnant of them shall be reserved in all
Ages from Perishing from off the Earth, by any, or all the Judgments that shall
befall them; who also, shall at length see, and be convinced of their Evil way,
and return to God again: though that, and the Promise to David, of a perpetual
Seed, may be accomplished in Christ, the Seed of Jacob and David, after the
Flesh; and a Seed, or Church to be always, through the grace of God reserved to
him: which yet may, and will be, through this, or that particular person,
abusing the grace and honor he is chosen to, may be rejected, and hardened by
him; and that also for the Public good, and warning of others; not to presume
to Sin against God, because of any such Honor chosen to; even as his more
Exemplary mixing of Mercies with his Judgments, having Mercy on whom he
pleases, Act. 9.3, 4, 5, 6. with Gall. 1.16, 17. and Act. 26.19.
when he might harden, and destroy them: as on Paul, when he Judged him, and
smote him down upon the Earth, and might have destroyed him; yet humbling
himself in that Judgment, and being not Disobedient to the Heavenly Vision, he
showed such Mercy, as not only to forgive, and spare him, but upon his
Submission, to take him into special Favor and Honor, that he might be a
Pattern of his Mercy, and Long-suffering, and readiness to Save Sinners, in
submitting to him; and so might be an Encouragement to others, As (...) Act.
22.16. is, Why tarryest, or delayest thou?
to Believe, that do ((...).) delay to Believe on him, 1 Timothy 1.15, 16. Such
Dispensations of Mercy are for the Public Good, and incurragement of all
others to betake themselves to Christ, in whom there is such Mercy. But I have
spoken to these things before, Part. 1. Chap. 1. Sect. 3. And am fallen upon
God's Dispensations; to which it remains, that I nextly speak.

CHAP. VI.
Of God's Dispensations of the knowledge of himself and of his Truth to Men.

The Preface.
HItherto we have considered of the Purposes of God; touching which, it is
safer I conceive thus to understand, and speak with sobriety, as I hope I have
done, then to climb Metaphorically into the nature of God's Willing, Knowing,
and Purposeing so, as to Clash with his Declarations of himself, and Pervert
the Truth of his Heavenly Doctrine, to Men's Destruction; making them believe,
That what ever God says, yet he has purposed Men's Sin and Misery, so, and upon
such terms, as they could not possibly avoid them: And that they were never
their own Mercies that they miss, and deprive themselves of; never had any
thing afforded to them, conducing to their Peace, etc.

But now let us come to view the Dispensations of God to Men, as briefly as we
may; not to speak of all his Dispensations, which are various, yea innumerable,
not possibly to be comprehended, or conceived by us; though all according to
his good pleasure in Christ Jesus, and none of them clashing with the Truth of
his Doctrine, but only of the Dispesations of the Knowledge of Himself, his
Truth and Doctrine to men; and so such means and mercies as tend to their
Repentance and Salvation, as considered in some general heads of them.

SECT. 1.
Of the Means or Mediums made use of by God, and vouchsafed to men for making
known his truth to them, and leading them to Repentance.

GOd vouchsafes unto men diverse Mediums of dispensing or holding forth the
knowledge of himself, and truth in Christ to them; Joh. 1.18. Exodus 33.20.
who is not to be known immediately, or by any direct sight of his essence and
being, by us mortals; but by some Mediums declaring him to us: and those are of
two kinds generally; by one, or both of which he has always declared his Being
and Mind to men, viz.

1. By his works of Creation and Providence upheld by Christ, Psalm. 75.1, 2, 3.
and ordered through him for, and about sinners since the fall; which though
they speak not distinctly and audibly who this God is, or that Jesus is the
Christ, or that there has been such a sacrifice offered up for us, as the
Scriptures mention; yet they do in the wisdom of God, more confusedly, Psalm.
19.2, 3, 4. and 145, 10.
but always truly and righteously (though by reason of our great ignorance and
darkness, less intelligibly to us) hold forth the substance of the doctrine to
be believed by us, 1 Cor. 1.21. Job. 1.4, 5. Psalm. 19.1. Romans 1.19, 20, 21. Job
5.8, 9. Act. 14.15, 17. and 17.26, 27. Romans 1.32. and 2.4, 5, 14. Psalm. 36.7.
and 145.9, 16, 17, 18.
and of the obedience required of us: namely, that there is a glorious God, the
Maker and Orderer of all things, and that he is Eternal, Almighty, Infinitely
Wise, Good, etc. That he is to be sought after, loved, worshipped and cleaved
to by us; that we are sinners against him and deserve death and wrath, and yet
that God is Gracious and Good to sinners, loath to destroy them: in a word,
that God is, and that he is the rewarder of them that seek him out, or
diligently seek him; the Savior of all men, especially of them that believe in
him. And to this the Scriptures bear witness, telling us, that therein (even in
the works of God) God and his truth are held forth to men, to their very Hearts
and Consciences, even that which is to be known of God, his Being, Power,
Eternity, Goodness, so as leading to repentance, and to glorify him as God,
and be thankful to him, feel after him; yea, and so as affording argument and
motive to trust in him in our miseries and dangers, as may be seen, Romans 1.18,
19, 20, 21, 28. and 2.4, 5. Job 5.7, 8, 9. So that even they that have but
them, and what God by his Spirit is manifesting in men through them, if they be
not led to repentance by them, and if they do not glorify him as God and
become thankful to him, are without excuse; which glorifying him as God must
needs be to have such honorable apprehensions of him, and affections toward
him as become him, according to the measure of the manifestation afforded by
him: (...).
and their being without excuse, must needs with reference to that signify,
that they can plead no just excuse for their not so thinking of him and
affecting him, and so demeaning themselves toward him, as becomes the Majesty
and Goodness of God; they cannot plead ignorance, or want of sufficient power
and grace afforded to have led them thereunto: the things of God being not only
outwardly set before them in his Works, but also so shined into them, as that
((...)) being considered or minded, they may be evidently seen. It Is true, they
do not distinctly discover Christ as made man, and suffering, and dying for us;
but that glory, goodness and mercy of God, which by means of Christ is streamed
forth more generally to men, is in great measure manifested in them. Joh. 1.1,
2, 3. Col. 1.16, 17. Heb. 1.3.
And the God they witness and lead to is Christ, and God in him; inasmuch as it
is Christ and the Father in, and by Christ who was the Creator, Upholder, and
Orderer of them; the heavens declare the glory of God (his Greatness, Power,
Majesty and Goodness, etc.) and the Firmament shows his handy work, who made
them; day to day teaches knowledge, and night to night utters Speech, Psalm.
19.1, 2. yea they declare that his name is near (so as it may in some measure
be seen, known, and understood of men,) Psalm. 75. (...) All his Works praise,
commend, and set him forth, even him who is God o^ Savior, God in Jesus
Christ, in, by and through whom he only ordere^ and disposes of them, Psalm.
145.1^ Now concerning this way of evidencing himself and truth, let these
things further be minded.

1. That this is an universal Medium of manifesting himself and truth to men;
both in respect of times and places, in all ages, and to all People and Nations
he affords this discovery of himself, as Psalm. 19.3. there is no Speech or
Language where their voice is not heard; their lin^ is gone out into all the
earth, and their words unto the ends of the world, so as that by these
Preachers or Declarers of his Name, to be called upon by men, it is truly said
they have all heard, Romans 10.18. and upon whom does not his light arise? Job
25.3. in this Medium Christ, the Word, with the Father, even that word that was
made flesh, is the true light, lighting every man coming into the world, Joh.
1.9.

2. That it is not good to argue from what men perceive in, and by them to what
they speak or hold forth to men, no more than its from a blind or purblind man's
sight to the things presented by way of object to him: they speak forth as much
of God as any do rightly discern by them, yea, and more. But all that they
speak or signify it to, do not perceive or see what they signify. Something
may, and often is set before men that they do not see, and often more than they
see, who see something: 1 Cor. 1.21.
they set forth God, in the wisdom of God, though man in his wisdom discerns,
or knows, or approves it not; the light shines in the darkness, Jo^. 1.5.
though the darkness in which it shines comprehends it not: we may not say
there is not so much held forth to all Gods Works, as some wiser Philosophers
and Poets see, because all did not see so much as they (though probably some
see more and better) but rather argue there was so much held forth to all,
because some did see so much to be held forth; the difference was in the sight,
not in the object; nay we that have more light, see by that light, that they
testify by way of interpretation and intimation of the Ransom and Mediation of
Christ; and sure they do so, and did so always, and to all since the sall, else
the light could not discover that they do so. The Object is the same in it self
in the light, and in the dark, in more light and in less, though it is not so
seen in the dark, or in a less light as in a greater: yea and the light is one
in it self to a quicker and duller sight, though a duller sight see not so well
by it as a quicker.

3. That much less are we to confound with the testimony of God in his Works
(or that his Works give of him) the collections and conceptions of men which
they have gathered from his Works in their corrupt wisdom, while lifting up
themselves in their thoughts, and boasting themselves to be wise, they have
become fools; and their foolish hearts were darkened in them, Romans 1.21, 22, 23.
as the Apostle speaks plainly, distinguishing between what God manifested by
his Works to, and in men, and what they, becoming vain in their imaginations
(and much more, when for that vanity they were given up of God to a reprobate
mind) concluded from them, and traditionally laid down for truth concerning
him, as about the plurality of Gods, the acceptableness of Image Worship to
him; things clearly discovered to be false, even by the light of God shining in
those Works, as by that Paul reproved them, Act. 17.24, 25, 26, 27. The
Philosophers conceived and taught many things from what they see in Gods Works,
which yet his Works did not signify to them; even as many now do collect and
gather many things from the words of God perverted by them, and set up forms of
faith and worship, which yet were never therein taught by him.

4. That without question God that is no respecter of persons, Act. 10.34. Romans
2.11.
accepts all in every Nation, who by such means as he affords them, sincerely
grope after him, and seek him, and therethrough are brought to fear him and
work righteousness, upon the account of, and through Christ the Savior of the
World and Mediator of God and men, even before, and though they attain not a
distinct knowledge of him: yea, and for his sake passes by such infirmities and
mixtures, as through ignorance and weakness, and the prevailing customs of
places not seen by them to be evil, may cleave to them: they that by nature do
the things contained in the Law or written Doctrine, their uncircumcision shall
be counted to them for circumcision, and glory, honor and peace shall be to
every one that does good, not only to the Jew that had Instruction and the Law,
but to the Gentile also that was without Law, and had not that Instruction the
Jew had, Romans 2.7, 9, 10, 11, 14, 26, 27, 28, 29.
and therefore are said to do it by nature, not as corrupted, but as prevented
only with that goodness and truth of God manifested in men by, and through his
works, without the written and vocal Instruction to the Jews superadded. And of
such as these probably our Savior meant inclusively, when he said, Many shall
come from the East, Matthew. 8.12.
and from the West, etc. and shall sit down in the Kingdom of God, when the
Children of the Kingdom (born and brought up in Gods Church, and under the
nature of his Instructions and Ordinances) should be thrust out: for though
there can be no salvation but by Christ, yet there may be salvation through
him, to them that distinctly hear not of him; (...) in the case of Infants,
dying in their ^fancy, may be seen. This then is o^ Medium of Gods making known
the Object of Divine Faith, or his truth to me^ in part, with reference to
their salvation.

2. The other way is by his Word, a^ distinguished from that silent language of
his Works, an express speaking forth, by intelligible and vocal sayings, or
visionary representations, to men's Spirits, the truths to be believed by men.
And this also he did, and thus dispensed the knowledge of himself to men diverse
and sundry ways, and at diverse and several times, Heb. 1.1, 2. which
dispensations, as to the acts of dispensing, both by Works and Words are to be
distinquished from the thing or object dispensed, that being but one in it
self, these very different and diverse; as in this latter way.

1. To some he dispensed the knowledge of himself and truth in some measure by
more immediate revelations of himself, as to Adam in Paradise, Genesis 2.16, E^od.
20.
17. and 3.8, 9. and to Moses, and the People at Mount Sinai in the Wilderness,
but fully and most immediately to Jesus Christ.

2. To some by Angels ministering the knowledge of God to them, and that either
waking as to Abraham, Genesis 18.1, 2, 3. and 22.11, 15, 16. Jacob, Genesis 32.1, 2.
Moses, Exodus 3. Zachary the Father of the Baptist, Luke 1.9, 10, 11. Ma^y the
Mother of our Lord, verse. 28, 30, and diverse others; or in dreams and visions,
as to Nathan, Psalm. 89.19. Dan. 7. and 8. and 10. Joseph, Matthew. 1.20. and
2.12. and diverse others.

3. To some by his Spirit more secretly, insinuating it self into their hearts
with the knowledge of God, as to the Prophets and Apostles more ganerally, 2 Samuel 23.2. Ephesians. 3.5.

4. In these last days by the personal appearance, and vocal ministration of
Jesus Christ himself, both to his Disciples, and to the World, Heb. 1.1, 2, 3.
and 2, 3.

5. To some he more mediately dispensed the knowledge of his Truth, by the
ministration of those to whom he had more immediately first declared it; and
that either,

1. By their vocal preaching of it, as by the preaching of the Prophets and
Apostles to the People amongst whom they were sent; 2 Pet. 3.2, 3. Romans 16.25,
26. Epes. 4.11, 12.
and so by the vocal Preaching of the Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, though
but secondary Ministers of it: amongst all which, the Preaching of Jesus Christ
our Lord, in his personal ministration, may be reckoned as prime and chief; he
being both a more or most immediate, and also a mediate Revealer of it in
diverse respects: Joh. 1.18.
most immediate as the Eternal Word, the Son of God, in the Bosom of the
Father: mediate as he was also Man, Matthew. 4.17.
and as the Manhood (...) employed in the making out the Wi^ the Father,
brought down by the Wo^

2. By their Writings the Scriptures (...) Truth, 2 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. and 3.2,
3. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. Joh. 5.39.
indicted by the instinct and direc^ on of the Holy Ghost, and left upon record,
for the instruction and helpfulne^ of after ages also, and of all people (...)
whom they are by providence ordered even such as to, and amongst whom (...)
Prophets, Apostles, and the rest of the heavenly Penmen never vocally
Preached. Now this Preaching by Word, ^ther as spoken or written, added to
(...) former the works of God, gives a mo^ distinct sound and signification to
p^dull creatures, and brings the knowledge of God, as to the declaration of it,
near^ to us: yet speaks the same things that (...) Works speak; The Book of
Ecclesiastes.
both agree to praise an^ commend God to men, Joh. 1.4, 5, 6, 7 1 Cor. 1.21,
22, 23. Psalm. 145.9, 10. an^ to cry all flesh is grass; and so in debasi^ of
man, and all other things, as to man happiness, that he may be made to enqui^
after God, look to, and acquaint himse^ with him, and embrace his grace and
favation through Christ brought to them But the Revelation by word is (and mu^
more as added to the former) more for and significant, and speaks out more a^
more distinctly what the other did b^ darkly hint and signify; and therefore
also more is required and expected from those which have this latter also, tha^
from those that had, or have the former only.

SECT. 2.
That the Dispensation of the Word or Oracles of God, was neither so Universal
as that of his Works, nor to all Ages the same, as to clearness and fullness,
but different to diverse Ages, and to diverse Persons in the same Ages.

QUestionless there has been no Age of the World, in which God did not reveal
his Mind by his Words unto men, Tit. 1.2.
from the very Creation and Fall to this day we live in; yea, we may say, there
has scarce been any person (if any) capable of understanding to whom the Word,
even Christ, as the Light of the World, has not by some means, and in some
measure of his Light and Truth addressed himself, as is signified, Joh. 1.4, 5,
9. yet we may say, that in many Ages the words of Truth, Psalm. 147.19, 20. Act.
14.16, 17.
or more express significations of his Mind by Law and Doctrine have not been
generally afforded to all men, nor in all Ages alike to any men. It pleased God
in that matter (as we have seen in what we said of his purposes) to
discriminate some people from other, Romans 3.1, 2. and 9.3, 4, 9 (...) Cant.
(...) 16. and (...) 7. (...)
and Elect and Choose some out from amongst the rest, whom he herein preferred
in Honor and Dignity above the rest. Some he was pleased to enclose and dress
as his Garden from the rest, Isa. 5.1, 2, -- 6. and 32.15, 16. and 35.1, 2, --
6. Act. 14.16, 17. Deuteronomy. 32.
who comparatively were left as the open F^ild; and to make them as his
Vineyard, when the rest were comparatively but like the Wilderness; when he
left other People to walk after their own ways (though not without continual
witnesses of himself vouchsafed them generally in his Works, in which was his
goodness leading them to Repentance.) He took Israel as a more choice People,
and Portion for himself: he made known his ways to Moses, his Acts to the
Children of Israel, Psalm. 103.7. He showed his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes
and his Judgments to Israel. He dealt not so with any Nation; and as for his
Judgments (Ordinances and Government in his Church) they did not know them; as
is said, Psalm. 147.19, 20. though yet wisdom in the mean time, even the Wisdom
of God, ceased not to cry to them without, even to them without the House she
had builded, the Church or City of God, and to utter her Voice in the Streets
to call men to Repentance, as Prove. 1 20, 21. and 8.1, 2, 3, 4. though in
respect of such outward, verbal and written Instructions as the Jews. Had the
Gentiles were a People distinguished from them: the Jews a People under Law, or
that had the Law, and the Gentiles a People without the Law, Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 71.
Act. 2.38, 39.
as Romans 2.12, 14. yet they were not wholly without Law; they were a Law to
themselves. The Jews were a People nearer to God in that respect; the Gentiles
a People far off, that had not God and his Covenant, and Promises Lodged and
Tabernacled amongst them, if we may so say, as the Jews had. Ephesians. 2.19, 20.
The Jews were as Gods Household, and household Servants to whom he opened his
mind more expressly and plainly, Psalm. 145.9. and 148.11, 12, 13.
when the Gentiles were as Tenants, dwelling at a distance from him; though he
a good gracious Lord to them all, and his tender mercies upon, or over all his
Works: but they stood not so hear him, nor had such advantages of hearing his
more glorious Discoveries of his mind as the other had. Only as we showed
above, they (the Jews) were not so privileged, merely for themselves, but to
be means of making known Gods mind to others, Exodus 19.5, 6. Ezekiel. 5.5, 6, 7, 8.
as a Royal Priesthood before him; which because they did not in their
Prosperity as they ought, but rather turned aside to the ways of the Heathen,
than endeavored to turn in the Heathen to him, therefore he dispersed and
scattered them and their Books, and Doctrine amongst the Heathen. Matthew. 10.1,
2. and 21.43, 44. and 28.19, 20, Psalm. 72.16.
And at length chose out a handful of them, whom he made, and found faithful
before him, and ordered them to do that great Work, of making known his Mind
among the Nations; taking in his remoter Tenants into his House and Household,
Romans 11.20, 21, 22. Mat. 8.12.
to be a People near to him; and turning his former Household Servants and
Children, born in his House, out of doors, beca^ or their pride and stubborness
aga^ him.

Nor did he only take, and use this ^berty in revealing his Words and
Judgments to one People, and not to other (though to that one, that they might
spread the knowledge of God among^ others, Romans 16.25, 26. Col. 1.25, 26, 27
Ephesians. 3.4, 5, 6.
Psalm. 17, 67.) but also to reveal (...) Words more fully to some persons, and
more immediately than to others; yea in some Ages more fully than in others. He
more immediate Discoveries of his mind, were not given to all men, no nor to
all Israel, nor to all that feared God in Israel, as to the immediateness of
their Discovery; Psalm. 25.8, 9, 12, 13, 14. Mat. 13.11, 12. Prove. 22.23. and
2.1, and 2.6. --
(though they that fear him have, and had in all Ages an understanding given
them into the mysteries of God, and secrets of his Kingdom, above any that fear
him, not as to the manner, efficatiousness, and usefulness of their perception)
but to some certain select persons from amongst those that feared him, whom he
was pleased at his pleasure to make use of, for the meadiate revealing, and
making him known to the rest, both fearers and not fearers of God as was meet
for them. As to Enoch and Noah before the Flood, in the separation of the
family of Seth from the rest; afterward to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and
the following Prophets and Apostles, and above all, to his only Son our Lord
Jesus Christ; who immediately in the Manhood received the knowledge of God from
the Word, or God himself, and diffused it abroad into his Apostles and
Disciples, to divulge it to others. Now as we may not from that election of
them (with respect to whom, and the committing of the faith to them, it is
called the faith of Gods Elect, Tit. 1.1.) conclude that all others of Israel
were rejected of God, or left without sufficient means of Salvation, because
not so Elected of God to that honor of so immediate Revelation as they: no
more may we conclude from Gods Electing Jacob and his Posterity to have the
more full means of Grace, and clearer knowledge of God manifested and committed
to them, and not so choosing the other Nations; but passing them by as to that,
Romans 2.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 25, 26, 27.
that therefore the other Nations were rejected of God from any possibility to,
and left without sufficient means of their Salvation. This liberty and exercise
of the Soverainty of God in honoring some above others, and that with
reference too, to the good of others, nothing prejudiceth the good of all, but
rather proclaims God the prosecutor and promoter of it, though such
vouchsafements of choice privileges, were choice favors to those, they were
vouchsafed to, and put the greater engagements of thankfulness and service to
God upon them. The like may be said about his different Dispensations in, and
unto former Ages, hiding comparatively from them, what he was pleased to
reserve for, and reveal to, and in these last Ages, as is said, Romans 16.25, 26.
Col. 1.26. Ephesians. 3.5. viz. that his hiding the mystery from those forme^ Ages,
does not imply his rejection of them to destruction, it being but a comparative
hiding thereof: it was not so made known then as now, says Ephesians. 3.5. For as
we said in the beginning of this Section, it was made known more or less in
every Age of the World, as to the substance of it, as holding forth the way of
man's salvation, as may be made evident by Induction.

1. In the Ages before the Flood.

2. And from the Flood to Moses. And

3. From Moses to David.

4. From David to the Captivity of Israel.

5. From Israel's Captivity to the coming of Christ in the Flesh, and so on.

6. From thence to these times. In which too, this will be evidenced, that all
the said Revelations of God, as to the way of men's salvation, have either
expressly; or implyedly spoken of Christ, and of his appearance in the Flesh, as
may be seen in the following Sections of that Induction.

SECT. 3.
Of the Dispensation of the knowledge of God and Christ, by his words in
Paradise, and from thence to the Flood.

NO sooner had our First Parents, Tempted of the Serpent, Fallen from God, and
was Convicted thereof by the Voice of God; but God in the greatness of his
Mercy in threatening Destruction to the Serpent, and his Works Preached Grace
and Redemption to Mankind, and intimately made Promise of a Savior to us; in
that expression, Genesis 3.15. I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between her seed, and thy seed. He (that is her Seed) shall bruise thy Head,
and thou shall bruise his Heel. Indeed, these Expressions were somewhat
Mystical; yet contained, in a manner, Isa. 7.9. and 9.15.
the whole Gospel: for, surely by the Serpent, was primely signified, That old
Serpent the Devil, and Satan, Rev. 20.1, 2. And by his Head, his Plot, Device,
and Project; and the Principallity, and Power, he thereby got over Mankind. His
Plot was, to separate between us and God, to our utter ruin, by inticeing us
to Sin against him, whom he knew to be so perfect a hater of Sin; and to have
so solemnly threatened Death to Man, in case of his sinning, as that he might
rationally expect, that in case he would draw him to Sin, his Ruin would
inevitably follow thereupon* and that being cast off by God, He should be left
to his (the Serpent) Power and Malice, to do what He pleased with him. The
bruising of his Head, Heb. 2.14. Coll. 2.16. Luke 11.22. 2 Timothy 1.10. Luke
1.74, 75. 1 Pet. 3.18.
then could signify no less, then the spoiling of his Plot, and devesting him
of his Power, by destroying his Works, and abolishing their Fruit; taking away
his Armor, Sin, and the sentence, and curse of the Law upon Man for Sin; and
so evacuating Death, the Wages of Sin, and setting Man at liberty from Satan,
so as he may return to God again: all which, God intimately promised, should be
done; not immediately by himself, for he said, I will break thy head: no, God
would have Satan know he disdained to match himself with him, as it were, in
the Combat; he would do it by a Man, one in that nature, that he had got
Victory over, and which was spoiled by him; even a Seed to be born to, and to
come forth of the Woman. And so he signified, both that Man should be Ransomed
from that his Fall, and from the jurisdiction of the Serpent the Devil, thereby
obtained: And that the Savior should be a Man; nor Adam himself, nor Eve, but
one to descend from them, the Seed of the Woman; with respect to which, Adam
hearing, and believing it, called his Wife by a new Name; for whereas before he
called her Ishah a Woman, Genesis 2.23. with 3.20.
or Manness, because one with, and taken out of Man; now he calls her Chavah,
or Evah; because by this gracious appointment of God, she was made the Mother
of all Living; the bringer forth of a Seed remotely, that should remedy dead,
and destroyed Man: and remove the Curse come upon the Creation by Man's Sin,
and so bring in Life and Immortality to Man? but for which, She might rather
have been called, the Mother of all Dying. This Promise God was pleased to put,
as a Foundation sure and firm, Isa. 28.16.
under Man's Feet, to support, and bear him up in all his following Griefs and
Sorrows, Labors and Turmoyles, even to Death, that now were to come upon him,
because of his Sin, that he might not despair, and sink under them. And this
before God proceeded to denounce any of those things upon him, or to take away
Paradise, and the Tree of Life from him: that so yet the Woman might
thenceforth conceive, and bear in hope; And the Man labor, and eat his Bread,
though in the sweat of his brows, yet in Hope; and both Man and Woman both live
and dye in Hope, even in the hope of Eternal Life, through this Faith of the
Promised Seed, or Messiah; which is the Faith that the Just have had, to live
by, and to dye in, in all Ages: So much was implyedly Revealed then to Man,
even to all Mankind then Being. Yea sure, and God further employed, That that
Seed should be one with himself; and so, God-man: when he after added ver. 22.
Behold Man is become as one of us, to know good and evil not by way of Irony or
Derision, but by way of Prediction, with respect to his former appointment,
That Man's Nature should be in the Promised Seed, as one of the Persons in the
Trinity, taken up into Unity with God, and to his glory and throne of Dignity;
to have indeed a knowledge of Good and Evil, such as the Devil little thought
of: not such as Adam got by Sin, to know the difference between his former
good, and his present bad Condition; but both an Experimental Knowledge of the
Depth of Man's Misery, to be born by him; and of the height of Good, in the
enjoyment of God's Glory, to be enjoyed of him: and such a knowledge of them, as
is with, and is given forth by the Divine Majesty: as also thereby may be
employed, his Power and Authority over Men, in the Person of Christ, to Save,
and enliven Fallen Man, and to help him against Satan, and all adverse Power,
being as one of the Persons in the Trinity, Isa. 11.2, 3. and 42.1.
the Spirit of Might, Counsel, Judgment upon him, etc. Thence also God took
away that Tree of Life, that might have preserved him Immortal in his Fall,
that he might be forced to look to the Promised Seed, and live by the Faith of
him, in a Mortal Dying condition. By the Faith of whom Preached, and held forth
doubtless by Adam and Eve, to their Posterity, as they came into the world.
Abel afterward offered up to God a more acceptable Sacrifice, than Cain. Heb.
11.4. with Genesis 4.4.
Yea, doubtless the very Law, and practice of Sacrificing mentioned all along
after the Fall, and propagated to all Nations, and places of the world, had its
rise and spring from the Promise of Christ; and was an outward Testimony, of
their acknowledging themselves Sinners; and that they needed by some Ransom,
or shedding of Blood to have Atonement made for them; and that there-through
only they might have access to, and liberty to Worship God: though all that
offered understood not, or believed so much. and that seems rather the meaning
of their Bloody Sacrifices, such as Abel brought then, of such dry ones as Cain
Offered. Cain by his Offering, seemed only to acknowledge God, Lord of the
World, the giver of the Creatures to Men, and not to think there would be a
Sacrifice propitiatory needful to take away Men's Sins, which Abels Bloody
Sacrifice, or Sacrifice of Living Creatures, seemed to have signified his Faith
of, by virtue of which, his Sacrifice was respected, and accepted; when as Cain
coming in himself, Genesis 4.7.
without such respect to Faith in the Mediator, was not accepted; though to him
God declared himself gracious, ready to Pardon, and accept him too, upon his
Repentance, and doing better. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted?
(namely with God, who is no respecter of persons) and if thou do ill, Sin (or
as some read, or understand, is a Sin-offering lies at the door; Genesis 4.10,
11, 12, 14.
(through which, namely, thou may obtain pardon, and grace to do better: but
Cain persisting in his Sin, and adding Murder to his Envy, was banished from
the presence of the Lord surely, from the society and fellowship of those, who
walked with God, and unto whom God was showing forth his Face, and gracious
Presence; implying that to men then, and to the rest of men, besides Cain, God
was manifesting his kindness and Truth; and Revealing himself graciously to,
Ver. 26.
and amongst them. Yea, and after that, when Enos was born to Seth, its said,
Then began men to call upon the Name of the Lord. Which may imply, that then
they began to gather together to more public and solemn Worshipping of him,
according to the Revelation of himself to, and amongst them, signified by his
Name. Some render it, Then began the Name of the Lord to be Profaned by Men:
and if so, then it signifies, That men did not generally turn aside from the
Name of God. Though Cain had walked unworthily of it, to Idolatries, and
Profaneness till Enos was born; which was in the Year of the World, Two hundred
thirty five; as appears, Genesis 5.3, 6. Nor did their so doing then, (if then)
hinder, but that God was vouchsafing the knowledge of his Name to them: nay,
else they could not have Profaned it, (as not called upon it) if they had had
to knowledge of it vouchsafed of God to them: but it is clear, without
exception, That God did Dispense the Knowledge of Himself, and goodness to
them: all those Ages before the Flood, however many then, (as now, also many
do,) did not receive it, or walk therein. For though I am not convinced, that
all those Patriarks from Adam to Noah, mentioned Genesis 5. were Prophets, and
Teachers, as some probably conceive, and as may possibly have been true; yet
its clear, Genesis 5.21, 22, 24.
that Enoch that lived many Years before Adam dyed, was a Holy Man, and a
Prophet; for we find, not only that he walked with God, but also, That he
Prophesied of the Coming of Christ in the last Judgment, Jude 14. Enoch, the
Seventh from Adam, Prohecyed of these Sayings, Behold, the Lord comes with ten
thousand of his Saints, etc. And Enoch lived above an Hundred years after
Lamech's Birth, who seems to have been an Holy Man, and a Prophet, and to have
lived in the Faith of the Messiah, or Promised Seed; as appears in the reason
he gave of his calling his Son Noah, Genesis 5.29. Saying, This shall comfort us
concerning our work, and the toil of our hands, because of the ground which the
Lord had cursed. Which, though some conceive he spoke by way of mistake, as
being overhasty in expecting the Messiah, or in Calculating the time of its
performance, hoping Noah was the Man, (as many good Men have been mistaken in
their over-short Calculating the time of Christ's Second Appearing.) Yet I
rather think, he spoke it by way of Prophecy, as fore-knowing, that in his
(Noah's) Loins that Comforter of Mankind, concerning their works and toil, lay
as it were hid and that of him he was to descend and spring forth in his
Season. Which Noah also was a Preacher of Righteousness both before, and after
the Flood; and ceased not to Testify against the World and its Wickedness; and
to Reprove, and Condemn it, both by his Preaching, and upright Living: And
though it is true. That in his time the whole Earth had corrupted its way before
God to the provoking him to sweep them all away with a Deluge: Genesis 6.1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, -- 11, 12, 13.
yet both then its evident, there were Sons of God amongst them, holding forth,
and professing the Name of God; (though by turning aside, to Idolatrous
Daughters, they also corrupted themselves by degrees;) and also, that even in
the worst of the Worlds Apostasy; both Noah Preached to them; and God, and
Christ by his Spirit, Preached to their Spirits, and strove in, and with them,
Reproving and Judging them and God was waiting for them, with much
long-suffering all the time that the Ark was preparing, Genesis 6.3. 1 Pet. 3.19.
Luke 17.26, 27. Heb. 11.7.
even till the day that Noah entered into it, and the Flood came upon them:
which Ark also, was a signification and Type of Christ; and while Noah was
preparing it, he was according to the manifestation of Christ then vouchsafed,
preaching Christ too, and as well entering into him by Faith, and bringing his
Family what he could in to him, as entering and bringing them bodily into the
Ark: But the World rejected them both together till the Flood came, and then it
was too late to seck help in either, when the Decree brought forth, and the
Destruction came upon them. Thus to those first Ages was God dealing with, and
dispensing the knowledge of himself and his Truth to the World, which Ages
contained the space of 1656 years.

SECT. 4.
Of the Ages after the Flood till Moses.

AFter the Flood Noah lived as a Prophet to, Genesis 9.29.
and among his Children by the space of three hundred and fifty years, even
until within two years of the birth of Abraham; and Shem his Son lived among
them five hundred years, till Isaac was fifty years of age; and both he and
Japheth appear to have been good men, as might also Arphaxad, Salah, Genesis 10.25.
Eber and the rest of them. It appears that Eber was a Prophet by the name he
gave his Son Peleg, signifying Division, because in his days the Earth was
divided; and he lived nine and twenty years after Shem, even till Isaac was
seventy and nine years old, and by consequence till Jacob and Esau was
nineteen. True it is that in those times, notwithstanding these good Men living
then in that little World, men quickly degenerated again. And sometime within
the space of three hundred years or less (possibly two hundred) in Peleg's days
they forgetting God and his Judgments and Mercies both, fell to build a Tower
to get themselves a Name, and probably to secure themselves against an after
Deluge, not believing the word of God, nor walking perfectly with him. Yea,
Josh. 24.1, 2.
and before Abraham's removing out of Haran (if not before he came into it)
Superstition and Idolatry began to overspread the Earth, so as that Terah
Abraham's Father was not free from it; though both Noah and Shem (and diverse
other good Men it is likely) were then living but that is to be attributed to
Men's corrupting themselves. God nevertheless was dispensing the knowledge of
his word to, and amongst them; but more fully yea more fully than to the Holy
men in former Ages was he pleased to dispense and give it forth to Abraham,
with Isaac and Jacob and their Children. Abraham he called and chose and
brought out (...) Vr of the Chaldees, and made known him self more familiarly
and clearly to him by way of Covenant with him, finding his heart faithful,
Genesis 12.3. and 18.18. and 22.18. and 26.4. and 28.14. Gal. 3.8, 9.
as Neh. 9.7, 8. with Genesis 12.1. Heb. 11.8. To him he revealed. That of him
should the promised Seed be, and so to Isaac and Jacob after him and that in
that Seed all the Families of the Earth should be blessed; there blessing
should be prepared for them, and given unto them; with respect to which he
called his name Abraham, as ordaining him a Father of the many Nations, that
they might be directed thither to look for blessing. To him therefore
Melchisedeck also the Priest of the most High God, and King of Salem, Genesis
14.19, 20.
gave a most solemn blessing after his return from the slaughter of the Kings,
Romans 4.11, 12.
by which his name was made famous doubtless in all those Nations. To him God
gave the word of Faith, even the promise of blessing in his Seed to all the
Families of the Earth, to propagate a Spiritual Seed to God by, of whom Abraham
Ministerially should be the Father; and added to it the sign of Circumcision, a
Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith which he had (both as it signifies a
gracious believing, and as it signifies the Word and Doctrine to be held forth
to his Children and Servants, and in the World as he had opportunity) before he
was Circumcised, for the Sealing unto men the truth of that Faith that was
given to him and held forth by him; that therein they that received it might be
justified and accepted of God as righteous, even they that believed God's
Revelation to him of blessing in his Seed to all the Nations, and there sought
it: Which blessing what could it signify, but that in, and by his Seed sin
should be satisfied for and taken away, Romans 4.6, 7. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.
and the Curse and Death removed, and that access to God and Grace, and a fvour
with God might through him be had, even by them all; which same blessing and
promise was also given to Isaac and Jacob, as may be seen in the Scriptures
fore quoted; yea to them all also was given further the promise of another
Inheritance, an Heavenly Country, figured too by the promise of the Land of
Canaan, which they believed and hoped for, and sought after, and plainly
declared their Faith and expectation of, Heb. 11.9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Something sure was in this beyond what the former Fathers had revealed to them,
by virtue of which he obtained the honor of being called the Friend of God,
and the Father of all that believe. 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Jam. 2.21, 23. Romans 4.16.
Genesis 49.10.
To and by Jacob also was yet further revealed that the promised Seed should be
of his son Judah, whom also he calls the Shiloh or Peacemaker, as implying his
work should be to make peace between God and Men, and between Men and Men, for
unto him should be the gathering of the People or their obedience; yea and this
famous hint was further given him of the time of Christ's coming, that it
should be before the Scepter or Tribe should depart from Judah, and a Lawgiver
should cease from between his feet; that is, they should be continued a Tribe,
and have the form of a Commonwealth and Government amongst them (though for
sometime interrupted as to the power with them, yet not taken or removed wholly
from them) till Shiloh should come or be born to him. Now this manifestation of
God, and of the knowledge of himself and Son vouchsafed to those Patriarchs
they transmitted to their Children, and it was kept by, and with them in Egypt
till the time of their delivery; Heb. 11.25, 26.
thence by Joseph and his Brethren during their lives, and after that by the
Fathers that succeeded them, though the generality of them declined from
walking with God perfectly, and defiled themselves with the Idols of the
Egyptians (even as the Children of Ishmael, Abraham's Son by Hagar, and his
Sons by Keturah; and Esau and his posterity too, to whom yet their Fathers
Abraham and Isaac were not wanting to transmit the knowledge of God they had
received from him too, generally had done.) And yet we may not think that
because those Worthies only had the honor and privilege to be chosen to have
such further dispensations of the Mystery of God opened to them, and be trusted
with them, and no others so as they; that therefore there were no other holy
Men in those times but they, or no knowledge of God and means of Salvation
afforded to other Nations. For beside what we have said Sect. 1. it is evident
as we noted above, that Shem, and Arphaxad, and Heber were living a good part
of those times; yea, and there was Lot too, and Melchisedech (if a man) in the
days of Abraham and Lot is called a Righteous man; 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
yea evident it is that amongst the Children of the East there were Job and his
Friends good men, Job. 1.1, 5, 8. and 17.8, 9.
yea, Job highly commended as not inferior to any for the fear of God and
uprightness of his heart, and they spoke of Righteous and Innocent men in their
discourses, as supposing there were such then to be found amongst them, and
they are probably conceived to have lived about the time of Israel's sojourning
in * Colligimus ex libro ejus tertia generatione posteriorem fuisse (Jobum)
quam Israel Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 18. cap. 47.
Egypt. And at the time of Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt, God did
marvellously make bare his Arm amongst the Na^ons, that they might know and
seek him, especially to Israel by the hand of Moses and Aaron. Now the Ages
spoken to in this Section contain at least eight or nine hundred years;
according to Bishop Usher, eight hundred fifty seven, beginning the 430 years
which it is said the sojourning of the Children of Israel in the Land of Egypt
continued, from Abraham's coming out of his own Country into the Land, and so
from his, and his Seeds becoming sojourners, and the promise being made to him
of Blessing in his Seed for all the Families of the Earth, mentioned by the
Apostle, Gal. 3.8, 16, 17. which promise, he says, was confirmed with him four
hundred and thirty years before the Law. And indeed it is to be minded, that
the Scripture Exodus 12.40. does not say that the Children of Israel sojourned
in Egypt four hundred and thirty years; but the sojourning of the Children of
Israel (who dwelt in Egypt) was four hundred and thirty years; and possibly the
Fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob may be included in that phrase the Children
of Israel, though they were their Fathers and not Children of Israel, by such a
manner of speaking as is used Ezekiel. 23.2, 3, 4. where Samaria and Jerusalem,
Aholah and Aholibah are said to have been two Women that committed Whoredoms in
Egypt in their youth, whereas they were neither Samaria not Jerusalem, nor
distinguished into two Peoples or Churches, or Commonwealths, Heb. 7.9, 10.
till many hundreds of years after their coming out of Egypt; or as Levi might
be said to pay Tithes in Abraham's Loins, so the Children of Israel might bs
said to sojourn in their Fathers Loins. But according to some that reckon the
beginning of those four hundred and thirty years at Jacob's or Joseph's going
into Egypt, and understand the confirming the promise to take in all the often
renewings of it with Isaac and Jacob, as well as the making of it with Abraham,
and confirming it once and again to him, grounding their so reckoning upon that
saying Exodus 12.40. which they understand to be the number of years that they
were in Egypt, it must be much longer, viz. one thousand seventy two, against
which latter account this seems considerable that Kohath Levi's Son was born
before Jacob went down into Egypt; and he lived but one hundred thirty three
years; and Amram Kohath's Son, and Moses's Father lived but one hundred thirty
and seven years, and Moses was but 80 years old at their departure thence, all
which sums put together make but 350 years; though Kohath should beget Amram
in the last year of his life; and likewise Amram Moses in his last, which is
not probable. And whereas it might be suspected that some one Generation or two
might be left out of their Genealogy, as in Matthew. 1.8. for some wickedness of
theirs, there is not only no other Scripture witnessing such a thing as in the
other case in Matthew; but also there is another thing seems to take that away
too, that Jochabed Moses's Mother, and Amram's Wife is said to have been the
Daughter of Levi, born to him in Egypt, Exodus 6.20. with Numb. 26.19. now
suppose her born 100 years after Levi went into Egypt, and longer it could not
be; and suppose her as old as Sarah when Moses was born of her, yet the time
between their going in and coming out, could not be 300 years, for 100 of
Levi's, 90 of Jochabed's and 80 of Moses, make but in all 270 years. Others
conceive the beginning of the account of the 430 years at Abram's going down
into Egypt, and sojourning there; and others at the mocking of Isaac by the
Egyptians Son Ishmael, but the matter being intricate, and besides my business,
I shall leave it, as I must do, undetermined, and pass on to the next Ages.

SECT. 5.
Of the times from Isreal's going out of Egypt, to the times of David.

THat God made known his ways unto Moses, and his Acts unto the Children of
Israel is the express saying of the Holy Ghost, Psalm 103.7. Yea, Numb. 12.
in a more full and familiar way did he manifest himself to Moses than to any
other of the Holy Men or Prophets, till the appearance of Christ. Exodus 3.2.
To him the Lord appeared by his Angel in a Bush, and gave him commission to
bring out Israel from Egypt; and by his hand he wrought many notable and famous
wonders in the Land of Egypt upon Phuroah, Chap. 7. and 8. and 9. and 10. and
11. and 14.
and his Land and People; and at the Read Sea, in his bringing Israel out: and
after they were brought forth he led them to Mount Sinai, where the Lord came
down and spoke unto the People with an audible voice, with thundrings,
lightnings, Exodus 20.
and great terror, causing them to hear his voice out of Heaven; and he gave to
them the Law of ten Words or Commandments, to show them what was their duty,
and to convince them of sin, Deuteronomy. 5.23, 24, 25, 26. and 18, 15, 16, 17, 18.
and of the greatness of his terror against trangressors. And when they cried
out, as not able to hear the voice of God and live; he graciously promised them
to raise them up a Prophet out of themselves, like unto Moses in all things
(even Jesus Christ the Lord) to whom he willed them in all things to listen.
And by the hand of Moses he gave forth many typical representations of him,
Heb. 8.5.
and of the grace and blessing to be brought in by him; showing him the pattern
of the mysteries in the Mount, according to which he was to make all things:
Psalm. 68.18.
and so he set up his Tabernacle amongst them, which with all its Rites and
Ordinances typified out Christ by, and in whom he would dwell amongst men. The
Ark of Testimony was a type of Christ to be incarnate and made flesh, with whom
the power and presence of God should be put forth for the good and helpfulness
of men that would obey and walk with him. The Mercy Seat was a type of Christ
the Propitiatory through faith in his blood, for the forgiveness of sins that
are past, through his forbearance, Romans 3.25. through whom he also keeps
Covenant and Mercy for ever with them that fear him. The Altar, both that for
burnt Sacrifice, and that for Incense were types of him also, as also the
Offerings made upon the one, and the Incense burnt upon the other, types of his
Sacrifice and Intercession. Yea the Redemption of Israel out of Egypt by the
blood of sprinkling, Romans 5.9. 1 Cor. 5.7.
was a type of the Redemption of men in their Spirits and Consciences from the
power of sin and Satan, through the blood of Christ believed in, and sprinkled
upon them: the Manna also and Cloud and Pillar of Fire, the Rock, the Sabboths,
Feasts, and diverse purifications in the Law enjoined; and the brazen Serpent,
all figures of him, and he the substance of all, as was showed above, Chap. 2.
Sect. 6. Now what God revealed to, and by Moses was left and committed to the
People by him, and was kept with, and amongst them. And though often times,
both in the time of Moses, Judge. 2.12, 14, -- 19. Deuteronomy. 31.29.
and of the Judges they did many of them rebel against God, and corrupt
themselves from the faith and true worship of him [as Moses also foretold they
would;] yet so great was Gods goodness, that he often raised them up Judges and
Saviors, and called them back again to himself, and so preserved the knowledge
of his ways amongst them, till the time of Samuel the Prophet; 1 Samuel 2.8, 9,
10, 11, 12.
whose Mother Hannah also most sweetly prophesied of Christ, as the King, and
the Anointed one of God, by whom God raising him up out of the dust, and
exalting him, would lift up and exalt his Servants also, and judge the world
righteously. And then by Samuel God began to reveal his word more familiarly
again, 1 Samuel 3.
and to teach the knowledge of his Son, and of his ways till after David was
anointed by him, yea till within a little of his reign. So that in all those
times of the Judges, which as the Apostle tells us, Act. 13.20. According to
Bishop Usher, 443. years.
was about 450. years, the knowledge of God was vouchsafed to, and continued
with his People of Israel, though through manifold calamities, and sometime
some eclipsings of it, yet it was never quite lost from amongst them.

SECT. 6.
Of the times from David, to the Captivity of Israel.

UNto David God yet further and more clearly opened his mystery, Psalm. 89.1,
2, 3, 19, 20, etc. and 132.
over and above what was before so plainly opened; giving him the Covenant of
an everlasting Kingdom, to be possessed by his Seed, even Christ for ever: of
whose Kingdom, the Kingdom settled on his natural seed, was a Type and Pledge.
Yea, and 110.3, 4.
to and by him it was declared, that Christ should be both a Priest and King; a
Priest after the Order of Melchisedeck: and 22.
that he should offer up, yea himself be the perpetual mighty Sacrifice; and
2.1, 2, 6, 7. and 16.9, 10, 11.
and through manifold oppositions of Jews and Gentiles, the Kings and Rulers,
and generality of Mankind; yea, through Sufferings and Death attain, and enter
into his Glory, and manage his Kingdom for the good of Mankind, so as that
Nations should have cause to sing aloud to God for his Goodness through him,
Psalm. 87. and 88. and 100. and 117. and 145.9, 17.
to them, to serve him with gladness, and come before him with rejoicing, to
enter into his Gates with Thransgiving, and his Courts with Praises, etc. 2 Samuel 23.3, 4.
He being through him good to all, and his tender Mercies over all his Works,
and all the ends of the Earth seeing his Salvation. But indeed the knowledge of
Christ flowed in so abundantly to, and by him, the Spirit of the Lord speaking
by him, and his Word being in his Tongue, that to mention all that was
dispensed to, and by him would require the writing out of a great part of the
Psalms; yea, and many Volumes in explication of them. The knowledge of the Lord
growing now as a River, as to the fuller and more abundant revelation of it;
which in the first Ages was but like a Spring: the light grew more and more
full and bright, as to its shining; as the day of Christ's coming in the Flesh,
and accomplishing therein the Prophecies concerning him, grew nearer. And this
revelation also was continued and held forth in the days of Solomon, and in the
succeeding Ages: Prove. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. and 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, -- 32, 33, 34,
35. and 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Solomon speaking many things most divinely of the preparation made by wisdom
for men, and her gracious invitations and calls of men to the participation
thereof, with much desire of their good, and great longsufferings toward them:
yea, her universal goodwill to the sons of men, the simple and void of
understanding, the Scorners and Fools that hate knowledge, etc. a great torrent
of Wisdom flowed forth to, and by him, much too full to be here particularly
mentioned. 1 King. 11.1, 2, -- 13, 14, etc.
It Is true, he grew loose and degenerate in his latter times, through the love
of strange women, and provoked God to rend away ten Tribes from his Kingdom in
his Sons days; and so to eclipse the Glory of David's outward Kingdom, leaving
him and his posterity only two Trides; that so it might the more appear, that
the Promise and Covenant made to David, was touching Christ and his Kingdom,
rather than touching any wordly Kingdom to be here inj^d by his natural Seed. 2
King. 4.
Solomon also bui^ stately Temple for Gods Worship, which was a Type too of
Christ, and what was prayed for, and promised in behalf of people repenting of
their sins, and praying in, (...) 8.
and toward that Temple, respected Christ as the truth of it, and is to be met
with in looking to him. But both that Temple, with the worship of God therein,
together with the House of David, the ten Tribes rejected; setting up through
their carnal policy, another way and form of worship in other places, in which
they did immediately reject Christ, and so their own mercy and salvation: till
persisting therein for about two hundred and sixty years space (notwithstanding
diverse Prophets raised up of God, and sent unto them, as Elias, Elisha, Ahijah,
Hosea, Amos and diverse others, by whom God abundantly held forth the knowledge
of himself and his truth unto them, to reclaim them to the right way of
worshipping God) they were at last carried captive by Salmanester King of
Assyria, in the beginning of the reign of Hezekiah King of Judah. All which
time the knowledge of God was more purely retained with Judah and Benjamin who
clave to the House of David, and to the Temple, and Worship of God ordered
therein (as also did many from the other ten Tribes.) And though they were not
without many imperfections, and sometimes great miscarriages and evils, yet
still the Promise and Covenant made with David, and the order for worship
settled by him with Gods appointment and approbation, was retained by them: and
those Ages contained about the space of 330. years, from the beginning of
David's reign to Isreal's Captivity, according to Bishop Usher, 327.

SECT. 7.
Of the times of the Prophets, from about the Captivity of Israel, to the
Restoration of the Temple, and so on, till the coming of Christ in the Flesh.

ABout the time of Isreal's Captivity, or somewhat before, God raised up, and
sent more Prophets, and with more dear and full discoveries still of his mind
concerning them, and concerning the mystery of Christ, and the right worship
of God through him; with more full and sharp rebukes and denunciation of
judgments against them, for their cas^ing off God and his Worship, as
appointed in his Temple, as the ten Tribes, o^ also for their carnal
apprehensions of the Seed of David, and Kingdom promised him, and of the
Temple-worship appointed to them (as Judah) neglecting Christ the vision of all
signified and aimed at in them, Isa. 28.14, 15. and 66.1, 2, 3, 4. Mica. 5.
Jer. 7.3, 4, 7, etc. and 22.5, 6, etc.
and foolishly promising themselves mercy and blessing in their adhering to
David's carnal and natural Seed, and worshipping in that material Temple,
neglecting the grace of God in Christ, and not yiedling up themselves to obey,
and walk with him, as is abundantly to be seen in the Prophecies of Isaiah,
Micha, and Jeremiah: for which cause also be gave up the Temple and City to
destruction, and both their People and Prince of the Seed of David to Captivity
for the space of seventy years. Yet was he very gracious, in the midst of his
judgments to remember mercy: and both before, and in, and after the Captivity
he gave them Prophets and Holy Men, to, and by whom he poured forth the
knowledge of Himself and Son for their Eternal Salvation, as well as for
support under, and instruction to profit by all the Calamities that then, and
in after Ages were to befall them: which Calamities also upon them, both
involving their Kingdom in the Line of David (none of his Seed, after that
Calamity, ever sitting any more upon his Throne) and their Temple, and
Temple-worship (never restored to its first glory again, as to their external
form of Worship, and testimony of Gods presence with them in it) were both
ordered as means and helps to make them more spiritual in the understanding of
their former promises concerning David's Seed and the Temple, and to look upon
the Messiah, as the compleatment and fulfilling of both, mainly pointed to in
both; who also with the grace brought in by him, was very much insisted upon,
and more lively set before them, together with the mercy of God through him for
the gathering them back again to himself (after that for their often and
constant rejecting him, both in the more mystical and typical tenders of him,
and in his addresses to them by his Spirit by the Prophets, and in his personal
appearing, they should be cast off, and given up to spoil and misery, and the
Gentiles taken into their place and prividges to provoke them to jealousy) by
the several Prophets in that time sent them. As before their Captivity by
Isaiah, Micha, and Jeremy in their captivity by Ezekiel and Daniel, and after
their captivity by Haggai, Zecchary and Malachy; who all spoke of Jesus Christ,
the Messiah very clearly and plainly to them, and in many things more plainly
than had been before spoken. Isa. 11.1, 2, 10, 11. and 42.1, 2, 3, 4. and 49.5,
6, 7, 8.
Especially Isaiah had that great grace poured forth to him, as to instruct him
into, and furnish him to set forth the whole tenure of the Gospel (...) amply;
particularly that the Me^ should not only be of the Seed of Da^ a root of Jesse
that should arise and re^ over the Gentiles, upon whom Gods Spirit should
gloriously rest, so as that the^ by he should bring forth judgment (...) the
Gentiles, Chap. 7.14.
be the light of them, (...) Gods salvation to the ends of the earth which was
also in substance showed (...) and by David: but also that he should born of a
Virgin, should be despised of (...) Jews, Chap. 53.
should suffer death, should be (...) sed or live again, and justify many by
knowledge, having borne their sins; a^ many things of like import: yea, spoke
of the New Heavens and the N^ Earth, Chap. 65. and 66.
and New Jerusalem; the Gl^ of the Righteous therein, and the ev^ lasting
punishment of the Wicked. A^ in many things the Prophet Micha, w^ prophesied in
the same times spoke (...) very same things, and almost in (...) same words
with him, as appears, Mi^. and 5. Joel also prophesied of the p^ring out of the
Spirit in the last days: ^remy and Ezekiel indeed were much take up about the
Sins of the people, Jer. 3.16, 17. and 31. and 32. Ezekiel. 11. and 33. and 34.
and 36. and 37, etc.
and the Captivities; yet not without intermix^ very clear prophesies of
Christ, and (...) goodness of God through him to all me^ especially to them in
their returning aga^ Of the new Covenant, and the restaurat^ of the Church to a
fuller Glory by him his appearing. To Daniel also in the Ca^tivity, was showed
and signified the time (...) the Messiah's coming; Dan. 9.25, 26, 27, etc.
his being cut off, but not for himself; that he should make an end of sin,
make reconciliation for iniquity, bring in everlasting righteousness, seal up
the Vision and Prophecy (confirm and perfect it) and anoint the most holy; yea
to, Dan. 2. and 7. and 8. and 10. and 11. and. 12.
and by him were showed the afflictions and persecutions which that people
should be exposed to, and tried with, till the time of the end; and their
restoration afterward, with the Resurrection of the Dead, the Kingdom of
Christ and its greatness and glory: very plainly also spoke the other Prophets
of him; Hag. 2.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Hagai that he should come into that Second Temple which was then building, and
fill it with the Glory of his Presence: Lachary that he should come meek and
lowly, riding upon an Ass, Zech. 9.9, 10, 11. and 12.10, 11, 12.
and upon a Colt the Foal of an Ass, into Jerusalem; should be peirced by them,
should cut off their worldly Props, the Chariot from Ephraim, and the Horse
from Jerusalem: should speak peace to the Heathen, Chap. 4. and 6. and 14.
have a large or universal Dominion; calls him the Branch, speaks of him under
the name of Zerubbabel (as he was then in his loins, as pertaining to the
flesh) as the Author and Finisher of the Faith, the Layer of the Foundation,
the Builder and Bringer up to Perfection of the Spiritual Temple or House of
God. Yea, speaks of the destruction of Jerusalem; Mal. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. and. 4.
the coming again of Christ with his Saints, and of the times of the
restoration of the things pr^sed. Malachy also spoke of Christ as (...) nigh
at hand to come, but not to be endured by them when he came; and (...) the
coming of his Messenger or forerunner to come before his face (even Jo^ the
Baptist) and of his coming again to execute vengeance on the proud, and save
them that look for him, and of the coming of Elias before that great day. To
say nothing of those other Holy Men Ezra and Nehemiah, with many others, during
the times of those Prophets, promoting the Knowledge and Worship of God; or of
the writings of other Good Men, though not Prophets, who drawing from the words
of the Prophets abundance of understanding, employed themselves amongst the
people to instruct them such discoveries of God and his truth, with manifold
Instructions, Counsels and Reproofs they had in those Ages: yea, all those
Writings of their Holy Men and Prophets contained in the Scriptures, they had
the help of till the coming of Christ, though under many and great Changes and
Afflictions under the Monarchies of the Persians and Grecians often times. And
though from Malachy to about Christ's birth, they had no more Prophets sent
them, vet they had all those discoveries given forth, both by Moses and the
Prophets in former times to instruct and help them, and to furnish them with
the truth for the Instruction of others amongst whom they had dealings, and
began to be dispersed more than in former times: and these Ages contained about
the space 700. years, according to Bishop Usher 717.

SECT. 8.
Of the Age of Christ, his Incarnation, and Manifestation in the Flesh to men,
and thenceforth to the Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, and so on.

WHat should I need to speak of the times of Christ's appearance and since, when
the dayspring looked down from on high, and visited us more gloriously than
ever; and what was all along pointed to before, as to come, was it self brought
forth, and as to the works of his coming in the Flesh accomplished? Surely then
God gave forth the truth yet more abundantly. And yet we may consider some
diversity in his Dispensations then, with reference to diverse times.

1. Immediately before the appearing of Christ, his Birth and manifesting
amongst men, there was given certain notice to some, that he was about to come;
as also by the Writings of the Prophets, there was ground to expect him, and he
was expected about that time; but more particularly notice was given to Simeon,
Luke 2.26.
an holy and devout man (and as some write, one of Sanhedrim or Great Council
of the Nation) that he should not (...) before he had seen the Lords Christ.
(...) Zachary (the Father of the Baptist) (...) revealed that he should have a
Son (...) his Wife Elizabeth, Luke 1.13, 14, 17.
that should be (...) forerunner, and go before his face, according to what was
prophesied by Malachy. Luke 1.
To the Virgin also, that she should conceive and bring him forth. And both by
the Virgin, and Zachary, and Elizabeth was he witnessed to before his Birth
After his Birth he was made known to, and 2.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 27, 28, 29,
30, 36, 37, 38.
and by the Shepherds; by Simeon also and Anna a Prophetess; as also to, and
by certain Wise Men or Magi that came out of the East Country to seek and
worship him, Matthew. 2. Before his being manifested by way of ministration to
the people, John the Baptist was sent of God to bear witness to him, who also
did clearly testify of him, and point to him as a person then born, and
amongst them. Behold, John 1.5, 6, 7, 15, 16, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Matt.
3.16, 17.
says he to them, the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the World;
witnessing that he had seen the heavens open upon him, when he was baptized by
him, and that the Holy Ghost in a visible form like a Dove (as it was foregiven
him of God as a sign to know him by) descended and sat upon him; and God
himself out of Heaven witnessed to him that he was his well-beloved Son, in
whom he was well-pleased: so that God vouchsafed to John, and by him to the
people a clearer discovery of him, than (...), or by any of the Prophets that
went before him; with respect to which, it is said, That amongst those that
were born of women, there had not arisen a greater then John the Baptist,
Matthew. 11.12.

2. In the time of Christ's Personal Appearing and Manifesting Himself to, and
amongst Men, from the time of his Baptism, to his Ascension; he Ministered the
Knowledge of God to Men by his Personal Preaching, and Miracles; and gave
himself a Ransom for many, accomplishing by his Death and Resurrection, the
Prophecies in that behalf going before concerning him. Therein both by Words
and Works he made manifest the way of Life, both to the World, and to his
Disclples more especially; to whom it was given to know, The Mysteries of the
Kingdom: even such Mysteries as many wise Men, and Prophets had desired to see,
and saw not; and to hear, but heard not they being blessed with a sight, and
knowledge of these things which were peculiar to that Age, even to be
Eyewitnesses of the Sufferings, and Glory of Christ, and to have familiar
Converse with him: their Eyes feeing, and their Ears hearing, and their Hands
handling of the Word of Life, that was before Promised from the Beginning, but
then was Manifest in the Flesh, and Conversed therein with them; of which, the
wise and prudent of the Jews, and the greatest part of the People deprived
themselves, by not seeing, what they see; and (...) hearing, what they heard:
but closeing the Eye, least they should see; and stopping the Ear, lest they
should hear, and understand with their Hearts, and be Converted, and Healed by
him, Matt. 13.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. For before them also, his Doctrine and
Miracles were such, as might have convinced them, that he was the Christ. But
to his Discipls he opened all things, they see and followed him in his
Temptations; see his Sufferings, and Eat and Drank with him after his
Resurrection, till he was taken up into Heaven; of which also they, (the
Apostles especially) were Eyewitnesses But yet,

3. In the times after his Ascension was the clearest manifestation of the
Mystery that ever was vouchsafed, by his pouring forth his Spirit, the Spirit
of Wisdom and Revelation, and power into, and upon those his Apostles and
Disciples, giving them to see into, and understand the Mystory of his Will,
even the ends and virtues of, and the grace of God to Mankind in, all those
things of Christ done and suffered by him: and the meaning of his Words and
Doctrine delivered to them by him, by which also they were furnished (being
thereto before his Ascension Commissionated) to open the Mysteries and grace of
God to all Men, to Jews and Gentiles according to the utmost opportunities
thereto given them. And they also during their continuance upon Earth reased
not faithfully and fully to declare the mind and Testimony of God to men, and
to endeavor to make them see the fellowship of the Mystery. God mightily
bearing Witness to them by many Signs and Wonders, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost
to the filling the Earth with the Knowledge of him, and of his Salvation: so as
that, by that time Jerusalem was Destroyed, and their Nation dispersed, and
carried Captive, they had sounded forth the word of Truth in, and unto most, if
not all Nations; so as that though they were but an handful of Corn in the top
of the Mountains, yea, their Fruit shaked like Lebanon, as was foretold, Psalm.
72.16. Yea, and afterward too; the word they had sowed up and down the world
took Root, and sprang up, and filled the world with Fruit, till through many
Persecutions and Cruelties endured by those that Believed, and by the Blood of
the Lamb, and Word of their Testimony they leavened the face of the World, so
as that the Emperors and Rulers of it embraced the Profession of it also: and
their Word and Doctrine, they (the Apostles also delivered in Writing to be
transmitted to Posterity; which even to these times yet remains with us.
Though it is true, that

4. In the succeeding times the Watchmen being not so Vigelant as Satan, the
envious One, the Tares of false Positions, or Doctrines, and of loose and evil
Live^ too, presently began to be sown in the World, after the departure of the
Apostles; (nay, they began to be sown before, but by reason of their Vigilance,
they took not such place in the Churches, as afterward they did,) till they
even overtopped the good Seed, and its Fruit: Ignorance, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12.
Error, Superstition, and Profaneness; sprouting up apace through Men's not
receiving the love of the Truth, that they might be Saved: till God, as he
threatened, gave up the World again to the over-spreadings of Deceit; permitting
the False Prophet Mahomet, to Introduce a false, and wicked Religion, to the
drawing away Multitudes, from the Belief of the Truth planted amongst them. And
the Roman Bishops, with their Clergy, to Usurp Dominion over the rest; and
living like Beasts, or Monsters, to fill the Churches that yet retained the
Profession of Christ, and the Scriptures amongst them, with all manner of
Error, Superstition, and Profaneness, which continued Universally over the face
of the World, where the most Famous Churches of Christ had been Planted,
(though not without mixture of continual Testimonies of God, and his Truth, and
Goodness, both by Works and Word; especially, as to the most Essential parts of
his Doctrine more, or less; and more, or less purely held forth:) till

5. In these latter times, God in his mercy again, stirred up a Spirit of
Reformation in some of his Servants, who through their constancy in Preaching
forth, and suffering for the Testimony of God, according to those measures of
Understanding they had of it, became successful Instruments in his hand, of
reviving the Light of the Truth that was almost damped; so as that it shines
forth again in, and by the Scriptures of Truth, and the faithful Preachers of
them: (though alas now again too much clouded with the glosles and
interpretations of Men, that subject not their own wisdoms to God's words;)
much more clearly than in some former Ages.

So that in this that has been said, in this large running over the times, it
appears, That the Dispensations of God in giving forth unto Men the Knowledge
of his Words, have been both in several Ages, and to several Men in the same
Ages, very diverse; for even in all, and every of those Ages, when it was
fulliest given forth also, all had it not alike immediately, or fully opened to
them; some were dispensers of it to others who received it by them, or from
their Mouth. All were not Apostles, nor all Prophets, nor all Teachers, that
were in the Church of God: though as he that follows a light carried by others,
may see, and go as well as those that carry it; and other men may eat as
heartily, and be as thriving, that buy their Bread by the Loaf, as they that
carry it out, and sell it (...) basket fulls: so also those that were no^ so
honored, as to be the Dispensers of the Mysteries of God to others, either
Jews or Gentiles, in an humble following (...) and feeding upon that Truth of
God dispensed by others, might walk, and live as well, and attain to Eternal
Life; as certainly, and happily as they that dispense it to them: yea, a Judas
might prove a Son of Perdition, though a Preacher of it: and Jeremy, and Paul
too, had they not returned to, and walked with God themselves, keeping down
their Bodies, and bringing them into subjection, might have done so too: while
many of their weaker Hearers, attained to Happiness, by what they Preached. It
may be said of Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, in respect
of their carrying out of the Word to others; as was said of the Virgins
Conceiving, and bringing forth Christ: Blessed the Womb that bare thee, and the
Paps that gave thee suck. So Blessed they that were betrusted, and came forth
with such Mysteries to Men, in the Name of the Lord; yet so, as the same Answer
of our Savior would also fit, with respect to the hearing, and obeying that
Doctrine. Yea rather, Blessed is every one that hears the word of God and keeps
it. We might also show, that there is, and ever was great diversity and
difference in the several Gifts, and Administrations of those Gifts of those
betrusted with the Word, and the Dispensation of it, and service of God in it.
Some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, some
workers of Miracles etc. and of the Apostles and Teachers, some Administered
more eloquently, and some with weaker Language; some more plainly, and
powerfully than others; some in one Style, and others in another; yet all one
and the same Truth, and by one and the same Spirit; as in 1 Cor. 12. But it
suffices, but to hint that to avoid further tediousness.

SECT. 9.
That in the former Ages, and so in all the Four Monarchies there was something
of the knowledge of God, by his People, and Words vouchsafed also to the
Gentiles.

Only this we may further Note, That though the discovery of the Truth, and
Mystery of God, was vouchsafed most peculiarly, and properly to the Jews,
before the Ascension of Christ: yet, not so hidden with them, but that
something of it, and so means to know more of it, was in all former Ages
vouchsafed in some measure, (over and above the Manifestations of God in his
Works) to the Gentiles, or diverse of them also; as might be showed, from what
we find in the Scriptures, and by other Writers.

In Abraham's time, while Shem was y^ living, (to omit some things
forementioned, Sect. 4.) His overthrow of (...) Four Kings, (Types perhaps of
the fut^ Monarchies after to succeed: Shinar ^ing Babylon; Ellasar, some take
for Syri^ Elam is Persia; and, the Nations, mig^ hint, to the other Nations
subject to the Roman Monarchy;) made him famous doubtless in those times. And
after that the advancement of Joseph in Egypt, when all Nations or Countries
thereabout pinch with a Famine, came thither for Breadcorn, might afford
probably some opportunity for spreading some knowledge of God from him, his
Father and Brethren then brought into, and living in Egypt^ but especially, and
certainly, (to omit the Patriarchs, Psalm. 105.13, 14.
Travelers into, and sojourning in diverse Lands, and Countries:) the great
Judgments of God upon Egypt and Pharaoh; The Miraculous Deliverance of Israel
thence; and the mighty Works then done, for, and amongst them, spread the Name
of God amongst the Countries, as is employed, Exodus 9.16. That I might show in
thee, in my power, and that my Name might be declared in all the earth. And it
appears by Rahabs confession afterward That they had heard of the mighty work
(...) God for Israel in those Countries of Can^ an, Josh. 2.10, 11. And then,
his drying up the red Sea, and Jordan, and driving ou^ the Canaunites so
miraculously. The standing still of the Sun and Moon, etc. These yet further
famed him, and his People among the Nations. 1 King 10. with Matthew. 12.43.
As afterward the Wars and Successes of David, and the Wisdom of Solomon that
was famous to the Ends of the Earth; to Aethiopia, and those far Countries: and
Solomon positively Asserts in his Paper, That the Nations far off should hear
of his Name, so as that they might come, (some of them at least) while the
Temple yet stood, to inquire after God: What else signify those Expressions, 1
King. 8.41. Moreover, concerving a stranger that is not of thy people Israel,
but comes out of a far country for thy Names-sake. For they shall hear of by
Great Name, and of thy strong hand, and of thy stretched out arm. And so we
find, that in all the Four Monarchies, Israel was so known of them, and had
such dealings with them, that they had opportunity by them, to hear of the
Great Name of God, and his Works; with the Syrians, and Assyrians we find they
had sometimes Wars, sometimes Peace and Leagues: and the Miracles done by Elias
and Elisha; and the healing of Na^man might spread his Fame with them: We find
the Ten Tribes, were at length carried Captive by the Assyrians, and pla^d in
the Cities of the Medes and other places; and that some of them had the
knowledge and fear of God in them, may most probably be conceived; though (...)
generality of them, while in heir own and were corrupted; yea, and the History
of Tobit, being one of the Captives (...) Israel makes it evident. In that
Monarchy Preached Jonas to Niniveh the Gr^ City, and Head then of that Empire;
and by his Preaching, it was Converted, and spared. And the Storm that be^ in
his running from God, and what the Mariners see, and heard of him; and his
deliverance out of the Whales Belly; and his Preaching to Nineveh, and their
Repentance, could not but spread the ^mour of God's Name far, and near (...)
those times. Afterward, then the Empire was Translated to Babylon, God made
known his People, and Himself then to them. Isa. 38. and 39.
Hezekiah's sickness, and recovery, and the Sign given him, and the Shaddows
going back in Ahaz Dyal, was there declared: insomuch, that thereupon they sent
Ambassadors to Jerusalem, to Congratulate Hezekiah about it: and after that,
Manasseth was thither carried Captive, and there Repented; and no doubt but by
those Wars with Israel, and Conquest got, they had some opportunity given them
of hearing of their God, and his Great Name, and Works: yea, those two Kingdoms
of Egypt and Babylon, and all the Kingdoms between them, had then Commerse
with them, and could not but hear much of them, and of the Name of God amongst
them; as also the Captivity of Jehoiakim, and Jeconiab and especially, the
great Piety and W^dom of Daniel, and the Three Worth^ then in Babylon, and
therewith many good Jews, for diverse years living, spread the knowledge and
fame of God amongst them. Yea, the Interpretations of Nebuchadnezzars Dreams;
the Deliverance of the Three Worthies from the fiery Furnace; the turning out
of Nebuchadnezzar, and restoring him again, were very famous, and begat very
public and notorious Proclamations of the Name of God amongst, or to all
Peoples, Nations, and Languages that dwelt in the Earth, that they should
reverence, and acknowledge him, Dan. 3. and 4. In the Persian Monarchy also
Daniel was in great repute with Cyrus, and Darius. The Jews, Ezr. 1.1, 2, 3, 4.
and their Cause was known to them. Cyrus made a Decree in favor of them, for
re-edifying the House of the Lord, whom he acknowledged to be God; The Lord God
of heaven. Darius also exceedingly loved and favored Daniel, and his Religion
was famously known to the other Governors and Rulers: and both it, and the God
whom he worshipped, was exceedingly glorified in his Deliverance from the
Lions, when cast into their Denn upon that account: so as that Darius also
publicly Proclaimed, or Decreed, That in every Nation men should tremble and
fear before the God of Daniel, Dan. 6.25, 26, 27.
as being the Living God, and steadfast for ever, and his Kingdom, that which
should never be destroyed, etc. And after Daniel, Ezra, and Nehemiah, Mordecai,
and Esther, were of great Note, and well known to the Persion Court, and
Empire, in several Kings Reigns. And God got himself a Name, and discovered
himself gloriously by his prospering, and helping them, and appearing
miraculously for their help, and for the Confusion of their Enemies: as the
Books of Ezra, Nehemiah, and Esther testify. Where also it is evidenced, That
the Jews, the Worshippers of God, were scattered up and down, and seated
amongst the Nations, and Professing God's Religion; Est. 3.8.
both in the Imperial City of Susa, and in all the many Provinces of that large
Empire: as is clear in that of Haman, where he informs the King of them, That
they were scattered abroad, and dispersed among the People in all the Provinces
of his Kingdom, and their Laws diverse from all People, etc. And commandment was
given to the Jews, in every Province, to stand upon their own Defense: and to
the Rulers and Lieutenants in the Provinces to Assist them; and doubtless, that
great Deliverance did mightily fame them, and their Religion: yea, it is
expressly Noted, That thereupon many of the People of the Land became Jews. Est.
8.17.
And those Dispersions of the Jews continued to, and in the days of the
Grecian, or Macedonian Monarchy too: to the beginning of which the Records in
Nehemiah reach, or to times immediately preceding it; for mention is made, Neh.
12.22. of the Priest^ that were, to the Reign of Darius the Persian? Probably,
the last Darius, that was subdued by Alexander: for Jaddua, (and Jaddua was
High Priests in the time of Alexander the Great,) is there mentioned. And how
God made known Himself, his People, and Truth, in that Monarchy; may be in part
seen, in what Josephus Records, Of God's appearing in a Vision to Alezander, in
the form, or habit of the High Priest of the Jews; and his acknowledging it,
and doing Homage to the High Priest, upon the sight of him, when he went in his
Priestly Habit to meet him, and his Army Marching against them, with a purpose
to have Destroyed them: his public owning of whom, and relating his Vision,
and the Immunities given to the Jews thereupon, could not but give advantage of
inquiring into their Religion, and of being instructed into the Knowledge of
God, worshipped by them: yea, we may find in the Histories of Josephus,
Polybius and others, That the Jews were not only dispersed here and there in
the Countries, but also Served in their Wars. And in the Reign of Ptolomy
Philadelphus, their Law, or Books of the Scriptures, were by Seventy and two
Interpreters, Translated into the Greek Language, and deposited in his Library;
which was a great advantage for the dispersing the Knowledge of God, and his
Word amongst the Nations. What should I speak of the many, and marvelous
Victories, and great help (...) Streights afforded to them in the times of the
Macchabees; Heb. 11.34, 35, 36, 37.
their constancy in their Religion, even to Sufferings and Death in the times
of Antiochus, Epiphanes, and Ptolomy, Philopastor and others, Recorded both in
the Books of the Maccabees, and alluded to, in Heb. 11. Did they not more
brightly sparkle forth the Knowledge of God, and notify him, and his Truth
professed by them, amongst, and unto their adverse Nations? And as for the
Roman Monarchy, the Jews were soon known unto them, sending to them, and
entering a League with them, as in the Book of the Macchabees is also mentioned.
They had Wars also with Pompey, who took their City Jerusalem, their Kings,
Herod, Aristobulus, and others, held their Kingdoms of them: and the Jews and
Romans had much converse upon many occasions, they had their Synagogues
dispersed up and down throughout their Dominions. Under that Monarchy was
Christ born, lived, and wrought his Miracles; suffered, dyed, rose, ascended,
sent abroad his Disciples into all Nations: yea, and beside their going abroad,
Pilate is said, to have certified Tiberius, of the Acts of Christ, and his
Famous Miracles; and that Tiberius moved it to the Senate, to receive him for a
god: as Tertullian in his Apology for the Christians, Chap. 5. and 21. relates
And the Jews having Synagogues all over there were Proselytes and fearers of
God also scattered up and down the World as is clearly employed; Joh. 12.20.
both by what is related of the Greeks, that coming to Worship desired to see
Jesus; and more plainly by what is said Act. 2. Dr. Hammond on the places Act.
2.5, 9, 10, 11.
Of Jews devout men out of every Nation under Heaven, abiding at Jerusalem at
the feast of Pentecost; Parthians, Medes, Elamites or Persians, dwellers in
Mesopotamia, Judea, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, Phrygia, Pamphidia, Egypt, and
the parts about Lybia, about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and
Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians. And in Act. 13.21. it is said that Moses of old
time has in every City them that Preach him, Act. 10.1, 2. and 11.19, 20. and
13.5.14.50. and 14.1. and 16.12, 13, 14. and 17.1, 10. and 18.2, 4, 7, 8, 12,
19. and 19.8. and 28.17, etc.
being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day; whence also so frequent
mention of the Jews, and of devout Men and Women, worshippers and fearers of
God, where the Apostle went in his Travels to Preach the Gospel found by him
before his Preaching to them. So that it appears that in all Ages many of the
Gentiles too had some rumors of the God of Israel, and opportunities given them
to enquire after, and acquaint themselves with his Word, Oracles and Worship.
To which we might add (if we shall give credit thereto) what is recorded of the
Sybils and their Prophesies, August also, De Civitat. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 23.
mentioned both by the ancient Christians, and before them by Heathens, as by
Varro, Cicero, Virgil, Aul. Gellius. Amongst the Christians of the first Ages
Justin Martyr mentions his sight of one of their places of Resid^nce in his
Exhortation to (...) Gentiles; and Lactantius is very large (...) reciting
diverse of their Verses, in wh^^^ they speak very distinctly of the Unity (...)
Oneness of God, vanity of Idols, of the coming of the Son of God, his Birth of
a Virgin, his taking away Sin and every evil thing; To say nothing ^f Hydaspes,
Trismegistus, Orpheus and others mentiononed in Lactantius and Eusebius his
Praepar. Evaugel.
the Destruction of Rome, the Resurrection of the Dead, and the Great Judgment,
etc. which whosoever pleases, may, if they can Read him, see more of in the Works
or Writings of Lactantius, especially in his Fourth and Seventh Books. And
indeed the fullness and clearness of the Testimony given to Christ in them (as
his being the Son of God, and God, his Healing, and working Miracles by his
Word, his Sufferings and Death and Resurrection, and the like) has caused many
to suspect their Verses to have been framed by some Primitive Christians out of
a Pious Fraud, as they call it, to draw in the Heathens more to Christ, which
to me seems an uncharitable thought of those first Christians, abundantly
spoken to by way of confutation, by the Reverend Bistop Montague in his Acts
and Monuments; I should rather say with Austin, Quisquis Alienigena, De Civit.
Dei, lib. 18. cap. 47.
etc. If any Strang^ that is not descended of Israel, nor received by that
People in the Canon of the Holy Scriptures, is read to have Prophesied any
thing of Christ, he may be cited by us over and above, not because there is
need of him, if he were not mentioned, but because it is not easily believed
that there were also in other Nations some Men to whom this Mystery was
revealed, and that they were carried out by a certain impulse to foretell it,
whether they themselves were partakers of the same Grace they spoke of, or were
void of it, or were taught it by evil Angels, as we know they did profess
Christ when he was present, whom the Jews acknowledged not; nor do I think that
the Jews durst deny that some pertained to God besides the Israelites since the
time that Esau being rejected Israel began to propagate and increase in the
World. Indeed there was no other people called the People of God properly but
they, but that there were certain Men, Citizens of the Heavenly Country, and
pertaining to the true Israelites, not by an Earthy but a Heavenly Society in
other Nations, also they cannot deny as in the Holy man Job, etc. Certain it is
that the Sybils were made mention of as Prophetesses of great note amongst the
Gentiles, and their Writings sought for, and laid up at Rome by the Senate,
before the time of Christ's birth, what we read in Virgil as uttered by the
Cumaean Sybil, though applied by him to Augustus Caesar and his times, savours
of what might be said of them concerning Christ, and can be applied to none but
him, for therein is mention made of Purging away our Sins, bringing in Peace
and Prosperity, renewing the World into its Golden or Paradise Estate. And the
Acrosticks mentioned in Austin, are to the same purpose, the initial Letters
thereof composing this sentence, Jesus Christ the Son of God the Savior; and
why might not the Lord reveal something of Christ to them, and suffer them to
utter it, as well as to Balaam, who though a false Prophet, yet prophesied of
Christ as is to be seen Numb. 24.17. But enough is said before to show the
truth of our Assertion laid down in the title of this Section viz. That in all
Ages, and in the times of every of the four Monarchies of the World, some Beams
at least of the Revelation of God and his Truth, as by Words and Oracles have
shined forth to, and amongst the Gentiles, so as they have had some
opportunities and advantages of hearing of them, and seeking the knowledge of
him by them.

The Sum and Conclusion of this Chapter is, That though the Truth of God, in
it self practicable to men, be but one and the same; yet the Revelations,
Manife-stations, and Dispensations of it have been very diverse and different;
some Persons have had nothing of it as to their knowledge and perception
knowable to us, as Infants dying in Infancy; some have had only some darker
significations of some things of it by the Works and Providence of God, as
many of the Heathen; some have also had some rumor of the words of God
revealed to, and in his Churches, and opportunities to seek it out and know it
as there revealed, as many of the Gentiles in all Ages; Some have had it more
directly in the words of it given to them, to some more immediately for
themselves and others, to some more mediately by others only, as in all Ages
amongst the Jews till after Christ's Ascension, though in some Ages more
darkly, and in others more plainly; yea, and amongst the Churches of God and
the holy Men themselves, there is and has been as we have noted diversity of
Dispensations and Administrations. And it is a certain Rule, that as the Lord
being good and upright, teaches Sinners the way that they might Fear him; Psalm.
25.8, 9* 12, 13, 14. Matt. 13.11, Pr^^. 1.23.
so he more especially and in further dispensations of his Truth teaches those
that Fear him; shows them his secret, and makes known to them his Covenant,
opens to them the Mysteries of his Kingdom, pouring out his holy Spirit upon
them. And this appears clearly as touching the Revelation or Dispensation of
the knowledge of the Truth in the more direct and substantial ways of revealing
it; besides which, we may observe that there were in several Ages certain
appendages to the Revelation of it by Word or Oracle, in and amongst his
Churches, though so as in the view and sight of the World, in which also we may
observe great diversity, as we shall, God-willing, show in the following
Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
Of the variety of the Dispensations of the knowledge of God and his truth, in
respect of certain added Appendages to his Word in Ordinances and Miracles in
sundry Ages,

SECT. 1.
That God did divers^y in sundry Ages, mind Men of, and confirm them in his
Truth by his Ordinances and Miracles; and therein what be the Ordinances and
Miracles here to be treated of.

THat there were over and besides the General Works of God, and the distinct
Revelation of Christ, by the Words and Oracles of God, other additional means
by which he furthered the knowledge of himself and of his good will to men
amongst them, partly by visible Acts and Rites enjoined to Men to observe and
practice in their worship of him (and accordingly either more purely according
to appointment, or more ^orruptly in swerving from his apappointment, practiced
by Men in their several Ages) to instruct them in, and ^^ind them of his Truth
otherwise revealed to them, and these we call Ordinances; and partly by visible
Works of his own e^traordinarily wrought to rati^^e and confirm the Truth
revealed, which we call Miracles; the Scriptures also every where do testify;
which because they were added to the Words and Oracles of God aforesaid, we do
not make a distinct way of discovery of Truth; but rather Appendages to that
way of discovery of it by Words and Oracles, rending to confirm it to, and
preserve it with them; which though some^ing of them have occasionally been
mentioned before, yet because they require and deserve a more full
consideration, we shall here speak to more distinctly, and yet as briefly and
succinctly as with conVenience we may: concerning which, let this first be
noted, that it may be first stated what Ordinances and Miracles we have to
speak of; that I do not speak of them in the largest extent that those words
will reach to; as to say, I do not by Ordinances mean all Rites and Acts of
Worship practifed by any People, for there were many Heathenish Rites
instituted by evil men at the motion and in^inct of unclean and wicked Spirits,
such (...) their Plays and Interludes, their strewing of Beds, and
Purifications of their ^ies, Sacrifices to Infernal Spirits, their detestable
and abominable Rites of Bacchus, Ceres, and others, which can no way be within
the compass of wh^ have to speak of, those being Ordinan^ of Satan and not of
God; Job. 38.33. Jer. 31.35, 36. and 33.25.
neither (...) intend, or shall I speak to all that (...) called, or were God's
Ordinances; (...) we read of the Ordinances of Heaven as for the rising and
setting of the S^ the making Winter and Summer, Se^time and Harvest, Heb. 9.27.
Arcturus and Pleiad^ etc. which belong to the works of God before spoken of.
Yea, and Death is an Ordinance of God in a large sense, since it is appointed
for men to die; but this (...) not to be practiced, but submitted to and
suffered by us. Ephesians. 5.30, 31.
So Marriage too is an Ordinance of God, and so was the Sabbath, and the Tree
of Life in Paradise before the fall. And indeed Marriage (^cially the forming
of the Woman out of the Man, and bringing her to him at the first) has in it a
very great and apt resemblance of the conjunction and communion of the two
natures of God and Man in Christ, and of Christ and his Church; and so gives
fit occasion of minding us of Christ's great love in descending to se^ a Wife
amongst men (as Jacob of old wh^ went down into Syria, Matthew. 22.1, 4.
and for a Wi^^ ^ept Sheep) both in his taking into un^on with himself the
nature of Man espo^sing and wedding it, as it were to the eternal word; at the
wedding where^^ God also made a Feast, Isa. 25.6, 7.
the Feast of F^ things full of Marrow made for all People, and set forth to us
in the Gospel, (...) the fruit and consequent of that Royal union of our nature
with God, consummated in the Ascension of Christ into Heaven, when the new
married Bride, as it were, was taken home to his Fathers house, and adorned and
glorified with all the Majesty and Royalty of Heaven; the Delicates of which
Feast are pardon of Sins, Peace with, and liberty to God by Christ, and welcome
through him, preached to us in the Gospel; As also in his seeking for himself
and by the Gospel and its Ordinances, and by his Spirit with both, espousing
men in their particular Persons and Spirits, and so the Church as the company
of persons so espoused to himself. The Marriage of whom with Christ God-man, is
to be consummated or accomplished at the coming of Christ again, and
Resurrection of the just when they shall be made partakers of the Glory of
Christ, and be as a new married Wife altogether brought home to Christ and God
in Christ, and be clothed with his Majesty and Glory, and be fed and satisfied
for ever with his blessed presence, and the consolation thereof, But though
this Ordinance of Marriage aptly minds us of, and leads us to consider and
press after the further understanding and enjoyment of these things; yet it
being at first Instituted in Paradise before the promise of Christ, and as now
continued through Christ, it being a civil Ordinancee, or an Ordinance
pertaining to the things of this life: I do not take it here into con^ ration,
but only those Ordinances of Go^ which more directly were appointed (...) and
pertain to the Religious Worship^ him. Out of which too I exclude tha^ (...)
the Sabbath, and that of the Tree of Life (if it might be so called) as
institute^ and given in Paradise before the fall, because before the promise of
Christ, and such as should have been, had man nev^ fallen, nor Christ been sent
forth for him. That of that Tree of Life, being now also expired and gone,
together with the integrity and innocence, in which God made man. The Sabbath,
as since (...) newed, through Christ, or by him continued, we shall in fit
place take in^ consideration. And so only these Ord^ nances which pertain to
his worship, and were since the fall enjoined by him to be observed, are those
we shall speak to.

Again, by Miracles I mean not all the monstrous or unusual providence, o^
things that have happened in the world, for there have been, not only through
Gods Providence many miscarriages, as it were of nature, but also through hi^
permission and sufferance, many great and stupendous things wrought by the
power of evil Spirits, for confirming the minds of Idolaters (through Gods just
and severe judgments) in their impietie^ which they (having rejected the light
of his truth) had given themselves up to Such as the going or removing of
certain mages, which Aeneas is said to have ^rought from Troy and Ascanius, to
have hurried from Lavinium to Alba, from which place it is recorded in the
Heathen Histories, that they went twice of them^ves, without any visible
appearing hand of man to carry them. Such also was that in Tarquinius Priseus
his time, that Actius Naevius the Augur, cut a Whetstone in two with a Rasor,
and that one of the Vestal Virgins, suspected for unchastity, to clear her
self, carried water from Tyber in a Seive; and the like mentioned by Lyvy, and
out of him by Augustine de Civit. Dei, lib. 10. cap. 16. which were all
doubtless wrought by Diabolical power. Matthew. 24.24. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.
As Magicians and Witches may be found by their help to do some such lying
wonders, to further their designs upon men; as it was also foretold by our
Savior and his Apostles, that Antichrist should do such things for hardening
his followers, that they might be damned that believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness. But I shall speak only of those far greater,
certainer and more glorious Miracles wrought of God, for the confirmation of
the truth of his Doctrine. And first I shall begin with his Ordinances.

SECT. 2.
That Christ was, and is the foundation all Ordinances appointed to fallen
(...) for his Worship of God; and that Ch^ and the grace in him, are the the
mainly witnessed to by them.

LEt me say this in general of all these Ordinances of God, which he ha^ given
to man since his fall, that Ch^ was, and is both the foundation of them, and
the matter chiefly signified and (...) forth in, and by them, they stood, and
stand upon Christ, and all look and po^ toward, or unto Christ, like the
Che^bims of old that stood upon the M^ Seat, and looked toward it; figuring the
Angels peeping down into that gr^ mystery figured by it. 2. Pet. 1.12.
Those Ordinances mentioned above, as given in Par^dise before the fall, might
be some resemblance too of Christ, either as he was the word, and should have
been the (...) and life of man as so, had he stood, (...) else as he was in the
Divine foreknowled^ of God to come in the flesh for fall^ man: but certainly
they were not found^ upon any promise of Christ to come, an^ suffer for us, man
as then not having sinn^ Nor were they therefore ordained of God to mind us of
him, and stir us up to lo^ and wait for him, but they were appoin^ to other
ends and uses: as the Sabbath (...) man's rest from his labors, and to mi^ him
of Gods resting therein from all (...) works, and to give him a more devoted
opportunity to contemplate the truth and works of God in, and to mind him of
the more blessed rest, he should attain in obeying him. The tree of life was
for pre^ving the life of man, immortal and free from Diseases, and the woman
for the comfort, society, and multiplacation of mankind. But the Ordinances
given to sinful fallen mankind, instituted as external means for, or ways of
our approaching to God, and entering, or holding communion with him, must needs
stand upon Christ, either first as promised, or else also as actually come in
the flesh: for we could not be in Covenant, or have Communion with God having
sinned, and being therefore sentenced to death, accur^ed, and banished from his
presence, but through a Mediator, and therefore always appointed for us
thereunto, must needs have dependence on him, and so both witness of, and lead
us to him. If than had stood in his innocence, doubtless he should have
worshipped God, and that not only inwardly in his heart, but also outwardly in
bodily actions; but sure those should have been more simple, and such as in
which the Power, Wisdom; Goodness of God his Maker, should have been
acknowledged, and his blessings sought, as in Praisings of him, ^hansgivings,
Invocations, etc. in which also he might have been in the power of God, and his
Word, and Spirit, the immediate Offerer and Priest himself, a^ should not have
had need of a Mediato^ but being fallen, the case was, and is altered. Now no
access or acceptance b^ by another, a person holy and harml^ in himself, and
that makes, or has mad^ peace and atonement for us, and has thereby power
and authority to present our suits and services, and to be our Righteousness;
and therefore also it was good and meet, that we should in all Ordinances have
thereof some apt signification and remembrance.

Verily the promises of Christ, as the seed of the woman to bruise the head of
the Serpent; and as the Seed of Abraham to bring in blessing to all the Nations
and Families of the Earth (or rather Christ as so promised) was the ground and
foundation of those Ordinances, appointed in those first Ages before his
coming* And the exhibition and actual appearance of him, the ground and basis
of those we have since: so as all stand upon his said coming, and the things
accomplished therein by him; and witness to him, and to his said coming; only
differently according to the different times and dispensations of the knowledge
of his coming those that were before his coming, represented him as then yet to
come, and (...) one that should in his coming mak^ atonement for us by his
blood; and therefore had something in them generally of bloodshedding: but
those since w^ ness to him, as one already come, and that has given already
suffi^ satisfaction for us, and therefore are without bloodshedding; as
signifying that there is nothing of that nature further needful to be done for
us, but only to partake of the benefits of what is already done, and live to
God therein. They were none of them appointed to us, upon the account of any
goodness of ours, found in us, or done by us; nor to signify or set forth our
own righteousness or goodness; ^ay rather in pointing to, or witnessing of
Christ, they all restifie of us, and against us, that we are sinners and
condemned creatures (...) our selves, and so altogether without ^ength or
worth, that there is no help (...) our selves for us; all our righteousness ^d
goodness too weak and worthless to ^eliver us: yea our fall and misery so
^reat, and our case so desperate, that all ^he creatures in Heaven and Earth
too, were too weak and worthless to relieve us: so as that it was necessary
that the Son of God should come and suffer for (...), and become our
Righteousness to ^ve us. Yea this, in both branches of it, might be yet further
confirmed.

That all the Ordinances have Christ (...) their foundation (Christ, I say, as
to ^me, or already come in the Flesh) is ^ident in this, that the promise of
him was the first thing preached to men, when ^victed of their sin, as the
ground and ^dation of their hope, and by consequence the ground of all their
worship the future, before any Ordinance for the Worship was mentioned to them
as fal^ as also we usually find some renewed (...) mise, or performance of the
Promise p^ ceeding the injunction of any new Or^ nance of Worship: yea, this
first is confirmed too by the second, viz. 2. That the all witness to Christ
and the grace of G^ in him, which appears in the very na^ of the Rites and Acts
of Worship req^ red in them, intimatoly preaching ((...) signifying an
acknowledgement of) m^ fall and misery, and the free grace of G^ in Christ
toward him for his restaur^ and recoverry again, and leading to m^ and abide in
the faith and expectati^ thereof, as may best be seen, if we (...) a brief view
of them by induction.

SECT. 3.
Of the Ordinances appointed before Mos^ and first of Sacrifices: therein also
(...) Gods Clothing man, and prohibiting (...) eating of Blood; and of (...)
several tim^ before the Law, in which the Gospel (...) revealed to all men.

SAcrifice is the most Ancient and (...) Religious Act or Institution, in whi^
men did approach to God and wor^ him that we read of. I do not say it (...) the
first visible Act wherein God (...) mind man of his sin and fall, and ob^ ^edy
provided for him: for I conceive ^at Gods clothing Adam and Eve with ^e skins
of Beasts, might not only m^nifest (...) them, and us in them, his (...) of us
^ough the promised Seed, to provide for ^ese our now frail and mortal bodies,
not only for Food, but Raiment also, to shell (...) us from the inconveniences
of the heat (...) cold, to which our bodies become weak and frail, and turned
ou^ of (...) life are exposed; and to cover the sham^ of our Nakednes^ that for
has brought upon us; and that we might be instruct^ to acknowledge him the
Preserver of us, and the Provider and Giver of ^our Ray^ent also, for which he
would have us, (...) serving his providence, depend upon him; but also it might
be to mind them, and us in them, both of their sin and fall^ that their (...)
should now stand in ^eed of ^l^athing, for the ends above ^entioned; as also of
their dese^ of death, and of the way (...), by which man must (...) clothed,
and presented ^vely in the sight of God. For the death of those Beasts
(probably slain too by way of Sacrifice at Gods appointment; for we find not
the eating of flesh allow^d before the Flood) might at once both mind them of
their own desert of death, and that it must be through the death of the
promised Seed, that they must have all their clothing and comeliness in Gods
presence, and be presented just and righteous with him, and enjoy all their
mercies and good things from him: and (...) a consideration in their clothing,
wo^ at once both tend to keep them lowly^ their own eyes (contrary to that p^
in Apparel that Satan and sin has n^ filled the world with, glorying in (...)
badges of our sin and shame, and turn^ that into wantonness, that should keep^
lowly, in mindfulness of our fall and (...) of Innocensie) and also raise up
the hearts to thankfulness, and to hope in (...) through the promised Seed, and
the (...) of Gods care of them through him. B^ I say, Sacrifice was the first
Religi^ Rite, and way of Worship that we (...) instituted for, and practiced by
men (...) we read not of any external act of W^ ship performed by men, till we
read (...) the Sacrifice of Cain and Abel, Genesis 4.(...) not that they were the
first Sacrifices the were offered, because the first mention^ doubtless they
had been accustomed, b^ Adam and Eve, and whoever else was (...) to them, and
grown up with them in (...) world (as it appears many were before (...) time)
before that fell out that is there (...) lated, to Sacrifice unto God: but the
Sacrificings are mentioned by occasion, a^ because occasions of what followed
the upon. And that they also were appo^ed of God to Sacrifice, may appear in
the that Abel is said by says to have offe^ up a more acceptable Sacrifice
than C^^ But had not Sacrifice been before appoi^ed of God, and the grounds
thereof ((...) ^omised Messiah, and the grace of God (...) mankind in, and by
him, and Gods ^acious mind concerning men, through him) been before revealed,
what ground could Abel have had of faith to offer in? nor would an Offering
upon his own head, or in imitation of Came only, have been accepted of God, who
requires us to do according to his appointing, in matters of his Worship
especially, and not according to our own imaginations. Both Abels faith then,
and Gods acceptance, imply that Sacrifice was Gods Ordinance, and that it was
instituted to be an outward solemn profession and exercise of faith; a
believing acknowledgement of Gods goodness to man in, and by the promised Seed,
and in expectation of blessing through him. Yea, and that God also appointed
Sacrifices, as well as approved them, when rightly done, may be gathered from
his after appointing Noah, to preserve of clean Beasts and ^owls by sevens.
Doubtless the distinction of Clean and Unclean, had reference to Sacrificing
first. For we find not that God gave men liberty (as we said before) to eat of
them till after the Flood, though possibly it might be otherwise: however that
appears one end of his bidding Noah preserve them by sevens, Genesis 9.2, 3, 4,
with 1.29.
that he might Sacrifice of them to God, as afterward we read he did; and that
God smelled a sweet savor of rest therein; and why a sweet savor of rest?
Genesis 7.2, 3. and 8.20, 21.
Seeing God himself after testifies, that he had no pleasure in Burnt Offerings
(...) Sacrifices, the blood of Goats or the (...) of Rams, P^l. 40.7, 8, 10 and
50.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Act. 17.25, 26, 27. Heb. 10.2, 3, 4.
etc. It could not be, because God wanted, or had any refreshing (...) them,
for he ^eeds them not; nor is he worshipped with men's hands, as if he needed
any thing, seeing he gives to all life and breath, and all things: nor was it
because they could take away, or make satisfaction for their sins; for it is no^
pos^ sible the blood of such Creatures should do any such things: but surely it
was because he had appointed them as a me^rial of his Son, and as types and
figures of him, and because of the faith of the Sacrificer in him. Sen. 9. with
Levit. 17.
As with reference to the blood of Christ, to be shed for us, he gave them the
blood of those Creatures to make atonement on the Alter for their Souls, and
therefore also when he allowed men the eating of flesh, he forbad the eating of
blood to them. Yea that they were appointed of God, and to such ends too, may
yet further appear, both by the practice of all the Patriarchs, and in that
when God had bid Abraham offer up his Son Isado for a Burnt Offering; Ab^^bam
said to Isaac, inquiring where the Sacrifice was, Psalm. 105.15. Genesis 22.8.
God will provide himself a Lamb for a Burnt Offering; which he being a
Prophet, might speak of the seed promised him, as believing that he should be
the Lamb of God to take away the sins of the world, and bring in blessings to
all Nations: and yet more clearly, in that God afterward by Law, more fully
appointed them by Moses, Heb. 11.10, 1, 5.
and as the Apo^^le tells us, to be shadows of good things to come. It Is true,
there might be diverse ends and reasons of Gods appointing them; as,

1. That men might thereby acknowledge him the Lord, the Author and Giver of
all good things to them; which they testified by giving some of them to him by
Sacrifice, as also by giving him, in his Priests, the Tenths or Tithes of them.

2. That men might therein join together in their worship and acknowledgement
of God, and so that a public worship of him might be kept up in the world, by
which men might be instructed to own and acknowledge him successively, and not
attribute things to other causes, and take, and use them as their own, at their
pleasures; and so fall to Atheism and Irreligion: but seeing though God was the
maker of all things before the fall, yet his continuing and giving those good
things to man kind since the fall; for which he is continually to be
acknowledged, and blessed by fallen mankind, is through Christ, and his death
fo^en.

3. The great reason therefore of such always of acknowledging him and his
bounty, was the promise and interposure of Christ, and that he and his love
might therein be signified to, and acknowledged and remembered by men; which w^
fitly represented in the shedding the bloo^ of the living Sacrifices, and in
the offering them generally by fire unto God; (...) therein was both a
remembrance of (...) and of death deserved by sin, and also (...)
fore-signifying of the Death and Sacrific^ of the Messiah, instead of men, to
take away man's sin, and by destoying Death, to be his Resurrection, and Life
therefrom: and that through him, and his Death and Sacrifice, men might have,
and had their access to God, to worship him, and might receive favor and
blessing from him. Surely this was the main ground of all their Sacrificing, in
its first institution; and so there was therein a^ more full teaching, by way
of representation, of the meaning of the foregoing Oracle about the promised
Seed, and how he should bruise the Serpents Head. And to such ends was it
delivered over traditionally from Father to Son, to be practiced by all
Nations, who retained this way of worship till the Messiah came, and till the
Preaching of him, as come, put an end thereto: as well the Gentiles a^ the Jews
had their Sacrifices, Atonements, Expiations for sin, etc. though they being
degenerated, and gone from the faith of the true God, and the right way of
worshipping him, lost also the right end and manner of Sacrificing: and as they
multiplied gods to themselves, so they invented, and brought in new Rites and
Ceremonies to those devised or supposed gods, according as their own fancies
and Satan ^ed them; which thing also in great measure befell the Jews,
notwithstanding that God took more peculiar care of them, and to keep them from
such degeneration, gave them Laws and Statues in writing, prescribing to them,
both to Sacrifice to himself only, and when, and where, and what to Sacrifice:
for he appointed them many kinds of Offerings, all pointing to Christ, and to
continue till the time of Reformation, by his appearing himself to put away sin
by the Sacrifice of Himself for us. Yet they also casting his Law behind their
backs, and desiring to be, and do like other Nations, fell into abominable
Superstitions and Idolatries; and even in their Sacrificing to God, and
according to his Rules prescribed, as to external form, lost the right end and
use of it, putting it in the place of Christ, and seeking to establish a
righteousness to themselves in so doing; or conceiting that thereby they should
obtain and have Gods favor, and be justified and saved in, and notwithstanding
their profane and wicked living; so as that God often pronounced against them,
that he obhorred and loathed them, and esteemed their Sacrificing an Ox, no
better than the killing a Man, or cutting off a Dogs neck, etc. even then
things unlawful and forbidden by him.

This also we might further note by the way, that at two several times the
Gospel was given forth by Word, (...) Sealed by outward Ordinance to (...)
whole world universally, before the (...) ving of the Law; and so there was a
(...) ^ouchsafed for preserving and witne^ it to, and with all men. Namely,
(...)

1. To Adam and his Family, who (...) by Word and Ordinance (namely (...)
curfice) was to deliver it to his Poste^ and they thereby to keep the public^
knowledgement of it from Father to (...) successively: from which Cain and his
Family swerving, and making a Re^ Schism, and by degrees the sounder (...) of
the Church too, even the Sons of God by mixing themselves with Cains Family,
and receiving their corruption^ proving Nephisms and Apostates from God, the
whole World became corrupt from the true Faith and right Worship, so as that
only Noah was fou^ perfect in his Generations; and God swept them all away with
the Flood, preserving only that Preacher of Righteousness with his Family alive
to new people the World.

2. By him (even Noah) was the right way of faith and worship again pro^gated
to all men by Word and Sacri^ so as it might have been received and retained by
them successively. But thou^ Noah himself, and Shem his Son lived long time;
yet before Abraham's time less than four hundred years, they had very generally
turned aside from the fa^ (...) sincerity of worship again, and made themselves
Gods of their own devising, (...) offered their Sacrifices to them. But God in
great mercy, that his Truth (...) the Witnesses of it, and way of Worship might
not be quite lost out of the world, took pity on it, and called and chose out
Abraham and his Family, and gave to them both the further revelation of the
Faith, with its Ordinance, and added also, as further promises; so another
outward Ordinance too, for witnessing and ^aling the same, viz. the Ordinance
of Circumcision.

SECT. 4.
Of Circumcision given to Abraham and his Seed.

CIrcumcision which was a Religious cutting off the Foreskin of the Flesh, or
member of Generation, was the next outward Ordinance then appointed of God to
men. And it began to be an Ordinance of God in Abraham's time, and so was not of
so early a beginning, nor of that Universal extent as the Law for Sacrificing,
nor so universally received and practiced by men; but given to, and pra^^ised
by Abraham's family, and those that were willing to join themselves with them.
And it was given to him, not only to be given to him, not only to be practiced
on himself and his Family, but to be delivered by him them as an Ordinance to
be observed them in their generations. Gal. 3.8.
After God (...) made his promise of blessing all Nation in him and his Seed:
(In his Seed as (...) person in whom the blessing should (...) and in him, as
he with whom the righ^ way of faith and worship was deposited) and after he had
promised tomultiply his Seed, Heb. 11.13, 14, 15, 16.
both Spiritual and Carnal, and had promised him, not only an Earthly but a
Heavenly Country; that it might be evident, that Christ, and the grace brought
in by him, was the foundation of this Ordinance also. Though this Ordinance had
some further and other significations, than that of Sacrifice: for though the
Death and Bloodshed of Christ might be implied in it, in that by Bloodshed men
were admitted into the Church of God in Abraham's Family; yet it was given also
further, Romans 4.11.
as the Apostle says, as a si^n and seal of the righteousness of the faith that
Abraham had, being yet uncircumcised. And so it was,

1. A sign in their flesh, both of Gods Covenant made with Abraham and his
Seed, concerning the blessing all Nations in him, and of his owning and taking
Abraham's Family for his Church and People; and so to be as a Sign or Mark of
the People, with whom the right Faith and Worship was deposited, as also a Sign
of the way of right believing, and coming to be of Abraham's spiritual Seed
under the promise of righteousness and ^ing, viz. that the way thereto, (...)
by attending to, and receiving his faith or doctrine concerning the promised
Seed, singly cleaving to him, and letting go all confidence in their natural
birth (and what they thereby were) as corrupt and lothsom; and so all fleshly
privileges to be cut off and cast away, so as to confidence for blessing or
life to be placed therein, nor in any fleshly thing, a Parts, Wisdom, Goodness,
Righteousness of their own, etc. which should all be let go for Christ, the
promised Seed, that they might by believing the testimony of God concerning
him, be made in him, and so of the Seed of Abraham after the Spirit, and
inherit the blessing; as also that the way for Abraham and his Seed to beget
Children to God, to be heirs with him, is not to consult with the Wisdom, or
use the weapons of the Flesh, nor by natural and carnal generation, but by the
word of God, the simplicity of the faith of Christ to be held forth by him. Nor
was it only his natural Seed that might come into Christ, and have this
blessing, but any man; and therefore he was to instruct (and disciple as it
were) all that were under his power and dispose, to circumcise all born in his
house, or bought with his money: nor were any to be accounted of that society of
external Worshippers, but those that had, of received that sign or badge of the
Covenant; as none are of the Spi^ Seed, but those that suffer the Spiritu^
Circumcision in Christ to pass upon the^ and so rejecting all fleshly glorying
and confidence, do worship God in the Spirit and Truth according to his Faith
or Doctrine. It was also,

2. A Seal or Confirmation of the Righteousness of the faith, which he had
while uncircumcised: by which faith may be mean^, either

1. That Object of Faith, that Truth or Doctrine he believed and preached which
was both; Romans 4.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
That in him and in h^^ Seed all the Nations should be blessed Gal. 3.8. and
that God would give hi^ a numerous Seed, especially as to his Spiritual Seed,
that should be heirs of the world (the world to come in its renewed state) with
him; and then the Righteousness of the Faith, so taken, signifies either,

The righteousness of it, that it is the right and true faith, that men ought
to embrace and believe, as pertaining to Christ, and the blessing in him for
all Nations, and the blessedness of his Sprititual Seed, and their enjoyment of
the* world to come; or else also,

2. The righteousness prepared for all Nations, contained in the word Blessing,
that is the forgiveness of sins, and the justification preached in that Faith
and Doctrine; even as David describes the blessedness of the man to whom the
Lord ^tes righteousness without works, say(...), Blessed is the man whose
iniquities are ^ven, and whose sins are covered, Romans 6, 7. or else,

(...) By Faith is meant, that believing of that Doctrine, and so in God, that
was and in Abraham before he received that Ordinance of Circumsicion, for it
was ^fied of him before, that he believed ^ording to what was said to him, and
that was accounted to him for righteousness: and so the righteousness of his
faith, also taken, may either signify the rightness and truth of his so
believing, or also his righteous account he had with God therethrough; Gods
justification and acceptance of him: (but I think the former (...) of Faith,
and its Righteousness, is ^ant rather by the Apostle) So that by this Ordinance
was Sealed both, that that was the Faith and Truth to be believed, by whosoever
would come in to them, yea by ^ll men as it might be to them declared: and that
therein is held forth the true Righteousness, and way to Righteousness (...)
all Nations, viz. that in so believing God as Abraham did, according to what
(...) said of God to us, and not according to our sight and carnal reasons, we
^all be justified with him. This was ^ealed by Circumcision: and so that
righteousness should be imputed to such also, though not Circumcised in the
flesh, (as Abraham then was not, when his Faith (...) imputed to him for
righteousness) that so he might be the Father of the also, as Heirs with him of
the promi^ made to him in Christ; and the Father too of the Circiumcision, not
because of their being outwardly Circumcised (for Circumcision did not feal its
self, or i^ own Righteousness, as to say, that men should be justified, and
imputed righteous, and so be Heirs of Abraham, and his blessing in Christ for,
and by being Circumcised; but the righteousness of the Faith which he had,
being yet uncircumcised) but if they walked in the steps of the Faith of
Abraham, which he had before he was Circumcised, as the Apostle says Romans 4.11,
12. This Ordinance then witnessed and sealed, and the promise o^ Christ, and of
Righteousness and Blessing in him for all Nations; and that the Faith was
committed to, and left in the Family of Abraham, through which the blessing
might be met with, and so directed and sealed the way to that blessing And this
Ordinance was practiced from Fathers to Children by Abraham and (...) Seed,
both that of the Bondwoman, an^ that of the Free, and by the Edomites also
though both the Israelites, and the Edomites degenerated from the Faith
witnesed to by it: yea and the Israelites also, the generality of them, resting
in the ou^ ward Circumcision, and neglecting the inward of the Spirit,
witnessed and di^ed to by it: and because it was a badge^ distinction of them
from other People and a sign of their being Children of the Covenant of God,
calling themselves, and ^ing called there after the Circumcision (as before the
Church, in distinction from others, Genesis 6.2. Romans 2.17, to the end. and 3.1,
2, 9, 10, etc.
were called the Sons of God) they lifted up themselves by it, and despised the
uncircumcised in the flesh; as if there was no grace or blessing in, and
through the Messiah for them, if not so Circumcised, not understanding the
right end of it, and Gods mind and meaning in it.

With reference to this Ordinance, we read of a Circumcision or Uncircumcision
of the Heart, of ^ar, and of the Lips; Lev. 26.41.
the heart is uncirumcised, 2 Cor. 3.16. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Jer. 6.10. 2 Timothy 4.3.
Exodus 6.12, 30.
while the car^ality of it, the fleshly wisdom and affection in it obstructs
and hinders its perception and reception of Gods grace and truth, and so keep
it off from trusting in, and loving the Lord. And the taking away that
carnality in its turning to the Lord, is the Circumcising it to love the Lord.
The Ear is Uncircumcised while men cannot endure sound Doctrine, or to hear the
reproofs of it. And the Lip, while a man cannot speak distinctly of, or to God
in prayers to, or confessions of him. And the taking away that carnality, or
fleshly frame of Spirit, that renders the word offensive and burdensome, or that
hinders a man from speaking aright and profitably to God and men, is the
Circumcising of the Ear and Lip; and the Circumcision of these parts by the
Grace and Spirit of God, are exceeding necessary for us, that we may hear and
understand, and so b^ and love the Lord, and his Doctrine, a^ utter them
rightly and profitably: and (...) attending unto Christ, this also is to be met
with by us.

This I may further add, that that Ordinance, though it sealed the
Righteousness of Faith, Romans 3.25.
yet it also obliged to the observation of all such other Laws or Ordinances as
were, or should be after given them of God, in their waiting for the promised
Seed: thence though it was long before the Law, yet it is said by the Apostle
to oblige to keep the Law, Gal. 5.3. and therefore when the Seed came to which
the Law witnessed, and (...) the faith of whom they were kept, (...) under a
Schoolmaster, then it, with the observation of the Law ceased, being swallowed
up in Christ, the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes.
But in the mean while God, as he see good and needful, ceased not to mind them
of Christ thereby; and to that purpose also, to add still other outward Rites
and Ordinances, that by many Witnesses they might be more confirmed, and kept
to the faith of him, from which, through their carnality, they were apt to be
departing. And indeed within four hundred years, or little more after this
Ordinance of Circumcision, being in Egypt, they there much corrupted themselves
from Gods true Faith and Worship, learning the ways of the Egyptians, and
defiling themselves with the ^minations of their Eyes, and with (...) Idols, so
as to provoke God to have consumed them there, as Ezekiel testifies: Ezekiel.
20.7, 8, 9. and 23.8.
there they exercised their Spiritual Whoredoms, and the Teats of their
Virginity were bruised, so as God lifted up his hand to have destroyed them;
yet for his Names sake wrought their deliverance; that so his Name committed
to, and called upon by them, might yet have its Tabernacle amongst them, and
might not be polluted amongst the Nations, as if of ^o profit to them that
received it, and retained it with them. Yea he greatly glorified his Name in
his returning to them, to take them from the heavy bondage which their sins had
brought upon them: so as that he made it famous to all the people about them.
And then also renewing his Covenant made with Abraham concerning them: He added
another Ordinance called the Passover, to be observed by them.

SECT. 5.
Of the Passover, and how that Typed out Christ.

PEsech, or the Passover (of which, and of its Institution we read Exo. 12.)
^as the next outward and public Ordinance appointed of God, to be observed
(...) them that worshipped him in the Family of Abraham: and that was In^ted
upon their Deliverance out of (...) to be Annually, or every Year obser^ on the
same Evening; both in remembrance of that their great Deliver^ from so heavy a
Bondage; and as a T^ and signification of that far greater (...) liverance and
Redem^tion promised to Mankind, in, and by the Promised Seed: and especially,
and peculiarly by the (...) Israel of God, to be enjoyed: and so (...) the way
whereby men might, and the Israel of God shall actually escape Sin, and Eternal
Death, by, and through him. That it was a Type of Christ, and his Death and
Sacrifice, and Men's Redemption thereby from Sin and Satan, the Apostle warrants
us to believe, in saying 1 Cor. 5.^. Christ our ^^ssover is sacrific^ for us.
And indeed, almost every thing in that Ordinance fitly represents Christ, and
the grace in him, and the way to partake thereof. As to instance;

They were to take every man a Lam^ for his Family, Exodus 12.3. aptly
signifying, Joh. 1.2^.
That Lamb of God; which God, (as Abraham said Genesis 22.8.) would find out for
himself, for a Burnt-offering: and representing his innocence, harmlesness,
meekness, profitableness, and fitness, to be a Sacrifice for us; as also, the
in him, is Blessing for all the Families (...) the Earth, which each of them
should accept, and seek for.

2. Their Lambs were to be perfect, of (...) First Year, a Male, without
blemish, Ver^. 5. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. and 2.22.
(...) spot, scab, or defect in him; representing the acceptableness of the
Person of Christ to God, and fitness for the Work of our Redemption, as being
without fault, or spot of Sin before him: nothing defective in him, for making
satisfaction and atonement for us; nothing superfluous, or that might be
spared; of a Masculine Spirit, fervent in the business undertook by him, in our
behalf, and of excellent sweetness, and nourishment, Verse. 3.
for us.

3. Psalm. 89.19, 20. Heb. 4.15. Isa. 53.9.
They were to take it out of the Flock, of the Sheep, or of the Goats, or Kids;
to signify, That Christ should be one with us, of the common Nature of Mankind
that is found in good and bad; one chosen out of the People, and in all points
made like unto us: yea, that he should be numbered with the Transgressors, and
make his Grave with the Wicked, and with the Rich in his Death; yet without Sin
in him.

4. They were to keep it up, Verse. 6.
till the Fourth day after their taking it; perhaps to signify, that not till
the Four thousandth Year, or fourth time of the World, Heb. 9.25, 26.
Christ was to be Manifest, and brought forth to his death, and Sufferings,
though set apart thereto, in the beginning thereof.

5. They were to kill it, to signify, Verse. 6. Luke 24.26. Heb. 9.22, 26.
That the Messiah must dye for our Sins; no Remission of Sins but by his
Bloodshed.

6. They were to Kill it in the Evening, or between the two Evenings; between
the declining and setting of the Sun; (...) signify, That in the End of the
World, or last Ages of it, he should appear once to put away Sin by the
Sacrifice of himself, Heh. 9.26.

7. The whole Congregation was to kill it: to signify, That we all had a hand
in the Death of Christ. It was the Iniquity of us All, that God laid upon him,
and so in some sense, he Dyed by (that is, by occasion of) us all, and for All,
Isa. 53.5, 6. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. 1 Timothy 2.6.

8. Verse. 9.
They were to roast the Flesh of it: to signify, As the great Sufferings they
had endured in Egypt, so much more the great and fiery Afflictions that should
befall Christ, in his Soul and Body: yea, it might note, That He, not only
should be killed or put to Death in the Flesh; but also, That his Soul should
be in Hell for a time, though not left there: That he might as well endure the
Miseries, which our Souls in their separate State from their Bodies should have
endured; as what we must have endured before in the Body, Math. 26.38, 39. and
27.46. Luke 22.44. Act. 2.31.

9. Verse. 7.
They were to sprinkle its Blood upon the Posts of their Doors; the upper Post,
and the two side Posts; but not upon the Threshold. Heb. 10.22, 29. and 12.24.
To signify, That he should be the Propitiotory or Reconconciliation for us
through Faith in his. Blood; 1 Pet. 1.1, 2. and 2.5, 9, 1^.
which being sprinkled upon our Consciences, should be as a defense over, and
about us; but must not be trod under foot, or counted as a common thing by us,
and that in such obedience to, and sprinkling of it, being sanctified thereby
God would spare us; yea, bring us out from the power of Sin and Satan, and
choose us to be a People to himself, to show forth his praises.

10. It was to be eaten by every Family; Verse. 4. and ^.
To signify, That the way for us to be made partakers of the Death and
Sacrifice of Christ, and to live by him, and be strengthened for our departure
from Sin and Satan, and walking after God in the Wilderness of this World, is
by a particular receipt and application of him, to us, or exercise of Faith in
him, as Cruci^yed for us: as Gal. 2.20. Joh. 6.51.53. etc.

11. It might not be eaten raw, Verse. 9.
or sod in water, but roasted; To signify, (perhaps) that Christ not nakedly
considered, either as the Eternal Word; or simply, as made Flesh, and giving
himself as an Example to us in his Life, or Suffering as an ordinary Man, or
any ways as the wisdom of the Flesh might represent him to us; but as made an
Offering for our Sins, Christ as Crucified and therethrough prepared and made a
meek Sacrifice for us: yea, and as lifted up, and glorified by the Spirit of
God to us is to be believed in, and fed upon, by us. 1 Cor. 2.2. 2 Cor. 5.14,
15, 16. Joh. 6.51.

12. They were to Eat it whole, Joh. 6.35, 48, (...). 53, 54, 55.
its He^ with its Legs, and the appurrenances thereof: To signify, That whole
Christ was given for us, and is given to us; and nothing of him is to be
neglected by us. His Deity, his Humanity, his Walking, Words, Actions,
Sufferings, all good to be received, meditated, and fed upon by us: all that
appertained to him, as Crucified for us. He is altogether delectable. Cant.
5.16.

13. They were to Eat it that Night, ^^rs. 10.
not to leave of it till the Morning: To signify. That in this World, or dark
time of this Life, we are to live by the Faith of Christ, and exercise Faith in
his Death: there will be no need of that in the Morning of the Resurrection;
Heb. 10.38. Gall. 3.25.
as also it might signify, That the Ordinance, and the rest of those shadows
of the Law, were but to continue till the day dawned, till Christ appeared, and
was Dead, and Raised; and then no further need of those observations.

They were to Eat it with their Loins Girt, ^ers. 12.
their Shoes on their Feet, their Staves in their Hands, and in haste; in a
Posture ready to walk, or travel out of Egypt: To imply, That in minding, and
exercising Faith in Christ Crucified, for us, we are to gird up the Loins of
our Minds, not to let them be seattered abroad upon vain things, but to set
them upon Christ and Heaven, the true and heavenly Canaan, and our Journey, or
March thither; and to have the hope God's Salvation, his Word, as a Staff for
our Support; and so to have our Feet shod, with the preparations of the Gospel
of Peace; ready in haste to follow after Christ, out of this World, from the
Power and Dominion of Sin, and Satan, under Christ's Kingdom, Government, and
Guidance unto the Glory to which He will carry us.

15. verse. 8.
They were to Eat it with Unleavened Bread, and bitter Herbs; as to mind them
of their hasty departure from Egypt, that they could not stay till their Bread
was Leavened; and of the bitter Afflictions they there sustained: so also to
signify, That we ought to keep the remembrance of the Grace of God in Christ,
without retaining our Corruptions, either the Corruption of our Natures, 1 Cor.
5.7, 8, 9.
which we are to be putting off, and laying aside, as our old Leaven; or much
less, the Leaven of Wickedness, Guile, and Malice; contracted by a wilful, or
willing Disobedience to Christ; but to walk in the Truth, and in truth, and
sincerity of love to Christ, and one another, even as he has sincerely loved
us; but yet to remember the grace of Christ, Zech. 12.10, 11 Ezekiel. 16.61. and
20.43.
with a mindfullness of our own Sin, and sinfullness, and bewailing our
piercings of him, with our unkindness; as also, with a taking down, what ever
bitter Reproofs or Afflictions attend the Preaching of, or Believing on, Christ
Crucified.

16. ^ers. 43.45.
No Stranger might Eat of it, o^ Servant bought with Money, till Circumciled:
the Foreiner and hired Servant might not eat of it. Which might signify, and
instruct us, That as Men cannot be in Covenant with God, or be in Christ, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Ezekiel. 14.3, 6, 7. and 20.3.
whom he has given for a Covenant to the People, etc. but they must thereto
put off their confidence in the Flesh, and its Privileges: so neither may, or
can any feed upon Christ, live by the Faith of him, and enjoy his Consolations,
(though in Service, or Office in the Church,) but in, and by Suffering, that
grace brought in by him to Crucify him to himself: and that none may expect
freedom from the Wrath to come, that abuse this grace of God, and turn it into
wantonness, not suffering it to Circumcise their Hearts, and conform them to
him; no Stranger to the grace of God, nor Mercenary Professor of it, while such
may be made partaker of his Consolation.

17. verse. 46.
It was to be Eaten in one House: To signify, That God loves, and requires
Unity, and agreement in Faith, and Confession in them that Communicate with,
and live by the Faith of his Son; Psalm. 133. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5.
that they should not make rents and schisms amongst themselves, and one from
another; but endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace,
and that out of that Unity, we cannot be pertakers of Christ.

18. verse. 46.
Not a bone thereof was to be broken: which was fullfilled in Christ, even in
his Sufferings, Joh. 19.36. As also to imply, God's care of the Members of
Christ, that Believe in him, Psalm. 34.20.

19. verse. 47.
All the Congregation were to keep that Ordinance: To signify, That all that
are drawn to God, by Christ; are to have their spiritual Life, and feeding, in,
and upon Christ, and therefore are to mind him: None of them thinking
themselves too bad, nor none too high, or good to have their Life by the Faith
and Rerembrance of him, and his Sufferings for them.

20. If any Stranger would keep it, verse. 48.
All his Males must be Circumcised, and so he might Eat of it: Which may
surther hin^, That God likes, and requires it, that not only we our selves
should submit to Christ; but also, endeavor what in us lies, to subject and
disciple all under our care and dispose; else come we not so heartily to him,
or with so good allowance, nor can expect such Blessing from him.

Such was this Ordinance of the Passover, and the Ordinances and Rites
appertaining to it; and it was the First Instituted of God by Moses; and though
a little before the giving of the Law, yet was one of those Laws given by
Moses; and was Confirmed again afterward, Exodus 23. ^vit. 23.5. etc. And
therefore may be counted an Ordinance of the Law, and (...) was of continuance
in the Church of the Jews; holding forth to them Christ and the Grace promised,
and prepared (...) Christ, and the way of partaking of the Grace, and living by
it, till the time (...) the Actual Sufferings of Christ: when in the Night, in
which he was betrayed, having desirously eaten it with his Disciples he
Instituted another, bearing great Analogy and Proportion with it: Of which
afterward, when we shall have considere^ other Ordinances that intervened. For,

SECT. 6.
Of the Sabbaths, Festivals, Purifications; and other Ordinances of the
Tabernac^ and Temple.

OVer and above the Ordinance of the Passover, we find many more given to the
Jews, all Types of Christ, and Instructing to him, as the Apostle plainly says,
Coll. 2.15, 16. Heb. 10.1, 2. We cannot look into them all particularly. I
shall here together briefly mention the chief of them. As,

1. They had diverse Sabbaths, and days of Rest appointed them; as their Seventh
Day, or Weekly Sabbath, their Yearly Sabbath, Seventh Year Sabbath and their
Seventh Seventh year, or Year of Jubilee. Of which briefly.

1. The Seventh-day Sabbath, was first Instituted in Paradise; unless Moses
spea^ of it, by way of Prolepsis, or Anticipa^ (...). That the Sabbath was
afterward appointed for that cause or reason amongst ^hers, because God on the
Seventh-day ^ted from all his Works that he had ^ade: but however, as it was
appointed before the Fall, so it falls not under our Consideration; but as it
was anew, renewed by Moses; for from the Creation to Moses, we read nothing of
the Observation of it. But as so given, it had in it, and that too in common,
with the rest two things considerable. The matter of (...), (as it were;) and
the Form of it: That is, it may be looked upon as it was, a certain, separate
time; and as it was, a time separate to some peculiar use.

1. As a time of God's Worship, and had in it, the Number of Seven, The
seventh-day; as in others, the seventh-year, and seventh seventh: So it with
those other Sabbaths, signified and appointed out Christ the Perfection and
Fullness of Time; or that in the fullness of Time, after many Labors and
Changes, he should bring in the Grace promised, as to the open Revelation, and
Dispensation of it: yea, and as some think, the perlect Rest from Misery,
Labor and Toil brought in by Sin; to be brought in by him, in the Seventh
thousand Year, (or seventh-day, a thousand Years for a Day) of the World: or
upon the Sounding of the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 10.

2. As to its Use; It, with others, was appointed for Rest, (as the Word Sabath
also signifies, The seventh-day sabbath, that (...) and Beasts might Rest from
their Labo^ The Seventh year, and year of Jub^ was for the Resting of the Land:
And so they Typed out Christ, to be, and (...) bring in the true Rest from
Labor a^ Sorrow, to the spirits of men, now through the grace of his first
Appearing, Matthew. 11.28. Heb. 4.9. Isa. 28.12.
and to both Bodies and Spirits, in his Second Appearing; according to that of
our Savior, Come to me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
give (...) rest. And there remains yet a Rest for the People of God: and so
Christ is called too the Rest, wherewith the weary should be made to Rest. And
by the Apostle, Christ is said to be, the substance or body of the Sabbaths,
Col. 2.16.

But more particularly: The Seventh-days Sabbath was appointed to be a Sign
between the Lord, and the Children of Israel, for ever: That it is the Lord
that does Sanctify them: as Exodus 31, 13, 14 17. And so it might signify, and
be a Sign, that in, and by ceasing from all our Workings and Labors, to get
Life and Righteousness, Romans 4.5. Act. 26.18. 1 Cor. 1.30.
to, and by our selves; and in attending to Christ, and God in Christ, so God
would sanctify us according to that. To him that works not, but believes on
him that justifies the Ungodly, (...) Faith is imputed to him for
Righteousness: And Sanctified (says Christ) by faith that is in me. And Christ
is made (...) us of God, Sanctification: as if he should say. The Sabbath I
enjoin you, as a perpernal Covenant, to signify to you, and instruct you. That
you are not you own Sanctifyers; or Sanctified by your own Works and Labors,
but by me in Christ, your resting place, in a quiet ceasing from your own
Thoughts, and Words, and Works; and resting in, and upon Christ, I shall ye be
holy to me. Isa. 58.13.

2. The Anoual or Yearly Sabbath I ^all that day of Expiation, 1 Levit. 16.31.
and 23.27, 28, 31, 32.
the tenth Day of the seventh Month; in which besides their resting from their
labors, they were all of them to afflict their Souls and Fast, and the High
Priest was by Sacrifice and by entning into the Holy of Holios with the blood
of the Sacrifice to make an atonement for himself and for all the People, and
to lay their Sins upon a Scapegoat to be carried by him into a desert place:
The most lively and clear ^ype of Christ the great High Priest, and the
Atonement made by him for all men by his own blood and sufferings, first
endured by him, and then in the virtues of them presented before the Father in
Heaven for the taking away our Sins there, that so mercy might be extended by
him to us. Both the Bullock for a Sin-offering for Aaron, and the Goats for the
People signified Christ bearing and suffering for the sins of those that are
Priests to God, the Israel. of God, our Sins, and for the Sins of the People,
even of the whole World, 1 John 2.2. the Goat that was slain a Type of him
dying for all m^ and bearing their Sins in his own B^ on the Tree; and the
Escape Goat (...) was sent away, having the Sins of (...) Congregation confessed
upon him, another Type of Christ removing and carrying away our Sins by the
virtues of his Sacrifice, and remitting them to the World, so as not to impute
to them, or charge them upon them: Yet so as if any man rested not on that day,
2 Cor. 5.19, 21.
and afflicted (...) his Soul, he was cut off from his People, deprived of the
benefit of that geners* Atonement or Expiation, Lev. 23.29, 30.
as signifying that the way for men to enjoy the bene^t of the general
Atonement or Purgation of Sins made by Christ, Act. 10.43. and 13.38, 39, 40.
1. Joh. 1.8, 9, 10.
is to own and confess their Sins, and be afflicted for them in the sense and
acknowledgment (...) them, and to rest upon and believe in him, otherwise they
must perish. Indeed there was in this (as in all other Types) many differences
between the Type and the Truth by reason of the imperfection of the Types, and
perfection^ the Truth not to be reached fully by them here the day the Priest,
the Sacrifice we^ different things, but all pointed out Chri^ here the High
Priest first offered for (...) own sins, and then for the Sins of (...) People.
But Christ had no Sins proper^ his own, none as a Priest, for he kn^ or did no
sin, Heb. 7.26, 27.
neither was guile found^ his mouth; He was holy, harmless, undedefiled,
separated from sinners, made (...) ^han the Heavens. Who needed not to do (...)
those Priests did, daily to offer, first for his own sins, and then for the
sins of the people. But this (the hithermost, the offering for the Sins of the
People) he did at once; or what sins might in any sense be called his, as
imputed to him and owned by him, and so undertaken to be satisfied for, and
removed (as the sin of Adam, and all as in him, and what naturally and
necessarily springs up therefrom; for which, he in the first place, and most
properly undertook, to ransom men from the judgment due to them; or also the
sins of his Members, as such that are owned by him as parts of himself, the
sins of Believers) for these, and for sins of the People (sins of another
nature committed willingly by Men in their own persons against the Grace and
goodness of God extended to them through him; Romans 5.14.
sins after the similitude of Adam's transgression) that he might obtain power
to forgive them also, Romans 5.18.
for all these he did offer up himself once, so as that by that one Offering,
he has both obtained a ^ease of that first Judgment, in which all stood
condemned, so as no man shall perish therein; and he has obtained power to
forgive those other offenses after the similitude of Adam's transgression upon
their confession of, and turning from them. Yea, Heb. 10.14.
he has for ever per^ed the sanctified ones, provided them (...) a perfect
purgation, so as there needs no more Sacrifice for sin to their perfe^ saving:
Yea, so perfect was that his one Offering, that there-through he ha^ obtained
eternal redemption, power of forgiving sins, and setting free from S^ and Death
for ever; and therefore stand not to offer any more, but is gone into Heaven it
self, there to appear in the presence of God for us; and having as it were
sprinkled his Blood upon the Mercyseat (appearing in Heaven as a Lamb that was
slain) he is set down on the Right hand of God, Rev. 5.6.
expecting till all his Foes be made his footstool, Heb. 9.10, 11, 12, 25, 26.
and 10.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Indeed if any man refuse now in the day of Grace and
Atonement to own himself the Sinner, and fall down before God to seek and
accept his pardon in Christ, he goes without its benefit, and is cut off from
the Congregation, for which yet the Atonement was made. This indeed belongs to
the Ordinance of Sacrificing, yet as appropriated to such a peculiar day, and
joined with this appointment of rest, I think it falls fitly to be spoken to
amongst the Sabbaths enjoined them.

3. Their Seventh year Sabbath was appointed for rest to the Land, and for
release and liberty to Servants and Bondmen as it were a year of rest, Levit.
25.3, 4, 5, 6. Exodus 21.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
so it Typed out the Rest and release from Labor and Sorrow, to be brought in
by Christ as before. But as it was a year of Release for Servants, so it Typed
out the Liberty to be brought in by Christ from Sin, Satan, and the Paedagogy
of the Law, procured by his Death, and offered in the preaching of the Gospel,
and to be effected by the Spirit of God in the belief thereof: But as there, he
that accepted of it, had and enjoyed it; but he that said, Nay, he loved his
old Master better, and so would not go out from him; he was to be brought to
the door, and his Master was to bore his Ear through with an Awl, and he was to
serve him for ever: So here, he that embraces the Grace of God in Christ, in
the accepted time and day of Salvation, he shall be set free; but he that
refusing it prefers the service of Sin, Satan, and Mosaical Law above it, shall
be given over to serve and perish in his corruptions and legal bondage.

4. The like was Typified, but more fully in the great Sabbatical Year, or Year
of Jubilee, when on the day of Atonement the Trumpet of the Jubilee was to be
sounded through all the Land, and they were to proclaim liberty through all the
land, to all the Inhabitants thereof; and every man was to return to his
possession, and every man to his Family, Le^. 25.8, 9, 10, 11, etc. for therein
was prefigured.

1. The general Release of Men from Thraldom to Curse and Wrath (to which in
Adam they were sold, and by their own actual sins, were further imbondaged,
many of them) procured (...) the Sacrifice of Christ and the Ato^ment thereby
made, and proclaimed (...) the Gospel; which like the Jubilee Trumpet, Isa.
61.1, 2.
being founded, proclaims the acceptable year of the Lord, the day of the
vengeance of our God (even the vengeance executed upon Christ, or upon out
enemies by Christ) to comfort all that mourn; Blessed are the people that know
(mind, own, and so take hold of, and prove) that joyful sound, they shall walk
in the light of God's countenance. etc. Psalm. 89.15, 16.

2. The general actual Release of all from under the first Death and Judgment
to be presented before the Tribunal sear of Christ to be judged anew; and the
full and total release of all the Israel of God, that have here believed in
Christ, from all their terrors, sufferings, and thraldoms to Sin and Death,
into the quiet and full possession of all the Kingdom and Glory promised, and
this to be effected at the great Day of the Lord, When the Lord Jesus shall
descend again from heaven with the voice of a Trumpet, and of the the
Archangel of God; when the seventh Angel sounding the mystery of God, shall be
fulfilled, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. Rev. 10.7.

3. The general restitution of all things spoken of by the Prophets, Acts 3.20,
21. Romans 8.19, 20, 21, 22.
when the Creature it self shall be delivered from the bondage of Corruption,
into the liberty of the Glory of the Sons of God, at the ^d Great day of
Christ's appearing: all which are signified to be the effects of the Atoning
Sacrifice of Christ, in that that Jubilee Trumpet was to be sounded, and the
said Liberty, Release, and Restitution proclaimed on the day of Expiation or
Atonement.

2. They had also diverse Feasts appointed them Monthly and Yearly: as,

1. They had (Monthly) New Moons, which appear to have been Festivals, 1 Samuel
20.5. times appointed for Sacrificing and gladness, and for the blowing of
Trumpets over their Sacrifices, Numb. 10.10. Psalm. 81.1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 5.17.
Typifying the renovation of the creature in and by Christ through his virtuous
Sacrifice; He that is in Christ is a new creature, old things are passed away,
behold, all things are become new; as also the Reformation and change of
Worship to be brought in by him; in the faith of which they were to blow their
Trumpets, and sing aloud to him with Thanksgiving, thereby also figuring the
joy and gladness, the renovation made by Christ, should bring in, Psalm. 40.1,
2, 3, 4. Rev. 14.1, 2, 3. Heb. 9 9, 10, 11, 12. Yearly Festivals were their
Feast of Passover, First Fruits, and Tabernacles; in which besides the Rests
required in them (by virtue of which they were also Sabbaths, some days
be^nging to them) and the abundance of ^crifices then to be offered (which
appertained to the Ordinance of Sacrificing, they did solemnly appear and feast
before the Lord, rejoicing in the abundance of his goodness, Prove. 9.12.3, 4,
5, 6. Matthew. 22.12, 3, 4. Isa. 25.6. Joh. 4.14. and 6.35, 48, 51, 55, etc.
and in the remembrance of the great things he had done for them, providing
for, and feasting their poor Brethren also with them, Neh. 8.10, 11. Exodus
23.14, 15, 16. Levit. 23. which in general led them to behold by Faith the
abundance of the Grace to be procured and brought in by Christ, the Feast of
Fat things full of Marrow, to be made in Christ for all People. For Christ is
himself the Feast or matter of it; the meat indeed, and the drink indeed, which
whosoever eats shall find satisfaction in, so as not to hunger after other
dainties; and whosoever drinks of, shall not thirst for ever after other Waters:
Yea, they might mind them of the great joy and delight to be brought in by his
Incarnation, or making his Tabernacle amongst us, his sufferings for us, and
pouring down of his Spirit upon us; but more fully at the harvest and full
income of all the promises, when the Tabernacle of God shall be with men for
ever, Rev. 21.4.5, so that these also had their foundation in Christ, and
poined at Christ to come.

3. Besides which, they had also other Ordinances yet under the Tabernacle and
Temple, and pertaining thereto, pointing out Christ; Levit. 12. and 13. and 14.
and 15.
in which they were to exercise themselves till his actual appe^ting, as
diverse Washings and Puri^^ons, cleansings from uncleanness, Heb. 9.12, 13, 14.
as issues, Leprosies, etc. all Typing out the cleansing away of our Sins by
the Blood and Spirit of Christ; especially that, Number. 10. of the ashes of the
red Heifer, is most significant: For there God appointed that a red Heifer
should be burnt, and the ashes of it preserved and laid up in a clean place,
and then to be mixed with clean Water, and by a clean Person, with Hyssop, to
be sprinkled upon the unclean for the cleansing of him, etc. which Water and
way of Purification was prepared for all the Congregation; yet so as he that
refused to be cleansed thereby, was to remain in his unclearness, and to be cut
off from the Congregation, verse. 9.20, 21. and evident Type and instruction,
that in and by Christ his sufferings and Sacrifice, there is provided for men
generally a way of cleansing their Consciences and Spirits from sin, both guilt
and filth of it, namely the Faith of the Son of God, the truth concerning him,
as given forth by him in his Spirit in the opening and bringing to mind his
Death and Sufferings for us, and the love therein testified to us; there,
through men may find cleansing from all their uncleanesses of Flesh and Spirit.
But he that will retain his filthiness, or seek some other way of deansing than
by the Blood of sprinkling, and will not obey the Gospel to be purified
thereby, shall be cut off from part or fellowship in Christ and with his
Congregation, Heb. 9.13, 14, and 10.22, 29. and 12.24, 25. Joh. 13.8.

4. Yea, and to add no more, the very Tabernacle and Temple themselves, the
places appointed for the Worship of God, as for offering Sacrifices and burning
Incense (which burning of Incense was also a Type of Christ's Meditation by way
of Intercession) were clearly Types of Christ, Col. 1.19. and 2, 9.
as the Spiritual place of our Worship, and of the Church in Union with him;
for he is the Place or Person where God has placed all his fullness; the
fullness of the Godhead dwells Bodily in him; Isa, 53.10. and 56.7. Heb. 17,
10, 13.
he is both the Altar of Burnt, offering, and Burnt offering it self; his Soul
being made an Offering for our sinand upon him are all our Offerings to be
laid; He is the door into the House of God, the way by which we may enter into
the Holy place, to have fellowship with him and his people; yea the way into
the holy of Holies; Joh. 10.9. Heb. 10.20.
yea, the Molten Sea, and Layer for the Priests and Sacrifices to be washed in,
Typified him the Sacrificer and Cleanser of us and our Offerings; the Golden
Candlest, and Table of Shewbread, figured him the light and food of the Soul.
The Altar of Incense showed him to be the perfumer of our Prayers and Services,
as he appears for us within the Vail even in Heaven, where also he is the
Propitiatory, or Mercy Seat, and obtaining pardon for, and covering our sins,
mediates the New Testainent, and obtains a keeping of Covenant and Mercy with
all that Worship God in and by him, presenting them acceptable in himself: Yea,
he is the High Priest in the Holy of Holies with the Names of the Tribes of
Israel upon his shoulders, bearing and presenting them before God for ever; the
house of Prayer for all people, Isa. 56.7. and the looking toward the Temple of
old in their Prayers, or their praying in it, instructed them to look to Christ
in all their services, as also their orders of Porters, Singers, etc. Typed out
the Spiritual Worship and Worshippers of God in Christ, who is, as is said,
both the door to be opened, and kept open, or shut in and by the Gospel upon
men as they are mere to enter or be excluded. Yea, he also, he is great
Doorkeeper, that has the Keys of David, that opens and no man shuts, and
shuts and no man opens, the matter and Ground of all our Songs and Praises; and
the great Master of the Music, tuning the heart by his word and Spirit put
thereinto, so as they may make melody unto God; but of most of these things we
spoke above: Christ then was the end and ground of all these Ordinances, in
which the People were to exercise themselves till his personal appearance, and
offering up the acceptable Sacrifice, when he swallowed them all up in himself;
being the substance of those many shadows which all vanished at his appearing,
when he propounded himself in the Gospel to (...) as the truth of all, and the
Spirit of them, in which now God, without these sh^^ dows, w^ll be worshipped
by us. Thought yet he has also appointed us some (...) outward Ordinances of
Worship, to ^serve to and amongst ourselves and others, a lively remembrance of
Gods grace in him toward us: Of which it remains that we say something also,
before we conclude this Discourse, about Gods Ordinances.

SECT. 7.
Of Baptism.

QUestionless Christ's Ordinances appointed by himself at, and since his coming,
must needs have their ground in him, and bear witness to him: they are but few
in stead of the many before enjoined and practiced; namely Buptism and the
Lords Supper, of which in order.

Baptism, as to the outward act of it, is a dipping or plunging into, Matthew.
3.17, 18. and 28, 19, 20.
or washing with water into the Name, that is to the belief and confession of
the Doctrine of Christ, and so into, or unto the Name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, who were distinctly made manifest in the Baptism of Christ, and are
distinctly mentioned in the Commission given by Christ for Baptism after his
Resurrection.

The outward act of Baptising was pra^^ed before amongst the Jews upon di^ers
occasions; whence we read, (...). Heb. 9.10.
that ^ere were in the Law diverse Baptisms or, Washings: but it was first
appointed of God, as an Ordinance for manifesting and witnessing to Christ come
in the flesh, to John the Son of Zachary, forerunner of Christ, called thence
John the Baptist, Luke 3.2, 3.
or Baptizer, who was not that Light of men, nor witnessed of himself or men,
as directing them to themselves or him, John 1.6, 7, 29.
but came to bear witness to the Light in all his Ministration; and so did
witness both by Word and Baptism, that Jesus was the Christ, the Lamb of God,
that takes away the sin of the world; endeavoring to reduce men to him by
calling them to repent of their former mistakes and miscarriages, in which they
had wandered from him; either lifting up themselves by their birth of Abraham,
or by their having and observing the Law and Ordinances of God, in the outward
acts of them: or else by growing altogether profane, and casting Gods Law and
Doctrine behind them. He therefore pulling down their Mountains, or high
Thoughts of themselves, because of such fleshly privileges, and filling up the
Valsies by elevating men's minds to higher thoughts of God and his goodness to
them that were ready to fink in fight of their own sinfulness and worthlesness,
preached Jesus to them, and the Kingdom of God brought nigh to them in him: and
(...) further instruction of them in his Doctrine washed them in Water unto
repentance, saying they should believe in him that came after him, in whom they
should find forgiveness of their sins, and the Spiritual Baptism, washing them
from their sins, and so should meet with Gods grace and blessing in him. So
that that Ordinance did not witness men to be holy, righteous, penitent,
believers or the like (though men in coming to it, desiring or yiedling to it,
did (at least intimately) profess some desire after God, belief of the Doctrine
Preached, and desire to repent and do better; yea, and were engaged thereby so
to do: whence we find some confessing their sins, and others professing their
faith) nay, on the contrary, it intimately testified of men, that they are
naturally, or as in themselves sinners, and so unclean, filthy, unfit for
fellowship with God; and therefore need to be washed and cleansed by his grace
in Christ: but it directly witnesses to, and of Christ, and God in Christ;
that he has provided a Laver and Fountain of Grace in Christ for us to be
washed in: John 1.31.
thence it is said also that John, in his Baptizing, was sent that Christ might
be made manifest to Israel, not that Israel might be made manifest to Christ,
Matthew. 28, 19.
or to John. Yes, thence also Christ after his Resurrection, appointed it as a
medium for discipling all the Nations, or Gentiles unto him, and bids them
baptize men into, or unto the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost (which name is but one, and is all included in the name of Christ)
neither limiting it to Disciples really already such as believe: for he said
not, go ye disciple the Nations, baptizing those of them that believe; but
disciple all the Nations or Gentiles, baptizing them, namely in, or as a means
of discipling them, nor much less did he bid them baptize them in the name of,
or by virtue of their Faith, Repentance goodness; as sealing or bearing
testimony to them, but in, or unto the Name (Authority, Government, Doctrine)
of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as witnessing that to men therein, and
engaging them thereto, to seek all forgiveness, cleansing, grace and blessing
therein, and assuring them that therein is to be met with by them, whatsoever
may conduce unto their salvation: thence they that are baptized into Christ,
Gal. 3.26, 27.
have put on Christ, are engaged to let go all other considences and grounds of
expecting favor and blessing from God, and to seek and expect all in Christ in
believing in, and ob^ying him; and so in the main end of it, it ^grees with
Circumcision, sealing the righteousness of the faith of Abraham, which he had
when Uncircumcised; that is to say, that in believing the word and doctrine of
God concerning Jesus Christ, they do rightly and truly, and are the^ in
justified and accepted with God: (...) and rather, that there is forgiveness,
^^stification and cleansing from sin, freely prepared in Christ for men, and
held forth or given in him to them, and that therefore God requires and
approves of it in men, that they come to him for it. Thence also we no where
find that John, or Christ, or his Apostles did either will it, or did practice
it, to turn away any that came to be baptized by them, and so to be received
into Gods Church or Kingdom: we read indeed that some Pharisees refused to
submit to that Ordinance, as not owning (...) or their need of it; and that
John admonished and warned others not to rest in any conceits of their fleshly
privilege as their being descended of Abraham, or in their being baptized by
him; for in (...) much as he tells them, that he baptized them with Water, he
would rather have them but wash away such carnal rests, and look directly to
the end of his baptisms namely, to Jesus the Lamb of God, that takes away the
Sin of the World, and Baptizes with the holy Ghost, and Fire But we find none
of Christ's Servants turning any way from it, Matthew. 13.47.
young or old, but on the contrary; That they gathered together so many as they
found: ( i.e. (...) the gracious Providence of God ordered to come to them)
good and bad, Mat. 21.10. We find them turning out some for time, or giving
them over to Satan, (...) some scandalous or enormous Disorderg, after they had
joined themselves to the Church of God; but never keeping out any Man, Woman,
or Child, that desired, or were brought to them for admision; except we shall
reckon as such, their rebuking some that brought little Children to Christ, for
the laying on of hands; for which Christ, Mark. 10.13, 14.
to show his great dislike thereof, and admonish them to do no more so for the
future; sharply rebuked them, and instructed them, that of such is the Kingdom
of God; and what Kingdom, but that in which were such outward Administrations
to men, and of which, he gave the Keys to them? And the reason of it, surely
is, because the grace of God in Christ brings Salvation to all Men. There is in
Christ help, healing, and blessing, for all the Families of the Earth; and
therefore, all are called and invited to come to him; his Church being, as a
great and public Hospital, whereunto all Sinners are called, that they might
be healed by him. Indeed, it is not the outward Baptism, or Baptizing that
Saves. It is not the servants washing, or Baptizing the outward man: and
therefore did they not Preach, or lift up their Baptism, as that which was
sufficient, or much less Baptize men into, their Baptis^^, but unto Christ. Nay
they told them, they Baptized, that they admitted into the floor of the Church
one and other both Wheat and Chaff: but Christ would in his due time make a
Separation. But yet inasmuch as Christ has ordained this Ordinance, to witness
to himself, and oblige, and engage the Baptized to seek their Help and
Salvation in him; and so in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, we may
expect Christ's Presence, and Blessing upon, and unto the Baptized therein, who
has not said to the Seed of Jacob, that they seek him in any of his Ordinances
in vain.

Lastly, This Ordinance, though not at all times appointed to the Church, or
observed in it, not till the actual coming of Christ in the flesh, as now it
is, though the Fathers passing through the Red Sea, had something of like
nature and use (after a sort with it, 1 Cor. 10.2, 3.) yet it is to continue to
the Worlds end, or to the appearance of Christ again, as appears Matthew. 28.19,
20. in that enjoining his Disciples to Disciple, Baptizing, etc. he promises
his Presence with them to the end of the World. True, there is no express
mention there of Water, but yet that being the known way of baptizing, which
the servants of Christ were capable of baptizing in; and that being also
afterward practiced by them, both upon Jews and Gentiles, though the pouring
out the Name or Doctrine of Christ, and the instructing the Nations thereinto,
was their main and principal work, no doubt but the baptizing with water was
included therein: so that this is one of the Ordinances of Christ, now in force
with us, to witness to him, besides which we have another: namely the Supper of
the Lord: of which nextly.

SECT. 8.
Of the Lords Supper.

DOubt cannot be made of this Ordinance, but that Christ is the ground and end
of it, seeing he himself did institute it in the Night in which he was
betrayed, after He with his Disciples had observed the Passover, in remembrance
of their deliverance out of Egypt, and as a type of his own suffering,
presently to follow, and of the Redemption of mankind thereby. The matter and
outward rites of it, namely the taking, blessing, breaking and giving Bread to
his Disciples, bidding them to take and eat it, and telling them it was his
Body broken for them; as likewise his taking and blessing the Cup (or Wine) and
bidding them drink it, telling them that Cup was the New Testament in his
Blood) being also dear significations of his Body broken for (...), and his
Blood shed for us, as he also himself informs us: and the end of it being by
himself expressed to be the remembrance of him: what more clear than that our
Lord and Savior hereby, sets before us, that he (Christ) as come in ^he flesh,
and his Body as broken with sorrows, and sufferings for our sins to the Death,
is the true Bread of Life; and that the believing mindfulness thereof, and of
the love testified therein, is the way for us to be nourished up in the hope
of, Eternal Life, and to be strengthened to serve God by him, and suffer with,
and for him: And also that his blood as shed, his Sufferings and Sacrifice, as
endured and presented unto God for us, and has obtained for us the remission
of our sins, and confirmed the promises of God, for giving us forgiveness, the
Holy Spirit and Eternal Life; and the love and grace of God, and Christ therein
testified toward us, is Drink indeed, fit to exhilerate and cheer the heart
more than the choicest Wine, and to fill it with Spiritual Consolations. As
also that he would hereby instrict us to love one another as Brethren, and as
he has loved us, walking together as partakers of the same grace, and laying
down our selves for the good of one another, as he has given us example.

Neither does this Ordinance witness to any goodness in us (though we in eating
and drinking together in remembrance of Christ, do therein profess our belief
of those things therein set before us, and oblige our selves to cleave to him,
and one another) but rather of our want and sitter inability to live in the
favor and service of God, but by the faith of Jesus and so by him, as yielding
therein con^^^al nourishment and strength to us. And therefore also though it
behooves men to come and Eat and Drink worthily (meetly, and so as becomes the
grace in the Ordinance set before us, even Communion with the Body and Blood of
Christ) that is to say, to have our hearts minding the grace set before us, and
to consider and own our own vileness and unworthiness, as therein discovered
to us; that we may neither be puffed up in our selves, or Eat by virtue of any
goodness or worthiness found in us, or be puffed up one against another; yet it
is to be exposed to, and pertook of by all that profess the Name of Christ, and
that seek salvation by him, being capable of discerning the Lords Body, and the
grace therein set before them in some measure, and so of examining themselves
according thereunto. Yea the Baptized and Professors of Christ's Name, are to be
instructed and called upon to remember the grace of God in Christ toward them,
and not because of weakness to be kept there from, for which we have no
president to warrant us; only in case any after profession of Christ, and
desire to seek him, do walk scandalously, such are to be withdrawn from, and
may be secluded for a time, till they be ashamed and confess their fault, and
at least profess repentance of the same; as well for their amendmendment, as
also to vindicate the Society of Worshippers from the scandal of alowing, and
tolerating evil doers in their profaneness and evil living.

This Ordinance also instituted but the night before Christ's suffering, is to
be continued till his coming again, even till he come in the Clouds of Heaven
to raise the Dead, and to take his Servants into fellowship with himself, in
his Glorious Kingdom, in which they shall be ever with him, and eat and drink
of his Consolations with him for ever. Till then his Death never to be
forgotten (nor then neither) because of the great Testimony of His, and his
Fathers Love, and the great Procurer of all our good and happiness; but till
then it is in this Ordinance to be remembered and showed forth by us.

And these two Ordinances, Baptism, and the Supper, are what he has appointed
to us, since his coming in the flesh, to be generally observed and practiced by
us: his Death and Resurrection having put a period (at least as to us Gentiles)
to all the rest before observed by the Jews. As for prayer and thanksgiving,
and the like, they were in force at all times, and so will be at least till
Christ's coming again, if not after also, its sure thanksgiving will. And its
clear they have, as now to be performed, their foundation in Christ, and what
he has done, and is become for us, and are to be offered up through him unto
God in, and by his Spirit: but because these are not instituted with any
visible Rites to signify the Grace of Christ to us (except kneeling and
lifting up our hands and eyes to Heaven be judged such which yet are not
commanded, though commendably practiced, implying our ^^se of our own vileness,
and our humbling of our selves before God, and hope in his mercy) but rather
are exercises that the sense of our own wants, and belief of Gods goodness and
grace leads us (as it were) naturally to, I shall not say any thing more to
them: but after I have a little digressed to take notice of the rabuses of
these Ordinances, too generally through mistake observable in all ages, I shall
speak a little of the other way of Gods witnessing to his truth, and so
conclude this Chapter also.

SECT. 9.
Of the too General mistake of the mind of God in his Ordinances, and men's
abuse of them in all Ages.

ZEal is good if it be ordered with discretion, and guided by right judgment
and understanding, otherwise it is very hurtful, it being like fire which kept
within its bounds, and discreetly ordered is very useful, but out of its due
place is often very damageable; kept within the Hearth it is serviceable, but in
the Thatch destructive. Now zeal is then right and profitable when it springs
from, and is ordered by the knowledge of God (...) and Christ, and so is mainly
for, and (...) bout the great matters of his Law, Jud^ment and the Love of God,
as Luke. 11.(...) but when those things are not known regarded, but the
eagerness of the Spi^ is exercised, and spends it self about the
superstructures and matters of lesser m^ment, it produces no good Fruit, but
ten^ to much Confusion only. And yet he^ generally has this been, and yet is
the way of the World, even of those that w^ be, or seem to be some bodies in
(...) Profession of Religion? to exercise themselves about, and be very eager
and zealous for the outside and Form of Religion and Godliness; (the outward
Dut^ Ordinances, and ways of Worship) with an ignorance and neglect of the
botto^ and foundation of all right Worship and the very heart, life, and end of
(...) Ordinances. The Vision of all, the preaching and believing of the Cross
of Christ, and the great grace and love of God in him, pointed out in and by,
and the very foundation and end of all (...) Ordinances, Isa. 29.10, 11, 12. 1
Cor. 1.22, 23.
men have not, nor yet (...) make any great account of; but it is sealed Book
to them, as the Prophet Isa^ says, or as a stumbling block and offen^ or else
as foolishness to them as the A^stle complains; while men are either a^lously
pursuing after, or priding themselves in their riches of other sciences
knowledge falsely so called, or indu^^ly earnest for outward Observances. ^ough
yet it is the knowledge of Christ, Col. 2.2, 3.
(...) of God, and his love to Mankind in ^st, which is the only true Science
in ^ich all the Treasures of Wisdom and knowledge are contained; and which ^oth
renews and frames the Heart aright to Worship God in Spirit, and Truth; and so
gives the inward, and true Circumcision, and Baptism; yea, and Sacrifice to be
offered up by man, and Supper, and Communion with God; and also, instructs, and
leads rightly to look upon, and use all outward Ordinances required of, and to
be observed by them. A very dangerous mistake, and yet the commonness of it may
be seen in what is noted in the Scriptures, touching the former Ages, and in
what is agreeable thereto; observable concerning the Men of our own time.

Thus we find the Prophets faulting Israel of old, for rejecting God's Rest,
wherewith he would have had them cause the the weary to Rest, and in which he
had provided refreshing for them: the Foundation he had laid in Sion, the
Vision of all: and instead thereof Preaching, and urging precept upon precept,
precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, Isa. 28.12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17. and 29.9, 10, 11.
here a little, and there a little, till they went back and stumbled, and fell;
for which God threatened them; also, that it should be so to them, precept upon
precept, etc. as is to be seen, Isa. 28. making much to do, and priding
themselves their building Temples and Altars; Jer. 7.4, 5.
^pecially the Temple at Jerusalem;) (...) offering many Sacrifices, burning
Inc^ and observing the other Ordinances, w^ as in all this, the grace of God in
Ch^ was not so seen, believed, and yielded (...) as to be thereby renewed in
their he^ and conversations otherwise: as is to (...) seen Isa. 1, 10-10. and
65, 1. 2-6. a^ 66.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Hos. 8.12. Which (...) is more evidently to be
noted in the J^ and Pharisees in Christ's, and the Apost^ time: for they spent
their zeal and hea^ for, and about keeping Sabbaths, offe^ Sacrifices, Tithing,
Mint, and Rue, a^ Annise, and so in Fasting, Praying, (...) and so in an
external holy Walking knowing themselves thereby, and lift^ up themselves
therein, as if they wereth godly People, holyer than their Neig^bours, the
chosen people of God; desp^ing others, in comparison of themselve while in the
mean time, they neglect^ the weighty things of the Law, the K^ of Knowledge,
Judgment, and the (...) of God, And where to profited, then their said Zeal and
Religiousness; but make themselves and others the m^ Children of Hell; even to
fill them w^ proud conceits of themselves, and (...) tempt of others, to the
very Opposi^ Persecuting, and Crucifying of the (...) Glory; and Murdering both
him (...) (...) that bare Witness of him; (...) (...) they sought
Righteousness, by, (...) so rested in their Works, about God's ^ward Ordinances
and Precepts, not ^itting themselves to receive the grace God in Christ; the
Righteousness of ^d, that they might have been renewed (...) yet, they ascribed
both all Gods (...) abundant Dispensations of Means (...) Ordinances to them,
then to others; (...) their Zeal and observances to some (...) special grace,
Electing and Destina^ them before time, and by some kind Irresistible Operation
in time, bringing ^m thereto: for as Josephus Notes, Luke 18.10, 11.
They ^ed all to a kind of Destiny: thence (...), God I thank thee, that I am
not other men are, -- or as this Publican, etc. (...) up a conceit of special
Grace to ^selves, against the true Grace of God, restified in the Gospel; and
begetting (...) indeed to God. And who sees not (...) be the too common way of
the ^orld, ^even the professing part of it at (...) both Papists and
Protestants are ^up, and wrangling about the Borm (...) ship, and Godliness,
neglecting the (...) few receiving the love of the (...) amongst us, so as to
be saved ^ere(...) so, as to experiment the inward ^ersion of the heart;
cutting off, (...) confidences, and rejoycings in, (...) of our selves; the in
ward (...) washing the cheart and conscien^ dead Works; and the inward (...) or
Communion with Christ, and one another, in the Spirit, and its ^lations. But
the great Zeal about ^gion is spent about the External part as the form, and
way of Baptizing the way of administering, and receiving Supper; the form and
way of Prayer, regulating men in their demeanours, conversations thereunto; The
way Churching, or imbodying into Socie^ and so the Frames and Forms of K^ledge
propounded or gathered, by (...) men at the best too generally Preach Precept
upon Precept; not knowing, lieving, or laying the foundation (...) Precepts,
the Son of God, the Savio^ the World, and the grace that brings, ^vation to all
Men: by which, men (...) have the fear of God taught, and b^ and nourished in
them: and indeed, (...) fear of God men have otherwise, they (...) it but by
the precepts of Men, they (...) otherwise daring to believe, or pra^ but as
warranted thereunto by t^ But besides, while they believe, or (...) not Gods
good will in Christ (...) World; and have not that as the K^ Knowledge, to
guide them in their a^hensions about, and use of Ordinance Precepts; they also
run into many ^ditions of their own, as the Jews, about their Sabbath-keeping,
and wa^ their Hands, etc. according to wh^ they teach men to Worship God,
^ditions in Doctrine, False Doctrine opposition to the Testimony of God ^ing
Jesus Christ; and Traditions in ^actise, about men's coming to, and ob^ying of
Ordinances; making those ^ings the badges and characters of their ^ood
condition; and laying them as the ^oundation, or fundamental givers of their
^ope toward God; and that Christ came and dyed for them; and of their
expecting Blessing from him, which are not so much as right Superstructures;
how great their mistake herein. Is not the great business of the World now, to
measure the outward Court, and to regulate that which is thrown out, and given
to the Gentiles? Do not men by their outward demeanours, and zeal for
Ordinances, ^dge themselves God's peculiar Portion, (...) well as the Pharisees
of old? and are ^ot these the things, about which they ^wrangle and Fight, and
run into Divisions and Factions? And are not the fruits of this misplaced Zeal,
high conceits of Men's selves, despising of others, and banding against the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ; against the gracious good will of God, to Men?
Instead of Preaching of which (...) all, that they might see, and believe, and
be renewed by it; and of making all ^en see, what is the fellowship of the
^ystery; calling and inviting all to ^ait upon God in Christ, for the knowledge
of Himself in his ways and Ordiances; Do they not deny, both the Do^ine of his
Grace, and his Ordinances; ^nessing it to all that are not so regulated, as
their Traditions exact? And the same folly and deceit is in men's Zeal, John
8.32.
for and knowing themselves by Opinion^ of Truth, or Contentious for them
(though the Truth indeed is earnestly (...) be contended for, against all that
would corrupt it; because that is it, which being indeed known, frees, and saves
men; when men wrest in their Acts, about Truth; and much more, in their
Opin^ons, which are not Truth: and reject the love of the Truth, by which they
should be Saved; so as they are not Renewed, and Saved by it. All their Zeal,
Contention and Acting, will be but in vain to them (...) they live yet in the
Flesh, as others t^ that spend their Strength and Zeal about outward
Observations. The ground (...) all which mistaken Zeal, is the Heart blindness
about, and Enmity against the grace of God in Christ; and desire to have their
rejoicing in themselves; yea, (...) Natural desire to be, as God; not in
conformity to him, and his will in Christ but to be our own Saviors, and to
(...) great in our own, and others Eyes; which things the Carnal Eye, and Heart
co^ceives it may attain to, in its earnest pre^ after, and observing outward
Acts of ^ligion, and Worship; they being also m^ obvious to the Carnal Eye; and
being (...) esteem too, because of the Name of G^ upon them, and godliness
supposedly p^ced in them; whence the power of g^liness, (the Cross of Christ,
Crucifying (...) ^o our selves, and the World, and the World to us,) it sees no
beauty, Romans 2.29.
nor finds ^o relish in it, being of that Nature, as wholly to lead a man out
of himself, ^o depend upon God in Christ, and ^ory in him; laying by, and
making no^ing of Man: nor does it render him ^orious to the World, as Zeal for
outward matters does, as the Apostle signi^es, Romans 2.29. He is a Jew, who is
one ^wardly; and Circumcision is that of the ^eart, in the Spirit, and not in
the Letter; whose Praise is not of men, but of God: ^plying, That the
Circumcision, and (...) the Religion, or Worship; that is in the outward, is
respected, or praised by Men, which the Natural Self-loving Spi^t likes: or
however, to find the Life of ^s own hands, that it may have something ^hereof
to glory in it self. Not but that ^he Ordinances of God and Christ are di^ently
to be observed; but in their place: ^ot as the Foundation of the Building, but
^s things to be Built thereupon, and helps ^r the more close cleaving to it.
Neither ^ey, nor our observations of them, are (...) be put in the place and
stead of Christ, (...) whole, or in part; but to be referred (...) Christ, and
he to be eyed in them, (...) the substance and end of them; thence ^at of our
Savior: these things ought ye (...) have done, but not to leave the other
^done, Matthew. 23.23.
But as men too commonly look upon them, and use them, they are endeavoring to
heal themselves, by their Acts and Exercises about them; and make themselves
Righteous by them: seeking Righteousness as it were, by Works. Making Christ in
effect, nothing but an injoyner and a rewarder of such works; Romans 9.31, 32,
33. and 10.2, 3.
or at most also, a mender, and maker up of Men's defects in their works;
setting up those Acts and Works of theirs, instead of the Faith of Christ,
which they should live by: yea, and their supposed Acts of Faith, are too often
nothing but a kind of work of theirs, a believing through works that is to say,
to which they are animated and strengthened, through the sight o^ conceit of
some good things done by them, or found in them; not a believing through grace,
as theirs in Act. 18.27. That is to say, begot, and sprung up through the
hearing and receipt of the Free Grace of God to Mankind, and so to themselves,
as, and while Sinners, without any good thing found in them, to difference them
from others, and give boldness to them, to believe in him: whence they are the
Children of the Bondwoman, born of and living in their Works, Frames,
irregulatities, and Observances, etc. And not of the Freewoman, the Free Grace
and love of God to Mankind, and by Christ Jesus: and no marvel then, if what
they have their Birth and Life in, they be also Principally Zealous, and
Contentious, for, turning that which was appointed as a means of their welfare
into a snare to themselves and others, and what in their right place was a
Table, upon which Christ and his ^race was set, into a Trap while they take
them for their Meat. But I shall no further digress about this much to be
bewailed Mistake, but proceed to the other Branch, Of God's Witnessing to his
Truth by Miracles, and so conclude this Chapter also.

SECT. 10.
Of Miracles confirming the Truths of God.

MIracles I call those Works and Effects of the power of God, which are beyond,
or contrary to the ordinary course of his Providence, in which God ^ath at any
time more expressly and signally Evidenced, his Presence with his People, and
born Witness to his Truth with them. Of which,

1. Some were only signs for Unbelievers, to draw them to believe the Truth
without any Figure of the thing to be believed: Such were the mighty things
wrought by Moses, before Pharaoh, and he Egyptians; and many things wrought ^y
Elias and Elisha, and those mentioned (...) Dan. 3. and 6. and the generality
of those ^ings wrought by Christ's Apostles.

2. Others had in them something Ty^al or Figurative of Christ, and the grace
(...) him, such was the healing the Israelites ^ng with Fiery Serpents, by the
Brazen ^pent. And the deliverance of Jonah (...) the Whales belly, a
signification of the ^th and Resurrection of Christ. Such also I conceive,
Numb. 21.9, 10. with Joh. 3.14, 15. Joh. 1.17. with Matthew. 16.4. Joh. 9.7. Joh.
20.31. Act. 2.22.
was the curing of Naamans Leprosy, by his washing in Jordan, 2 King. 5.
Christ's turning Water into Wine, at the Wedding; Joh. 2. And the opening the
Eyes of the man born Blind, by the Pool of Siloam; which is by Interpretation,
Sent. Yea, the most of the Miracles wrought by him, as they were confirmations
of him, and his Doctrine; so they had also some significant intimation of the
grace brought in by him, As the spiritual healing, enlivening, and saving of
men. But this was the General and first end of all God's Miracles to
demonstrate himself, his Truth, and People to Men: touching which Miracles, I
note,

1. That they were not at all times, nor ordinarily wrought; for then would
they not have been taken for Miracles, but upon some special times, or upon
special occasions. As

1. When God brought Israel out of Egypt, to manifest himself to be the true
God; and Israel his People; and to prepare them for his Law, and evidence it to
be his: and so in his Call in them to be, and setting them up for his Church,
with whom his Truth and Worship should be deposited; that the residue of the
Nations all about might know, which was the true God, and which his Church; and
(...) where to seek, and find him, and hi^ Truth: Therefore he set his signs
in Egypt, and in the Wilderness, to get himself a glorious Name, or an
everlasting Name, as Isaias says; and to make his Name known in all the Earth,
as he said by Moses, Isa. 63.12, 14. Exodus 9.16. We read of few Miracles
before, except we account the preservation of Noah in the Ark, and the
Destruction of Sodom, for such; and surely there might be less need, then
because of the long Lives of the Patriarks, and first Fathers, amongst men to
hold forth the truth to them.

2. In the time of the Apostasy of Israel, to manifest to the halting People,
who was the true God, and which his Worship; and so to turn their hearts back
again, as in the times of Elias, and Elisha. 1 King 18.36, 37. 2 King. 2. and
3. and 4. and 5. and 6. and 7. etc.

3. In the time of the Captivity, Jonas 1. and 2. and 3. Dan. 3. and 3. and 6.
Isa. 38. and 39. Job. 20.31.
and a little before in Jonah's time, for making known himself, and his people
amongst the Heathen, to prepare them to receive his Message, and confirm his
poor Captives that waited upon him, and give them favor amongst their Enemies.

4. At the coming of Christ in the Flesh, and his Actual Preaching the Kingdom
of God, and accomplishing the things of our Salvation, to make him manifest to
be the Christ; and that to be the truth that was Preached by Him, and his
Apostles, in his Name; Mat. 11.5, 6. Heb. 2.3, 4. (...) In seting up, or taking
to himself from a^ong the Gentiles, a people to be his church, (...) which the
residue of men might resort to seek him, Dent. 4.
Act. 15.3, 4, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17.

2. That though God wrought many of his Miracles, so as they were conspicuous
to, and amongst the Gentiles; yet, Israel were Witnesses of more of them then
the Gentiles, till after Christ's Ascension: Israel had the pre-eminence too in
this Dispensation.

3. That it was not God's mind, that people should look for Miracles to be the
foundation and ground of their Faith, but that they should believe, and have
their Faith grounded upon his Doctrine, to which he bare Testimony by those
Miracles and gifts of the holy Ghost; as, and when he pleased: especially,
after he had by such Miracles evidenced the Truth, and therefore he faulted it
as an evil, and unbelieving, and adulterous frame of heart, to be requiring
signs after he had sufficiently evidenced Himself, Psalm. 44.1.2, 3. and 77.11.
12. Isa. 63.7, 8, 9, etc. Psalm. 78.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 105.5, 6, 7, 8. Joh.
20.29, and 7.37, 38. Romans 4.17, 18. Heb. 4.2.
and his Truth to men: as Matthew. 16.1, 2, 3, 4. Joh. (...).48. Directing them
to the Wonders and Miracles formerly wrought by him: and to acquiesce and rest
in his Authority and Truth, as Witnessed thereby and not to be doting upon new
Signs, to satisfy the vanity of their Mind; thence we fin^ David, and other
holy Men of God, often mentioning, and looking back to (...) Works and Wonders
of old: and Go^ ordering men so to do: they that believ^ because they see,
being not so happy, no^ their Faith usually so firm, as they the believe and
see not, but believe accordi^ to what is spoken; and as the Scripture says.

4. That God having given a full Testimony to his Truth, and to the Revelation
of his Truth in these Last Days, by his Son, and confirming it also by diverse
Signs, Miracles, and Gifts of the holy Ghost would have us henceforth
acquiesce in them; and not either look after more Miracles to persuade us to
believe, nor receive any, because they may work them, for he has forewarned
us, that he will suffer Antichrist to come with Power, and Signs, and lying
Wonders: yea, to show great Signs and Wonders, to try whither we will, and do
heartily love his Son, and the Truth Revealed to us, by, and concerning him;
that so such as love him not, nor acquiesce in his Truth, as already witnessed
and confirmed, might be deceived by him, and go to destruction. Matthew. 24.22,
23, 24. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.

5. That though the generality of these Miracles wrought of God, were wrought
by his servants and people; yet he gave not to all his People, either to have
the sight of them, or much less power to work them; but only to some few, and
in some Ages as he pleased. So that in these additional Dispensations also,
both of Ordinances and Miracles, God has used his own liberty; and there has
been both as to Persons, Peoples, and Ages, great diversity. But we have been
large enough upon this Branch of the Distinction as to God's Dispensations. Let
us now proceed to his Operations, in, and upon Men, in and with these his
Dispensations.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Gods Operations, and first of those of them that are in Mercy, and Directly
his.

SECT. 1.
That the Operations of God are many of them very secret, and not to be known
or discerned, but by his Word concerning them; and therefore to be soberly
treated of.

GOds Operations in, and with the Dispensations of his Truth, and the means
thereof are certainly very intricate, secret, and incomprehensible as to the
manner of them; and therefore also great sobriety is to be used in our
assertions concerning them, taking the word of Truth altogether for our guide
therein: yea, it is better soberly hereabout to profess our weakness and
ignorance, than to be rash and presumptuous; for, (though its evident by the
Scriptures, that God and his Spirit accompany the means he affords to men; Genesis
6.3.
whence that, My spirit shall not always strive with man: implying, that during
the day of his patience, He is striving, as it is also asserted, in 1 Pet.
3.19. That Christ by his Spirit, preached to the Spirits of men now in prison:
and in Prove. 9.3. That Wisdom cries with, and as well as her maidens unto men,
to call them to Christ; yea, and Christ promised his Spiritual presence with
his Servants in their faithful Ministration, always to the end of the World,
Matthew. 28.20. Yet, it is truly said too, That as God has his way in the Seas,
and his path in the great deep where none can trace him; so his footsteps in
his operations are not known, Psalm. 77.19. That of Solomon in Eccles. 11.5.
being true; where having exhorted men to disperse, or scatter abroad their
gifts, or abilities, either in outward things, as riches for the relief of the
Poor: the bread that perishes, or the word and knowledge of God; the bread that
endures to everlasting Life; though it be as upon the Waters (through
difficulties, and with unlikeliness, as to our sense and reason, of reaping any
fruit of it; as also, upon many) having used Arguments thereto, both from the
future recompense of Reward, or proof of fruit brought forth to God thereby,
[after many days thou shall find it:] and from the uncertainty of the
opportunity for doing good; requiring more diligence in doing it, [Give a
portion to seven, and also to eight, for thou know not what evil shall be
upon the earth.] And from the manner of other things (...) which God teaches
us, [If the Clouds (...) full of rain, they empty themselves upon the earth.]
And men that have gifts of knowledge and understanding, are compared to Clouds
full of Rain; as men that seem to be some body, and are no body; but boast of a
false gift, are like to Clouds, and Wind without Rain, Prove. 25.14. And from
the fixedness of men's states after death they are like Trees, that lie as they
fall; and having warned of consulting with carnal Reason, flesh and blood in
employing our Talents, or of minding and poring upon things that may discourage
us: [He that observes the wind shall not sow, and he that regards the clouds
shall not reap.] He lays down this following Aphorism or Assertion, answering
to a secret discouragement of our not seeing, or perceiving any good, done by
out dispensing our Gifts. As thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, or
Wind; nor how the bones are, or grow in the Womb of her that is with Child^
even so thou know not the Works of God, who makes all. And therefore
counsels, In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withold not thine
hand, for thou know not which shall prosper, or be right, either this or
that; or whither they shall be both alike good. By all which, and especially,
by that following Verse, it appears to me; that in the Fifth Verse
forementioned, he speaks of God's Workings in, and with the Word dispensed;
that they are as secret, hidden, and unknowable, so as to comprehend, fathom,
and declare punctually every thing therein, as it is to know the way of the
wind, or growing of the bones in the womb of a woman with Child. To which
agrees that of our Savior. Joh. 3.8.
The wind blows where it lists; and thou hear the sound of it, but can
not tell whence it comes, or whither it goes: So is every one that is born of
the Spirit. And that in Mark 4.26. So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should
cast Seed into the ground, and should sleep, and rise night and day, and the
Seed should spring and grow up, he knows not how; for the earth brings
forth fruit of her self, etc. Such knowledge then is too wonderful for man to
attain, and comprehend; and therefore we have need of sobriety, lest we rashly
puffed up with a fleshly mind, as thinking our selves, by our wit, and parts, and
sciences, sufficient to dive to the bottom of this depth; pry into things that
we have not seen, too secret and deep for us. Surely it may admonish us, not to
be peremptory in our thoughts about them, that may clash with his Revealed
Doctrine, the Gospel Truth, which is certainly to be believed as truth by us,
and not upon presumptions of our knowing the abstruse Secrets of Gods knowing,
willing, and working in men, to be contradicted by our conceptions. Yet some
things with sobriety as the Scriptures of truth instruct, and inform us, we may
consider, and conceive, and so holding us close to that Clue, or Thread, let us
consider them in, 1. The Distinct kinds of operations, Attributed to God. 2.
The manner of his Working, in those kinds of operations.


SECT. 2.
Of Gods merciful Operations in men by his Grace, preventing them, or his
preventing Operations.

KInds of Gods Operations, or Workings in Men, in the Scriptures Attributed to
him, are more generally Two, for they are such, as are either more directly and
properly God's, and so Attributed to him, as the operations of his mercy
toward men, or such as are not altogether, or not always so properly God's,
though after some sort Attributed to him, as the operation of his Wrath, or his
hardening operations.

1. The operations of God in grace and mercy are such, as his mercy to men
leads him to effect, and work in them by his Power and Spirit, in, and with the
means afforded, for the inlightning, softning, converting, and leading men to
himself. Though its true, he is in some sense (...) gracious in all his works,
Psalm. 145.17. Either to those, he works in, and upon, or to others whose good
and glory he makes them subservient to. Psalm. 136.1^, 18, 19.
As he slew mighty Kings, for his mercy endures for ever. Og the King of
Bashan, for his mercy endures for ever, etc. But in this Distinction, we
intend by gracious operations, or operations in mercy; operations of the first:
so such as directly tend to the good and welfare of those in whom they are. And
so he works,

1. By way of prevention of men, in, and with his gracious means and
manifestations of himself to them, vouchsafed them, while altogether in
themselves dead, blind, ignorant, helpless, and before they know, or can by
themselves know, or do any thing that is good. And so generally the operations
wherewith he prevents men, capacitating men for the good to which he calls and
moves them; such as Christ's first inlightnings of men, preventing them, with
his light, truth, goodness; and therein giving them capacity to see them; and
so speaking to them in his Calls, as to give them a capacity of hearing him;
though otherwise deaf, and dead in themselves: and then in that capacity of
seeing, and hearing, he requires them to see, and hear; that is, Exercise those
capacities and abilities brought to them by him. Of which we read, Isa. 42.18,
19.
Isa. 42. Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind that ye may see. And Joh. 5.25. The
deaf hear the voice of the Son of Man. And they that hear, (that is listen, or
exercise the hearing faculty given them by him, in his preventing them) do
live, this is Christ's standing at the door of men's hearts, and knocking so as
men may hear; upon which he promises, That if any man hear his Voice, and open
to him, He will come in to him, and sup with him. Rev. 3.20. Concerning which
preventing Operations, we may find, That they are afforded in, and with the
means to all men, according to the means afforded them: Jews and Gentiles, one
and other capable of them. Christ being the true Light, inlightning (by way of
prevention of them) every man coming into the World; though by way of
consequential, or more special, lightning not all, but them that believe in the
Light, and follow him, Joh. 1.9. with 8.12. and 12.46.47. He was in the world.
(by spiritual influences dispensations, and operations;) and the World was made
by him, (both at first, and in its present Being, supported, ordered, and
enriched:) as the same Word is rendered, to advance, 1 Samuel 12.6. And the world
knew (minded, received, owned) him not. He came to his own, (both to all men,
made, and ransomed by him, and therefore also his; as Exodus 19.5. And more
peculiarly to the Jews, more choicely his; and this also by Spiritual
Influences and Operations, in the mercies and means afforded them; even before
his being made flesh, spoken to afterward, ver. 14. Though if any contend, that
that includes his coming to the World, and to the Jews, in the Flesh; and in
his Gospel more plainly Preached, I will not strive with him; yet I think it
speaks more directly to what was before,) and his own received him not: But to
those that received him, (in those preventing Operations) to them he gave the
dignity of being the Sons of God, even to those that believed in his Name: who
were borne, (or begotten to God,) not of Bloods, nor of the will of the Flesh,
nor of the will of Man, but of God; even of the knowledge of, and by the power
of God, as working upon them, in, and through that knowledge: yea, manifesting
that knowledge, and making it powerful, to beget them to him. But that God
vouchsafes those Operations for bringing in men to himself through, or upon the
account of Christ, unto all men I shall make it evident; first, by considering
it, with respect to the Gentiles, that had lesser means; and then to the Jews,
and such as had the fuller means amongst the Gentiles.

SECT. 3.
That God afforded those merciful preventing Operations to the Gentiles, with
the lesser means afforded them.

FIrst for the Gentiles, that had the first and lowest Dispensations before
spoken of. We find, that the Truth was manifested in them, and wrought in their
hearts, in some hints of it, toward their confessing and glorifying God, but
was smothered, or held down by them, Romans 1.18, 19, 20, 21. Which last Phrase,
as it signifies their Wickedness, so it also implys, the Truths Operativeness;
otherwise, no need or place for their holding it down in unrighteousness, to
prevent its force: and that God was not only externally propounding it to
them, but also internally working in them, to cause them to discern it; is
clear, in that it is said, He manifested it in them; so as what he showed being
minded, or heeded; they might understand the invisible things of God, (...).
his eternal Power and Godhead. Yea they are said to have known God in some
measure; the knowledge of God was as it were put into them, in, and through
Gods preventing Operations in them, manifesting it in them, so as that they are
rendered faulty, yea, inexcusable in that they did not glorify him as God, not
were thankful: not inexcusable, because Adam, and they in Adam might have
glorified him, having the knowledge of him there, but upon the account of what
God had showed them, and they personally knew and imprisoned in
unrighteousness, they shall be silenced and have nothing to say for their own
excuse why they did not glorify God as God, and were not thankful; they shall
not be able to plead that they had no sufficient means or operation of God in
the means to have enabled them so to have glorified him and been thankful, as
was expected of them: yea, when he says their foolish hearts were darkened, it
implies that they were first in some measure enlightened, and that it was their
own folly not regarding the light or understanding, but letting it go, ^^at
exposed them to darkness; as the foolishness of a man perverts his way, and
then his heart frets against the Lord; not a mere inability to understand, but
a heart refusing or letting go that Light and Grace that brings understanding:
Prove. 19.2.
as the feed sown in them that understood not, was said to be sown in their
hearts, and was thence taken by Satan, through their not regarding to
understand; it is such a foolishness, Matthew. 13.19.
or foolish careless heart that perverts men, and brings darkness on them,
(...) is yet further cleared in verse. 28. where it is said they liked not to
have God in their knowledge, and therefore God delivered them up to a reprobate
or injudicious mind, to do things not convenient; where it is plain that God so
prevented them with some measure of his truth, and such manifestations of
himself, Job 20.14. and 22.17.
as gave them opportunity and capacity of receiving, having, or retaining it in
their knowledge or acknowledgement; and that their folly was a wilful folly,
not liking or approving it; a saying to God, depart from us, we will not have
(or desire not) the knowledge of the Almighty, or of thy ways, that rendered
them worthy reprobation, or delivering up to an injudicious mind. In which
sayings also is employed, that God did come, and offer, and prevent them with
the knowledge of himself, so as that till they did reject and thrust him from
them (and that likely for some space of time, God being patient and slow to
anger, and to reprobate men) there was something of judgment vouchsafed or set
up, as it were in them; or something tending to make them judicious. And that
was more sure than what was yet with them after they were so delivered or given
up, when yet so much was in them as to know that they who do such things as
they did, were worthy of death, verse. 32. yea and in Chap. 2.4, 5. It is said,
know thou not O man (art thou a man and can be ignorant) that the goodness
of God leads thee to Repentance. Is it not there implied that the goodness of
God has such preventing operations in it, as not only to deserve of men that
they should repent, but also to lead them to Repentance; even those who yet
through their hardness and impenitency, treasure up wrath to themselves;
[(...)] it acts men to it, and in verse. 14. it is said to have such operation in
them, as to accuse or excuse them in themselves; and that the effect of the Law
or Doctrine otherwise published to the Jews, was in some measure written in
their hearts, though not the Law it self, so as their hearts were framed to
conformity to it, yet the opperations of it, yea so as that the Apostle
supposes that some of them did or might do by nature (that is without such
verbal or written instruction as was afforded to the Jews, for nature seems to
be there plainly opposed not to grace, but to outward instruction by Law or
Doctrine) the things contained in the Law of the Jews, as to render them in
Gods acceptance as Circumcised. Romans 2.25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
And so as our Savior signify, Matthew. 8.12. admittable to sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in Gods Kingdom, when many of the Jews that had the
Law and Circumcision, and so were Children of the Kingdom in its outward then
administration, by breaking of the Law should be accounted as Uncircumcised,
and be cast out of the Kingdom. Deuteronomy 30 11, 12, 13, 14. Romans 10.7, 8, 9.
To which passages of the Apostle we might add that in Act. 17.26, 27.
signifying Gods nearness to all, that they might feel after him and find him
(in some lower degree answering to that of the word, being near to the Jews,
and to others to whom (...) brought in the more plain declarations, in the
heart, and in the mouth, that they may believe and do it) and that of the
working of Gods Spirit in the old world, where its said the Spirit of God was
striving judging, or reproving in them, Prove. 1.20, 21, 22.
Genesis 6.3. compared with 1 Pet. 3.19. where the Spirit of Christ is said to
have preached to their spirits, while the long suffering of God waited for
them; and that in Prove. 1. where wisdom cries to them without, and in the
streets, as well to those in the City, and reproves them, and withal stretches
forth her hand, puts forth her power to them, so as to render them capable of
choosing the fear of the Lord, verse. 24.28. or why else condemnable for not
choosing it? To say that they were so, because in Adam they had that power, is
to blind men's selves, or show their blindness and want of understanding; for
how was Adam without, or they now without, capable in Adam of turning at
reproofs, when as that condition was not capable of reproof, or needed not to
turn, but abide what it was? Who sees not that this is the voice of Wisdom, and
the working of her power (who is Christ) and her addresses unto men as fallen,
simple, scorners, and so not speaking to them as in Adam standing, and
therefore also not to continue in, but to choose the fear of the Lord brought
to them by her that calls them to Repentance, in the light and truth wherewith
^he prevents them? What power had Adam standing, to rise from his fall when
fallen? Even as much as a living man to rise from the dead when dead; so that
it is clear that this speaks of Christ's addresses to fallen men, and condemning
them for not choosing what he brought to them, and made chooseable by them in
his calls and stretchings out of his hand to them, in his preventing them;
which may be also inferred from all the rebukes and condemnations every where
in the Scriptures denounced against the Heathen; not for what they did in Adam,
but in their own persons, and in their respective generations: as also from the
Apostles assertion concerning all, that they shall at the last day receive
according to what is now done, he says not in Adams body, but in the body,
namely by them, personally every one in his own body, while here living.

SECT. 4.
The same showed with respect to the Jews, and those that have the greater
means of grace.

EVident things need less of demonstration to make them manifest, and therefore
on the operations and workings of God in the hearts and consciences of men that
have more means (such as the Law, Doctrine and Gospel of God) we shall not need
much to insist to prove Gods vouchsafement of them, that in the Proverbs above
quoted reaches to such also, and includes them principally; and Isa. 5. speaks
of such more directly, in which God is said to have done so much in his
Vineyard (the House of Israel, and the men of Judah) that he looked it should
have brought forth Grapes; and challenges them to judge between him and
themselves, and to say what could have been done to his Vineyard, that he had
not done in it, and why then they had not brought forth fruits by virtue of
what he had done to, or in them (not in Adam where there was no need of the
Winepress of afflictions, nor of gathering out the stones but) in themselves to
be expected from them? And so in Ezekiel. 24. the operations of the Word and
Spirit of God preventing men, are fitly resembled by those of the Fire boiling
the Water, and making the Scum to come aloft, so as that the Servant might
throw it off; and in that sense God is said ( verse. 13.) to have purged them,
as the Fire may be said to have purged the Water when it has wrought up the
Scum, and separated it from the Liquor: but they like slothful Servants, not
then casting off the ^^perfluity or overflowings of naughtness, suffering the
filthy Soum to boil in, and unite with the Water again, exposed themselves to
rejection, never to (...) ^urged more, till his wrath rested upon them. The
like is implied in Isai. 48.16, 17. that God teaches men, and leads them to
profit (as all his teachings and leadings tend to profit) and yet they are not
taught and led by him; hearken not to his Commandments, and so meet not with
the profit, the peace and righteousness his teachings lead to. And in Jer.
6.28, 29, 30. the operations of God prevented them, and were like the
operations of Fire melting and refining the Me^^ls, yet the dross being not
separated or purged away. Reprobate Silver, says he, shall men call them, etc.
The like is to be seen in Hos. 11.3. where God says, He was to Ephraim as one
that draws with the Cords of Love, and Bands of a Man (discoveries of love, and
drawing motives suited to the nature of man, and extended through the Man Jesus
Christ, Mediator of God and Man) yea and was as one that took off the Yoke from
their Jaws, and laid meat before them: thus he prevented them with his gracious
operations; yea, and healed them; yet they refused to return, knew not, or took
no notice of his healing them, verse. 2.5. they went back, and brake his Bands
in pieces, and threw his Cords from them: as in Jer. 5.5, 6. and Isal. 2.3.
Such Gods preventing operations, and so generally extended, that we may
conclude that saying of Esdras true, in 2 Esdr. 7.21. That God has showed to
men, certainly as they came into the world, what they should do that they might
have life; and what they should observe that they might escape punishment; but
these being not persuaded, contradicted him, and proposed to themselves vain
imaginations, and compassing themselves about with a multitude of sins, said of
the Almighty, that he is not, and acknowledged not his ways, but despised his
Law, and brake their engagements to him, and not believing his Ordinances,
fulfilled not his works, etc. Yea, and Stephen says they always resisted the
Holy Ghost, that did not obey and submit to him: they resisted not man only,
but also God, who is therein employed to have wrought in, and upon them for
their Obedience; would have gathered Jerusalem, but they would not. As for
those that are brought in to God, seeing it is expressly said, that no man can
come to Christ, except the Father, who sent him, draw them; (as we have showed,
Joh. 6.44.
he also draws them that refuse to return) and that of his own will he begat us
with the word of truth, Jam. 1.18. Ephesians. 2.1, 4, 5. Joh. 1.12, 13.
quickened us when before dead in sin^ and trespasses; that they are not born of
blood, or of the will of the flesh, or of the will of man, but of God: there is
no question to be made of them, but that God prevents them before they come to
him; inlightens, quickens, or so speaks to them, as to make them capable of
hearing; moves and works in them to look to him and be saved before they do any
of those things, (...) which of themselves, as of themselves none are
sufficient: and therefore I need not enlarge my Discourse about them: not will
I enlarge to insist upon any particular branching out of Gods preventing
operations into the several streams that may be in them; only this I may say
that there is in them,

1. A giving forth, or bringing to men some discovery of light or truth to the
heart, witnessing the being and goodness of God more or less to men; and the
emptiness and vanity in Men, and in the Creature, in sin and sinful ways, etc.
And therewith

2. Some discerning of, or capacity to see, perceive or be sensible of the
light and truth discovered, And

3. In that is also, some reproof of the simplicity, folly, and evil of man in
affecting, seeking after, and cleaving to such vain things; with

4. Some secret drawing to inquire, feel after, or seek God, a better object
that can satisfy, etc.

5. With all this, some strength and ability, both to behold and mind what is
presented to it, and to listen to the secret whispers of truth to the heart,
and also to choose the good it draws to, and refuse the evil discovered to be
so vain and empty. And all this might be distinctly showed from Prove. 1.20, 21,
22, 23, 24, 28. with Matthew. 13.14, 15. but I forbear to enlarge growing too
voluminous.

SECT. 5.
Of the Concomitant, or accompanying Operations.

NOw though all Operations following after these preventing Operations that
come upon a man, as in a sleep, to awake and rouse him up, or as dead to
inliven him before he can see, or hear, or work, may be with respect to them
called subsequent or following Operations: as we have also elsewhere
distinguished them; yet because some of them accompany men in their closing
with, and obeying the grace that prevents them, and others follow after their
having so closed with, and obeyed it, or else refused to close with it; we
shall here a little briefly consider them distinctly, and so in the next place
say,

2. There are also Concomitant Operations that accompany men in their choices,
works or ways, upon their being prevented as before, as not only Gods
considering or minding what men w^^, or do; for that is no Operation of his in
them, but also moving and strength^ing, them to, and in their willing and doing
what he moves them to, even framing and putting forward their will, and so
working in them both the to will and desire, and the to do, or be effectual, as
that what he moves to, may be acted and affected, and they not be carried away
by violence, either of Satan or corruption therefrom; but that they may, (them
notwithstanding,) both will and do, and so work out what he is working in them,
by a sweet and gracious compliance with, or rather putting forward their wills,
begun to be inclined by his grace preventing them; thence that, 2 Cor. 6.1, 2.
we beseech you receive not the grace of God in vain; for in an accepted time I
have heard thee, in the day of salvation I have succored thee or helped thee:
his preventing grace brings a day of salvation, an accepted time through
Christ's mediating for them, whom God hears and helps in his work and business
of Mediation, and extends his grace to men, helping his Servants that are his
Instruments in their Ministration, and so concurring with the means afforded
men: and he is also present with men in their receiving his grace, assisting
and helping them therein against what opposes them, that so they may receive it
effectually, and not in vain; otherwise they must receive it in vain, and could
not avoid it: but now he admonishes them, as there is good ground for it, not
to receive it in vain. It might be illustrated by the case of Israel in the
Wilderness; God prevented them with his goodness, making a way and liberty for
them to depart out of Egypt, and follow him in the Wilderness, exhorting,
directing and inciting them to follow hi^ against all enemies and
discouragements, and in their obeying he was with them to animate and
strengthen them, and make their way plain and prosperous to them: yea he is
strengthening to obey that grace that prevents them, and capacitates and excites
them to obey, does also run along with them, and help and carry them on in
their obeying, as is employed in those Sayings of Paul, Phil. 4.13. 1 C^r. 15.10.
I can do all things through Christ, that strengthens me: and I labored more
abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God that was with me;
which being but yielded up to by him, flowed in upon him, made use of him, as
it were, R^^. 6.12, 13, 14, 16. Gal. 5.16.
and acted, carried, and wrought with him, yea wrought him to will and to do of
good pleasure; whence also those counsels of yiedling up the Members as Weapons
or Instruments of Righteousness to Holiness, and those assertions, that if we
walk in Spirit, we shall not fulfill the lusts of the Flesh: the Spirit yielded
to shall act and strengthen men against sin; so sin shall not have dominion
over you, for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace, even to be acted and
carried on by grace. Whereas God withdraws his concurrence with men, and
reproves, and secretly nips them when they neglect the advantages given them
by, and rebel against his grace, preventing them. But those pertain rather
partly to his preventing Grace, and partly to his Operations in Wrath and
Judgments upon men, and therefore I shall not insist here on them.

SECT. 6.
Of God's Confequent, or Subsequent Workings or Operations in men.

THere be also consequent, or subsequent Operations in men, upon, and after
their obeying, closing, and complying with his grace: as not only his
approving the heart and conscience, but also, blessing the Soul, pouring out
his Spirit into it, and thereby making known his words; giving it more light
and truth, and leading it into more good: inabling it to go on yet further, and
follow after God still in his good ways, and giving in comfortable
encouragements thereunto; in which the Soul still closing with, and following
after the Spirit, receives more of its presence, concomitancy, strength, and
helpfulness; and is followed still with more grace, peace, blessing, goodness,
etc. the holy Spirit entering into it, and taking up his abode therein, in his
light, life, virtues, operations, grace, as an indwelling Principle, as a
spring of living water, bubling, or springing up to everlasting Life; Joh. 4.14.
filling it with Lustings after God, and against the Flesh, and its evil and
carnal operations. For all the operations and workings in the believer, Gal.
5.17, 19. Romans 7.20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
are not the operations of God and his Spirit: there is also in him, while here
the flesh, and corrupt Nature, and bent lusting and working in him, against the
Spirit; being so far from being of it, that it is altogether contrary
thereunto. But all the fruits of the Spirit, as love, joy, peace, patience,
etc, are the Spirits, and so God's workings in the Soul; yea, they are the
consequents of the Souls entertainment of, and obedience to, Gods gracious
preventing operations, and of its walking in his accompanying Influences. Now
these consequent operations, are every where mentioned, where God promises more
Grace to men, upon their listening to, and obeying of him: Prove. 1.23, 35.
Chap. 2.1, 2, 4, 5, 6.
as, Turn at my reproofs. Behold, I will pour out my spirit to you, I will make
known my words. And again, Whosh hearkneth to me shall dwell safely, and shall
be quiet from the fear of evil. And, My son, if thou receive my sayings, so
that thy heart keep my commandments, so that thou incline thine ear to wisdom,
and apply thine heart to understanding, etc. then thou shall understand the
fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God: -- then thou shall understand
righteousness, judgment, equity, and every good path. Of the same nature are
those sayings in John 14, 15, 16, 17, 21, 23. And Psalm. 25.8, 9, 12, 14. Good
and upright is the Lord, therefore (by way of preventing operation) he will
teach sinners the way: and then upon their being meekned by those first
Teachings, to which they tend, it follows, as a consequent work, or operation.
The meek will he guide in judgment, the meek will he teach, (that is, further
teach,) in his way. All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth to them that
keep his Covenant, and his Testimonies. What man is he that fears the Lord,
him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose; his soul shall dwell at
ease: The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he shall show them
his Covenant, etc. But why should I multiply Expressions here, about seeing all
the Promises of more Grace and Blessings, almost are significations of the said
operations; only this I may add, That Gods operations of this nature, are,
(though not universal as to all men, because all close not with his grace, in
his preventing operations; yet,) universal and uniform, in a sort to All that
believe, and obey the grace of God in every Nation and People, and under every
Dispensation of the means of Grace and Knowledge of God afforded to men: for in
every Nation, he that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted of
him; there being no respect of persons with him: though as to the measure of
what he works, consequently to men's faith and obedience, there is, and may be
great difference; yea, and as to the things, the gifts, or graces thereby
effected: but in the main substance, there is an unity, and uniformity in his
said workings. All that follow on to know the Lord, shall know him. All that
with meekness receive his Teachings, shall be further taught, and guided in
judgment. All that turn at his Reproof, he will pou^ out his Spirit to, and
make known his words to, more or less: his Promises to that purpose, being
general or universal to all such; and He true, and righteous in the performance
of his Promises. A great encouragement to All, to close with, and obey his
Truth and Grace. Thus to that distinction of his gracious operations into,
preventing, accompanying, and following operations.

SECT 7.
The said gracious operations, otherwise distinguished.

BUt the said gracious Operations may be also otherwise distinguished, and are
in the Scriptures distinctly mentioned under other Names, as convincing,
converting, regenerating, or renewing; healing, comforting, strengthening,
conforming, and the like. Of which briefly,

1. God, in, and by his words and works, and by his Spirit, is convincing the
hearts and consciences of men; of his Being, Goodness, Truths; of their own
sinfulness and misery, the vanity and worthlesness of their own works and
righteousness; the emptiness and fadingness of all Creature-injoyments, the
uncertainty of their lives, the vanity and brutishness of their own thoughts,
and imaginations, the evil and sinfulness of their ways, etc. according to the
means afforded them, and manifestations of his Truth, in, and by those means
to, and in them. This kind of operation is often spoken of in the Scriptures:
as, Prove. 1.23. Turnye at my reproofs, my arguings, or convinements of you.
Implying, That Wisdom is, arguing, reproving, and convincing men. Again, ver.
25.30. John 16.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Ye set at naught all my counsels, and would none of my reproofs. So our
Savior tells his Disciples, That the Spirit which he would send them, should
reprove, argue, or convince the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of
Judgment. Of Sin, because they. believe not on him, etc. And this is that which
is called the Spirit, striving with, or judging in men, Genesis 6.3. Gods standing
in the Congregation of the Mighty, Rev. 3.20.
and judging among the Gods, How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the
persons of the wicked, Psalm. 82.1, 2. Christ's standing at the door and
knocking. And in this operation, is,

1. A manifesting, and evidencing his Truth more or less to men, shining it
into their Consciences, and showing it them. As, Romans 1.19. 2 Cor. 4.2. Yea and

2. An opening the Eye of the Mind, or Conscience, to see, and discern it, so,
as ^hey in some measure know, or perceive (...) both which are employed, in that
we ^ake to above, Of his preventing opera^ons, Romans 1.19, 20, 21. Act. 26.18.
John 1.9. Joh. 5.25. and 6.63.
Opening the eyes of the blind, inlightning men ^at come into the World: which
may be also represented under another Metaphor, of speaking to the Dead, and
causing them to hear, or perceive what is spoken, his words being Spirit and
Life.

3. As also, a discovery of other Objects, in, and by that light; as God, Self,
Sin, or the like. And,

4. A causing the Mind or Spirit of a man, to view, or reflect upon the Objects
discovered, as upon the sinfulness, weakness, worthlesness discovered in
themselves, in, and by that light, or truth discerned: the sinfulness of their
ways, and works; the bootlesness or unprofitableness of their righteousness,
the unsafety of their conditions, etc. which are more properly his judgings,
and reprovings of them, in, and by that Light. The Light at once, both
representing, or discovering the Nature of things, and passing judgment, or
causing the Mind to pass judgment, the judgment of Truth upon them: either by
way of approving what is commendable and excellent, or of reproving what it
discovers, as empty and evil: whence it is said, The Gentiles not having the
law, are a law to themselves: which show, the work of the Law written in their
hearts; their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean
while accusing or excusing one another, Romans 2.14, 15.

2. In and by the same light, truth, and spirit, judging, and reproving, or
convincing men; God is also affording his ^erting operations: yea, those
con^cements tend to Conversion, and are ^ered to that end, that men might be
^verted from the Evils they are con^ced of, and reproved for, to God; (...)
those good things they are convinced (...) and that are evidenced, and commend^
to them; as may be seen, in what our ^iour, and the Apostle Paul say of men,
(...) smother those convincements. They (...) closed, or winked with their
Eyes, Matthew. 13.15. Act. 28.27.
(...) they should see with their eyes, and hear (...) their ears, -- and be
converted, etc. ^plying, That the things presented to ^m, in those
convincements, and re^oss, the Grace set before them, which (...) had some
capacity afforded them to ^re seen, and heard, and to have under(...), would
have converted them: it (...) to such ends and Purposes, and they ^d some
perception of it, and fearing ^h a thing, least it should draw them (...) from
their Lusts, and Idols, they sup^st it, turned from it, and refused to See,
(...), and Understand it: which also is ^plyed, in that wisdom in her reprov^
adds; Turn ye in, or at my reproofs, (...) 1.23. The goodness of God there^
evidenced, leading to Repentance, (...) 2.4. And this is joined in Act. 26.
(...) With the opening of the eyes of (...) blind, viz. the turning them from
dark^ to light, and from the power of Satan, (...) God. And it has in it over
and (...) what is mentioned, in his convincings, though in them, this always
too (...) vouchsafed, viz.

1. A more intimate, or express hintin^ or discovering some better Object, tha^
what our hearts are set upon, and posse^ with: some better good to be sought,
o^ embraced, than we are embracing, or seeking after, as God, or Christ; and
some righter way to walk in, for seeking them then that in which men walk,
Prove. 1.2^ Joh. 15.26, 27. with 16.7, 12, 13, 14, 15.

2. An exerting some Divine Power or stretching forth the hand, thereby drawing
the Heart and Soul off from those ^nities, discovered and reproved to, or ^ter
that better Object represented: and (...) the representation whereof, the other
va^ and evil things are reproved. Prove. 1.2^ Hos. 11.3. Yea, and often a kind
(...) driving men off from what is reprove^ to what is ^ommended, even from the
Idols, to the living and true God, by hed^ing up as it were, the way of the So^
with Thorns, so as not to suffer it to fi^ any thing but rentings, and
prickings, a^ pains; convincements and horrors in (...) following after, Prove.
23.29, 33. Luke 15.16.
pursuing, or retaining own thoughts, ways, and enterprises; in Hos. 2.6, 7.
and 6.5. and therewith al^

3. A bending, bowing, and inclin^ the heart to let go the vanities discov^ and
reproved, Hos. 5.15. and 6.1. Act. 26.18, 28. Matthew. 21.30.
and to turn to God Christ exalted and commended, Psalm. 1^.36. Though
oftentimes the heart (...) sulting with flesh and blood recoyls ag^ and
withdraws, like him that said, I go Sir, and yet went not: thence that
complaint of Ephraim, that was brought to ^ay, Come let us return to the Lord,
etc. (...) Ephraim, what shall I do to thee, -- thy goodness is as the morning
cloud, and as the ^arly dew it goes away, Hos. 6.1, 2, 3, 4. And, I drew them
with the cords of a man, with the bands of love -- but, -- they refused (...)
return. Hos. 11.3, 4, 5. But then,

4. In the bowing, and inclining of the ^art Godward; there is also, a
strengthing, helping, encouraging, and furthering of it: as in the Father of
the Prodigal, being him afar off, and running and meeting him, and bringing him
home to himself, even to his House, Luke 15.20, 25. And as is asserted, 2 Cor.
6.1, 2. In the excepted time I have heard, In the day of ^ation I have helped
thee. Of which ^ore, in Sect. 5. Such his Converting perations.

3. Then there are Renewing, Rege^rating Operations, which though they (...)
initially in the converting operations, and the convincing operations tend to
^em too, yet are more properly found (...) the Converted Soul; though it may be
^uly said too, That the Soul is further ^onverted in them: and they may be
im^ed, in that sanctifying by Faith in ^rist; mentioned, in Act. 26.18. As a
^nsequent of the being turned unto God: (...) very effecting the Faith in
Christ, and (...) sanctifying therethrough, may be (as I conceive) included
therein: for the Soul wrought upon in the Converting Operations, to look toward
God and Christ, as presented to the Soul, in that beholding him; (to which, in
the Converting Operations also, it is moved and begotten) by the power of the
same grace it is strengthened, begot, and framed, to close with, believe in, and
depend on God, in Christ, in which its made a New Creature; as to its State
with God, and as to its receipt of new Principles of Spiritual Life, in which
it lives, and acts from, to, and for God; being acted by the Grace and Spirit
of God that takes Possession of it. Indeed, Regeneration fully is the begetting
and bringing forth the whole Man to God, by the Spirit and Power of God, and so
is a continued work, in which men go on gradatim, step, by step, and is not
completed, till the Adoption be in the Redemption of the Body, in the
Resurrection of the Dead. As appears in Matthew. 19.28. Ye that have followed me
in the Regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit upon the throne of his
glory, shall sit on twelve thrones, etc. Where those words, [in the
Regeneration,] are so placed, as they may either be referred to the words
before, Ye that have followed me in the Regeneration; and so it signifies, That
Regeneration is a progressive work; as the following of Christ also is: a thing
as daily in doing, a thing in which Christ is to be followed, that it may be
done more, and more in us: even, as also seeing, and entering his Kingdom here
in its Spiritual State is: We cannot enter his Kingdom, but by being born of
God; nor further enter into it, to be under the Regiment, Power, and
Privileges of it, then as we are born of God: namely, of God, as objectively
discovered to us, and looked to, or known by us, (they that know thy Name will
trust in thee;) and as efficiently and efficaciously working by his Power, and
Spirit in us: And so Regeneration contains in it, Healing, Confirming, and
Conforming too: or they may in the place above quoted, be referred to the words
after it, and denote the time, when they should receive their Honor, and
Reward: viz. In the Regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit on the throne
of his glory: that is, In the time of the Resurrection: and so it signifies,
That the Regeneration is not completed, till the Resurrection; when the Body
also shall be changed, and be found in the Spirit and Glory of Christ. But here
I do, (as usually men do) in speaking of Regeneration, speak of its First Acts,
Of making a man in Christ. The overcoming of the Heart to close with, and
believe in God and Christ; and depend on him: and so the infusing the Spirit
and Principles of new and heavenly Life into him. And so I distinguish it from
healing conforming Operations: and it is sometime included, in Conversion; as
the end, or ultimate acts in it: (as Conversion is usually meant, of the Souls
first turning to God; for otherwise, Souls after Regeneration falling into
actual Sins, or sinful frames, must be Converted from them:) but as I said
before, it properly follows, upon the heart turned to behold, or look upon God
and Christ; as presented in his Gospel: and it stands, in the framing,
strengthening, and overcoming the heart to close with, rest in, and rely on God
in Christ; in, and through which, his Spirit and Power, Framing and Creating it
in Christ, does enter into it, possess and act it, for, and toward Christ.
Ephesians. 2.10. Numb. 21.9. 2 King. 5.14.
And this is by a certain creative Power: whence that Phrase, We are his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good works. Somewhat like the healing
of the Israelites, in their looking to the Serpent of Brass; or the healing of
Naaman, washing in the waters of Jordan. and it has in it,

1. A Spiritual quickening, or inlivening of the Soul, Psalm. 36.8.
in its listening, and looking to Christ, to living affection to, and likement
of him, and so desire after him, through the presentation of the excellency of
him, as made known to, and apprehended by the Soul; as Phil. 3.7.

2. A Spiritual quickening and strengthening of the Soul, through the same Seed
of the knowledge, or word of Christ, cast into the heart, to a fleeing, or
betaking it self for refuge and rest to him; and so to close with, and hope in
him, and in God through him. Heb. 6, 18, 19. Psalm. 9.10.

3. A certain Spiritual inlivening of the Soul in him, and upon him, his mercy,
Gal. 2.20.
goodness, power, faithfulness, love, etc. and so to an acting in that life,
infused and put into it, both toward God, and toward man: which the grace
seen, and believed by it operates, works, and begets; yea, and preserves, and
carries on in it, and it unto, and in. It is set forth in Ezekiel 36.25, 26. By
the making the Heart and Spirit new, by his Spirit, and then putting in his
Spirit, into the Spirit made new; the begetting a new judgment, bent and
disposition in the Soul, and a new heart, desire, love, affection toward God
and Christ? a new will, purpose, and resolution for him; and then a putting his
Word, Power, and Spirit, into that Heart and Spirit, renewed to live in it,
feed, act, and animate it, in, and for God, according to his mind.

4. His healing operations, are a kin to those Regenerating operations, and may
be co-incident with his comforting operations too in part; they are spoken of
as fruits, and consequents to Conversion, Matthew. 13.15. Least they should be
converted, and I should heal them: but by comparing that with Mark 4.12. It
includes, or stands in the Remission of Sins; at least, as the necessary mean
to it, or womb put of which it proceeds: for there for healing it is, and their
sins should be forgiven them: Which by way of Metonomy, may signify, and take
in the consequents of forgiveness also: such as,

1. The speaking peace to them, etc. so the quieting, pacifying, and comforting
of the Heart and Conscience, in the sight and view of his goodness, and
knowledge of his love and favor toward it, and of the forgiveness of Sins,
and hope of Happiness; in which the heart-broken, and disquieted with
convincements, reproofs, and fears is healed.

2. A renewing and rectifying the whole man in mind, and judgment, will, and
affections, and conversation; sanctifying of him throughout, filling him with
right and wholesome apprehensions, and thoughts of God and Christ, and himself,
and all things: with right affections to God, healing those distempers before
in his heart and affections; in their out-running after yanities, and doting
upon Idols; taking offense at God, and his Truth, hateing what should be loved,
and loving what should either absolutely, or comparatively be hated: and so
healing the passions, fears, cares, anxieties, and griefs of mind, etc.

3. A removing and taking off Wrath and Judgments, that might formerly be
inflicted on them for their rebellions or stubbornness against him: yea, and by
degrees, and in due time, taking off altogether the Disease, and Judgment, that
came upon us in Adam, and through his Fall; the power of natural Corruption and
dominion of Sin: and the bodily infirmities and Death too in the Resurrection.

5. Comforting Operations, are in, and through his Word or Truth, as it is in
Christ, and by his hand, power, and spirit working therein, and therewith, in
showing help and remedy in Christ, and in God, and causing the Soul to
apprehend, and see it; even suitable helps to all its needs, and Exercises; and
by begetting lively hope in God and Christ, for the receipt of that help, both
under its afflictions, and in due time out of them all; and by showing the
gracious and good end of God, in his afflicting, denying, crossing, suffering
or ordering evils to it: the lifting up, reviving, and chearing of the heart,
and spirit; and maintaining the cheerfulness and comfort of it in God: as in
John 14. He comforted the hearts of his Disciples, by, and through, presenting
to them God, and his goodness toward them, as an object, therefore worthy to
be believed in, by them: and himself, as a constant lover of them, that as well
went away from them for their good, as came and staid with them, even for their
helpfulness and salvation: that he would send them another Comforter, who also,
and more fully should comfort them, by leading them into the Truth, (causing
them to understand the Truths he now spoke to them,) and giving them to know
his Presence with them, even while to appearance, and in his body absent from
them, etc.

His comforting Operations may be many, or fewer, according as he pleases, and
as he sees good to give, and the conditions of his people require, and they are
meet for, but they are all in, and through his goodness, and grace in Christ
discovered; as all his other gracious Operations be: while he by his Spirit
minds men of, and opens to them his Love, Power, Wisdom, Faithfulness, his
undertakings for them, promises to them, examples of his goodness, and
faithfulness to others in like cases; and therein also sets before them, the
inconsiderableness of their Enemies, Dangers, Sufferings; the lightness and
momentaniss of them, in comparison of the good afforded, and promised them; he
raises up, and incourages their hearts, and fills them with assured hope, and
consolation. 2 Thessalonians. 2.16, 17. 2 Cor. 4.15, 16, 17, etc.

6. His strengthening and confirming Operations are many of them of the same
import, and from the same spring, with his comforting and healing Operations:
they are spoken of 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 1.6, 7, 8.
16.7. 8. Ephesians. 3.15, 16. 1 Pet. 5.10. And they differ little the one from the
other, and therefore I put them both together as under one Head; only his
confirming Operations be such efficacies of his grace, and workings of his
Spirit, as in, and by which he opening his Truth more clearly to the heart, and
therein discovering the weakness of all opposite Principles; or otherwise, also
evidencing his Presence with his Truth, People, and Ways, does make the heart
more firm in belief of his Truth, and so in resolution to cleave, and adhere to
it, and to him in it, and to his people and ways according to it; begetting in
the heart more assurance of their Rightness, and of good success therein. His
strengthening Operations, (besides what has been hinted of them, in the
foregoing Operations,) more respect oppositions, resistances, and assaults
against men, in Gods way; either by Sin in men, or by Satan, and men from
without them; as also Afflictions, Pressures and the like from the hand of God:
to stand under which, and against all assaults, the grace of God in Christ, as
it is sufficient to strengthen men, so it does it also, by presenting such
Motives from, Romans 5.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
and considerations of Gods love and goodness, Christ's faithfulness to them,
and care and watchfulness over them, and power and promises to save them; the
good and gracious ends of God in them, and assurance of a good Issue out of
them; with other Arguments as the Gospel, or Truth Revealed affords:
therethrough putting courage and resolution, virtue and manhood as it were,
into them, so as to stand it out with patience and magnanimity to the end.

7. His conforming Operations, are of the like nature with his Renewing and
healing, and by the same means or mediums, even the beholding the glory of
Christ, and of God in Christ, as opened to men, and by his Spirit effectually,
and by a certain creative force, or power working therein; as also, by the same
Spirit he will conform the body, to his own glorious body, at his coming: only
there is this difference, that in conforming the Soul, Mind, and Spirit to
himself, he works upon men, in a way suitable to men living; voluntary agents,
and in their exercise of themselves in the ways in which he leads them, as in
beholding his Glory, presented by him before them; and therefore men are
capable of hindering themselves of their own good in that, by turning away their
minds from him, unto vanity. As Naaman might have hindered the healing of his
Leprosy, by coming out of the Waters of Jordan too soon, viz. before he had
washed the Seventh time, though in continuing so to wash, he could not hinder
it, God effecting it in him by a creative power. But in the Resurrection, and
conforming of the Body to Christ's glorious Body: Christ will work purely,
Physically, (or Hyperphysically rather,) and irresistably, as he wrought in
creating things that had no voluntary agency in themselves; at least, none
before he had made them: or as he works upon natural agents or things, as to
make the Earth to Bud, or the Corn to grow: or more irresistibly then so to;
even as in making Heaven and ^arth. But this pertains to the manner (...) God's
operation in these his gracious Workings: before we speak to which, we shall as
we propounded, consider the other kind of operations attributed to God, and see
what the Scriptures signify to us concerning them.

CHAP. IX.
Of Operations in Wrath and Judgment, attributed to God, as Hardening, Blinding,
Deceiving Men, etc.

SECT. 1.
That the Scriptures Attribute these kind of Operations to God, and that yet we
are so to conceive of him in them, as not to make him the Author of men's
Sinnings.

GOd is said in the Scriptures to harden, blind, and deceive men; and therefore
that such Operations or Workings as tend to these things, are Attributed to him
is evident, both in the Writings of the Prophets, and Apostles; for God is said
by Moses, to have hardened Pharaoh's heart; and he said to Mo^ when he sent him,
to him that he wou^ harden his heart, so as he would n^ let the people go,
Exodus 4.21. and 7.3. a^ 9.12. And so he is said to have hardn^ Sihons Spirit,
and to have made his he^ obstinate, that he might deliver him in^ Isreal's hand,
Deuteronomy. 2.30. And Isai^ says, by way of Expostulation; Lord why have thou made us
to err from thy way^ and hardened our hearts from thy fe^ And Paul says of
God, whom he will (...) hardneth. And the Prophet Isaiah, (...) quoted by the
Evangelist, said, God ha^ blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart^ Joh.
12.40. It being God, who bade the Prophet go, and make the heart of the people
fat, and their ears heavy, and she their eyes, lest they see with their eyes,
an^ hear with their ears, and understand wit^ their hearts, and be converted
and healed (...) Isa. Zeph. 3.5. Jam. 1.13, 17.
6.10. And God said to Ezekiel (...) If the Prophet be deceived, I the Lord
have (...) deceived that Prophet, Ezekiel. 14.9. But (...) how may these things be
looked upon a^ the works and doings of God? seeing the (...) just Lord, will
not, nor can do iniquity (...) Let no man say when he is tempted, (...) am
tempted of God: for God cannot be^ tempted with evil, neither tempts h^ any
man: every good gift, and ever^ perfect giving is from above, and comet^ down
from the Father of Lights, with (...) whom is no variableness, nor shadow o^
turning. Surely, those things to deceive^ and harden, and make men obstinate,
and ^o blind men, are the works of Satan; and how then can they be ascribed to
God, ^e most holy God, who is of purer eyes ^en to behold iniquity; much less
then ^ay he make, or impel, or stir men up ^o do evil: Surely therefore they
are not ^s works, or doings, in a proper way (...) speaking, or in a direct or
proper way (...) operation, no more then darkness, can (...) properly ascribed
to the Sun: how ^uld so holy a Tree bring forth fruit so ^trary to his
Holiness? Or how should (...) punish men for their Iniquities, if he ^o work,
incite, or frame men unto wick^ness? It would be great iniquity in a ^dge or
Magistrate, to provoke, incite to, ^uch more, to necessitate men to things
^idden by the Law, (and yet more, if (...) be a Law, whereof he was Law giver
(...).) and then to hang and draw him, ^r what he was so the cause himself of:
and shall God be like to such unjust Per^ns? God forbid: yet after some manner
^f speaking, and in some way suitable to ^s holiness, those things also are
ascribed (...) him; which remains with sobriety to ^e inquired into by us.

SECT. 2.
That those Operations as ascribed to God are Judiciary Acts, consequential,
both to Gods preventing grace, and men's abuse of it.

DOubtless, this first may be Asserted. That these kind of Acts or Operations,
as ascribed to God, are ever Judiciary acts, and ordered to men by way (...)
Punishment and Judgment for their abuses of, and Rebellions against his
goodness, and gracious Operations first preventing them. These are none of his
first operations, in, and with men; but he first extends his goodness and
mercy, leading to Repentance: (yea, mixeth such too, with these sadder
operations:) and for men's hardening, and blinding themselves there against,
hardens and blinds them; according to that in Isa. 66.3.4. They have chosen
their own ways, and their soul delights in their abominations: I also will
choose their delusions, and will bring the^ fear upon them. Because when I
called, none did answer; when I spoke, they did not hear; but did evil before
mine eyes, and chose that in which I delighted not. And that in Romans 1.21, 26,
28. ^use when they knew God, they did not (...) him as God, neither were
thankful, etc. For this cause God gave them up to vile affections, etc. And
even as they did not like to retain God in their Knowledge, God gave them up to
a Reprobate mind. This also may be seen in those instances of Gods hardening and
blinding before mentioned. For certain it is, That Pharaoh was a proud,
Tyrannical Oppressor of Israel, See Exodus 3.14. with 4.21.
before God hardened his heart; God says of him, That he knew surely, that the
King of Egypt would not let them go, but by, (or no not by) a mighty hand;
before he spoke of hardening his heart. And we and, that upon Moses's first
speaking to him, in the Name of the Lord, to let the people go, to Worship, or
hold a Feast to the Lord, in the Wilderness; Chap. 5.1, 2, 3.
which was but a reasonable demand: yet, he behaved himself proudly against the
Lord, and said, Who is the Lord, that I should they his voice, to let Israel
go. I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. Yea, and after Moses had
told him, who the Lord was, even the God of the Hebrews, and had used Arguments
to persuade him to let them go; yet, Verse. 6, 7, 8, 9.
he was so far from harkening to them, that he increased their burdens, and
oppressions, exacting their ^umber of Brick, but denying them necessary
Materials, to be brought to them as before, to the greater imbittering of their
Spirits, and to the exposing them to their Taskmasters rage and cruelty: yea,
and after God had bid Moses work Miracles before him, and the Egyptians, and
show them some Signs, that God had ^^t him to him, on that Message; yet, it is
said, Chap. 7.13.
That Pharaohs heart hardened, as Ainsworth reads it, suitable to the Hebrew.
Verse. 14.
Or, Pharaoh hardened his heart; as the Greek reads it. And God says of him,
Pharaohs heart is hardened, Verse. 23.
he refuses to let the people go. And after their Waters were turned into
Blood, Pharaoh turned, and went into his house: and it is said, Neither set he
his heart to this also. And after God had smitten him with the Plague of the
Frogs, and his heart began to yield; so that he promised, upon God's removal of
that Plague, Chap. 8.8.
to let the people go: yet, when God had at Moses's request, removed it, it is
said, That, when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, (namely, that he would do;
Chap. 3.10.) Yea, and when God had sent the Third Plague, That Pharaohs heart
was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them, as the Lord had said. Yea, and yet
again, when God had threatened him with the Judgment of Flies, Verse. 28.
and inflicted it, because he would not by the threatening, be admonished; and
that also made his heart to bow again, and yield so, as to promise, upon the
removal thereof, they should go, and worship God in the Wilderness. Yet, after
that Judgment was removed, Verse. 32.
it is said, Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also* neither would he let
the people go. Yea, and after the Fifth Judgment upon their Cattle, in which,
as in the former, Chap. 9.7.
God severed between the Egyptians, and the Israelites; smiting the Egyptians
Cattle only, and not Isreal's: yet it is said, Pharaohs heart was hardened:
(remained in that stiffness, and obstinacy, of purpose, to which he had set it
upon the former respite:) and not all this while is it said, That the Lord had
hardened his heart. Till after the Sixth Judgment, Chap. 9.12. And then is it
said, The Lord hardened Pharaohs heart. And yet after, and in the Seventh
Judgment, he made it yield again, so, as to confess his Sin, and justify the
Lord; and entreat their Prayers for him, with promise thereupon, of letting
them go, and they should stay no longer: yet, Chap. 10.1.
after it was over, it is said, His heart was hardened. And God says, Chap.
10.1. Go in unto Pharaoh, for I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his
servants, etc. So that it appears, that Pharaoh was proud and wicked, and
hardened his heart against the Lord: before, God is said to have hardened his
heart. And the like we may say of Sihon King of Heshbon, and the Canaanites,
Josh. 11.20. The measure of their Iniquity was now full, so as it was not in
Abraham's time; Genesis 15.16. And yet more plain it is, in that of Israel, in Isa.
6.10. To which that in Joh. 12.40. Isa. 1, 2, 3, (...) 5.
has reference; it is, Go make the heart of this people fat. And it was such a
people, whose eyes he blinded; as of whom he had said, I have nourished, and
brought up children, and they have rebelled against me: a sinful Nation, a
people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers; children that were
corrupters, that had forsaken the Lord; provoked the holy one of Israel to
anger, and had gone backward: A people of whom he says, Why should ye be
smitten any more? ye will revolt more and more; whose Rulers were as the Rulers
of Sodom, and their people, people of Gomorrah. Yea, of whom he says, What
could have been done more then I have done in my vineyard? Chap. 5.1, 4, 5, 6.
Wherefore then, when I looked for grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? And
concerning whom therefore he resolved, to take away the hedge, that it might be
eaten up, and to break down the fence, that it might be trodden down, and to lay
it waste, etc. And such a people also were they, of whom he says in Jer. 6.30.
Reprobate Silver, shall men call them, because the Lord has rejected them:
They were such, as would not hear the Word, nor obey the will of the Lord; but
said, We will not hear, we will not walk in thy ways. They were all grievous
revolters, walking with slanders, brass, and iron; all corrupters. Such as with
whom all means had been used, and pains taken to no purpose: the bellows were
burnt, the lead consumed in the fire, the founder me^ed in vain; the wicked
were not plucked away Jer. 6.16, 17, 28, 29. And the like may be seen in, Psalm.
81.10, 11, 14. Prove. 1.22, 23, 24, 25, etc. These. 2.9.10, 11, 12. by an^ that
will read them.

SECT. 3.
What that saying of the Apostle, [That God har lens whom he will;] imports,
and how it is to be understood, by us.

EXceeding clear it is then, That God Exercises those his hardening Operations,
only by way of Judgment and Punishment for former goodness abused, and sinned
against: yet some reading, that God said to Pharaoh, That for this cause He
raised him up, to show in him, his Power, and that his Name might be declared
in all the Earth; and that the Apostle thereupon, adds, So then he will have
mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens: Thence conceive,
That God Created Pharaoh, and made him King, on purpose to harden, and destroy
him. And so that he purposed to harden some, whom he pleased, merely because he
pleased, and without respect to any thing, good, or evil in them: and so
accordingly in time, hardens them, irrespectively, merely because he will; and
to show his power, and wrath, in their Destruction. But they that thence, thus
conceive, and conclude, do greatly mistake, and wrest the Apostles sayings, and
infer more from them than they afford any colorable ground for. For,

1. Neither does the Apostle say, That God created, or made Pharaoh King, with
a purpose, to harden and destroy him; nor speaks of his creating him, or making
him King; but speaks of his raising him up; which compared with the Hebrew
Text, that uses the Word (...) signifying, to make to stand. Or with the Greek
Septuagint, that says, (...), I have preserved thee: clearly speaks, but of
Gods upholding him in, and raising him up, out of former Judgments, so as he
was not Destroyed by them; nor says he, That he might harden and destroy him,
but that he might show in him his Power, and make his Name known in all the
Earth; which he might, and could have done, had Pharaoh humbled himself before
him, as he required of him; in showing mercy upon him, and making him an
instance of the efficacy of his grace; but he not so doing, he did it in
hardening and judging him.

2. Nor are the following words inferred, and concluded by the Apostle
thereupon. Either,

1. Whom he willed, he hardneth; as speaking of Gods eternal purpose, to harden
some, as signified by the word Will. Or,

2. He hardens any man, merely because he will, without respect to any
foreprovocation on their part: indeed, his showing mercy may be, and is without
any respect to any foregoing goodness to deserve it: and so his distribution
of Talents, Places, Prerogatives; and so his comparative hating in that respect
some over others, as in the case of Jacob and Esau, nationally considered,
forementioned by the Apostle, may be so irrespective is we showed before, and
might be so determined by him before the objects of such determination were
born, or had done good or evil; but we never find any such thing asserted about
his hardening men, much less does the Apostle here say such a thing: but,

3. He says he will have mercy, on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens; thereby signifying.

1. That God is not ordered or directed by any of his Creatures, asks or
receives counsel from none of them what to act or do in any of his
dispensations of mercy or judgment; but is the sole and sovereign orderer of
his own actions: according to that in Isai. 40.13, 14. Who has directed the
Spirit of the Lord, or being his Counselor, has taught him? with whom took he
counsel, and who instructed him and taught him in the path of judgment, or
taught him knowledge, or showed him the way of understanding? Behold the
Nations are as the drop of a Rucket, etc. or as the Apostle, with allusion to
the Prophet; who has known the mind of God? or who has been his Counselor?
Or who has first even to him, and it shall be recompensed to him again? For of
him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever
Amen. Shall any teach God knowledge, seeing he judges them that (...) on high?
as Job says, No, He does a^ things, not according to others pleasures (...)
thoughts, but according to the counsel of (...) own will, Romans 11.34, 35, 36.
Job 21.22. Ephesians. 1.11.

2. That he has, and exercises an absolute sovereignty over his Creatures, in
judging them in mercy or wrath; so a^ that his hands are not tied from doing
good to whom he pleases, be they never so vile or unworthy of mercy: nor is he
by any birth, height, works, privileges conferred upon them, so engaged to
them, that in case of their sinning presumptuously, and abusing his goodness,
he may not harden and destroy them: as he is not ruled or ordered by his
creatures; they can give no law to him: so such is his power over them, Genesis
18.25. Zeph. 3.5. Tit. 1.2.
he can do what he pleases to, and with them: only he cannot lie or do
iniquity: whosoever has sinned against him, be they what they will, King or
Peasant, Jew or Gentile, yea, Exodus 32.33.
or a Prophet, Apostle or an Angel, he can and may blot them out of his Book:
nothing conferred upon them by him, or done formerly by them to, or for him,
can abridge his power of so dealing with them. As again, no vileness of birth
or condition, sinfulness of life and conversation, or punishment fore-inflicted
on them, can take away his power over, for showing mercy and compassion to them
if he pleases, especially to the penient and humbled soul that seeks mercy of
him, and submits to him. Thus ^ot only Pharaoh and Sihon mighty Kings,
notwithstanding their greatness, were hardened and destroyed by him; but also
the Jews the seed of Abraham, Isaac and Israel despising his Law, and rebelling
against his counsels and commands, and refusing to walk in his ways, etc. were
not only punished with many sore and heavy Judgments, but also, notwithstanding
all their privileges (Gods choice of them, love to them, and honor conferred
upon them) yea, and notwithstanding all their Temple-building, Sacrifices and
Services done to him, and works of righteousness of their own wrought by them,
were at length for their refusals of Christ and his Doctrine, and despite done
to him, and his Servants broken off, (except a remnant by grace, or mere mercy
reserved) and unpeopled by him: being hardened, blindned and given up to their
own imaginations and delusions, to stumble and fall in them. And on the other
side, not only Rahah, Ruth, and some other poor Sinners amongst the Gentiles
obtained mercy, but even the Gentiles more generally after, and notwithstanding
their long going astray, and walking in their own ways, Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13,
14, 17, 18, 19, 20.
and their many and great abominations, Idolatries, Adulteries, and all manner
of open and heinous wickednesses, had the Gospel and Kingdom of God sent unto
them; and therein pardon of their sins, and peace from God was tendered and
preached to them, through, and in the name of Christ, and whosoever accepted
the tenders and terms thereof, were admitted into the kingdom and Church of God
and Christ, and received into nighness to them. Matthew. 11.25, 26.
So also the mysteries of the Kingdom of God were hid from the richer, learned
and prudent persons of the Jews, that were there through lifted up against God,
their riches, prudence, yea or self-righteousness notwithstanding; and revealed
to the poor and simple Disciples, though despicable in the eyes of the other;
and but as Babes and Sucklings in respect of their parts and capacities, and
this because it so pleased God. It seemed good and meet to him to deal so with
them. Yea, the Angels that sinned, though high and glorious Spirits, yet God
did not because of their height, power or greatness spare them, but plunged
them down into destruction: when as poor, fallen, contemptible man, of a far
meaner constitution and condition, being made of the dust, was pitied by him,
and found mercy with him. And therefore in the belief and apprehension of this
Sovereignty of God over his Creatures, and liberty to dispose of them, in
showing them mercy, or withdrawing it from them, and hardening, and blinding
them as he pleases, as also of his infinite purity, and perfect hatred of sin
where ever he finds it: the Apostle Paul beat down his body, 1 Cor. 9.27. with
Act. 9.15. 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
^d brought it into subjection, least having preached to others, he should
himself yet, notwithstanding a chosen Vessel, and an Apostle, be a cast away;
as Judas, ^ough a chosen Apostle, was before him; and as he tells (and would
not have us ignorant of it) many of the Fathers that were highly honored and
privileged, God was that notwithstanding, so far displeased with for their
sins against him, that he destroyed them. As the Apostle Jude also minds us,
that the Lord having ^ed his people out of Egypt; yet afterward destroyed those
that believed, not that is, did not abide believing, as Psalm. 106.12, 13.
though they were his people, and sometime believed, yet that exempt(...) them
not from destruction: yea, Moses himself, though a Prophet, and greater than
the rest of the Prophets; yet not believing to sanctify the Lord before the
people at one time, was cut off from entering into the good Land of Promise^ his
being such a Prophet, yea and in all other things faithful, would not
privilege him from such a judgment upon him, having but that one time so
failed before him. And Jeremy, Jer. 1.5. with 15.19, 20, 21.
though a Prophet and sanctified in the womb thereunto; yet turning out some
way it seems, stood (...) upon his returning again; otherwise (...) had been
rejected, his first ordination (...) notwithstanding. Psalm. 51.1, 2.
Thence David also ^ing sinned in the matter of Vriah, could not, nor durst
plead any engagements upon God, to continue his favor to hi^ or restore him to
it, as if God was by any thing fore-done to him, or by him ing^ged to save him,
but only pleads and (...) for mercy, according to the multitude of his mercies,
as intimately acknowledging therein that he had so broken Covenan^ that nothing
of his former privileges of services could plead an exemption from Gods
judgment: but that God might justly cast him out of his sight, and depsive him
of his presence and spirit. He lay at Gods mercy and good pleasure therein,
whether to cast him away or re^ him; and could challenge nothing of favor as
due debt upon any account to him.

And this Prerogative God has, and exercises over his Creature, that so no
flesh might presume to sin against him and abuse his grace, or turn it into
wantonness, thinking to plead an exemption from those forest judgments (as the
Jews were very often apt through mistake to do) because they are his people,
and he had chose, and called, and saved them; of because they have formerly
believed, obeyed and served him, built him Temples, offered Sacrifices,
preached or prayed in his Name, etc. But that all might learn to tremble before
him, and stand^ awe of him, and work out their own salvation with fear and
trembling, with all lowliness of mind, depending on hi^ mercy and grace for
their salvation; not ^ing high minded, or pust up with pride or there
privileges, or services, or any excellencies found in them, or received (...)
God by them. And that the poor and humble sinners, yea the vilest and most
wretched might be persuaded and ^couraged to flee to him for mercy, and ^eg it
of him; who notwithstanding their unworthiness, can extend it to them, and
^oth, and will to all, that in due time ^ble themselves under him, and seek
mercy and grace of him in Christ Jesus. To these purposes he both admonished
Israel, when first taken into favor, and ^ghly honored of him to be his
choice people, after being redeemed miraculously ^om Egypt, they had heard his
voice from Heaven, out of the midst of the (...), as no people under Heaven
had: (...) though he had so loved and chosen them, and would keep mercy and
covenant with them if they loved and obeyed him; yet if they, after all this,
should forget him, and serve other Gods, they should perish, even as the other
Nations driven out from before them. Romans 2.8, 9, 10, 11.
He would ^ut no difference between them therein, except it might be in
destroying them with a more grievous destruction, as they had been more
honored of him: whence ^s^ those serious cautions in Deuteronomy. 6. and 8. (...) be
ware of being lifted up, to forget, ^d sin against him; and that Deuteronomy. 29.18,
19, 20. left there should be amongst them man or woman, family or tribe, that
shou^ turn away, etc. and bless himself in (...) heart and say Tush, I shall
have peace (God will not curse me because I am such (...) such a one, and have
done such or su^ things) though I walk after mine own in^ ginations; The Lord
will not spare him (whatever he be) but his wrath and ^ger shall smoke against
him, till he h^ utterly destroyed him. And of the same Israel, when they were
broken o^ through unbelief, and were blinded and hardened, it is said by the
Apostle Pa^ that they, if they continued not in un^ lief ((...) rejection of
the Gospel) sho^ be grafted in again; for God is able graft them in again (
Romans 11.23.) (...) unworthiness, and Gods present judg^ments upon them
notwithstanding (...) which purpose also the same Apostle pr^ed for, even those
of Israel, wh^ stumbled at the stumbling stone, and (...) his heaves desire
was, that they might (...) saved, yea, and to that purpose prov^ked them by his
writing, to jealousi^ Romans 9.32. with 10.1, 2. and 11.16. (...) seems then that
he knew, that it was (...) Gods power to save or destroy them (...) he pleased.
True it is that the gifts an^ calling of God, are without repentance Romans
11.29. But that was such a gift an^ calling them in their Fathers, and out
(...) love to them, as that a seed of them she not fail of the blessing: which
God co^ have performed to the Fathers in Mose^ and a generation to have been
brought ^t of him, though he had destroyed the ^hole Congregation besides,
Exodus 32.10. ^a, the Baptist told them, that God is ^le of stones to raise up
Children unto Araham, Matthew. 3.8, 9, in, and upon whom the promises made to
him, should (...) accomplished. Let these considerati^s move us then to stand
in awe, and ^e heed of presuming upon the account any favors, privileges,
choice of us, (...) promises to us, or righteousness done (...) us, to sin
against him, least we fall and (...) hardened and cut off, as they, through ^h
presumption sinning also were; we and by faith, be we not high-minded (...)
fear: yea, let him that thinks he ^nds most surely, and that God is so in^ed to
him, that no sin of his can pos^ly make him fail of the Kingdom, take ^ed least
he fall remembering that which ^poken by the Lord in the Prophet E^el, Chap.
33.13. when I say to a ^hteous man, thou shall surely live (as (...) will say
so to none but those which ^e in Christ, and so truly righteous) yet that
righteous man (so under the pro^se of life) trust in his righteousness (in ^s
believing, loving, and being accepted God) and so commit iniquity, he shall
^ely dye. Nor let us listen to those that ^ing led aside with that error of
the ^ws, shall say, when the righteous man ^th so, ay but when is that, as if it
was (...) impossible supposition; for that is to render vain the sayings of
God, as the Devil would have us, that we might look upon the serious Cautions
and exhortations grounded thereupon, as ridiculous such as theirs would be,
that telling us, (...) Noah's Flood come again we shall all b^ drowned unless in
such an Ark as his was should exhort to get us such Arks, when as the foresaid
supposition in it self, is of (...) thing not to be feared, nor possible to fa^
out, considering Gods absolute promise to the contrary: they might as well to
tha^ supposition in Ezekiel. 33.14. when a wicked man turns from his wickedness,
etc. (...) shall live; reply and say, true but when is that How can that be,
that a wicked man should do so gracious an act, as to turn to God from his
iniquity? Seeing a ba^ tree (as every wicked man is) can bring forth no such
good fruit as repentance and turning to God is. Besides that righteous men may
turn from their righteousness to commit iniquity, is actually proved to be too
often true, as is eviden^ in David, Solomon and others: now to say God cannot
in such a case leave and giv^ over, and harden such a one, is all on^ in
effect, as to contradict the Apostle, and say God cannot harden whom he will
and to contradict David, who by cryin^ for mercy, and not to be cast out of God
sight, employed it to be mercy to him, and n^ engagement toward him, not then
(...) cast him away and destroy him. But (...) wave such frivolous cavils; take
we h^ of sinning presumptuously, or having sinned, of challenging the favor of
God upon the score of our former righteousness or services, but let us rather,
as David, in such a case beg for mercy from God, not to cast us away, or take
his holy Spirit from us, whereby our hearts might be hardened from his fear;
acknowledging Gods power, (our former believing or doing righteousness
notwithstanding) for our rebellions or departures from the way of
righteousness, to harden and destroy us. He will have mercy on whom he will
have mercy, and whom he will he hardens: in which is yet again employed further,

3. The Power, Force and Irresistibleness of Gods Will and Decree when it
comes, or is brought forth, by any thing that man can do there against. As he
will have compassion on whom he will have compassion, whoever say against it,
or are discontented at it, and endeavor to hinder it. As the Father of the
Prodigal would have mercy upon his repenting Prodigal Son, show him respect,
pass by his former miscarriages, and with gladness entertain him with the
highest demonstrations of his love, however the Elder Brother murmured at it,
and was displeased with it, signifying that so God will extend mercy to the
Publicans and Sinners in calling them to repentance when he will, and accepting
those of them that obey the call, forgiving all their former more notorious
sinnings, for all the Pharisees discontents and murmurings at it; and would
call in mercy the Gentiles, and justify the obeyers of his call, though the
Jews murmured at it, and opposed it, persecuting the Apostles who were
instruments employed thereto: by him so when he will harden and blind any
persons it shall prevail; whom he will he hardens, however the persons hardened
by him might suppose themselves privileged there against, or might think by
their wisdom or strength to prevent or hinder it. And so in both those senses
God might be said to raise up (or as the Hebrew word signifies, cause to stand,
preserve and raise out of former judgments) Pharaoh, to show in him, his
power, (his liberty and power to harden, and destroy the greatest and mightiest
that sin against him, and the power and force of his hardening operations, when
and so far as he will harden) and so to make his Name to be declared in all the
earth for the admonishing all others to fear and tremble before him, and take
heed of provoking him to these kind of judiciary proceedings against them; such
is the import of those sayings, worthy our diligent consideration.

SECT. 4.
That God in hardening and blinding men, does it by degrees, and with such
mixture of mercy, that till they be totally hardened, there may be remedy.

YEt it is to be minded too, that this hardening and blinding men, is not done at
once usually, but by degrees, and till it be fully done there is hope for
mercy: yea, the hardening men in part, so as that they run upon their own ways
and counsels, is ordered of God, who is slow to wrath, and ready to fongive,
and delights not in the death of the wicked, but rather that they turn and
live, as a means to bring men upon such rocks and difficulties, as by which
they may be forced to cry to God for, and accept of his mercy; and so it is
said, Israel is in part blinded, Romans 11.^5 32.
or blindness is in part happened to them, till the fullness of the Gentiles be
come in, and that God has shut them all up in unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon them all; and so in Isa. 63.17. when through their hardness they
have run themselves upon miseries, and then begin to see the error of their
ways, they are put upon crying mightily to God; look down from Heaven, and
behold the habitation of thy Holiness, and of thy Glory; where is thy zeal and
thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy mercy toward me? are they
restrained? and, O Lord, why have thou madeus to err from thy ways, and hardened
our hearts from thy fear? Return for thy Servants sake, the tribes of thine
Inheritance: yea, we may see that Gods hardening Pharaoh, occasioned him to rush
himself upon such judgments, as somewhat softened him, and made him cry for
mercy and forgiveness, and upon crying for it he had it: so rich in mercy is
God, even to his enemies, when by his judgments they are moved to repentance,
and to relent from their purposes, Exodus 9.27, 28. yea, and had he not then
hardened his heart again, he and his Servants, and so provoked God to harden it
too, verse. 33.34. Chap. 10.1. he might have escaped further judgments. But he
there again hardening his heart, God hardened it more, or gave him up to greater
hardness, even to his surther misery and destruction: but we may see how long
it was before God came to that with him; he had before that hardened his own
heart, as we noted before. Hardening himself after the judgment of the Frogs,
Exodus 8.8.12.
his heart was or remained hardened, so as not to take notice of the following
judgments, tho confessed by his Magicians to be by the finger of God, and not
by any such arts as they practiced; and that rushed him upon a another
judgment, in and by which his heart was some what softened, and made (...)
yield so as to promise to let the people go; and to entreat Moses to cry to God
for him. Who also readily heard him, yet then also hardening his own heart
again; he provoked the Lord to harden it too, till he threatens him to send all
his Plagues upon his Heart; and upon his Servants, and upon all his People, to
make him know that there was none like Him in all the Earth. And sure that
might have such tendency as in Psalm. 83.16. That knowing him to be such a one
he might seek his Name; and indeed (adds the Lord) for this cause or purpose
have I raised thee up (made thee to stand, or as the septuagint reads it,
preserved thee namely from perishing in the former plagues, from which he was
raised up or out of) that I might show in thee my power, and that my Name may
be declared in all the Earth; which might have been all accomplished too
without his ruin, had he by that forbearance and long suffering in which God
yet endured him though a Vessel of wrath, madeup or fitted to destruction: been
led to repentance (as his long suffering and goodness does lead to that, Romans
9.21. with 2.4, 5.) God says, not as some rashly from that conclude that he
raised him up, much less created him, that he might destroy him. But he
preserved and endured him yet that he might show his power in him, and that his
Name might be declared; which might have been also in his overcoming his
obstinacy and making him yield to seek him, as at length he did make him yield
to let Israel go upon their own terms; and had he then also submitted to have
sought Gods Name; his power had appeared, and his Name might have been declared
by him; or by occasion of him throughout the Earth, with his safety and
welfare; as it was by Nebuchadnezzer after wand humbling himself before God
after judgment executed upon him. Dan. 4.1.2, 3.34.35, 36, 37.
But he then also yet retaining his wickedness and not seeking the Lord, who
had so clearly and notoriously made known himself both in the power of his
wrath, and readiness, to show mercy in his humbling himself before him; Exodus
14.3, 4.
provoked God to harden him further, even to give him up to a total hardness to
run himself into utter ruin (and so accomplish Gods purpose that ways) by
opposing him. And yet that also even his total bardning men to Destruction (as
destruction follows thereupon) and his destroying men when fully hardened, as
it is a judgment that he is slow in passing and bringing upon men, (he had)
rather the issues of their own ways in and upon his hardening them in part
might a waken them to repentance* Ezekiel. 33.11. and 18.32.
and that they would thereupon turn to him and live) so when he is provoked to
it and does it, it is in mercy to other men, and for their admonition and
warning to listen to him, not rebelling and hardening their hearts against him:
or upon sight of former Rebellions and Self-^dnings which has provoked God to
^rden, or blind them in part, to return to God, and put away their iniquities,
that he may have mercy upon them, and not ^ave them, and give them up also to
^ter ruin: So it is said, That God would harden Pharaohs heart at the last, to
pursue after Israel, when he had let them go; and when his heart, and the
heart o^ his Servants turned against Israel, to lay. Why have we done this,
that we have (...) Israel go from serving us; yea, Exodus 14.3, 4, 5, 8.
he did also accordingly after their so recoyling, actually harden it, to this
end, That the ^gyptians might know him to be the Lord; even that the remainder
of them might know him; and so as in Psalm. 83.6. Seek his Name: as also is
employed in the last Verses of that Psalm; That the ^ter and everlasting shame,
trouble, confusion, and perishing of the obstinate Enemies, is ordered to this
end, That men may know, that he whose Name is Jehovah is most high over all the
Earth. But,

SECT. 5.
How and in what sense the foresaid operations of hardening, blinding, etc. are
Attributed unto God, and how he works in, and unto them.

LEt us view now, how, or after what manner God may be said to harden blind,
deceive men, and turn their heart to hate his people; as Psalm. 105.25. (tho
that might be rendered, their heart returned to hate his people: (...)
as in Exodus 14.5. Their heart was turned against the People:) Seeing it is
said, That God is not a God that has pleasure in iniquity, he hates the worke^
of it; Psalm. 5.4, 5. Ezekiel. 33.11.
and he himself swears, that he has no pleasure in the Death of the wicked
(namely, that they should continue in their Sins, and dye;) but rather, that
they should turn, and live: Surely, they are not his operations properly, and
directly, a^ those of his mercy, in drawing men to himself, and framing them to
his mind (...) but by a kind of indirect, permissive, accidental operation; as
the Sun may be said to cause darkness, by leaving the Horizon; or to make men
blind that look against it, and not by it; or the like (...) yet they are
ascribed to God, because against his will, setting it self to hind^ them
effectively, they could not be wrought: or because also it is with (...) will,
as a just and righteous thing; that such things as hardness, blindness, dece^
should befall them, for their punishment by running therethrough upon their own
Calamities: and because they are occasioned by something properly and directly
wrought and done by him: we may say, that by such ways as these, God may be
said to do them.

1. By permitting, leaving, and giving to men to themselves, and to their own
imaginations and lusts, to be hardened by them, not giving forth his grace any
further, as to such and such a particular (or in a total hardening not at all)
to hinder and keep them back from such hardness and blindness, but letting them
have their wills and liberty to follow after their ^wn devices and purposes,
and so to run themselves into desperate stiffness of heart against God and his
counsels, as in Psalm. 81.11.14. Israel would none of me. So I gave them up to
their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels. And so the
Gentiles becoming vain in their own imaginations, and not likeing to retain, or
have God in their Knowledge; God give them up to vile affections, and to a mind
void of Judgment, Romans 1.21, 25, 26, 28. And so as the Sun going from us,
causes darkness; so Christ, who is the Light of the World, hiding himself from
a people, it follows upon it, Joh. 12.39, 40, 42.
that their ^ryes are blinded, and he has blinded their eyes; namely, by
taking away his Light from them: not by imparting, or ^utting malice into them,
but by withdrawing his mercy from them: as Augustine well says, Non impartiendo
malitiam, sed non impertiendo misericordiam.

2. By giving leave and commission permissively to Satan, to enter into them,
as it were, and possess them, with lying, and false imaginations, hopes and
fears; and so to deceive, Job. 1.
and blind, and harden them. So the Lord took away all that Job had, by
permitting, 2 Samuel 24.11. with 1 Chronicles. 21.1. 1 King. 22.20, 21, 22, 23.
and giving leave to Satan to do it. And he is said, to have moved David
against Israel, to say, Go number the people, in letting Satan provoke David to
it. So he hardened Ahabs heart, by giving leave, or commission to a lying
Spirit, to entice him to go to Ramoth Gilead, by promising him, by the mouth of
his false Prophets success and prosperity in his so doing. And he may be said,
to have deceived those Prophets, not by his Spirit dictating any deceit to
them: (far be it from us, so to Blaspheme him:) but by giving way, and leave to
the False Spirit to enter into them, and deceive them: as in the same way, he
is said, to send men strong Delusions, that they may believe a lie, etc.
namely, by letting Satan, who is forward to such work, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12.
if permitted, bring strong Delusions to men, and insinuate them into their
sancies: as he might be said to * Mark. 5.12, 13. with Math. 8.31, 32. Luke
8.32, 33.
send the unclean Spirit into the Herd of Swine; when, upon their desire of it,
he gave them leave to go.

3. By ordering such good and holy Providence to men, as by which their
hearts, (especially, if left to themselves, and Satan,) will take occasion to
harden, ^lind, and stiffen themselves in their resolutions for Sin, and against
God. So his very suffering the Magicians to do such ^ings by their
Enchantments, as Moses and ^aron did by his Finger; or ordering Moses and Aaron
to do such things, as they could do the like, occasioned Pharaoh to (...) light
by those Judgments; yea, his gradous readiness to remove the Judgment, and give
respite to Pharaoh so easily at his promise of doing better, and entreaty of
Moses to pray for him, hardened ^baraoh' heart: or rather, as the Apostle says,
Romans 2.4, 5.
He after his hardness and impenitency, despising or looking overly upon God's
easiness to be entreated, and so upon his goodness, and long-suffering which
should have moved him to Repentance, hardened his heart against God, and
trea^red up wrath to himself, against a day of Wrath: according to that in
Psalm. 50.21. These things have thou done and I kept silence, thou thoughtest
that I was altogether such a me as thy self, etc. And that in Eccles. 8.11.
Because sentence against an evil doer is not executed speedily, therefore the
heart of the Sons of Men, is fully set, (that is, is hardened and made
obstinate,) in them to do evil. So that accidentally, and eventually, God's
goodness, and forbearance to them, hardens them, and blinds them, because they
take boldness thence-through their wickedness to presume to Sin yet more, and
becoming (...) in their imaginations, blind themselves and are made uncertain,
whither God dislike their ways or not; or whither there be any God, or
providence of God, because he does not punish the evil of their ways. Again, by
ordering Israel to march through the Wilderness, where according to
probability, it might be thought they would be entangled: and so by ordering a
kind of Trial to Pharaoh, whether by all his fore-past Judgments, he would yet
stand in awe of him; seeing he would yet hold fast his covetous design of
enriching himself, by their bondage: He also permitted Satan to put into his
heart such a thought, that now he might have a good advantage, to force them
back; and so he was strengthened, and animated to pursue after them, to his
Destruction. And so God turned the hearts of the Egyptians, to hate his
people, by ordering such blessings, and multiplication to his People, as
provoked them, being evil, to envy and fear them; and then permitting them to
Satan, and their own hearts, to stir up envy and hatred against them. Thus we
find too, God threatening obstinate people that refuse to walk in his ways, or
be warned by the sound of his Trumpet, that he will lay stumbling blocks before
them; and the Father and Son shall fall together upon them, Jer. 6.17, Isa.
8.13, 14. Romans 9.33.
18, -- 21. Such was Christ's weakness, Cross, and abasement; and the Fathers
withdrawing from him, 1 Cor. 1.2^.
on the Cross, to the Jews and Pharisees, who out of envy put him to Death; and
the Preaching of the Cross to the generality of them.

4. Yea, we may add (if we can conceive otherwise of it, then as included in
what is said) By cursing his Blessings and even his own Ordinances to Men, as
Mal. 2.1, 2. That they should be made as snares and traps to them for their
abuse of them: as in Psalm. 69.22, 23, 24, 25. Let their table become a snare,
and that which was for their welfare a trap, etc. Yet this is so, accidentally
as it were, by reason of their pride, covetousness, etc. which apts them to
take offense, and boggle at the Word of God, which altogether speaks in such
was against them, vexing, galling, and inraging them, (they loving their deeds
that are evil,) and so becoming a Savor of Death, unto Death to them: Yea, the
very Spirit of God may work such Discoveries of their resisting and rejecting
them to their very hearts, as may occasion the heart, retaining its love to
iniquity to exert its wickedness, and so occasionally harden it, to desperate
Rebellion, and so may his Judgment too: as in Rev. 16, 8, 9. And thus I
conceive of God's hardening Operations; or such Operations as attributed to him.

I shall close up this Chapter with Mr. Mallers Exposition of those Words, in
Psalm. 105.25. He turned their hearts to hate his people. Not that God, (says
he) was the Author of Pharaohs, and the Egyptians evil Counsels; or that he
put, those crafty and wicked counsels, into their minds: For God is a God that
wills not Iniquity, etc. Which sentence is repeared often in the Scriptures; as
in Deuteronomy. 32. Hos. 11. Psalm. 92. Ezekiel. 33. Which with both hands, or rather with
our whole Soul is to be held fast by us; that we may know, that God is not the
cause of any Sin; nor does he will, effect, or approve of the wickedness, and
obstinacy of the Wicked: but the cause of Sin is the corrupt will of Man; and
the suggestion of the Devil; but God is said to have perverted, or turned
Phara^hs, and the Egyptians hearts, in that he forsaking them; left their
preverse hearts such as they were naturally, that they might pour out their
hatred conceived against Israel: which hatred was not of God, but of their
inbred malice, pride, covetuousness; which because God did not correct, or take
away by his Grace, he is said to have perverted, or turned their hearts, that
the Godly might understand, that those things (which happen to them, from such
evil men) come not unto them, without his will. This (says he,) is the most
sincere meaning of it, and most consonant to the Scriptures: To which agrees,
Aug. Tom. 2. contra Pelag. p. 300. God hardens, not by putting Malice into men,
but by withdrawing his mercy from them. And in his First Book, against the 2
Epist. of Pelag. chap. 18. No man is compelled by the power of God against his
will, either to good or evil; but God forsaking men deservedly, they go into
evil, and helping them undeservedly, they are converted to good. That Phrase of
perverting them, and hardening them, used sixteen times in Exodus, is not to be
understood of any efficacious action of God, but of his permission, and
forsaking; as Aust. Lib. 5. contrae Julianum. For it is usual in the Hebrew
Tongue, that Verbs, or words signifying Actions, are put for the causes of
Actions; either truly such, or such, as without which, they would not be; which
seeing they are the Will, Power, Permission, it often falls out, that they are
to be expounded by, I will, I can, I suffer, or permit; and by their own
infinitive; as, Gal. 5. So many as are justified by the Law; that is, desire to
be justified. 1 Cor. 10. I please all men; that is, desire or endeavor it.
Luke 8. Hearing, they bear not; that is, will not hear: Why have thou made us
to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts from thy fear? that is, Why have
thou left us, and suffered us to err, etc. And not rather drawn us back, and
governed us by thy Spirit, that by our negligence, malice, or wickedness, we
rush not into evil, etc. Thus he, which soberly construed, and looked upon as
the Judicial acts of God, after Grace extended and rejected, I conceive, to be
very right and Orthodox. For which cause I have thus noted, and transcribed it,
as worthy to be credited and received. And thus much for the kinds of God's
operations: in which also we have showed the manner of God's working in
operations of this latter kind, which respect the working of men to Sin; or
rather, in what sense such operations may be Attributed to God. I might have
noted also, That the same sentence of Truth, or providence of God may have
diverse operations in diverse men: as that saying of Christ, to the Jews, Joh.
8.32. If ye continue in my words, then are ye my Disciples indeed; and Ye shall
know the truth, and the truth shall set you free. As it occasionally offended,
and enraged those Jews; so it might comfort others, and instruct others in the
way, to obtain freedom; and admonish others of, and cause them to fear,
departing from his words; and as the same cloud that protected the Israelites,
blew the Egyptians into the Sea, But I pass it, and come to what remains, viz.
The manner of God's working in his Gracious Operations, which are more
properly, directly, and effectively his.

CHAP. X.
Of the manner of God's working in Men by his grace, preventing accompanying
and following them.

SECT. 1.
That God's gracious operations are according to the counsel of his will, and
in some sense different and unlike.

IT is most certain, that God, (as the Apostle says Ephesians. 1.11.) works all
things according to the counsel of his will. All things namely, that he
works: or we may not say, That he works ^ens Sins, and Evils in them, or
the works of the Devil, which he came to destroy: (...) all things that he
works, he works according as his most infinitely wise ^nderstanding
directs, and his will ^herein determines, without asking advice of, or
submitting himself to the gui^ance of any Creature whatsoever: though yet
heither does the Apostle there^ mean that he works nothing with respect to
our wills, and works: for sure^y that is not so, but in all his punishments,
and rewards, as properly such, he has respect to the wills, and workings of
Men, and so the counsel of his will is pleased to order: for even in those his
works, (his punishing Pharaoh for his Cruelty, Suppose: And Judas for his
Covetousness: And approving Cornelius his Sincerity: And David's Zeal for his
House.) He wrought according as the counsel of his will ordered, and not
otherwise. And we may say, that according to that most perfect Counsel of his
most holy will, he may, and does work differently in diverse, or in the same man
at diverse times, as he pleases, Psalm. 14.5, 17.
though always holily and graciously, both in his preventing, and following
operations; as well as in his dispensations of means; there may be diverse
measures afforded, and what he does afford, he may afford it diversely; as God
may prevent some sooner, than others, as John Baptist in the Womb; or presently
after, as Timothy from a Child, etc. Some he may call into his Vineyard at the
Third hour, when others may stand idle till the Ninth, or Eleventh. Yea, and
some more strongly than others, using more and more powerful means to enforce
them: as the Lord is said to have instructed Isaiah with a strong hand; and he
hedged up the way of swerving Israel as with Thorns; so as not to let her find
her Lovers, and so in a manner forced them by afflictions and convincements, to
return to him again: though some, even so forced as it were, Isa. 8.11. Hos.
2.6, 7. Isa. 1.4, 5. Hos. 5.15. with 6.1, 2, 3, 4.
yet revolt or soon recoile. Yea, and Christ implies, that where God afforded
more glorious means, he also put forth more power, in, and with them; Matthew.
11.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. and 12.40.41, 42, etc.
so as had others had those means, they would by the power put forth in them,
have done better than they did, with what they had, or then others did that had
those greater means, in which his operations, as well as in his dispensations,
we ascribe to him his own glorious liberty; and acknowledge, That he will have
mercy, on whom he will have merry; and whom he will, he hardens: as we showed in
the foregoing Chapter. Let me add,

1. That he is not prescribed by man, or any other Creature, but by the
counsels of his own will, has ordered, both whom to prevent with his mercy and
grace; and that we have seen, is generally all men in their seasons, and
according to capacities given them: moved thereto by no man's merit, but by his
own mere good will, and pleasure; and whom he will, he after such grace
afforded, striving with them, and softning them, abused by them, hardens; no
man has prescribed that to him, and upon whom to order it; as we have noted:
but as himself pleases.

2. After men having abused grace, are in some measure hardened by him, it is
merely in his good pleasure, on whom to show such mercy, as to prevent them
again and follow them longer, that he may overcome their Evils, with more
goodness: and on whom he will, and when for such abuses give up, and cease
striving with them.

3. With reference to following Grace; He will have mercy, on whom he will have
mercy: even to justify, accent, and receive them as his chosen ones. No man
has prescribed him his way, or set him a Law in this; nor will he be let
from showing mercy on them whom he pleases thus to show it to: namely, those
that hearing, and learning of him come to Christ, etc. And again, whom he will,
what manner of persons he pleases, and not whom men prescribe to him; he
hardneth and rejects, even those that rebel, and are disobedient 50 his Son,
whether Jews, or Gentiles, zealous and devout observers of the Law, or profane
and loose livers: Yea, or what ever else they be, or may have been, as was
before s^ewed.

SECT. 2.
That in this diversity of operation, he observes in some sense an uniformity
and a likeness with men Generally. Psalm. 33.12. to 16. Considered.

YE^ it appears, That the dealings of God with men are uniform too: whether
he give greater, or lesser means to lead to know him, and to Repentance, yet
in, and with those means, his preventing operations are alike afforded to them
that have the lesser as the greater means, alike, I say, not in measure, as
neither is the measure of what is required of them alike; to whom more is given
of them is more expected and required; nor is the very matter of the operations
formerly the same, or alike; for in that respect too there are diversity of
operations, though the same Lord: but alike as to analogy, or resemblance in
God's dealings; wherefore also, his proceedings with them in Judgment, is, or
will be alike, only to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile, Romans 2.7, 8, 9,
10, 11. Both are reproved, and faulted, for putting God, and his Truth from
them, and imprisoning it in unrighteousness, etc. As on the other side, the
obeyer of God's Voice, the fearer of God, and worker of Righteousness in every
Nation: (I say, not in the practice of every Religion, for that stands not with
the fear of God,) is accepted of him: the uncircumcision of the uncircumcised.
(And by way of Analogy, the want of outward Baptism, in the outwardly
unbaptised, that have not opportunity thereunto) shall not prejudice their
acceptance with God, they doing the Truth, Romans 2.25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
revealed of God to them: nor on the other side, shall the outward
Circumcision, or Baptism, and Profession help the disobedient: So that the
Equity of Gods ways, and uniformity of his dealings with men appears in his
diversities of dispensations and operations: that he walks in one way with men
for approvement, or disapprovement, justification, or condemnation. And with
respect to the equity, and in that sense, likeness of his dealings with men in
his gracious operations, as laying the foundation of it in his judging them, is
that excellent passage in the Psalmist, very pregnant, Psalm. 33.12, 13, etc.
Blessed is the Nation whose God is the Lord: (who own and worship God in
Christ, and whose protection, and defense he is:) the people he has chosen for
an inheritance to himself, as in some sort and sense, the Nation of Israel to
have his Statutes, Judgments, and Oracles, betrusted with them: so more
choicely, the Worshipers of God in Truth, in every Nation; the Nation that own
him for their God, and cleave unto him. Or, as Psalm. 4.3. The man, and so the
people, that is godly, or, gracious; those that hearing and learning of the
Father come to Christ, and so are built upon him; for they are the chosen,
generation, the royal priesthood, the holy Nation, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5, 9. But then
least we should think Gods goodness to be bound up to some few only precisely
chosen, as most take the sense to be, it follows, The Lord looks (...) has
looked down, or with care and consideration, looked) from heaven: He beholds
(...) he has beheld, or seen; yea, providingly seen, and beheld) all the sons
of men even so beheld, and looked upon them with an eye of pity and
compassion, as that he has looked out for himself a Lamb for a burnt-offering,
to take away their Sin, and so bring in Grace and Salvation to them: (as the
same Word is used, Genesis 22.8. (...) Where it is rendered, So to look, as to
provide; and thence the Name of that place Jehovah Iireh, Verse. 14) and then it
follows, from the place of his habitation or dwelling, (which is properly, and
in the truth of it, Christ as having Dyed for all men, he is raised again,
ascended, and glorified, he as so considered, as one that has performed his
will, in Suffering for us, is the habitation of God's holiness; his beloved one
in whom his Soul delights, and where it has pleases him, that all fullness
should dwell; even all the fullness of the Godhead, bodily: from thence, (even
in, and through him, as having done his will,) he looks (...) he has
consideratively looked, or set his heart to take care of, and for them, upon
all the inhabitants of the Earth. As he looked down with pity upon them at
first, to consider their misery, and provide them a Savior: so now having
taken up his rest, and dwelling in him, he through him yet again, beholds them
to take care of them, and to extend his goodness and favor to them, to load
them with his benefits, and afford them disco^ veries of his Truth: and then He
fash^ oneth ((...) He is fashioning, or is the fashioner of) their hearts
together: o^ alike (...) in his beholding them, and dispen^sing his goodness
and truth to them; di^covering his Being, Power, Goodness, the vanity of the
World, and of their Lives and all things here below, etc. He is secretly
convincing them, and by his goodness, leading and drawing them, to, and after,
or toward himself in his Son, to repent, to grope and feel after him, and seek
him who is not far from any one o^ us: and so is in like manner, or together
one with another, and one as well as another, framing, and fashioning their
hearts, even toward himself, who is one, and in meeting with, or coming to
whom, they would be together; and then it follows: He considers, (...) minds,
understandingly takes notice of) all their work. When he has framed, or frames
their hearts, even the heart of all the Sons of men, or Inhabitants of the
Earth in their several times together to one object, himself as in Christ his
dwelling place; or ali^e as to the manner of his framing them, then, and not
till then, he considers their Works, and minds how they work; whether they
yield up to him in his framings of them, to work, and walk in them or in that
truth, and goodness, by which he is working, and framing them; or else to rebel
against him: and then it follow* No King is saved by the multitude of an Host,
a mighty man is not delivered by much strength, an Horse is a vain thing for
safety, neither shall be deliver any by his great strength; Behold the eye of
the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his Mercy, to
deliver their Soul from Death, etc. As if he should say, upon the Lords framing
their hearts a like or together, though he leads and draws all men one way, yet
minding their works there is there great difference; some of them withdrawing,
rebelling, or resisting his grace and Spirit and smothering the truth in
unrighteousness are choosing their own ways and running to Hosts and Horses, and
Chariots; and to their own strength: to creatures, Idols which are vain, and
therein are disallowed of God, and meet with disapprovement and destruction,
but others in his framing their hearts choose the fear of the Lord, and
harkening to his voice do betake themselves to him, and to his Mercy to home
therein, and make him their stay and refuge, to own and accept him for their
God and Savior. And upon these his eyes are in a further sense, to own and
take special care of them as his Portion, People and inheritance: to choose them
to himself and bless them, and stand by them in all Conditions; 10 deliver
their Souls from Death, and to keep them alive in Famine, when others want and
Perish, as Isa. 65.13, 14. According to that in Prove. 1.31.32, 33. The refusers
of the Lord and of his fear, that despise his counsels, and set at naught all
his Reproofs, shall eat the fruit of their own ways, and be filled with their
own inventions, the turning aside of the simple shall slay them, and the
prosperity of Fools destroy them: when whosoever hearkneth unto Wisdom (in any
or every Nation) shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from the fear of evil.

SECT. 3.
That Gods operations in Men are neither properly Phisical, or properly and
simply Moral, but supernatural having some thing like either in them.

THere is great contest amongst Men, wither God do work Phisically, or as a
natural. Agent; or only Morally, by swasion and counsel in Men for the
converting and regenerating of them. That I may cast in my verdeit amongst
others toward the deciding that controversy, upon which men on both sides lay
a great part of the weight of their apprehensions they that are for the
Physicalness of them thence argueing their irresistibility, and they that are
for the Morality of them thence arguing the contrary. I shall briefly say.

1. That I conceive those terms are not apt and proper to be applied to Gods
Operations, for Phisical signifying natural, it should imply that they that say
he works Physically, say he works naturally which must, mean either by, or
according to the nature of the things in which he works; but nature being his
work, and corrupted too since the fall, his workings must needs be both
distinct from and far above the workings of it; or else that he works naturally
as opposed to voluntarily, or by free Election and choice in himself, which is
not true neither, for though in all his works he according to his own glorious
nature, and so naturally works most holily, righteously, wisely, etc. And it is
not possible for him to work otherwise; yet in respect of the work it self, the
matter of it and way of carrying it on he works freely, and according to the
counsel of his own will as was noted above. And again, Morally signifies
properly, after some manner and custom habituated in the subject by often
exercise, which is not competible with Gods nature and essence. But I conceive
the mind of that distinction, is, either as God wrought in his making and
giving beings and natures to things, or as men work upon one another by
arguments, and motives, persuading to better or other manners in a word,
whether creatively by introducing by almighty power new species, nature,
principles, or the like; or whethe^ only by arguments and motives provoking and
moving men to what he would work, in them or have them work, etc.

2. And so understanding it, I conceive his workings which are all
Supernatural, are neither simply of the one kind, nor of the other but of a
mixed Nature; for as I apprehend.

1. His framing of the heart by his preventing Operations, are more of a
Physical nature in the sense last mentioned, then of a Moral; some what like a
man's awakning another out of a Dead Sleep; not by arguing and reasoning him,
awake, but by some so loud noise, or some so forcible action as somewhat opens
his senses, and removes the obstructions of them, and give him a capacity to
hea^ and speak, or like the putting life into a Dead Man, so as he is capable
of Stirring, Moving, Hearing, Seeing. The Dead hear the voice of the Son of
God: this is somewhat a kin to a Physical, yea, is that they understand by that
phrase of a Physical. Operation; God in his preven^ing men by his grace, so
stretches out his hand, or puts forth his power as to effect or create in men
Capacities of hearing, seeing and minding the things h^ sees before them;
whence its compared to an opening the blind Eye, or unstopping the deaf Ear, as
is employed Ezekiel. 1^, 2, 3. Rebellious people are said to have eyes to see, and
yet see not, ears to hear and yet he or not.

2. But then having thus prevented men, and given them such capacities by his
creative power. He by his Light, Truth, and Grace, is reproving, counselling,
exhorting, allureing, and by diverse arguments, and motives is persuading or
moving men to see, and hear and awake, and exercise themselves to such things
as he is propounding to them, as to behold him, behold him, Isa. 65.1. To
listen to his Son, and turn at his reproofs in the power and strength and
ability, that he withal gives them supernaturally, and so as it were to feed
and soment, and use means; to preserve (even by the means he gives them too)
the life or quickening, or senses he had infused into them. And this is evident
in all the Scriptures: God shall persuade Japheth, and he shall dwell in the
Tents of Shem, Genesis 9.27. Incline your ears and come unto me, hear and your
soul shall live, Isa. 55.2, 3. And he that bears (namely, when made to heal,
listens) shall live, John. 5.25. Turn ye at my reproofs, behold I will pour out
my spirit unto you, I will make known my words. Ye set at naught all my
counsels, ye set at naught all my reproofs; ye did not choose the fear of the
Lord; the turning away of the simple slays them; but whosoever hearkens to me shall
dwell safely, etc. Prove. 1.23, 25, 31, 32.33. All which, and multitudes more
imply Gods counselling, exhorting, mourning, by arguments, and so inclining the
will made in some measure at liberty to obey, and follow him. And thence it is,
that men^ may resist the Holy Ghost, and vex, and grieve him, and rebel
against him, as also they are capable of listening, obeying, inclining to him;
and so God works as a man would do upon one awakened by him, he may persuade
him, jog him, stir him, and persuade him by arguments to awaken more and listen
to him, and as such a one seeing such a person so awaked wilful, in stopping
his Ear and resusing to hear him, yea using all means to compose himself to
sleep again, may be provoked by such Rebellion and Obstinacy, not to exercise
or use all the power he has to make him keep awake and hear him; or seeing a
man inlived by him (if such a thing might be) wilful in refusing means to
preserve, or foment his life unto a more perfect state of living, might be
provoked to leave him and let him die; so do men by their Rebellious refusings
of life, provoke God not to exercise all his power, or more power for their
good, but to leave them to their own will and ways and so to ruin, But,

3. Men in the power of the grace, they are prevented with, and by the power of
that grace set before them, and striving with them; being willing to look upon
or listen to God in Christ in what he sets before them; or not obstinately and
rebelliously refusing and turning from him, he then further exerts his creature
power, and infuses into and begets in them, not new substances; but new
Principles, dispositions, yea, his divine seed, or word and Spirit, and so
creates them in Christ Je^s, to good works to walk in them; re^enerates, renews
them and makes them ^e before him. Which proceeds not ^^om their willing and
listening to him, (...) from him and his grace speaking to and working in them,
whence they are ^d to be born of God; and of water and of the Spirit, the word
knowledge, (...) grace of God and his power working therein, and we are said
beholding as (...) a glass the glory of God to be chang^ ^ into the same image,
from glory to ^ory as by his Spirit; and to be begot(...) by his will in the
word of truth, etc. which may be illustrated by the healing of the strung
Israelites, and Naaman, and the blind man at the Poole of Siloam, only whereas
they had eyes and legs by the ^eative work of God in the womb, and (...) by
natural birth, we here say the spi^ual or inward faculties and capacities of
seeing, hearing and discerning Spiritual things, and so of coming to them by
willing, choosing, and loving them are given by the preventing grace of God
coming to and upon them. But as their power of looking, going, washing being
given of God by a certain power, and then he affording and presenting to them
objects, to look to go to and wash in, wrought upon their wills by moral
persuasions, which were resistible; and some of the stung Israelites, possibly
might resist or disobey; but then they by them being persuaded, and obeying,
looking, going, and washing, as was prescribed, and continuing so to do, God by
his creative power gave them healing, cleansing, and sight. Even so is it here
as has been expressed; I need not inla^g^ to add that God in some measure
having created in Christ, regenerated and renewed men, affords still means of
preserving and maintaining what he has created and renewed, and gives Moral
arguments and Motives, to make use of them. And in their so doing goes on yo^
further to c^eat^ them in Christ, renew and reg^ate them till they be made
complear and perfect, in the day of Jesus Christ, as is also (...) illustrated
by Naamans washing seven times in Jordan, that he might have perfect healing,
of which had he sailed in doing that he would have missed. Search the
Scriptures and see if what is here said suit not with them.

SECT. 4.
That God so works in Men, that they also are said rightly to work sometimes
the same things, though with some formal difference between what is his, and
what their working.

FUrthermore, we may find that the same acts or actions are in Scripture
ascribed to God and to Man; as to purging, cleansing, making the heart new,
etc. tho yet differently and upon diverse accounts. One Scripture says,
Circum^^se your selves to the Lord, and take away the foreskin of the heart,
Jer. 4.4. Another says, The Lord will Circumcise thy heart, and the heart of
thy seed to love the Lord thy God, etc. Deuteronomy. 30.6. One saying, Cast away all
your transgressions and ^ake you a new Heart, and a new Spirit, for why will ye
die, etc. Ezekiel. 38.31. Another says, A new heart will I give you, and a new
Spirit will I put into you, etc. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Some Scriptures say, God and
Christ purify and purge Men, Acts 15.9. Tit. 2.14. Ephesians. 5.25, 26. And others
exhort men to purify and cleanse themselves, and say, that believers have
purified their own hearts by the Spirit in obeying the truth, as 2 Cor. 7.1. 1
Pet. 1.22. The reason of which may be seen in what has been said, for therein
it appears how both work, and that there is an evident distinction between the
manner of their workings to the same effect, and so distint grounds for the
attributions of the same works to both. as

1. God is said to do those things and most properly, in as much as he both
prevents men with his grace, in and by which he capacitates and inables; and
then also incites and stirs men up to do those things, to cleanse, purge, and
wa^ themselves, etc. and men yielding up themselves to him in the grace given
them in his calls and counsels; then his grace and God in and by it works also
in and with them, yea, acts in them the things required of them; and produces
the effects renews their hearts, purifies their Spirit; etc. and yet,

2. Men are said to do the same things inasmuch as through his grace the^ yield
up themselves to God and his grace, to do those things in them, in listening to
him; looking to and waiting upon him in the strength and motion of hi^ grace,
preventing and accompanying them; and in the means he vouchsafes them. And so,
in acting forth by their powers and members the things which grace yielded to,
worket^ in them to will and to do of good pleasure, as that in Deuteronomy. 30 may
clear it, in that it renders the circumcising work of God to love and obey him,
as a consequent work to their being brought in the strength of his preventing
grace (in and with his afflicting them, and again, returning to them to call
and subdue them) afforded to them to listen to his voice and turn to him. And
so also does that in 1 Pet. 1.22. and that in Romans 6.12, 13. and 8.13. Which
speaks of yielding up our Members Weapons and Instruments of Righteousness to
Holiness; of mortifying the deeds of the body by the Spirit: and purifying our
souls by the Spirit in obeying the Truth; clearly implying that both the Man
and the Spirit are Agents differently working together in the same Works. Much
what like as a Scholar and his Master, when the Master guides the Scholars
hand, and by it frames a Letter, the Master does it by the Scholars hand, as an
Instrument or Subordinate Agent; and the Scholar by the Master as the Principal
Agent, Director, Framer, etc. The Scholar yields his hand, and the Master uses
it; even so the Spirit does those things in us by our Faculties and in our
Obedience; and we in obeying the Spirit do them by the strength, power, and
guidance of the Spirit. So as that neither does the Spirit those things in us,
without our compliance and obedience; nor do we no^ can we do them in and of
our selves, but by the Spirit yielded to by us, and leading, strengthening, and
governing of us. Thence the Scripture also represents the believing Man, or Man
called of God, as a third person between two others, calling for his subjection
and obedience, the new Man and the Old; the flesh and the Spirit, the flesh
moves him to give up his mind and members unto it and its motions; and the
Spirit on the contrary challenges them for his and moves, excites and provokes
to his service. If the man yield up to the Flesh, it becomes his Master, and He
its servant framed more into its mind; and if the man through the grace of God
yield up himself to the Spirit, then the Spirit in and by him as his Master
works the works of God; creates him in Christ Jesus to good works, and renews
him more and more by his Divine Power and influence, as is to be seen, Romans
6.11.12, 13, 14. etc. and 8.2.4.12, 13. Gal. 5.16.17, 18. Ephesians. 4.17, 18.20,
21. But yet let this be also minded, that that which God requires of man is not
properly and formally Gods working or operation, no more then the Child's
yielding his hand to his Master, and moving it in his Motion, is properly and
formally his Masters holding and guiding his hand, and framing the Letter with
it. And so neither does God fault men for not doing that of and by themselves,
which is properly the work of his power to do, nor for not doing that that is
properly his operation; but for not doing that which is theirs to do by his
grace afforded them. That is, their not yielding themselves to him and moving
in his Motion; for their two operations are so distinct, Ezekiel. 24.13. Isa.
48.17, 18. Jer. 13.10, 11. Romans 2.4, 5.
as that they may be also separated, and the withdrawing of the one, prevent or
hinder the other; whence God is said to have purged Men and yet they not
purged, to teach Men and yet they not taught by him, to make Men cleave to him,
and yet they not cleave to him, but refuse to hear him: to lead Men to
repentance, and yet they not led of him, inasmuch as God prevented and followed
them with his grace to have moved and provoked them to those things, which yet
they refusing to yield themselves to him in, were not done, the effects of Gods
grace and profit of his teachings missed by them. Which stubbornness of Men in
refusing him and his operations, provokes him to leave them, and then the
things he offers to work, and in some sense is working in them (as the fire
burns under the Pot that purges the Scum from the Water, Ezekiel. 24.3.4, 5.13.
that it might be cast off by the Servant) are never effected nor can be, but
they perish in their Sins. For as God works not such effects in Men, without
their Members and Powers yielded to him, and working instrumentally and
subordinatly under him: So neither can Men work or effect those things in
themselves without God and his Spirit; or he withdrawing from them, which
should provoke us to diligence in listening, and yielding our selves as
obedient Children to him, not quenching his Operations in us, nor provoking him
to wrath against us, least in his wrath he swear against us, Psalm. 95.7.8, 9,
10, 11.
that we shall not enter into his Rest. Or to say as Ezekiel. 24.13. Because I
have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, therefore thou shall be purged no
more till I cause my fury to rest upon thee; needful it is that we be
instructed, or receive his instructions that his Soul leave us not, Jer. 6.8.
Joh. 15.5.
for then, woe to us; For without him we can do nothing.

CHAP. XI.
Some Scriptures considered whence some gather, either that God works all
things good and bad in Men; or so works all that's good, as to Necessitate men's
well-working irresistibly, or so as to confound men's workings with Gods in
them.

SECT 1.
Philip. 2.12, 13. Considered, and that Gods working in Men the to will, and to
do does not necessitate the working out exhorted to.

VErily, what we have said of Gods Operations, might be of use to take the
Apostles counsel, Philip. 2.12, 13. To work out our own Salvation with fear and
trembling, seeing it is God that is the worker in us of the to will, and to do
of good pleasure. The meaning of the Apostle in which also may be understood
(both how God works in us to will, and to do; and how it behooves us therefore
to work out our own Salvation with fear and trembling) by what is already
written. Yet because some do make use of this Scripture, that God so works the
to will, and the to do as to enforce and necessitate the whole working out of
their Salvation in Gods working in them; God working all in them that he
requires of them, so as there is nothing required of them, distinct from his
Operations in them, contrary to what was noted above, I shall therefore take it
into particular consideration. And say.

1. That conceit cannot stand with the Apostles scope in writing, nor the
things employed therein, nor with other Scripture expressions. For,

1. If God so work the to will, and the to do or to be Operative as necessarily
to include the whole working out exhorted to, then was there no need for Paul
to take any care about it, either that they might be blameless or harmless; or
that they might shine as lights, holding forth the word of life: or least he
should run in vain, or labor in vain, concerning them (which seems to be this
scope in thus writing to them, and exhorting them, to lead and help them
forward to such blamelesness, and that he might have fruit in his labors for
them) for none of those things he exhorts to or mentions, as the end of that
his exhortation could possibly be wanting in them, if God so wrought in them
the to will, and the to do as necessarily to effect the^ nor could the thing he
would not have happen come to pass, except God should cease working in them,
and in that case, all his care and writing could do them no good, nor
contribute any the least furtherance to them: nor could they possibly provoke
God to leave them, and withdraw from them his working in them: forasmuch as
during the time of his working in them, the to will, and the to do; they must,
according to that conception of it, both will, and do, and work out their
Salvation; and so there could be nothing to displease him, except the very
inhaerency of corruption in them, and its proper lustings against him, and his
grace; which yet, while God so works, could not hinder God's so working; and so
by consequence, not their working out, he working that also effectually, and
necessarily in his working in them. And therefore why should it, or how can it
be conceived it should move him to cease his working in them? Seeing also that
he imputes it not to men that Sin, is in them, and wars against them; or what
they do by mere force of that; so as it is not they, but Sin that dwells in
them; as is employed, Romans 7.16, 17, 20. and 8.1, 2. Nay, then the Apostles
Exhortation to them had been needless, seeing they could not do otherwise,
though he had not exhorted them, it being supposed. That God did work in them,
the to will, and the to do, what his grace believed moved them to, before this
Epistle came to them much less should he have exhorted them; To have wrought
out their Salvation with fear and trembling; and that upon that account, that
God works in them to will, and do; if his so working in them contain in it, and
necessarily include their working out their own Salvation. For,

2. In so exhorting them, there is employed by him, both that there was
something for them to do, which they had liberty, and power given them to do,
and which was needful for them to do; and also, that there was some
possibility, either by not doing it, or by not doing it so, as they ought; they
might provoke God to displeasure against them, and so to withdraw his workings
in them: Why else should they work out their Salvation with fear and trembling.
But if God's working in them to will and do; do include, and contain within his
proper operation, their very working out to; then is there nothing for them to
be exhorted to; the ground of the Exhortation containing in it, the matter
exhorted to: much less could there be any room for fear or trembling, least
they should grieve him: the possibility of that, being taken away by the manner
of God's working in them, according to that conception; he should according to
that have rather said, Ye must work it out, and cannot but work with much
assurance, and rejoicing; yea, without all fear of any possibility of offending.

3. Nor is it consistent with other Scripture sayings, which mention, the
manner of his operations, or imply it, as that Romans 6.12. Let not sin reign in
your mortal bodies, that ye should fulfill the lusts thereof: neither yield your
selves instruments of unrighteousness to sin, but yield your selves unto God,
for sin shall not have dominion over you, etc. Where the Apostle plainly
implys, That God by his Grace, so takes away the Dominion of Sin, where his
grace is not put away; that sin cannot command and enforce obedience from men;
but yet neither does it so necessitate obedience to it self, and the resistance
of Sin, but that its yet in men's power, (notwithstanding grace, and so Gods
working in them, to will, and to do;) to yield their members to Sin, which is
also working in them, and being yielded to, by them will work in them, to will
and to do, what they ought not: yea, and by so yiedling their Members to it,
they become subject to it, and give it dominion or rule over them; and it is
put upon them, as strengthened, and furnished by grace, to resist Sin, and not
to yield to it: whence such sayings, Abstain from fleshly lusts, have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them: If
ye walk after the flesh ye shall dye, but if by the spirit, ye mortify the
Deeds of the body, ye shall live, etc. Which all imply, the workings of God in
the Believer, to be such as do not so take in, and necessitate men's working,
but that they may possibly Sin against him, and work evil. Yea, why else says
he, Grieve not the holy Spirit of God: if God's workings so included, and
necessitated our workings in his working, that we cannot grieve him. Beside
that, it is an evident case, that the holy men, in whom God by his Grace and
Spirit, did work the to will, and the to do; yet did sin against him: and that
not merely of infirmity, or for defect of his working, but against, and
contrary to his working in them, grieving, and quenching him that wrought in
them, Isa. 63, 10. as in the case of David's sinning. The Scripture speaks, of
the condition of the Believer in this matter, so, as may be fitly represented
by the case of Israel of old, in respect of the Canaanites, when brought into
Canaan; they had the present of God with them, and such furniture of strength,
and defense afforded them thereby, so as they might have kept them under; and
it was their own great neglect of improving the advantage of God's presence and
help with them, who, subdued their Enemies under them, both giving them will
and courage to fight them, and in their Fight, efficacy of subduing them; if
they let, or suffered them to Reign over them: as well as it was great
imprudence, in respect of themselves: yet, they might possibly make Leagues,
and confederate with them; and so provoke God to withdraw from them, and leave
them to their power, so as to become Servants, and Tributaries to them. So it
is with the Believer, God works in him the to will, and the to do, in his
listening to him, and in his strength, and furniture of grace given, he may
mortify Sin, and not let it reign in his mortal Body; yet this grace does not
work so compulsively, and irresistibly, or so to enforce, and work his
obedience to it, as that he cannot neglect it; and by neglecting it,
confederate with Sin, and provoke God to withdraw himself, and leave him to
Sins Dominion. God indeed gives more grace; yea, more than there is naturally
power in envy, or other lusts, in the Carnal Spirit, to make us serve them;
such as by which we might deny them service, and resist them; yea mortify, and
keep them under, though not be without molestation from them, as we would; and
therefore God faults and resists men that yet lift up themselves, and will
serve their proud, or envious humors, Jam. 4.5, 6, 7. So that it seems,
notwithstanding more grace given them, men may possibly yield themselves
servants to their Corruptions, that have less power in them, to enforce their
obedience: yea, and thats' the reason God is displeased with men, that they
serve them; was there not more power in God's grace to help them against them,
then in their corruptions, to inslave them; they would not be so obnoxious to,
or worthy of Wrath from God; but rather would be pitied, and helped by him:
except where having put away more grace, they are inslaved again by their
Corruption, God withdrawing from them. But if God so wrought in men, their
willings, and doings as in the Conception at first mentioned, there could be no
possibility of any believer to fail of doing God's will, but by God's mere
voluntary first-leaving him; no possibility of letting Sin have dominion over
them, or grieving the Spirit; and so neither ground, or need of any of these,
or the like Exhortations.

SECT. 2.
How God works by exhortations, and whether his working in men to will, and to
do is by and through the exhortation to ^k out their Salvation?



and puts in principles seeds or capacitates for Operation. Psalm. 9.10.
He begets in men a will to trust, not by exhorting them merely to trust, but
by declaring his Name and causing them to know it; and then, when he has so
principled them to work or walk, etc. he uses to exhort men in that power and
strength brought to them, and given them, to work or walk and act forth, and by
those exhortations further excites and stirs up and puts forward the will or
the man, to act in those capacities foregiven. And in such exhortations, he
works after the nature of divinely Moral working; that is, by presenting that
to the understanding and judgment which affords rational ground for the willing
and doing what he exhor^ ^o; and therefore also usually before, or however with
those exhortations lays down those grounds and adds such motives which
presented to the understanding, are as proper means to convey motion to the
Soul and excite it to will and do what is exhorted. But now the ground or
motive here used and presented is such, as being interpreted and represented in
the sense objected, destroys the exhortation, and takes away all the motive to
it and ground thereof; so as that the exhortation can be no means to produce
the things exhorted to; upon the account of the ground and motive used to
enforce it as so understood. The exhortation is that they would be always
obedient, and now much more in the Apostles absence, working out their
Salvation with fear and trembling, which may indeed be a means to excite and
stir them up to such diligence and obedience with fear and trembling, i^ with
all they are made to apprehend need, cause and ground for so doing, as to say,
that it being God that works in them to will and to do of good pleasure, there
is danger least by their negligence and carelessness, he may be provoked to
withdraw his operations without which they can do nothing, and so they may fail
of his grace. But to represent such a thing as this to the understanding reason
and judgment, that God does absolutely and infallibly work so in them to will
and to do, that he therein also works their working out completely and
inavoidably, so as to leave no room for, or possibility of their disobedience
or miscarriage in what he requires their working out of, is such a ground of
security, certainty, and impossibility of danger o^ miscarriage, as both takes
away from the understanding all conception of any need of their diligence, and
renders it inconceiveable how they should be negligent or disobedient; and so
leaves no room for their fear and trembling, otherwise then as unavoidably it
may be wrought in them. Again,

2. That in the ground and motive [That it is God that works in you etc.]
being used and laid down as the ground and motive to enforce the exhortation,
as rendering a reason why they ought to be so careful, is as represented by the
Apostle rather the means of making them obedient to the exhortation (as also it
was a means by way of motive to induce the Apostle so to exhort them) then the
exhortation any means by which God works what is asserted in the motive. It is
not God works in you to will and to do by my exhorting you, or because or for
he exhorts you by me to be Obedient. But because its he that works in you to
will and to do, therefore be ye Obedient, and therefore I exhort you work out
your Salvation with fear and trembling; The exhortation might be a means to
excite them to work out, not a means of Gods working in them asserted in the
motive, wherewith he urges the exhortation; the ground of the exhortation is
true in it self, and so asserted and laid down as a thing to be apprehended by
them as true in it self: not depending for its truth upon his exhortation as to
be made true by it (as it must do if the exhortation be the means of it) but as
giving ground for the exhortation and affording motive to obey it because of
its absolute truth. As the foundation of a house is firm before the
superstructure be built upon it; and neither depends upon that, nor is laid by
it, but the superstructure is laid upon it; and it is rather as a way or means
to further the laying of the superstructure, and not the laying of the
superstructure a means of laying the Foundation.

3. If Gods working in them the to will and to do the thing exhorted was by the
exhortation, then not before the exhortation and so not till the Epistle came
to them, and so not in the time when Paul wrote it, and so he wrote false in
saying in the then present time; It is God that works, etc. But if God did
work in them to will and to do of his good pleasure before the Epistle came to
them (as is most unquestionable) then this superadded exhortation was needless
to them, if his working in them was such as infallibly included in it their
working out also; seeing they did it all before and could not but do so, so
long as God continued his working: Which was neither made longer nor shorter by
the Epistle writing (according to that sense espectly) nor depended thereupon,
but was merely of his good pleasure. And if it should be his good pleasure to
cease working in them without their provoking him to it (as to it they could
not by that interpretation provoke him) then was it not possible that they
should work out their Salvation, much less upon the ground propounded by the
Apostle, the truth thereof then failing and without that asserted in the ground
( viz, Gods working in them) his exhortation would avail them nothing; So that
that interpretation renders the exhortation needless both in respect of God,
and in respect of them; in respect of God, for he wrought so before and of good
pleasure. And therefore also in respect of them, seeing he working their
working out so as to effect infallibly their whole operation, they could not
want any exciting thereunto.

4. Yea if God so wrought in them by this Exhortation, the working out their
Salvation would not all the other Exhortations be needless, seeing all that
they exhort to are included herein? Or how ever.

5. Then must this and all other Exhortations be obeyed necessarily, and no
faultiness in believers for not working out their Salvation with fear and
trembling, unless that God first failing, they were left in an incapacity of so
doing (which failing of his also consists not with that interpretation) which
is cross to the Scriptures, as we have seen; These and other like reasons might
be urged against such a sense of the foresaid saying, and against the objection
of Gods so working by the exhortation, let us see then how we are to understand
it.

SECT. 3.
The aforesaid Scripture, viz. Philip. 2.12. Briefly opened.

THe Apostle having after diverse exhortations (as to let their Conversation be
such as becomes the Gospel of Christ, to be like minded, or, to mind the same
thing to have the same love to be of one accord, and of one mind; to do nothing
out of strife, and vain glory; but in lowliness of mind to esteem each other
above themselves, not to mind their own commodity, but each to mind the good of
others, etc.) to provoke them thereunto the more, propounded to them the
example of Christ, his self abasement for our sake, and the great glory he had
thereupon received of and with God; afterward returns again to exhort them
further, even in the consideration of Christ's sufferings for them, and the
great honor and dignity that God had thereupon exalted him to; making him Lord
of all, as they had always obeyed, not only in his presence with them, but now
much more in his absence to work out (or accomplish) their Salvation with fear
and trembling; pressing that exhortation further with this reason or motive,
which seems to have special respect to their working out with fear and
trembling. For it is God that works (or God is the inworker or effectual
worker) in you both of the to will, and to do of good pleasure, or of his good
pleasure; to which he adds, do all things without murmuring and disputing, etc.
So that those words. For it is God, etc. are used as a motive and argument, to
enforce an exhortation given to believers who had already closed with the grace
of God, wherewith he had prevented them, which grace of God may also be
understood by their Salvation: (as sometimes it is called in Act. 28.28. and
the word of it, the word of Salvation. Act. 13.26. Ephesians. 1.13.) to be wrought
out by them for that received and believed in their hearts, was operative and
was framing or working in their hearts, to frame them in heart and Conversation
unto God, to which therefore he exhorts them to yield themselves to work, in
its working both to will, and to do; so working out and finishing what that
effected, and gave them power and motion to in its Operation, and this with
fear and trembling; least they should by neglect or restraint of it grieve,
that good Spirit of Grace working by and in it, or mix something of their own
with it; or work out their corruption with or instead of it. And that upon this
account, because, what the Salvation or grace of God is working in men, it is
God that works it, who is greatly to be feared and reverenced; and with fear
and trembling, to be obeyed and served. And the phrase, it is God that works
in you to will (or to be willing as (...) is rendered 2 Cor. 8.10, 11.) and to
do (or to be operative and effectual) of good (or of his good) pleasure may be
thus understood, viz.

1. With reference to his preventing Operations, if we should apply it also to
them (as there are Operations preventing believers, in what they are) to do, as
well as to other men, to bring them to believe; but to oary it even to those
that respect men's first closing with Christ also, though the Apostle writs not
to such here, as were yet first to close with him, we might understand such a
saying applicable to such persons.) Thus,

1. God by his preventing grace in the means afforded, is operating and working
or drawing your hearts to mind and listen to him, and to Christ as set forth by
him, and to be not only willing but actual and effectual doers of his word, in
yielding up to attend upon him; in the means vouchsafed. Therefore seeing it is
God that is moving and working in you to will, and to do those things, and he
does so work of Good-pleasure; its his love to you leads him so to work, and he
is at liberty to cease so to work, and may do it if provoked by your
resistances; and then you can do nothing to purpose, therefore in his inclining
your wills to himself, do you yield up to him; and in his exciting, stirring,
and inwardly working you to do and walk forth in his ways, in which he is
waiting to be gracious to you, do ye yield up your Members to obey him. And
this with fear and trembling, least you provoke him that works in you these
things, to withdraw his Operations, and then ye can do nothing that will avail
you. Or,

2. Its God that is working or works in you the to will, and to be operative or
to do. Its he that frames the heart to believe and love, and to be full of
Spiritual inward Motions, and efficacies, and to walk forth in them; Men can do
none of these things of themselves, but God does work these things in men's
hearing and learning of him, in such means as he does afford in his Church, or
Sion; every one that hears and learns of the of the Father comes to Christ, to
him he gives the (...) the power and act of believing, frames the heart to
trust in him, and fills him with effectual operations; but he does it in their
attention to God, in the means directed to by him, such as is listening to the
Apostles Doctrine, and obeying their wholesome Counsels. Therefore be ye
obedient to those outward instructions, and yield up to follow him in such ways
as in which he so works; Be swift to hear, Slow to speak, Jam. 1.18, 1^.
etc. seeing God willing begets men by the word of Truth. And as our Savior
says, Murmur not, lift not up yourselves in your own Wisdom and strength of
reason to oppose him or to wave and wind out from his teachings; seeing no man
can come to Christ but by the Fathers drawing him, in and by his teachings
afforded in the Ordinances, and ways of instruction vouchsafed in Sion
(especially) he that hears and learns comes to him. So the Apostle afterward,
do all things without murmuring or disputing, verse. 14. and this with fear and
trembling, least ye fail of the grace of God and deprive you selves of that
work of Regeneration, without which no Salvation, and so I labor in vain in
respect of you, as verse. 16. But,

2. With reference to his working in believers, already in some measure
pertakers of his grace, and so that have it working in them (as it is as I said
before properly directed to such.) The Apostle then instructs them, that what
that Grace or Salvation working in them wrought, it was God that wrought it,
either for making them willing, or operative and effectual, and therefore he
would have them act that forth with fear and trembling, and so work out their
Salvation. As if ye should say quench not, nor grieve the Spirit of God that is
working in you the will to do good; and then assisting and working the act when
ye are willing, withdraw not your selves or members from it, for it is God who
is a consuming fire, and working of good pleasure is so much the more to be
awfully obeyed, least his love provoked to anger and jealousy, it go ill with
you. He that has made his Son Lord of all is of his good pleasure working in
you to be obedient willingly to this Lord, even by that Grace received and
believed by you. See then that with reverence and trembling ye submit to him,
and work out your salvation.

The Apostle in all this implies, that God so works in men the will and deed,
as that the men may put a stop to his working by withdrawing or consulting with
their carnal reason and affections, and so grieving of him. As also the Apostle
John supposes the same in 1 John 3.17. He that has this Worlds Goods, and
sees his Brother have need, and shall shut up the bowels of his compassion,
how dwells the love of God in him? where he implies, that the love of God
dwelling in the heart, will upon sight of a Brothers need, move the bowels of
compassion, and open them in a man that has wherewith to relieve him; will be
working upon his will to be willing, and put him forward to do what it moves
to, i. e. to relieve him; yet that man imprisoning that love of God; and not
letting it dwell richly in him, and as the ruler over him, may shut up the
bowels of his compassion; and do little or nothing for him; contrary to which
the Apostle exhorts here to work out and do what that salvation and grace leads
to, because it is God that moves and works in its operations.

Corinthians, in 2 Cor. 8.10, 11, etc. Titus too to come with it to them to
provoke and further them in it; and as he had begun so to finish in them the
same Grace, verse. 6. yea, and another Brother with him, lest he should be
ashamed of what he had boasted of them in Macedonia, touching their
forwardness, and uses diverse arguments to stir them up to go on with what they
had begun, and to do it cheerfully in that and the following Chapter. By which
it appears that God so works the will and the deed, that men themselves may be
said to begin and finish them in his operation. Yea, and not only the men
themselves that will and do, but others also may by way of instrumentality and
motive be said to begin and finish the same too, by diverse kinds of
efficiencies and operations. But how could either the one or the other be said
to begin and finish the to will, and the to do, if they were only patients in
them, and God wrought and effected the whole business in them, and that so
irresistably as that they could not but be effected in them; yea, and what need
of taking care lest they should be backward in effecting what God absolutely
effects and works wholly in them, and out by them too, as the conception I
oppose herein conceives of him. God then has so his efficiency and operation
in men to move and act them to will and to do as that men also have a
subordinate efficiency too; yea, and so as they may so listen to corruption and
temptation as to hinder and not work out the intendment of Gods operation in
them. He may purge and yet they not be purged, as was before showed; So that
need, notwithstanding Gods working in us to will and to do, yea therefore the
rather to be exhorted to work out their own Salvation with fear and trembling.

SECT. 4.
Isa. 43.14. Considered, and what some collect there from.

AGainst what I have here said, touching the resistibility of Gods working in
Men, and men's stopping or smothering it, some oppose that in Isa. 43.14. where
God says, I will work, and who shall let it, whence they draw a general
conclusion, that whatsoever God works in an^ man, cannot be let or hindered.
But to that I say, its good to mind the scope of the Scriptures we allege and
hold to what they properly speak of, and therein we cannot so easily miscarry.
Now its evident that that place in Isa. 43. speaks not of his working in men by
his gracious operations we are speaking of, but of his delivering his people
Israel, who were precious in his sight, and honorable, out from their temporal
bondages under their enemies as the Chaldees and Babylonians, and so from the
people of the North and South, etc. as both the Verses before and after show;
and of that he says, He will so work and effect it, that none shall let or
hinder it, but maugre all oppositions of Men and Devils, he would accomplish
it. Even as he did bring them out of Egypt, mangre the malice of Pharaoh and
the Egyptians to hinder it: but what is this to the business in hand? the
operations of the grace and truth of God in men, and so of God in and by them.
We deny not but that what ever God will work and effect absolutely engaging
thereto his omnipotency and power to effect it, be it in men or about men, it
shall not, nor can be let. The things that fall under his absolute Decrees,
and in and to which he is resolved to engage his omnipotency absolutely, there
is no letting or hindering thereof; but that I deny to be the way of Gods
working by his grace and truth, ordinarily in Men: but upon condition, by the
failings or obstinancy rather of men in not yielding to which, that which God
conditionally offered to work, and that he was in such ways working may be and
often is hindered, and men become as vessels broken upon the wheel, as God is
framing or working of them, as in Jer. 18.3, 4. he prevents with grace, and
moves and excites men to hear and listen to him, and in so doing would work in
them all his good work, and in that way he would so work too as none should let
him; as he wrought so upon Naaman in his washing in Jordan: but men may (and
often do) not hear nor listen to him, or having begun in the Spirit, they abide
not therein, but turn away from him; and so by observing lying vanities forsake
their own mercies, as is evident, Psalm. 81.10, 11, 12, etc. where God bids
them, having set them at liberty, open their mouths wide and he would fill
them; in which he was moving them to listen to him, but they refusing deprived
themselves of what he would have done for them; for he would (he says) have
subdued their enemies and sed them with the finest of the Wheat, had they
hearkened to him; which, because they did not hearken, they had not effected
for and in them; so in Jer. 13.11. he says, he had caused Israel to cleave to
him as the girdle cleaves to the loyn^ of a man, even the whole House of
Israel, and the whole House of Judah, that they might be to him for a people,
and for a name, and for a praise; and yet they refusing to hear, never attained
thereto, but became as a girdle marred^ good for nothing. So that tho so far as
God works absolutely in men is wrought, nor can any man hinder its being so,
yet men may provoke him to undo what he has wrought in many things, and to
take away what he has given them, and may hinder themselves of what he tenders
to work further, and would certainly work so as none should hinder it, did they
hearken to him, and walk in his way prescribed to them by him; of this I say,
men may hinder themselves by their refusing to hearken to him, as the forecited
Scriptures clearly hold forth, as may be seen by any that can understand them.

SECT. 5.
Psalm. 110.3. Considered, and what some conclude from it.

MAny allege that of the Psalmist, in Psalm. 110.3. to prove God's irresistible
and infrustrable manner of working in bringing in some to God: the words are,
Thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy power in the beauties of
holiness, etc. The words may rather be read, Thy people free will offerings in
the d^y of thy power in the beauties of holiness, etc. ^mely, shall bring, or
shall be or yield themselves free will offerings; there is no mention there of
any compulsive irresistible bringing them in, but rather of a free, willing
running to him, and offering themselves to him in the beauties of holiness, the
Sanctuary, that is, Christ according to the truth, this the posture of ^s
people in the day of his power or ar^es. Now most certain it is, that those who
are Christ's people, given to him of the Father, (that is, that hear and learn
of him in his teaching them and glorifying Christ to them, as those two are put
for the same thing in substance, in Joh. 6.37, 40, 45, 65.) they come
voluntarily, willingly, and freely to Christ, and offer free will offerings to
him in the day of his power or armies: that is of his being glorified at God's
right hand and in the Gospel, which is the power of God to the salvation of
those that believe or credit it; and to the making them free and willing to
serve him, Romans 1.16. and so in the day of his armies and companies going forth
to propagate his Name and fight the good fight of Faith, his people, those that
stand on his side and for him offer themselves freely. Nay further, it is
granted, that no man makes himself willing to serve Christ, but they that come
to him; his people are made free by his power working in his Gospel published
to them, his truth set before them and abiding by them, as in that of John
8.30, 31, 32. If ye continue in my words, (that is, hearing and receiving or
minding them) then are ye my disciples (that is, his people) indeed; and ye
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free: (set you at liberty
from the love of sin and the world, etc. to serve and walk with God in holiness
and righteousness, and so offer up your selves free will offerings to God.)
Which place fitly expounds the other; and yet clearly shows, that that is a
consequent operation of God following upon men's receiving and continuing in the
truth, preventing them, and so becoming his people, in which they are more made
his or given up to him, and so is propounded conditionally to such as do but
begin to credit the truth and listen to it, agreeing with that in John 6.44,
45. No man can come to me, except the Father, who has sent me, draw him. As it
is written in the Prophets, And they (that is, Sion's children, the waiters
upon God in the Doctrine given forth in Sion, Isa. 54.13.) shall all be taught
of God. Every one therefore that hears and learneth of the Father (that is,
thy people) shall come to me, shall be a willing people. Agreeable also to
that, is Hos. 6.3. Then shall we know if we follow on to know, etc. And Isa.
55.5, 6. Thou shall call a Nation that thou knew not, and a Nation that knew
not thee, shall run after thee, (shall be willing or voluntaries) because of
the Lord thy God, and for the holy one of Israel, for he shall glorify thee.
Seek ye the Lord, while he maybe found, and call upon him, while he is nigh,
etc. As if he should say, The glory of Christ discovered in his calls, by the
Father's teaching, being beheld, shall make people willing and free to follow
Christ; they that know or take notice of his Name, will trust in him; seek
therefore to know that Name or discern that Glory, etc. This may indeed show
what we have noted before, that they that yield up to the counsels and calls of
God, afforded with his preventing operations, and so look or listen to Christ,
and God in Christ, shall find the creative power of God framing their hearts to
the love of Christ, and causing them to run freely after him; yea that hinders
not but that men to whom those preventing operations are afforded, may resist
and wind out from the counsels and teachings of God therewith given them, and
so frustrate themselves of the creative operations that follow upon men's not so
resisting. Isa. 53.1.
They that believe not the report, prove not the arm of the Lord; that is, to
be met with therein by men. Naaman not washing in Jordan, had not felt the
power of God to heal him. Some I know urge that of Luke 14.23. Compel them to
come in. But that being spoken to the servants, as to be their act, can
signify no more than a more earnest urgency with men on their parts, and
cannot enforce the signification of any compulsive, irresistible working of
God, and therefore I shall not further insist upon it.

SECT. 6.
1 Cor. 4.7. Considered, and Men's Collections from it.

SOme, from that saying of the Apostle, Who makes thee to differ, 1 Cor. 4.7.
or what have thou that thou have not received? And if thou have received it,
why do thou then boast? argue, that it is and must be some more special
irresistible grace of God afforded to some men more than to others, that
working irresistibly differences them, in point of believing, from others, upon
whom God does not so irresistibly work; and that they received from God their
very doing better, as to hearing and learning, than others; which if God had
given to others as well as to them, the^ would have done, yea must necessari^
have done as well as they. But here again, Men mind not that they swerve from
the Apostles scope and business, and wrest or carry his words from the thing he
treats about: which is not of men's hearing the Word of God, and giving heed to
him in the means of Grace, (though that also is of God) but of believers
difference in their gifts and receipts of Gifts from God; by occasion of which
some were apt to be puffed up above others; and some for one, who had greater
Gifts, against another, who had less, as appears clearly in the former Verse.
To these he says, even to them who had more excellent Gifts, Who made thee to
differ or excel? What have thou? What Gift or Excellency, that thy Brother has
not, which thou have not received? And if thou have received it, why do thou
then boast or pride thy self of it, as attributing it to thy self, and lifting
up thy self above thy brother by it? This is clearly and evidently the scope of
the Apostle in that place; which being kept to, we cannot err by occasion of
his words. But if we will take his words and carry them from their scope, we
may perchance through our reason fall into mistakes; as if we should thence
argue, that we have no cause or ground any of us to commend one man's diligence
in the use of his talent, and fault another man's slothfulness; or that the
slothful ought in like manner to be excused or not blamed as the other that
has less Gifts, though diligent in them; because as the one man's less Gifts
proceed from God's good pleasure to give him less, (as but two talents when
another has five) so the other man's slothfulness in like manner proceeded from
God's good pleasure too, that pleased not to give him such diligence as another
has. Surely he that minds the Scriptures, would see such an use of those words
as so to argue from them to be but an abuse of them. And so If we should thence
conclude, that God made Adam to differ from himself by falling from his created
innocence; or suppose there had been another man every way as perfect as Adam,
and no more free and able to stand than Adam, and every way alike tempted and
assisted as he, must he needs have fallen as Adam did? if so, then how had Adam
power to have stood? and how was his fall merely wilful and voluntary? nay how
can it be looked upon otherwise than as necessitated by defect of Grace on
God's part, or by his providence ordering a temptation to him above his
strength, and against which he could not stand? which would certainly involve
God as the necessary cause of his sinning, and much take off from the clear
equity of his Justice in so severely punishing him and us in him. But if we say
such a man, so supposed, might by the same Grace that Adam had have stood, a^
Adam also himself might; then who i^ that case had made the difference, the one
standing, and the other falling, had it not been merely Adam abusing the Grace
given and listening to the tempter that should have made himself differ both
from the other and from what himself was before? It seems clear to me too, that
men in the same state may act differently, and in their different acting God
may make the better acter differ in his state: As of two men equally wounded,
and equally every way assisted and furnished, and moved to look to the brazen
Serpent, the one might do better than the other; as suppose by the same power,
that one abused running from the brazen Serpent, the other yielding to the same
motive and motion afforded to both might have looked to it, and then the brazen
Serpent, or God in and by it might make the difference between them as to their
state, healing the looker to it, when as the other running away was not healed:
without which healing act of God their different actings had done nothing to
the differencing one from the other as to their condition. Sure it is better
walking in God's way, than in our own: for in God's way we may expect to find
God making us to differ both from our selves and others that refuse his way to
walk in their own, though yet neither can we walk in God's way, the use of his
means in any right manner, without his preventing Grace inabling and moving us
thereunto, and his assisting Grace helping us therein.

As for the other part of the collection that men receive from God their doing
better, the Scripture mentioned gives no ground for it, because it says not,
What do thou, that thou have not received; though in a sound sense, speaking
of good actions, it may be truly so said, according to that in the Philippians,
before spoken to. It is God that works in you to will and to do; the
strength, virtue, power, motive, motion to do what is good, and assistance in
doing it we have from God, without which we could not do it; yet so as it may
be man's voluntary, unnecessitated act, at least as to some kind of acts as to
the means of Grace. Nor may such a voluntary acting in the strength of God's
Grace, give him any ground of boasting, no more than a poor man has cause to
boast, that when a rich man offered him Gold, and moved him to receive it, yea,
took him by the lame, dead hand, and brought it to receive it; he did not
wilfully pluck it from him, or by some unworthy show of his reluctance against
him, provoke him to let go his hand, and so to deprive himself of the Gift he
gave him; or that after diverse attempts to pluck away his hand; yet at length,
through his persuasion, yielded it to him. Such a man might say, he did better
than another that threw it away, or persisted in his obstinacy so to do, but no
cause to boast of himself, either that he has more than another that received
something as well as he, what it pleased the same rich man to give him, though
not so much, because he had his more, not from his better act of receiving, but
merely from the rich man's gift, who, if he had pleased, might have given him
less, and the other more, (which is the case the Apostle there speaks to) or
that he has what another threw away and might have had, would he have received
it and not been so obstinate: He may say, he did better indeed, and so he did;
and so do they that hear and learn of the Father, better than they who like the
deaf Adder, stop their ears and will not hear; but that he did it, he may thank
the Donor, who would have him accept his kindness, and persuaded him to it: and
that the other did not so, ^e may fault himself, and may worthily be faulted
both by the Donor and by others that did better; who also shall rise up in
judgment with him and condemn him, for that oft-times with less persuasion and
motive they did better than he that refused to do well, though upon more
persuasion and stronger motive, as Matthew. 12.40, 41, 42, 43. Though yet that
God may and does prevent some with more Grace than others, and more powerfully
than others, yea more early, and with more absoluteness of bringing off from
and drawing over all oppositions from them than others, may, for ought I
perceive, be true and truly granted, it being at least possible and probable,
God being at liberty to distribute the dispensations of his Grace and gracious
Operation as he pleases. Yea, I conceive, we may see evident difference between
his dealings in that respect with Jeremiah, John the Baptist, Paul, and some
others, ordained by him to be choice Instruments in his hand for others good,
and many other believers. But though that be so, yet that that is his ordinary,
constant manner of working in all that are prevailed with to believe, is not
thereby proved or evidenced, much less do any of the Scriptures mentioned
evince it.

SECT. 7.
1 Cor. 12.6. Considered, and what some argue from that, and therein, whether
sin be merely a privation.

LAstly, Some from that saying of the Apostle in 1 Cor. 12.6. That it is the
same God that works all in all, infer, That God not only works and
effects in men all their good actions, so as necessarily to include, and by
way of necessitation; to effect and produce all their operations in them too,
but also some further carry it to all the actions of all creatures good and
bad, even to the very works of the Devil and the flesh in men; saying, that all
actions, even the actions of sin too are wrought in men by God, and so are of
God: which Error in both branches of it they run into by running from the scope
of the Apostle, in the said Chapter, in which he is not speaking of all
Creatures, much less of all the Actions of all Creatures, but of Spiritual
Things and Persons: whence the Title of the Chapter is, (...): Concerning the
Spirituals; Spiritual Persons, or Persons endued with the Spirit, and Spiritual
Gifts. Concerning these, he says, There are differences of operations, ((...))
of miraculous workings, as after it signifies in Verse 10. or efficacious
workings of God, in and with his Gifts and Administrations: which operations,
though different, yet he says are of one God, who works all (or all those
things, (...)) in all; namely, in all those Spiritual Persons and Gifts, and
Administrations, or also in all toward and unto whom those Gifts and
Administrations and Operations are vouchsafed; as there are in and by his
Gifts, and in the exercise and administration of them in some, operations of
convincement in others of conversion, in others of comfort, etc. all which
things one and the same God works in all, in whom they are wrought: that seems
to be plainly the sense of the Apostle, and not that God works
necessitatingly all the good things men act forth, so as necessarily to cause
them, as their going to the places of his Worship, their hearing, reading, etc.
but all those things effected and wrought in their attending on him in his
administrations, and by his operations effected in them; much less, that he
works all men's evils, evil Thoughts, Lusts, Blasphemies, Adulteries, etc. as
some thence strain; which is plain Blasphemy, and directly opposite to that of
the Apostle James, James 1.13. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted
of God, for he is not to be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. And
to that in Psalm 5.4. Thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness; or,
Thou are a God that willest not iniquity. I know that such men, as so wrest
that passage, seek to justify or excuse God again, (or themselves for their
Blasphemy rather) by saying, that sin is nothing but a privation. Which if so,
then is it not properly a Work or Operation, but rather a ceasing to operate,
or a removal of his operations; as darkness is properly no operation, but a
removal or bare absence of the operation of the light inlightning; nor does
darkness operate any thing, though by occasion thereof Creatures may operate
amiss, or operate something upon themselves, as by imagination, fears, etc. but
surely sins are more than mere privations, yea, sins of omission are not simply
the not doing, but the omitting or willing neglect to do what ought, or when a
thing ought to be done: much more are actual sins of commission, operations,
entities, and beings; such as the setting the heart upon covetuousness, loving
the World; in which is not only a privation of the love of God, but a position
of the affections due to God upon the World; and so in Adultery, Murder,
Blasphemy, which if they be not operations positively, than are there no
workers of iniquity, much less can God be the worker or operator of them: but
not to insist upon the confutation of a thing so openly repugnant to the
Scriptures, and to Sense and Experience, and of so great a Blasphemy, as the
making God the Author and Worker of those things the workers where of he hates:
which affection, or disaffection rather, is not imaginably possible to be in
him toward himself, as it must needs be, if he be a worker; yea, the great
worker of them all, in all Men and Devils too; he working all their workings of
them, as that Blasphemy, abominable to be conceived or uttered, implies. The
foresaid passage speaks evidently of the workings of God in all the Members of
Christ, who are therefore afterward compared to the natural body, animated and
acted by one spirit of life; and it speaks of the spiritual operations in them
all, that they are wrought of God, and not of operations sinful and Diabolical,
though if we do carry it to all natural and animal operations, rightly, simply,
and as regularly such, it may truly also be extended so far in a sober sense,
that they are wrougth by and in the strength, power and motion given them of
him; yet so as that they are either natural or voluntary operations of the
creatures too, according to the natures that he has given them; and as
touching voluntary operations are such and so upon the will of the rational
creature, as not to necessitate its action, or divest it of the power he has
given it and preserves in it, for choosing or refusing freely, objects
propounded to it, without his necessitating its determination: so as that it is
commendable in its choice, and faulty in its refusal of such good objects as
are propounded to its choice and election. But I shall proceed no further in
this Discourse about God's Operations.

The sum of it is, That all the good that is wrought in us, it is of God, in
and by such means and ways as he pleases to afford us, and in such a way as
seems good to him and to the counsel of his own will; yea, and all the good
wrought by us, it is of and in and from him, yet so as we are therein acters
with and under him; free and voluntary agents. And all the evil wrought in us
is of Satan and our own Wills, contrary to the approvement or likement of God,
though not without his sufferance, which his sufferance is also approved by
him: and so we may say of all the evil wrought or acted by us; yea, and that
oft-times he does not only suffer men to do evil, and and to have evil things
wrought in them; but also does wisely and holily deliver or yield up men to
Satan and their own Lusts, either in part for their own correction and others
admonition, or else wholly to their own destruction and other men's warning. And
lastly, That the good he works in us, he works it diversely, according to
his good pleasure, both as to means and power exercised with and by the means
for working it, as has more largely been explicated; so as in many he
certainly and effectually overcomes their hearts to believe in him and abide
with him in the Faith, when others are not so overcome by his Grace; yet so as
he neither offers violence or force to the wills of the one, nor is defective
or wanting to the other; but that as the salvation of the one is of him in a
way of their willing and free obedience, so the destruction of the other is of
themselves, in, and as the just reward of, their own voluntary, unnecessitated
disobedience.

To which I shall add nothing further, but only some brief Conclusions from the
whole distinction, as thus largely in the several Branches of it spoken to,
with some Positions about the Grace of God and Freedom of Will in the
Conversion of Men; And last of all, Some brief hints of some Uses naturally
resulting from the whole Treatise, and the several Heads of Considerations
therein, which may offer the profit of it to our Minds and Meditations.

CHAP. XII.
Concludes this Treatise, Byway of 1. Conclusions, 2. Positions, 3. Heads of
Uses,
briefly laid down therein.


SECT. I.
Some brief Conclusions drawn from the Premises in this Distinction as hitherto
opened.

COnclude we at length this large Discourse, Conclus. 1.
and to that purpose first.

From what we have said about this Distinction and the several Branches of it,
we shall lay down these following Conclusions.

1. That the Truth of the Gospel, Doctrine or Object of Faith praedicable to
all men, is not to be measured or judged of by the diversity of the
Dispensations of it, and operations or things effected with or by it; or of the
purposes of God for such dispensing it, and working with and by it: or thought
there be difference, as to manner or measure or both in them, yet the Doctrine
in it self is nevertheless as to the Object or Medicine prepared for men and
the fullness in him the same for all men; and so is God's love in preparing him
one the same: so as no ground for questioning of, or much less concluding
against God's love to all, or the object or remedy being for all, because all
have not the same dispensations and operations therethrough afforded them. For,

1. Some that have no dispensations of revelation here of it, nor any operation
discernable to, or affirmable by us, may be and shall be saved by virtue of the
Object or Medicine prepared for them, as Infants dying in their infancy, 2 Samuel
12.13. Jer. 31.29, 30. Matthew. 19.14. and I think no body will conclude Idiolism
or Deafness from the Cradle, a sign of Reprobation, but rather, that where
Christ speaks nothing to men, or does nothing amongst them, he will not impute
sin to them, Joh. 15.22, 24. though yet he may do more to those kind of persons
than we wot on.

2. If some that have none, than much more such as have less dispensation and
operation than others may be saved; even when they that have much more, abusing
them, shall perish, as the Apostle says, If the umcircumcised do by nature,
(that is, without added instrustion from the Law) the things contained in the
Law, (the Doctrine of God) shall not his uncircumcision be counted
circumcision? And on the contrary, the man to whom more was purposed and
dispensed, both for means and operations in the means, breaking the Law, (not
obeying and yielding up to these more instructions and operations) his more
shall not profit him, but aggravate his condemnation; for God is no respecter
of persons, but in every Nation he that fears God and works righteousness
(have he more or less dispensations or operations) shall be accepted of him.
His distributions may be unequal or not alike, and yet he deals equally and
according to one rule in his Retributions, respecting or accepting men, not
according to what they had or received from him and he did to and in them, but
according to their receipt and improvement of what he gave them, Romans 2.25, 26,
27. Acts 10.34. 2 Cor. 5.10. Yea,

3. Many first shall be last, and the last first. Many first in means, least in
their acceptance of Gods grace in and through those means, and so by
consequence, in Gods gracious acceptance. And many last or least in means,
first in acceptance both of the grace of God in their hearts, and so in their
being accepted of and by God in their persons. A Prophet is not without honor,
but in his own Country, where they may have most of him. Naaman seeks out and
accepts the Prophet Elisha, though a stranger to him, and was healed by him;
and the poor Widow of Zarepta believes and entertains Eliah as a man of God,
and was sustained she and her family by him, when the generality of the Leapers
and Widows of Israel scarce regarded them: the Gentiles will often hear
acceptably, what the Jews, to whom the salvation of God was first and chiefly
sent, reject and make nothing of, Acts 28.28. Matthew. 8.10, 11, 12. Luke 4.24,
25, 26, 27. Matthew. 19.30. and 20.16.

2. Diversities of dispensation and operation, Conclus. 2.
and so of purpose for dispensations, are diverse testifications of the same
love that wrought in God, to prepare the object or remedy therein testified of.
Some do more fully and eminently testify it than others, and the fuller do
more abundantly privilege, honor and engage to obedience those to whom they
are vouchsafed, than the less do; yet that diversity clashes not with, but
diversely flows from and testifies to the universality of the love and grace of
God, even the same grace that the Doctrine of the Gospel (the object of Faith
mediately) speaks forth unto men; yet so as those that have the fuller means of
the testification of that grace may be said to be more loved and honored (as
well as (yea therefore) more engaged to Faith and Obedience) as to the
streamings forth of that love, and thereby vouchsafement of advantages for
salvation, than other men. As God's peculiar purposes to Jacob, Jeremiah, and
John Baptist, yea and to the Jews, and the vouchsafements accordingly given
them, argued them more loved than other people to whom such vouchsafements were
not given, not as love signifies either God's approvement of them in their
personal consideration in themselves, or provision of a remedy for them as
falled, or good will to save them more than others in their submission to him;
but as to the giving forth more clear demonstrations of his love and therein
choicer honor, and means to be brought to know and submit to him, and to be
instruments of bringing in others thereto also, Luke 12.48.
Mal. 1.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 78.67, 68. and 87.2. Exodus 19.4, 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 4.23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 37. and 7.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. but then as he gave the more to
them, he required the more again of them; nor stood their justification in
their having or doing more, but in one and the same Righteousness provided for
and given to all men, Romans 3.22. and 5.18. in whom any other believing, though
not so peculiarly honored and privileged, and in that sense loved as they,
should and might be equally accepted and justified with them; and out of whom
none of them could be justified more than any other men out of him. The like
may be said of diversities of dispensations of gifts and operations to
believers after their believing, as the making some Apostles, some Prophets
some Evangelists, etc. they might be sai^ to be more loved, as to the addition^
dispensation of honor and priviledg^ and yet but alike and on the same ter^
accepted with others not so lifted up as (...) their approbation in the same
Beloved.

3. Conclus 3.
That though some men were more peculiarly favored and privileged as to
dispensations and operations for bringing them in to God, and fitting them to
his mind, that they might be made more choice instruments for the public good
of others, by a stronger and more efficacious and unresistible way of working
(as without all controversy, Jesus Christ, as Man of the Seed of David, was in
a peculiar way, above all flesh, dignified for the good of all men, and so John
the Baptist, his forerunner, Jeremiah, and some others, in a more eminent way
than the generality of other men, as called and chosen to be choice instruments
of good to many others) yet nevertheless it follows not, that the generality of
God's people or chosen ones, were people so fore-known and purposed to be by
some more special, irresistible way brought in to God and preserved with him,
by such grace as for the want of which the rest must needs perish because
denied to them.

4. That though the Universalists, Conclus. 4.
so called, do deny the foresaid apprehension of the Particularists or Limiters
of the Grace of God, as in the close of the foregoing Conclusion is rejected,
yet it fol^ows not, that they must needs be Aequa^ists, as to matter of
dispensation, or ope^ation, or purpose thereabouts, according to Arithmetical
proportion or even^ess, for they grant, as has been showed, That,

1. There are diversities of dispensations to and operations in and upon
Unbelievers to bring them to believe, not all so openly called by the Gospel as
some, not all Persecutors so struck down as Saul, not so strangely and strongly
prevented; yea, it is remarkable, as to this, that there is difference between
the first setting up the Name and Church of God amongst people, and his
after-drawings thereto. In the first setting up a place for his Name, or making
known his Truth and Worship, God went forth with stronger hand and stranger
works for evidencing his Truth and manifesting Himself, that people might more
clearly know where to seek him and wait upon him, than afterward, when he had
made such discoveries of himself and of the places and people where his Name
more gloriously dwelt. As in bringing in Israel to himself at first, and taking
them for to be a peculiar people for his Name, he went forth more gloriously
with Signs and Wonders and mighty Works, confirming his Truth and manifesting
his Church and himself in it than afterward; as expecting, that when he had set
up a Church, and discovered, as it were, the place of his residence, people
should after ward resort to him upon the account (...) his first discoveries,
though all und^ those dispensations and mighty operation in and amongst them,
received not hi^ Grace alike. So also when he first glorified his Son Jesus, as
come in the flesh, and upon the Jews rejecting him, took out of the Nations a
people for his Name, that so (and there) the residue of men might seek him, he
bare witness to his truth and people by more glorious evidences and
demonstrations from Heaven by many Signs and Wonders and Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, than since he has done, (as Acts 2.22, 23. and 15.14, 15, 16, 17. with
Verse 12. Heb. 2.4, 5.) as expecting, that all after-ages, his truth and people
being so discovered, should resort and cleave to those truths and ordinances to
which he has given so clear testimony that they be his, though neither did all
under those dispensations receive his Grace alike.

2. It is dispensations to and operations in believers are not all in that
sense equal or alike; to some even of them is more given, to some less, and in
some he works more and otherwise than in others, distributing to and working in
every one according to his good will, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6, 7. yea, and as Christ
on earth was pleased to manifest more love and endearedness in more choice ways
to some of his Disciples than others; as it is said Jesus loved Martha and Mary
and Lazarus with a kind of intimated emphaticalness, John 11.5. and John is
called his beloved Disciple, John 13.23. so he yet pleases to love some
believers more than others as to manifestations of love and love-secrets to
them and to the making them of or fitting them for more usefulness to men;
Though,

3. His dispensations to and operations in all believers as such, are of more
special and choice favor (though perhaps not with so great outward means and
privileges in means as to some) than to and in other men not believing. His
operations in them may be with less strife and wrestling with them than in
those that believe not, because he finds less reluctance usually. The more
grace is got into and is retained by any one with the more facility he is
usually led; as Prove. 2.10, 11. Psalm. 119.32. I will run the ways of thy
Commandments (says David) when thou shall have enlarged my heart; but yet his
dispensations and operations are of a more owning, approving and justifying
nature and of more sweet and comfortable concernment to them than to any others.

4. Yea, we assert his liberty in general to make of the same lump one Vessel
to honor and another to dishonor, as in the case of Jacob and Esau, one to be
highly privileged, and another of the same lump to be for meaner employment
and service, and yet so as may stand with real love to both; so as that he is
ready to accept the vessels of dishonor in their submission to his government
and seeking him as Grace is afforded; as an Edomit^ might find room in the
third generation to be admitted into the Lord's Congregation, to be united with
the honored Nation, Deuteronomy. 23.7, 8. Yea, if any man cleanse himself from
pollution by the Grace afforded him, he shall be a vessel of honor fitted for
the Master's use, 2 Timothy 2.20, 21. Vessels of dishonor may be made vessels of
mercy and honor too, Jer. 18.4, 5, 10, 11. When as vessels of honor lifting
up and abusing themselves in their honor may be made vessels of wrath and
dishonor, as in the Angels that fell, and as in Jer. 9.25, 26. and and 22.24.
Though Coniah were a signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck him thence,
etc. Such our apprehension and judgment, according, as we conceive, to the
Scriptures alleged. So that though we be Universalists in asserting God's
grace in Christ for and to all, and Equalists in asserting the equity of his
dealings with all, yet we be not Equalists in asserting like Dispensations and
Operations as to measure, manner or continuance afforded to all. Thus for the
Conclusions.

SECT. 2.
Positions touching God's Grace and Man's Will in the Work of Conversion.

I Shall add some few Positions about the working of God's Grace and the Will
of Man, in, or in tendency to Man's Conversions: Positions that I had sometime
intended for a Neighbor Minister, had providence so ordered, and he accepted.
They are these that follow.

1. Position 1.
That the Will or Soul of Man is by nature wholly bond and thrall as to any
Spiritual motion or action, so as it has no liberty from sin to move Godward,
Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. Joh. 8.32, 33, 34.

John 21.18. Acts 5.4. 1 Cor. 7.36, 37.

Isa. 5.3, 4, 5. and 50.1, 2. Ezekiel. 24.13. Hos. 11.3, 4. Matthew. 22.12. Prove.
1.22, 23, 29. Matthew. 13, 14, 15. 2 Cor. 6.1, 2. Romans 1.18, 19, 20, 21.

4. That God gives men such liberty by his said preventing Grace, to the end
that men might listen to obey and seek him with it, and not abuse it to their
own hurt and his dishonor, Jer. 7.9, 10. and therefore bids, counsels, and
excites them with his following operations, to use it well, choosing the good
and refusing the evil, and apply themselves to the means of his appointment,
made known by him to them, and wait upon and seek him therein, according to the
power and liberty thereto given them, Isa. 5.3, 4. Hos. 11.3, 4. Prove. 1.20,
21, 22, 23, 29. Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13, 14, 19. Romans 10.7, 8, 9. Isa. 55.1, 2, 3,
4, 6, 7. reproving them for the contrary both by words and chastisements, Jer.
2.13, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Hos. 7.13, 14, 15. Prove. 17.16.

Prove. 17.16. Matthew. 11.21, 23. and 12.40, 41, 42. Ezekiel. 3.5, 6, 7. and 5.^, 6,
7. Prove. 1.5, 7.

Prove. 1.23. and 8.17, 32, 33, 34. and 9.12. Isa. 55.2, 3, 4. Hos. 6.3. Psalm
25.8, 9. John 8.31, 32, 36. and 7.17. Matthew. 13.11, 12. 2 Chronicles. 15.2.

Psalm. 81.9, 10, 11, 14, etc. (...) 5.6, 7, 8, 11. Prove. 1.23, 24, 29, 30, 31,
32. Isa. 5.1, to 7. and 6.10, 11. Jer. 6.16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 28, 29, 30. Ezekiel.
24.13. Ho^^ 1.3, 4, 5. Matthew. 13.12, 13, 14, 15. with (...) 12.40. Romans
1.18.21, 26, 28. These. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.

by their rebellions and be gracious to them. Psalm. 68.18, 19, 20. Luke. 13.6,
7, 8, 9, 10. Prove. 1.22, 23. Ezekiel. 33.11. 15, 16. Isa. 55.6, 7. and 30. 18.
Hos. 11.8. Jer. 3.1.2.9.12.14. Luke 15.17.18, 19, 20, 21, 22.2 Pet. 3.9. Yet
herein God uses his liberty for hardening or showing mercy, giving up sooner or
striving longer, and with what means he pleases, as. Romans 9.18, 19. Jer. 6.29,
3. Genesis 6.3. Luke 13.3, 4, 5. Rev. 3.7. He can rise up and shut to the door,
Luke 13.25, 26.
and turn the key against men when he pleases.

Mary choose the better part, the fear of the Lord; yet the whole work of their
Renovation, new creation, bringing into and ^ing with Christ, and conforming to
(...) their coming to Christ and trusting (...) him, etc. is the effect and
product o^ Gods Grace in them, wholly and solely ^ed thereby, even as Naamans
cle^g, and the blind man's restoring to hi^ght was, so as that their
Regeneration, and yet much more clearly their justification, is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs (although in such willing and running as the
Grace of God moves to and effects) but of God that shows mercy, nor are
they born of bloods, or of the will of the flesh, or of the will of man (though
in such use of their liberty effected in them as grace leads to) but of God,
even as Naamans cleansing was not of his own or other men's wills, though in his
willingly abeying the voice of the Prophet and persuasion of his servants to
wash in Jordan. John 1.12, 13. and 3.3, 5. Jam. 1.18.19, 20, 21. Ephesians. 2.8,
10. Romans 9,16. 1 Cor. 9.24, 25. with 2 Kings 5. and John 9.

up and justly suffers to perish in their sins. Mark 1.23.24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
and 3.1.5.10. and 5.2.13.17, 18, 19, 20. and 6.4, 5, 6. Luke 4.23, 24, 25, 26,
27. John 5.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Math. 13.57, 58. Jer. 1.5, 6. Luk 1.13, 14, 15, 16.
and 5.27, 28. Math. 11.25, 26, 27, 28, 29, John 6, 36. 37. Mark 16.15, 16. 1
Pet. 2.5, 6. 7, 8. etc. These be the positions I intended for my sometime
Neighbor Minister, to which let me add one or two more, viz.

etc. And all the ordinances and commands of duties but either appointments of
and injunctions to ways in which his Name and Son are to be sought, and soon
that being brought in to him he might justify us and be our righteousness, or
else to witness to and glorify his Name in word or conversation. 1 John 4.19.
Romans 1.16, 17. and 2.4, 5. Psalm. 9, 10. and 36.7, 8, 9. Romans 10.17. and 15.9,
10, 11, 12. John 3.3.5.14, 15, 16, 17. and 1.12, 13. Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14.
Philip 1.27. And therefore they that darken and render doubtful to men the
love, pity and good will of God in Christ toward them and readiness to save
them through him, and put men to seek to find it out by their endeavors after
works and frames, serve not God therein nor do they profit men but are
instruments rather in the hand of Satan to hurt and hinder them. Nor are such
rightly begotten to or born of God who not believing but neglecting the name of
God and his ^ve and good will in Christ to mankin^ (...) so toward themselves,
have their h^ ^wards God begot and Sprung up and ^ed in them from the conceit
and ^deration of any frames, changes, act^ (...) and endeavors of their own
but are ^dren of the Bondwoman. Acts 2 8. (...) Romans 9.8. Jam. 1.18, 19. Gal.
4.22, 23, 24. etc. Luke 18.10, 11, 12. Math. 23.13. Isa. 28.12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17. and 29. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Psalm. 118.22. 2 Cor. 4.4. 1 These. 2.16. with
2.4, 5, 6, 7. Romans 9.30, 31. and 10.1, 2, 3.

to them while sinners and ungodly their hearts are overcome to hope in him and
love him and so to yield up themselves to him to be his and to live to him,
they are the Children of God and of the promise, the called according to his
purpose, the Elect and fore known ones, whom he has praedestinated or
foreordained in Christ and through him, to be conformed to him and his image,
in sufferings and in glory. And accordingly such he has used to call forth to
service and sufferings for him, and in their faithfulness therein has
justified and approved them and afterward glorified them, and so he will yet
do, which may animate such lovers of him for his love to hold them fast by him
in all their sufferings either from o^ (...) him as knowing they are ordained
o^ (...) thereto for their conforming to him (...) 1.12, 13. and 3.3.5.14, 15,
16. (...) 3.7, 8.9.26, 27, 28, 29. Romans 9. (...) 8.28, 29, 30, 31, 32. etc. 1
These. (...) 1 Pet. 2.21. Isa. 50.8.9. Jam. 5. (...). Heb. 11.39, 40. and 12.1,
2, (...) Thus for the positions.

SECT. 3.
Some brief hints of uses of the foregoing Treatise and first of the first
branch thereof.

WHat we have hitherto said in this treatise may be diversely useful. And
first that which we have noted about the Gospel doctrine as to the faith, hope,
obedience, and terrors of it may serve.



1. The great love, mercy, pity and good will, of God to us, and to all men,
both as men made by him, and more abundantly as and notwithstanding fallen from
him in Adam and so become in our selves miserable, corrupt and loathsome, and
the great grace of our Lord Jesus toward us, in so abasing himself at the will
and appointment of the Father for us; the great price he has set upon us, and
provision made for us for our Salvation and happiness. In this was manifested
the love of God to us that he sent his only begotten Son into the ^wo^ that we
might live through him: In (...) do men waving this demonstration (...) seek to
know it some other way by ^ing into themselves and indeavour^ (...) to frame
themselves to love him. (...) is love, not that we loved him, (...) ^he loved
us, and sent his only bego^ Son to be the propitiation for our sins. 1 John
4.9, 10. And ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ that he being rich
became poor that we through his poverty might be made rich. 2 Cor. 8.9. So that
therein also is discovered to us good ground given us in him of looking to and
hoping in him, and of loving, of and living to him, that has done, prepared
and set before us so great things as the word of truth speaks of, having not
spared his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him
freely give us all things? Romans 8.32. He dyed for all, that they that live
should not henceforth live to themselves, but to him that dyed for them and
rose again. 2 Cor. 5.15. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself;
not imputing their trespasses to them; we pray you in Christ's stead therefore
be ye reconciled unto God. ver. 19, 20. See also Romans 12.1.

2. The wretchedness and misery of our condition by nature who needed such a
remedy to be made and provided for us, and so the odiousness of our sins, both
of that sin of Adam and of us all in him, and the sinfulness thence contracted,
and much more yet of continuing in sin against him, after and notwithstanding
such mercy and kindness showed us for our redemption, and so also the deadness
of us through sin, both as to the sentence of the law pronouncing us dead and
condemned men, and the utter deadness of our selves in our powers to help and
remedy our selves and one another, yea such deadness as no creature power in
our selves, or in Heaven or Earth could raise us out of it, which is clearly
seen in the cross of Christ, in that he dyed for us all to save and revive us.
The love of Christ constrains us because we thus judge, that if one dyed for
all, then were all dead. That we were all sentenced to death appears in this,
that he that came to succor us was fain to dye for us. And that we were so
wholly lost and dead in our selves as to our helping our selves from under that
sentence, is seen in this that such a one as Christ was fain to undertake it
and perform the Redemption of us even by his own Death and sufferings, which
concludes against all flesh, yea against the ability of all creatures to have
helped us much more against our own sufficiency to have helped our selves, for
if there had been a law that could have given life then doubtless God would
have spared his Son, and righteousness should have been by that Law, if either
our sins had not been infinitely displeasing unto God, but that he could have
passed them by without any great satisfaction to his truth and holiness, and to
his righteous law: Or if we or any other creature for us could have helped us or
given the satisfaction requisite, he would not have taken such a course for our
deliverance. But in this glass i^ seen at once, both sins hainousness and man's
helplesness, yea Gods infinite power, love and goodness toward us, yea and
further, our deadness in our selves to help or animate our selves, and so the
falseness of that conception, that man has free will by nature, to any
Spiritual good, or that such a conceit or opinion springs from the bowels of
such a doctrine as makes Gods good will to be toward all men and Christ's Death
for all is hereby plainly discovered also; for if we by nature had or have any
such sparks or principes of life and liberty, to what purpose was it that
Christ dyed for us to procure into himself for us in the nature of man the
power and Spirit of God, that living therein he might call and quicken us and
cause the dead to hear his voice that in hearing they might live. John 5 25. So
that no doctrine so clearly bears witness against man that he is dead in sins
and trespasses by nature and has no sufficiency of himself, as of himself so
much as to think a good thought, as that does upon, which the odium of the
contrary conception is usually but falsely fastened, we thus judge, not as the
denyers of those truths infer that if one dyed for all, then all must needs be
eternally saved, but with the Apostles, that if one dyed for all then were all
de^d. 2 Cor. 5.14.

3. The unspeakableness and certainty both of the happiness of all those that
accept of this Grace of God; Submit to him, and seek their Righteousness and
Salvation in and through Christ; seeing he has done so much for all, while
Sinners, that men through him might be Saved. And his Son is such a Mighty,
Merciful and Complete Savior (as has been showed) set up on purpose that
whosoever Believes in him might assuredly be saved and have everlasting Life,
John 3.14, 15, 16, 17. and 6.40. Romans 5.9, 10. and 8.32, 33, 34, etc. And also,
of the Misery and Destruction of all, that after all this done for them, reject
and rebel against him, and persist so doing till the day of Grace be out with
them. In as much as they despise the riches of God's goodness and forbearance,
that is, leading men to repentance, and after their impenitent hearts, treasure
up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, etc. Yea, are guilty of
treading under foot the Son of God, counting the Blood of the Covenant, shed
for their sanctifying, an unholy thing, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace.
And therefore, as on the one hand, if being enemies, he has reconciled us to
himself, by the death of his Son, Faith leads us to reason, or infer, how shall
we not much more be saved by his life: so on the other hand, it leads to say,
How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? And of how much forer
punishment, (than Death without mercy, as the Law inflicted on the despisers of
it) shall he be counted worthy of, who has trampled under foot Christ, and
done such indignities to God and to his Grace, as were before mentioned? Romans
2.4, 5. and 5.9, 10. Psalm. 68.19, 20, 21. Heb. 2.3, 4. and 10.26, 27, 28, 29.
and 12.25. etc.



1. With thankfulness and gladness of heart to receive the tidings of so great
Grace, and acknowledge it and bless God for it, and for all procured for us and
streamed forth to us, Acts 8.8. Psalm. 100. and 117. 1 Timothy 1.15.

2. To betake our selves to him in Christ, to seek him, wait upon him, hope in
him, yield up our selves to him in the obedience of faith, and love required of
us by him. Be reconciled to him. Deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, living
soberly, righteously, godly in this present evil World, living to him that dyed
for us and rose again, both in our bodies and spirits, which are his, being
bought with so great a price, as the Death and Blood of his Son, to glorify
and serve him with all cheerfulness and faithfulness, pressing after the hope
set before us in him, and taking heed that we incur not those terrors or
terrible judgments of the Lord prepared for scorners, that that Doctrine
presents us with, to warn us of sin and arm us against and deter us from sin,
Isa. 55.1. to the 7th. Psalm. 100. 2 Cor. 5.10, 11, 15, 19, 20, 21. and 6.1, 2.
Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. Heb. 12.15, 16, 17, 25, 28, 29.

3. To exercise Love and Charity to others, both as it evidenceth such love and
goodness in God toward our selves, more unworthy of it from him, than any
others can be of love from us, and as it evidences them loved and pitied of him
(even when yet sinners and unconverted) and in a possibility of salvation. So
it leads us to be followers of God, pitying the ignorant and those out of the
way, and endeavoring their helpfulness, as he has and does pity and help us,
and has provided help for them, and is graciously extending means of it unto
them also; embracing and owning those that embrace and own him, as we our
selves, and they are embraced by him; doing good to all, but chiefly to those
of the household of Faith; and not to retain such a selfish and Cainish
disposition, as to say, Am I my Brothers keeper? So be it I know Christ dyed
for me, what need I care for knowing whether he dyed for my neighbor? as if my
neighbors welfare pertained nothing to me: yea, and furnishes us with matter
of truth and goodness to propound to them in all cases, both for instructing
them in knowledge, what to believe, and how to walk; and for encouraging them
in the way of faith and obedience, by minding them, what they may expect and
shall meet with therein; and for comforting them in distress; and admonishing
and warning them of, and reproving them for sin and wickedness, propounding
Gospel Terrors to them, without turning them to the Law of Works, 1 John 4.9,
10, 11, 12. Ephesians. 5.1, 2. 2 Cor. 5.10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21. Prove. 22.17,
18, 19, 20. And so,

(in part) to provoke them thereto and deter them from Sin and Disobedience.
And,

Adam, without remedy sufficient to save them; Principles tending to beget evil
thoughts of God in the hearts of men and to make them give him the lie, and
throw away the foundation of Repentance and Faith and Hope and of Baptism and
all Ordinances and Duties, that he has laid for them and sets forth to them;
and either to live carelessly and desperately, as if sure already either of
salvation or damnation inevitably, or to establish to themselves a
righteousness of their own, and build upon foundations of Frames and
Qualifications in themselves, which are sandy and slippery and not of God's
laying. As also it reproves that evil way of too many Preachers, who laying
aside God's coner stone and foundation, and neither daring to believe
themselves, nor hold forth to others, the good will of God, testified in the
Gift and Death of his Son, for all, (the true and right and clear bottom,
foundation of and medium for begetting all right Repentance, Faith, Hope, Love
and Obedience) do teach men to lay such frames and conceits of them for their
bottom foundation of believing the Gospel. And for the Vision of all, the Rest
wherewith the God would have the wearied Soul to rest and be refreshed, and the
foundation upon which all Precepts, Reproofs, Consolations, etc. are to be
laid, and by it supported; for or instead hereof, I say, they lay Precept upon
Precept, Precept upon Precept. Line upon Line, Line upon Line, here a little
and there a little to men's destruction, and making them have their fear toward
God spring from and be ordered by the precepts of men; bidding them believe,
repent, hope, love God, and giving them directions and grounds of their own for
so doing, when they have taken away or made doubtful God's sure and certain
ground for them, even the Gift and Death of his Son and the Grace in his Son
for them; making the people also believe and look upon that as God's gracious
will toward them, which indeed was the false Prophets sin, and God's judgment
upon them, as may be seen, Isa. 28.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16. and 29.9, 10, 11, 12,
13. Many more evil Principles and Practices the Gospel-Doctrine reproves; but
this in brief from the first Branch of the Distinction, leaving the rest to
judicious Observation.

SECT. 4.
Brief Hints of Usefulness from the other Branch about God's Purposes,
Dispensations, and Operations, and the diversity in them.

WHat we have noted about God's various Purposes, Distributions, and
Operations, may be also of good use upon diverse accounts; As,



Abraham did, upon the Authority of God, whose it is, according to what is
spoken, and as the Scripture has said, Gal. 5.22.
that so we may experience the Operations of God in our selves therethrough,
both toward God, our selves, and others, such as the truth believed, will work
in us in all Godliness, Sobriety, Righteousness, Peace, Joy, etc. Romans 4.17.
Joh. 7.37.3.



1. Not to judge our selves thereby justified or accepted with God, more than
they, because we have more; for that is no good ground for so judging, as
appears, Romans 3.1, 9, 10, 19.

2. Nor condemning and despising them, as if because they have less, therefore
they are rejected of God, and no hope of their salvation; for neither is that
true, as has been showed, and as appears, Matthew. 8.12. Romans 2.25, 26, 27. Acts
10.34. But,

3. Knowing that God requires more of us to whom he gives more. 2 Cor. 6.1, 2.
Luke 12.48. see that we take heed that we receive not his grace in vain, but
walk more humblily and holily and suitably to God and his goodness, least they
rise up in judgment against us; and while they appear many of them on the right
hand of Christ admitted to fellowship with Abraham Isaac and Jacob in the
Kingdom of God, we our selves be cast out. Math. 8.12. and 12.40, 41, 42. but
walking in the grace bestowed upon us, see that we pity and pray for them that
God would give forth the clearer and revelations of his truth and of himself to
them also; that having means for more in^ged knowledge of him, they may be also
in more open way for obtaining his Salvation and render more full and ample
praises to him generally then any of them now can or are capable of, yea and
endeavor we so to glorify God and his Name before and amongst them, and carry
it forth as we have opportunity to them, that they may by us as good Stewards
of the Graces of God and dispensers of his Mysteries to them be occasioned to
glorify God for his mercy toward them, for so much doubtless is required of us,
as of Israel of old toward us. Psalm. 67. Exodus 19.5, 6. 1 Pet. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.
Romans 11.30, 31. But truly we have great cause to fear, that God has a very
great controversy upon that account with us; because instead of receiving his
grace effectually, so as both by word and conversation to shine forth as lights
to the residue of men, that they might be drawn to seek God with us, (as was
the end of God in taking us to be for a people to him, Acts 15.16) and instead
of seeking his Kingdom, to promote it and enlarge it among the Nations, and to
all the ends of the Earth, and his righteousness by declaring it and holding it
forth to them, we are walking in darkness, profaneness, uncleanness,
covetuousness, wickedness, seeking to enrich our selves and enlarge our
Kingdoms, even with the spoils of them and to the stumbling and hardening of
them, withholding the light of the truth of God as with us from them, and not
minding to carry it amongst them, or so to walk amongst our selves and in our
trafficking and commerce with them, as might manifest the favor of God to and
amongst them or draw them unto us to seek God with us. It were much to be
wished, that the Nations that are called Christian, did more heartily believe
and adorn the Gospel Truths that are held forth in the Scriptures amongst them,
and leaving off their pride, ambition, covetuousness and so their corruptings
of the truth, and contentions with each other for the Earth, and all of us too
much against Heaven, they would set themselves and make it their design to
endeavor the calling in and conversion of others that lie yet without the
Scriptures and Oracles and Ways of God therein expressed, to the more clear
means of the knowledge of God and his Christ, and so to their own happiness and
endless bliss. But by reason of the contrary, found generally with us, we have
great cause to fear, that reproof and judgment sometimes for the like
miscarriages pronounced against Jerusalem, in Ezekiel. 5.5, 6, 7. Thus faith the
Lord God: This Jerusalem, I have set it in the midst of the Nations and
Countries round about her, and she has changed my judgments into wickedness
more than the Nations, and my statutes more than the Countries that are round
about her; for they have refused my judgments and my statutes, they have not
walked in them. Therefore thus says the Lord God, because ye have multiplied
more than the Nations that are round about you, and have not walked n^wy
Statutes, nor kept my Judgments, neither have done according to the judgment
of the Nations that are round about the, ^erefore the says the Lord God
behold, I eve^ (...) am against he, and will execute judgments ^n the midst of
thee, in the sight of the Nations, etc. That so the Nations might be taught to
fear God by his judgments on us, that have neglecte^ to teach them to fear God
by his judgments or Ordinance; of truth deposited withus.

Naaman, in such a like misprision, 2 Kings 5.11, 12. or as saying (...)
hearts, that we can do nothing toward our o^ ^ful^ess or hinderance in the way
of salvation; if God purpose to save us, we shall be saved, and cannot fail of
it, none can hinder his operations or workings to that purpose; and if not so
purposed to be saved, it is in vain to strive for it. But minding what has been
said about his purposes of Salvation and Damnation, and the way of his
operation and working, receive the Grace brought to us, and yield up our selves
to God in it, to be saved by it; not hardening our hearts against him, while it
is called to day, but hearkening to his Voice, such as it is, in and with the
Dispensations vouchsafed us; and so working out our Salvation with fear and
trembling, as he by his Grace is working in us of his good pleasure, lest by
grieving and quenching his good Spirit in the workings of it, in and with us,
and sinning presumptuously against him, we provoke him to withdraw from us,
leave us to our selves, and so harden and blind us, and give us up to sin and
Satan, to our utter ruin, 2 Cor. 6.1, 2. Heb. 3.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15.
Psalm. 95.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Isa^ 1.3, 4, 5, 6. and 5.1, to 6. and 6.9, 10, 11.
Jer. 6.16, 17, 18, 28, 29, 30.

5. To bless God for such as he either (...) ages or now more especially and
signally ^th prevented with his grace so as more extraordinarily and ^ly to
frame them to himself and rai^ them up to (...) instruments of declaring to us
^is Salvation ^ing his grace by them as instruments brought (...) us. But not
to limit God to deal with us or all his Saints just as he dealt with them, but
in what he vouchsafes us, wait we upon him, seek after him and serve him.



6. Lastly to provoke others to examine and try these things whether they be so
or not, by the Scriptures of truth, and not by men's traditions and Philosophy
rules. And to give occasion to them to help my shortness, or correct my
mistakes in these things where any such appears and i^ evident to any. But
let none out of pride, arrogarcy or strife, because these things clash with
their thoughts therefore rashly lift up themselves against them but in Sobriety
consider them, and in meekness i^ ^e, if in any thing I be out of the way, as
knowing that the wrath, pride, passion, arrogance and larshness of man, against
what he apprehends wrong, does not accomplish the righteousness of God.

And so I shall conclude, leaving these my Considerations and Endeavors to
find out and propound the Truth, as also my self to the merciful judgment,
protection, blessing, and disposal of the All-wise and Glorious God, the
Creator of all things, and the Father o^mercies to us lost Creatures. And of
Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior, the Son of the Father in Grace and
Truth. To whom with, by and in his holy Spirit be everlasting honor and glory
and thanksgiving throughout all ages and in all places of his Dominions for
ever and ever. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
Laus Deo.
The former Copy was finished, March 10. 1658. This, November 18. 1663.


