THE BEST EXERCISE FOR CHRISTIANS In the worst Times.

In order to their Security against Profaneness and Apostasy.

Good and useful to be considered and improved by all the Lovers of God, and
Believers in the Lord Jesus Christ, for their direction and preservation in
these times of the overspreading of Iniquity and Transgression, from the too
great Deluge of Errors and Impieties threatening our destruction.

Proposed to Consideration By J. H. an unworthy Servant of God in the Gospel of
his Son.

Mal. 3.14, 15, 16, 17. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to
another, and a book of remembrance was written before the Lord for them that
feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name, And they shall be mine, says
the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels, and I will spare them,
as a man that spares his own Son that serves him.

London, Printed for Thomas Passenger, at the sign of the Three Bibles on
London Bridge. 1671.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
REad I pray thee also with candor and consideration this Epistle; for as it
informs thee something about this Treatise, so it also supplies some defect in
it, and contains something useful to be considered.

The ensuing Treatise was first in its substance the matter of some of my more
private Exercises some years since; which being copied out upon the desire of
one (who I wish may be as diligent to peruse and make good use of it, as I was
for his helpfulness ready to copy it) and afterward viewed by some of my
friends, met with so good respect, as induced me to make it public, that
others also might have benefit by it. To which I was the rather willing,
because it proposes and excites to such exercise as is good and needful at all
times, for all that think of Heaven, and desire the enjoyment of God and
Christ; and being in the way thereto, would not fail thereof through the
temptations befalling them in the world. But especially in evil and perilous
times, wherein such temptations most abound. What is there more behoveful for
us then, or can afford like safety and satisfying to us, as Gods love toward
us? and therefore what should be so much endeavored after by us as to obtain
that, and having obtained it, secure it to our selves? Indeed there is a
general and universal love of God (herein also mentioned) in and through the
gift of Christ the Son of God, to be the Savior of the world, extended to all
men, wherewith God prevents all our endeavors, and under which all men are,
during the day of his grace and patience, and which men need not (in a sort)
endeavor for; it being attested in the Scripture absolutely for and toward
all, without proposing any condition for attaining it; expressed in such
sayings as these, that God sent his Son the Savior of the world: Gave him to
be the Propitiation for our sins: That Christ came into the world to save
sinners: Dyed for all, and is risen again: Bare our sins in his own body on the
tree: That God has made him Lord of all, and prepared a feast in him for all
people, Isa. 25.6. and the like. These have no condition proposed for our being
included in them; for its never said, God sent him for us, or Christ dyed for
us, if we believe or repent; nor is it said, he came to save sinners, if they
believe and repent: But without that if, It is a faithful saying, and worthy of
all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners,: That
he dyed for us, while yet without strength, ungodly, and sinners; not
suspending it upon our believing and repenting: As if in case we believe not,
he dyed not for us, or came not to save us. For though it is true, that there
is a salvation (and that the main end of his coming) that we cannot have,
except we repent and believe; yet the end of his coming, is not to be
confounded with the event and effect. He came to save Israel out of Egypt, and
to bring them into Canaan generally, yet many of them perished by the way,
Exodus 6.8. with Numb. 26.64. and were not eventually brought in thither. So
Christ came to call sinners (not if they will repent, but) to repentance, or
that they might repent: That was the end of his coming and calling, not the
condition of it; and such an end, as is often not answered in the event, witness
Prove. 1.23, 24. Isa. 50.2. and 66.4. where he complains, that when he called,
they refused, and answered not. Besides, that there are acts of his saving, in
which he has saved, and does save us, before we can be capable of coming to
him for salvation, or of repenting and believing. The very foundation of
Repentance and Faith toward God, lies in those principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, or Word of his beginning, in which he is asserted to have died for all,
and to be risen again: Which had he not first done for us, so as to have
ransomed us from under the first judgment, and from the power and jurisdiction
of Satan as he would, otherwise, have exercised the power of death over us, had
he not in that respect destroyed him, and made peace for us; yea, and did he
not save us by upholding and preserving us, and prevent us with his calls and
grace, bringing salvation to us, we could be in no capacity of repenting,
believing, and being further saved by him. In such sense he has partly saved
us by his death, before his calling us; having abolished death, 2 Timothy 1.9, 10.
and partly is saving us through his mediation, during the time of his calling
us, yea, before our obeying him, (yea, and whether we obey his call or not,
Romans 2.4, 5.) his long-suffering being to be accounted salvation, 2 Pet. 3.15.
and so he is the Savior of all men; and not only of them that believe, or
upon condition of believing. The feast is prepared for men, in which is all
fullness of Grace and Eternal life given us in Christ, 1 John 5.11. whether men
come to him for it, and receive him and it, in and with him, and the invitation
prevents men's coming to it, and is given, and is to be given, whether men come
or not, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear. It is not said,
nor ordered to the servants to say, Go tell them if they will come, I have
prepared my dinner, etc. but absolutely, Go tell them, I have prepared my
dinner, my Oxen and fatlings are slain, and all things are ready, come to the
Wedding: This is to be, and is by Wisdom and her Maidens said to the simple,
and persons without understanding, Mat. 22.4. Prove. 9.3, 4. And they who here
go with an If, or condition in their mouths as to these things, they do not
their message rightly, they keep not the wholesome form of sound words used in
the Scriptures; they let not men see certainly, that Grace and love of God
which is to be showed them, that it might be as a powerful Argument to beget
faith and affection to God and Christ in them; and to make them that duly
consider it willing to come; and which if rejected, leaves them without excuse,
and aggravates their sin, and makes evident the equity of their condemnation
with a witness. Indeed in Promises and Threatenings, which always respect the
future, there is an If, or condition understood, where not expressed often; as
appears 1 Samuel 2.30. Jer. 18.7, 8. Jonas 3.4. but not in declarations in
matters done. Now I say, this love and salvation so generally expressed, is not
that to be sought, to be obtained, or that we may be under it, we being all
preventingly under it; and too many content themselves with being under the
enjoyments of its streams, in having the patience and bounty of God exercised
toward them, and in hearing that God has loved them while sinners, and Christ
has died for them: sitting down content with this, or some more common gifts
vouchsafed in, or through such means, as upon the account thereof are afforded;
not minding that though those things be true without condition, and so ought to
be proposed, yet they were not done without an end, which ought to be pursued.
Though its not said, Christ died for all, if they will live to him; yet its
said, He died for all, that they who live, might live to him: Though its not
right to say, God is patient toward men, and does them good if they repent, as
if not otherwise; yet its right to say that he is patient toward them, and do
(...) them good, that they might repent: It Is not handsome to say, The Gospel
is sent to men, if they will believe, yet it is to say, It is sent to men, that
they might believe; and in believing be justified, sanctified, washed, renewed,
and be made new creatures, having on them the Wedding garment, without which
they may not partake of the feast, nor be the Subjects of Gods choice love, in
which true bliss and happiness are to be enjoyed; nor be made partakers of the
special salvation, in which Christ is the especial Savior of them that
believe, the Author of Eternal salvation; unto which things, as to our being
the Subjects enjoying them, there is an If, or condition: And therefore, that
these ends of what Christ has done, and does, might be obtained by us, it is
needful both that the Gospel be declared clearly and plainly to men, by those
who are thereto called; and that where declared, men set their hearts to it, to
mind it, that they might (in another sort or sense) find this general love and
salvation, that is to say, as to the knowledge, belief and efficacy of it upon
them, it being (as is showed in the Treatise) the way by which men are, and may
be begotten and brought to Repentance, Faith, and the New Birth, and ^o become
the objects of the special love a^ salvation: The Word in the Gospel is the
seed of Regeneration, 1 Pet. 1.23, 25. The Gospel of Christ, even the preaching
of the Cross, that Christ died for our sins, and was buried and rose again
according to the Scriptures, is the power of God to salvation to every one that
believes, Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.22.24. and 15.1, 2, 3. the preaching that Christ
died for all, and to what end, and that God was in Christ reconciling the
world, and is the Word of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15, 19. The Grace of
God, (...), saving to all men, teaches, that denying all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly. That Teacher is
to be attended to, and that teaching learned, and they are greatly faulty, that
slight or darken it, or overly hear it, or rest in a notion of it, without
being brought under the special love by it.

Though yet neither is this all that men should attend to in hearing and
receiving it, to be made in Christ by it, and so objects of special love. All
the business is not done and over, in that: it is needful also to abide and go
on therein; for we have adversaries will endeavor to pull us back, or pervert
us from it. Pharaoh who hindered Isreal's going out of Egypt, endeavored when
gone, to fetch them back again: So deals Satan; and as all that were brought
into the way to Canaan, attained not to Canaan, because some turned back in
their hearts, and some such as had believed and sung his praises, afterward
through unbelief perished: So there is a danger here too. And therefore as
Moses his work was not all over, when he had brought them over the Red Sea, and
led them to Mount Sinai; so neither was the Apostles, when by their Ministry,
and Gods blessing thereon, they had brought any to Christ, and so to Mount
Sion, now they were jealous with a godly jealousy, for such as they had
espoused to Christ, lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve, any of them
might be corrupted from the simplicity in him, 2 Cor. 11.23. Least by any means
they might be moved, and the Tempter should tempt them, and render their labor
frustrate, 1 Thessalonians. 3.5. Therefore they wrote Epistles to them, wherein they
instructed, reproved, warned them, provoked them to watchfulness and
stedfastness in the faith; So run that they might obtain; so to hold fast and
abide in Christ, as not to lose their reward, nor fail of the Grace of God;
directing them how to behave themselves, so as to be preserved in Christ unto
eternal life. And that is the main scope and drift of the Treatise here
presented, that being in the special love of God, thou may be kept in it.

But I am sensible that some things might have been spoken to that I over
looked in it; for some perhaps by the love of God spoken of in the Text,
understand not that love whereof he is the Subject, and we the Object, Gods
love to and of us; but that whereof we are the Subjects, and God the Object,
our love to and of God. And indeed upon consideration, I had thought of
inserting some things in that sense also. Not because I think I have taken it
amiss, but because I think that also might not have been unprofitably spoken to
as one sense of the phrase, though the matter comes much what to the same; for
the lover of God is the choicely beloved of God, as it is said, I love (namely
with an approving, delightful, love) them that love me, Prove. 8.17. Psalm.
147.11, and my Father has loved you, because ye have loved me, John 16.27.
they are the called according to his purpose, and all things work together for
their good, Romans 8.28. to them God has promised the Crown of life, and a
glorious Kingdom, James 1.12. and 2.5. Only to supply that defect, I shall
here briefly note, that in those words [Keep your selves in the love of God] so
taken, there is signified:

Note 1. That the real and hearty Believers of the Grace of God, love God for
his love believed by them; so in 1 John 4.19. We love God, because he first
loved us: First loved us, namely, in sending his Son into the world, while we
were sinners and ungodly (for that is it in which he not only has commended,
but still and always commends his love to us, Romans 5.8.) not only to be our
Teacher, but also to be the propitiation for our sins, that we might live
through him, Verse. 9, 10, 14. This love rightly perceived, and heartily
received, turns the heart to love God:

1. So as letting go or rejecting all other Gods, or Objects of trust and
worship for the sake of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, beloved also as the
Son of God and our Savior, to choose him for its God, and to say of him, He is
my rock, my fortress, my God, in him will I trust, Psalm. 91.2.

2. So as for the sake of Christ, and God in him, to count all things loss and
dung (where this love is indeed hearty and strong, for there be degrees of
loving God) yea, to forsake father, mother, lands, life, all things for the
knowledge and enjoyment of him, panting and longing after fellowship with him,
Phil. 3.7.8, 9. Luke 14.26.33. Psalm. 42.1, 2. and 27.4. Yea,

3. So as (though with the loss of all things, where this love is vehement) to
desire and endeavor the promoting of his glory, yielding up its power and
members thereto, 1 Cor. 10.33. Phil. 1.20. Act. 20.24.

4. So as it loves, observes and keeps his words and sayings, and does his
commands, John 14.21, 23. 1 John 5.3.

5. So as it loves and waits for his salvation willingly, tarrying for it,
Psalm. 40.19.

6. Yea, and so as it loves his name, and his people, delights and cleaves to
them, Isa. 56.6. 1 John 3.23. and 5.1.

By which trial may be made, how we have received and believed the Grace of
God, whether in vain or not, examining and proving our selves, whether we be in
the faith, and Christ by his Spirit and its efficacies be in us, or not, 2 Cor.
13.5. that being the way by which the rightness and effectualness of our receipt
of the Grace of God, or its ineffectualness may be discerned; as these
Scriptures signify, 1 John 1.6, 7. and 2.3, 4, 5.6, 9, 10, 11, 29. and 3.7, 8,
10, 14, 19, 20, 21, etc. that where it is otherwise, we might (not question the
reality of Gods love, of compassion and well-willing to us, but believing that)
give the more earnest heed to the things heard in the Gospel, so as to receive
them more heartily: turn at his reproofs therein, and yield up to the power
therein working, that we may be renewed thereby, lest we be rejected of him,
Heb. 2.1. and 6.7, 8. and where we find his Grace effectual in any measure, we
may be more encouraged to mind it still, that we may both be preserved therein,
and be perfected thereby; and this the rather, because (as is here implied too.)

Note 2. Such as are in the love of God (in this sense also) may possibly not
abide therein, but be corrupted from it, if not careful to preserve themselves
in it, yea, there is danger hereof, especially in evil times. That this is so,
may be evidenced partly,

1. In what is said to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus; viz. That he had
left his first love, Rev. 2.4. and of the Angel of the Church of Sardis; viz.
That he was dead, and what remained in him was ready to dye; whereas he had
more rightly received and heard, Rev. 3.1, 2, 3. and to the Angel of the Church
of Laodicea; viz. That he was lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, Verse. 15.
implying nothing, as if he had never been otherwise, nay, surely his boasting
rather was an effect of his reflecting upon himself, and what he had found
there, so as to grow secure and careless there through, as judging he had got
such a stock of Grace, as could never be spent, and come to nothing; as Israel
so kind in her youth, as to follow God in a Wilderness, being enriched by him,
fell off from her affection to him, so as to have no love at all for him,
saying, We are Lords, we will come no more at thee, Jer. 2.23.31. Partly also
and more fully,

2. In what our Savior says, Matthew. 24.12. Because iniquity shall abound, the
love of many shall wax cold; yea, so as to miss of salvation, as the next Verse
implies, wherein he adds, But (in opposition to those former) he that
continues to the end (as implying that the others had love, but continued not
to the end in it) shall be saved (implying, that those others should not;) and
yet saying their love should wax cold, he implies it was sometime hot: And
therefore there is need of the exercise here commended by the Apostle Jude, for
keeping our hearts in a warm temper toward God. But here it may be objected.

Object. That the Apostle John says, He that is born of God sins not,
because his seed abides in him, neither can he sin, because he is born of God:
how then can a lover of God fall therefrom?

Answ. To this (because not spoken to in the Treatise) I shall say the more:
And so,

1. That by born of God, is either meant one framed to the mind of God, through
the knowledge of and acquaintance with him, so as he is made in a high degree
like him, a spiritual one, as opposed to the carnal, and babes in Christ, 1
Cor. 2.14. with 3, 12. the perfect, 1 Cor. 2.7. as distinguished from such as
are yet short; one that discerns all things rightly, God and Christ, and his
excellencies, so as highly to love and fear him, emptiness and vanity in all
things else, so as not to be taken with them; imperfection and mutableness in
himself, so as he durst not trust himself from him, or out of his way; one into
whose heart wisdom is so entered, as that knowledge is become most pleasant to
his soul, and the fea^ of the Lord most prevalent, so as discretion preserves
him, and understanding keeps him (Prove. 2.10, 11, 12.) in such fear of God, and
love to him, that he cannot sin, because he cannot find in his heart, or be
persuaded to neglect Christ, and his counsels, and ways, or be withdrawn from
them. And no doubt, but in following on to know the Lord, and abiding in
Christ, he will so teach us of all things, write his Law, and put his love into
our hearts, subdue and mortify our corrupt affections and passions, and make
us so wise, as it will be quite contrary to our natures (our new natures) to
sin willingly against him, however strongly provoked or tempted thereto, as in
Joseph, that said, How can I do such wickedness and sin against God? Genesis 39.9.
Yea, and we attain such height and strength of love to him, as that many waters
cannot quench it, nor the floods drown it, Cant. 8.6, 7. and as to be persuaded
on good grounds, with the Apostle, that nothing shall be able to separate us
from the love of God (even from loving God) in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.37, 38. but
then all right Believers and Lovers of God, are not so spiritual; as appears, 1
Cor. 1.12. with 3.1, 2. nor have attained such wisdom and knowledge of him.
Thence the Apostle says not, I am persuaded nothing shall be able to separate
you as speaking to the Romans, as in Verse. 13. If ye walk after the flesh ye
shall dye) but us, as speaking of himself and the other Apostles, and such as
they in perfectness and growth.

2. Or else by born of God, rather may be meant the same with the abider in
Christ, as in Verse. 6. He that abides in him, sins not; and so Chap. 2, 29.
He that does righteousness (that constantly and perseveringly does it) is born
of God; and 1 John 5.1. He that believes (that is, goes on believing
perseveringly; for words of the present tense its observed usually (or often)
imply continuance) that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, and so its like
that in Psalm. 119.23. They that keep his testimonies, and seek him with the
whole heart, they do no iniquity, etc.

3. Or, He that is born of God, that is, that is led by the Spirit of God, as
Romans 8.14. he sins not, nor can sin, namely, as while so led, no such fruit can
be of him; in opposition to Gnostics, or others, that impute their sinnings to
Gods Spirit, say, they are tempted, or led of God to it.

4. And then the word Cannot is taken in a compound sense; as when it is said,
An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit, nor good tree bad fruit, Mat. 7,
18. that is, abiding such; but a bad tree may be made a good tree, and a bad
man a good, and a good tree, a right noble Vine, may degenerate into a strange
plant, Jer. 2.21. and so a good man into a bad, a lover of God, to leave his
love of him; and that by entertaining,

1. The love of the world; For if any man love the world, the love of the
Father is not in him: and of that, even Fathers and young men, such as had
overcome the wicked one, it seems, needs to be admonished also, 1 John 2.12,
13, 14, 15, 16. as the Apostles themselves were by Christ, Matthew. 6.24. Luke
21.34, 35, 36.

2. Corrupt Doctrines; such as lead to high-mindedness, pride, carelesnes, or
corrupt any ways from the Faith and Gospel: Therefore the Apostle warns the
Fathers and young men also, of the Antichrists, 1 John 2.18.26. 2 John 8. as
Christ did also his Apostles, Matthew. 24.45.23.24, 25. Principles of Atheism,
Infidelity, rejecting the Scriptures, and the Hope and Judgment to come.
Thence the Apostle Peter warning of the Mockers in the last days, that would
say, Where is the promise of his coming, bids the Believers take heed, lest
being led away with their error, they should fall from their own stedfastness,
2 Pet. 3.4, 5, 17. By such means men may be withdrawn from their love of God.
Or,

3. By thinking themselves to have abtained, and so growing remiss: So men
heated with their labor, and thinking they have wrought enough, sitting down,
may grow cold, or catch cold; and, He that deals with a slack hand, becomes
poor, Prove. 10.4, Or,

4. Through the same conceit, withdrawing from the Assemblies and Societies of
Brethren. Thence the Apostle opposes these to those that separate themselves,
Jud. 19. and forsaking the Assemblies, is opposed to holding fast the
profession, and ushers in wilful sinning, Heb. 10.23, 25, 26. for how can one
be hot alone? Eccl. 4.11.

Need therefore of this Exhortation now, especially when Atheism and evil
principles so abound: And we may be encouraged to take the Apostles
Exhortation, because he further implies, that,

Note 3. Believers may in a diligent minding the Grace of God, and using the
means appointed of him, through his promised presence and assistance, keep
themselves in a warm temper in the love of God. So our Savior implies in
Matthew. 24.13. in that having said, The love of many shall wax cold, he adds,
but he that continues to the end, shall be saved. Men may continue warm in
their love then to the end, and why not? A man in a good way, may easily keep
himself in it, though he meet with Cheats or Robbers, if having good
directions, a skilful, faithful guide, using strong persuasions to follow him
and his directions, and a strong Guard to secure him from violences, he will
but adhere to, and follow them; and nothing but amazing wilfulness (Jer. 2.12,
13.) may endanger him, being brought into the love of God: The same that
brought us into it, will keep us in it (namely, the love and grace of God in
Christ) if minded, kept in view and obeyed by us; whereto we have good
directions in his Word and Doctrine, and the Holy Spirit of Wisdom is given
from Christ to be our Guide and Director therein: And taking heed thereto, and
making use of those Gifts and Ordinances appointed by him to that purpose, God
and Christ will guard and secure us from Satan and his instruments. Thence its
said, Forsake not wisdom, and she will preserve thee; love her, and she will
keep thee, Prove. 4.6. and, He that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, has both
the Father and the Son to secure him from miscarrying, 2 John 9. 1 John 2.24,
25. The same exercise or perpetuated fire that will warm a man when cold, will
easily preserve a man in his heat, when heated by it, if not forsaken; and both
the Word and Love of God are compared to fire, and hot burning coals, Jer.
23.29. Cant. 8.6, 7. Keep we but to them and they will keep us warm, and as for
exercise to keep us warm. Its further implied,

Note 4. That it is a good and useful exercise that we are here directed to;
viz. To edify our selves on our most holy Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost.
For,

1. Therein we are put upon minding Gods and Christ's love to us, that being the
great matter held forth in the Faith, whence it is called, The Gospel of the
Grace of God, Acts 20.24. and that minded, will nourish as well as beget love
and warmth thereof in us toward him.

2. Thence we shall gather strength against our enemies, and what would
prejudice us against God, and cool our love to him; for (a little to add to
what is somewhat too barely mentioned, p. 177. l. 25, 26, 27.) there through we
may grow in wisdom; for he that cleaves more firmly to Christ, the Wisdom of
God, shall receive more of the Spirit of Wisdom from him; and, He that walks
with wise men shall be wise, Prove. 13.20. for, in the mystery of Christ, held
forth by and among them, amd in Christ himself, are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. and, the wise man is strong, and the man of
understanding increases strength, Prove. 24.^. for, wisdom strengthens the
wise, more than weapons of war, Eccles. 7.19. Thence the being rooted and built
up in Christ, and his mystery, is the way to be preserved from such as would
entice us, Coloss. 2.2, 3, 4, 7. As also thence we shall be more filled with
love to God and Christ; and, Love is strong as death, Cant. 8.6. yea, and
therein we may warn one another of, and arm one another against our enemies and
coolers, and instruct and encourage one another, and provoke to love and good
works, and so strengthen one another, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11, 14. Heb. 10.23, 24. Two
are better than one to keep from falling, or help up again, Cant. 4.10.

3. In the fellowship of holy men also is spiritual heat: Thence also Solomon
tells us, Two is better than one; for if two lie together they will be hot
(fervent in spirit and in love to God and one another) Cant. 4.11. For there
God commands the bl^ssing and life for ever, Psalm. 133.4.

4. And then praying in the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Faith and Love is the way
to obtain more Spirit and Grace from God, Matthew. 7.7, 11. Luke 11.13. and
thereby we may have more experience of him answering our prayers, which engages
to love him the more, and so tends to increase in us, and keep us in the love
to him infused by him, Psalm. 18.1.3.4. and 116.2. I love the Lord, because he
has heard my prayer, etc.

But though these things might have been more largely handled in the Treatise,
yet it being sent up to the press before I thought of doing so, and in the
Press before I thought it was: And what is there said about keeping our selves
in the love of God in the other sense of it (which I look upon as the more
proper and genuine sense) including and leading to this, it shall suffice to
have given these hints of them here. Which having done, I shall detain thee no
longer from the Treatise it self. But wishing and praying for Gods blessing on,
and with both it and thee, that my cost and pains therein be not lost; and with
desire of thy prayers for me^^, and thanks to God if thou meetest with blessing
in, and benefit by it, I leave thee to God, and rest,

Lyn, March 17. 1670/1 Thy Friend and Servant in the Gospel of Christ, John
Horn.

Books sold by Thomas Passenger, at the Three Bibles on London Bridge.
ROyal and Practical Chemistry, by Oswaldus Crollius, and John Hartman
faithfully rendered into English, folio, price 10 s: Gods Revenge against
Murder, by John Reynolds, containing Thirty Tragical stories, digested into
six Books, newly reprinted, folio, price 10 s. Lord Bacons Natural History,
folio, price 8 s. Sandy's Travels, containing a description of the Turkish
Empire, of Egypt, and the Holy Land, of the remote parts of Italy, and Islands
adjoining, folio, price 8 s. Markbams Masterpiece. Roman Antiquities, by Tho.
Godwin, quarto, price 2 s. 6 d. Dod upon the Commandments, quarto, price 2 s. 6
d. The famous History of the Destruction of Troy, in three Books, quarto, price
3 s. Valentine and Orson, price 18 d. Etymologicum Parvum, by Francis Gregory,
octavo, price 3 s. Chemical Essays, by John Begumis, price 18 s. Spiritual
Antidotes against sinful Contagion, by Tho. Dolittle, price 18 d. Pools
Dialogue betwixt a Papist and a Protestant, twelves, price bound 1 s.
Monasticon Fevershamiense; or, A description of the Abbey of Feversham, octavo,
price bound 18 d. The Christians Crown of glory; or, Holiness the way to
happiness, octavo, price bound 8 d. The Path way to Health, price bound 18 d.
The Complete Academy, or Nursery of Complements, bound 1 s.
THE CONTENTS.
1. THe Epistle of Jude analized and paraphrased to Verse 20. which is the
Text, page 1. The Text propounds a serious counsel to unfeigned Believers, page
10. Wherein is, I. The title or compellation of them, Beloved. Whence is
observed, Observe. 1. That they that abide in the faith when others turn aside,
or endeavor to corrupt it, are more worthy than others, p. 11. II. The note of
distinction, But ye. Whence it is observed, Observe. 2. That there is a great
difference between hearty Believers and others, especially between them and
Backsliders or Corrupters; and that difference is to be noted by Christ's
Ministers, p. 13. III. The matt^^ mainly exhorted to, To keep themselves in the
love of God. Observe. 3. That Believers are in Gods love, p. 16. Which is, 1.
General, or a love of pity p. 17. 2. Special, A love of owning and delight, p.
20. Believers are in the general love both as all others, p. 23. Believers are
in the general love both and so as others are not, p. 26 And they are in the
special love, p. 24. The streams and fruits thereof in 12 particulars, p. 25:
to p. 39.
Which is applied by way of use, 1. To unbelievers by way of Exhortation, p. 40
Reproof, p. 43 Instruction. p. 45.
2. To believers by way of 1. Comfort, p. 46 2. Exhortation, and that to Love
and hope in God, p. 50 To rejoice in, and give thanks to God, p. 51 To
moderation in griefs, fears, etc. p. 52 To obedience to him, p. 53 To abide in
him, p. 54




Which leads to, Observe. 4. That it is the believers greatest concernment, to
keep themselves and one another in the love of God, p. 56


Whence four points and noted, as included. Point 1. That possibly ^ey may go
out of Gods love: which is explicated and proved, p. 60 to 68 An Objection is
there answered. Point 2. That there is not only possibility, but danger also,
p. 71


Danger
1. Of it, from, 1. The many enemies endeavoring it, p. 73 1 Satan, ib. 2. The
flesh, p. 44 3. The world, p. 75 4. False Teachers, p. 76
2. The believers weakness to defend himself, p. 81. Or rather aptness to
conceit himself strong, p. 85 3. The holiness and severity of God against
withdrawers, p. 87
2. In it, showed in four particulars, p. 92, 93. Point 3. That there is no
necessity of it: Believers may keep themselves in Gods love, p. 94 Not of
themselves, p. 95 But by the Grace of God, p. 96 Which is considered in seven
particulars, p. 97 The Armor of defense given them, briefly explicated, p. 106
Point 4. That it is expected from the believer, and is put upon him, in some
sort, as his work, to keep himself in the love of God, p. 111
Which is considered, 1. As to its act, what is implied in it, p. 112 2. As to
its rea^^ns, p. 115


The fourth Observation, with its several points, applied, 1. By way of
Reproof, several ways, p. 120 2. By way of Exhortation, to care and
watchfulness, p. 124


IV. The way and means of this preservation, Edifying your selves, etc. Thence
Observe, That the way for believers to keep themselves in the love of God, is
to edify themselves in their most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, p. 128


In which are two branches; viz.

I. To edify themselves in their most holy faith: Where is considered, 1. What
is meant by the Faith, p. 128, 129 the foundation to be built on, The Doctrine
of Christ, and Christ as declared therein. 2. Why its called their faith, p.
133 3. Why called the most holy faith, p. 134 Wherein is showed, why it is holy,
p. 134 Wherein is showed, why it is most holy, p. 139.
4. What that is that is to be built on it, 1. Negatively, not the faith, p.
157 2. Affirmatively, themselves, p. 158 Wherein is implied, 1. That believers
are Gods building, p. 158 2. That they are yet in themselves imperfect, p. 159
3. That their perfection is to be sought in abiding in the faith, p. 161


5. How the believer is to be built on the faith or wherein that building
themselves consists, in four particulars, 162 6. What Is implied in saying
actively, Build up your selves, p. 165. viz. 1. That their growth is gradual,
p. 165 2. That the believer is to be active, p. 167 1. In a diligent minding
the most holy faith, p. 169 2. In a faithful exercise of spiritual gifts, p 172
3. In exercising charity, p. 175 4. In walking in all things as becomes the
Gospel, p. 176
7. How this tends to keep believers in the love of God, p. 177




II. To pray in the Holy Ghost. Wherein is considered, 1. What it is to pray,
p. 179. in seven particulars. 2. What to pray in the Holy Ghost, p. 185. viz.
To utter our words and desires to God, 1. In the light, direction, and
guidance of the Holy Ghost. 1. In the things prayed for, p. 186 2. In the
manner of praying, as to 1. The way of approaching and, p, 189 2. The
expressions, p, 189 3. And the earnestness in praying, p. 190
3. In the encouragements and motives to pray, ib. in eight particulars.
2. In the operation of the Holy Ghost through his testimony minded.
Considered, 1. Negatively, in eleven particulars, p. 197, 198 2. Affirmatively,
in seven particulars, p. 199. to 204
3. What is implied in exhorting believers so to pray; viz. 1. Their
insufficiency of themselves, to keep themselves in the love of God, p. 204 2.
That there is sufficient Grace in God and Christ for them, p. 205 3. That God
will be sought for it, p. 206 and why, in seven particulars, to 209 4. That of
themselves they know not how to pray as they ought, ibid. 5. That God has not
left us to our selves, but gives us his Spirit to help, p. 210 6. That having
done so, he requires, that we neglect not his gift, p. 211. 7. That possibly
believers may and do neglect it, p 212 8. That praying in the Holy Ghost, is a
good means of edifying themselves in their most holy faith, 213
4. How the praying in the Holy Ghost, conduces to believers keeping themselves
in the love of God, p. 214 The use of the foregoing Observations, and both its
branches, 1. By way of Reproof, in eight particulars, p. 218.

(Where yet there is omitted a reproof due to those that deny or deride the
praying in the Spirit, contrary to the Apostles Exhortation here, and in Ephesians.
6^8. As also of those that brag of so doing, or think they do so, when they do
not; which may be discerned by what is said of it herein.)

2. By way of Exhortation: wherein is propounded, 1. Motive. From the ends of
our being built up on the faith. p. 225. and the fruits and consequents of it,
p. 226 2. Encouragements to it in five particulars, p. 230

Use. We have the posture in which we are to do all this, Waiting for the mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto Eternal life. Wherein is considered, 1. The
posture it self of Waiting, and what is therein included; viz 1. Hoping, p.
235. which implies, 1. That the thing waited for, is not yet accomplished,
ibid. 2. That yet there is good ground to expect it, p. 236, 237
2. Tarrying, wherein is implied, 1. That God exercises his people with want
and delay, p. 240 and that for diverse reasons, p. 211 (which should be 241.) in
five particulars. 2. That there ought to be a patient bearing that delay, p.
214. (or 244)
3. An earnest desire and seeking, p 215. 245 4. A waiting upon God and Christ,
p. 216
2. The object waited for, 1. The mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, as the means.
2. Eternal life, as the end, p. 217. al. 247

1. Mercy, etc. where is considered, 1. What Is meant by this mercy, p. 219,
220. and in that, wherein God and Christ have showed their mercy, ib. 2. What
this term Mercy implies, both as to, 1. The word Mercy, p. 227. viz. 1. That
believers yet need mercy, p. 228. upon three accounts, 2. That they do not
deserve the love of God, and his blessings p. 230
2. Its being the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, that that speaks
encouragement to expect it, and wait for it, p. 231. Because, 1. He is the
Lord, p. 232 2. He is ours (the believers) Lord in special, p. 233. 3. He is
Jesus our Lord, that is a Savior, ibid. 4. He is also Christ, anointed of God
to be our Savior, p. 234. al. 274


2. Eternal life. Unto Eternal life signifies; either, 1. The end and tendency
of his mercy, p. 235 2. The term of our waiting, p. 236 3. Or the end and issue
of both, p. 238. al. 278.
Where are propounded, 1. Some reasons of it, or grounds to expect it, in six
particulars, p. 238 2. What is in this Eternal life to be expected, in seven
particulars, p. 242
The use of all, 1. To commend the most holy faith p. 2^6. 2. To condemn the
Unbelievers and Apostates folly, p. 24^ 3. To show the infinite happiness of
the abiding Believer, that obeys this counsel, 250. ^^ter with it concludes.




THE BEST EXERCISE FOR CHRISTIANS In the worst Times, etc.
JUDE 20, 21. But ye, Beloved, building up your selves on your most holy Faith,
praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God, waiting for the
Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.


THE Apostle Jude writing this Epistle to them that were sanctified by God the
Father, ver. 1. (separated by him from the world unto himself, through the
prevalencie of his heavenly Call) and preserved in Christ Jesus (from the
Apostacy and back slidings where-through many others had miscarried) and
called (to his service and confession of his Truth;) after salutation of them,
in which he desired further mercy to them, ver. 2. and that peace and love both
from Christ to them, and from and in them toward one another, might be
multiplied; informs them of the end of his writing this Epistle to them,
Namely, to exhort them to contend earnestly for the faith which was once
delivered to the Saints, ver. 3. Namely, that it might be kept pure and
immolate amongst the Churches; and that because of certain men, ungodly
persons, forewritten to this Judgment, as abusers of the Grace of God, and
turners of it into wantonness, who were crept in amongst the Churches unawares,
and become Teachers that impugned the Truth, and denied the only Lord God, and
the Lord Jesus, v. 4. either in their Conversation in denying their subjection
and service to him, giving themselves up to lasciviousness and wantonness, or
in their Doctrines concerning him; as by comparing it with 2 Pet. 2.1. it
appears, or indeed by both. To arm them against these corrupt persons, that
they might neither by their corrupt Doctrines or practices be seduced or
perverted from the faith, but might earnestly contend for it (both for the
profession and honor of it, against them.) He

I. Minds them of the danger of sinning and backsliding from the truth after
they had received and acknowledged it, by the dreadfulness and impartiallity of
Gods judgments upon those that in former ages (and so by consequence in these
ages too, in which God having more clearly discovered his Grace to men, and in
a more glorious way does more expect a worthy receipt of and an answe^rable
return for it,) have rebelled against him, and lived vitiously and wickedly
before him.

To this purpose he instances, first, in the people of Israel, who though they
were God's people, and he had done wonderfully for them, in saving them out of
the land of Egypt, yet they afterward not answering his so great goodness with
answerable fruit in some measure, but after so great engagements to believe,
yet not believing, were therefore afterward destroyed by him, ver. 5.

Secondly, In the Angels, who being glorious Spirits, or set in a first
Principallity, or seat, left their own (or proper) habitation, and so kept not
their first estate, abode not in the truth, but departed therefrom (as Peter
has it) Cast down to Hell, and reserved by God in everlasting chains under
darkness, unto the Judgment of the Great Day, ver. 6.

To admonish and warn all other Angels, (as the Messengers and Ministers of
God's Word are sometimes styled) to take heed to themselves and to their
Doctrine, to continue in the Truth, and not apostatize from it as these had
done: And thirdly, In Sodom and Gomorrha, and the Cities about them, who
(though great and populous Cities, yet) giving up themselves to fornication,
and going after strange flesh, are set forth as an example, suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire, ver. 7.

Secondly, After these instances of God's Vengeance upon men for abuses of his
goodness, and apostatizing from, or failing of his grace, he compares those
deceivers and ungodly persons whom he would have these Saints contend against
with those forementioned Sodomites, fallen Angels, and unbelieving Israelites,
ver. 8. To the Sodomites in in that they had defiled the flesh. To the fallen
Angels, in that departing from the truth of God they were become filthy
Dreamers (inventors of Lies and Falsehoods, and spreaders of them, to draw away
men from the name and faith of Christ (like the false Prophets, Jer. 23.27,
32.) and so from subjection to his Lordship and Government, whose Lordship and
Dominion they despised, as the Angels probably did through their pride as the
occasion and spring of their fall: and, to the Israelites, as in not believing,
so in speaking evil of the Dignities, God had set in his Church, as also in the
world; as they did against Moses and Aaron. ver. 8.

Thirdly, He convinces their evil herein by the contrary carriage and
demeanor of Michael the Archangel, who (though a glorious and powerful Angel,
yet) contending with the Devil about the Body of Moses, durst not bring against
him, being also a power (though a wicked one) a railing accusation, but, said,
the Lord rebuke thee: in which instance whether the Apostle allude to that of
Joshua the High Priest in Zach. 3.2. (where such a like passage is read, that
the Devil standing at his right hand to resist him the Lord said, the Lord
rebuke thee, Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee,
etc.) or, rather to some other passage which the Apostle might read (as the
following Prophecy of Enoch) in some other Records which till that time were
preserved amongst them, but are now lost as to our knowledge, may be a Question.
It may seem the later rather, because it is said, that the dispute was about
the Body of Moses, of which there is no mention in that of Zachary. Now to that
demeanor and carriage of Michael he opposes the carriage of the false
Teachers, that he herewarns of: Michael would not rail upon, or bring railing
accusations against the Devil. ver. 9.

But these blaspheme, or speak evil of those things (or so many things, as)
they know not, even of such Dignities (or, Glories, (...),) as they should
reverence, the Powers over them; or else the Glorious things of Christ which
they have not acquaintance with, and what they know naturally as bruit (or
unreasonable) Beasts, what they know by their brutish senses or carnal mind,
in those they corrupt themselves, or are corrupted. ver. 10.

Fourthly, He denounces a woe against them, and shows the reason thereof from
the wickedness and wretchedness of their ways. Woe unto them, for they have
gone in the way of Cain (envying, and persecuting their better Brethren, more
sound in the Faith and acceptable to God in their services than themselves,)
and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, (or, as others render
it, as a reward, namely, of their forementioned wickedness in hating their
Brethren, and the way of truth,) they have gone astray in, (or been powered out
in) the error of Balaam, which was the teaching Balak to lay stumbling blocks
before the children of Israel, and so to tempt them to eat things sacrificed to
Idols, and to commit fornication, Rev. 2.14. so these for reward, as Balaam
did, laid stumbling blocks before the right believers and worshippers of God,
leading them by their corrupt Doctrines (or also as a recompense thereof being
given up thereto, as Romans 1.26, 27. by their licentious and wanton practices)
to communicate with the Idolaters of the world in their Idolatrous worships,
and to indulge the flesh in lusts of uncleanness, and perished in the
gain-sayings of Korah; in such rebellious oppositions of the power and Lordship
of Christ, and the Dignities authorized by him as Korah practiced against God
in Moses and Aaron. ver. 11. Yea, he yet further describes:

Fifthly, Their evil Case and Way. These are spots (says he) in your feasts of
Charity when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear; Clouds they
are without water (that is, such as boast themselves, and make show of being
some greatly gifted persons, but they give no profit or refreshing to them they
drop their words upon) carried with winds (that is, with sundry and diverse
Spirits and Doctrines, and not guided by the one Spirit and truth of God.)
Trees whose fruit withers, (or, such as are in the end of the harvest toward
winter corrupting and rotting their fruit, such as yield no savoury fruit;
yea,) Trees without fruit, (without any good fruit in Doctrine and
Conversation, they bring in none to God, nor do any real good in their
Generation,) twice dead and plucked up by the roots, (as unfit for fruit or
profit to the Church of God, as such trees be, being also not only dead in Adam
and in themselves, as from him, or in him, as all men naturally are or were;
but then after some life given them in and received of also by Christ, they
have died again, lost that life and sap they received from him, and being given
up to Satan for their neglects or contempts of Christ, they are plucked out of
him, have no root or standing in him, or in the Grace in him, as ver. 12.

Raging waves of the Seas, foaming out their own shame, (troubled and troublous
boisterous persons, acted and made unquiet by their lusts and evil spirits that
have influence upon them, and therefore they in their boysterousness and
unquietness of Spirit, foam out, speak, and vent forth their own shame, their
evil principles, guilt of conscience, or vain-gloryings in things that
discover their destituteness of the fear and Grace of God within,) wandering
Stars that seem to have light, and profess that they know God and can discover
him and his truth to others, but are not fixed in Christ, and therefore wander
into evil and erroneous principles, and perhaps go about too from place to
place to corrupt others with their delusions.)

For whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever, for whom the greatest
rejection from God, and saddest distress and misery in the depths of Hell for
ever are reserved as their due deserved portion, as being sinners of the
highest degree of wickedness, because they deny the Lord that bought them, and
corrupt others from the faith of him. ver. 13.

Sixthly, He confirms the Truth of what he had said about the sadness and
wretchedness of their estate by the Prophecy of Enoch the seventh from Adam,
which though we have it not recorded elsewhere in our Bibles, yet was by some
other Writings in those days handed to them.

And Enoch also the seventh from Adam prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the
Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and
to convince all the ungodly of them of all their ungodly deeds, which they have
ungodlily committed, and of all the hard speeches which ungodly godly Sinners
have spoken against him, ver. 14, 15. and then:

Seventhly, Gives a further Character or Description of them, to whom he
applies that Prophecy, and it may seem, first, with reference to the last
clause of it. These are murmurers (namely against God and his Servants, like
the Israelites of old in their unbelief against the Lord, and against Moses and
Aaron,) complainers, (the word signifies, faulters of their destiny, lot, or
condition, not submitted to, or content with the Providence of God to and
about them) and then with reference to the middle clause of the said Prophecy,
Walking after their own ungodly lusts, not keeping them to the word and will of
God set before them in the Gospel, but as complaining of the purity, severity,
or simplicity of that they break those bonds, and transgress those bounds that
they might walk after their own imaginations, both as to faith and manners. v
1.6. And their mouths speak great swelling words (as of their parts, worth,
seize) or as in 2 Pet. 2.18, 19. (the parallel place to this Epistle)
They promise others liberty; they talk of being free from and above those rules
of faith and worship that Christ has prescribed, and promise others freedom
and liberty from such trials, persecutions, or temptations as they see the
faithful cleavers to Christ exercised under, will they but listen to them: yea,
they speak as if they had their heaven and happiness, Kingdom and glory here,
while yet themselves (as he says) are servants of corruptions Having men's
persons in admiration for advantage, or profit-sake, flattering and commending
men's persons, their greatness, parts, or places for some gain to themselves.

Eighthly, Having thus at large described them and the evil and wretchedness of
their way and condition, he fortifies them against them, by putting them in
mind that this was no strange matter, nothing but what the Apostles of Christ
had forewarned them of.

But, ye Beloved, call to mind the words which were before spoken of the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, how that they told you, that there should be
mockers (Deceivers) in the last time, walking after their own ungodly lusts,
ver. 17, 18. and then,

Ninthly, Gives yet a further Character and description of them, and shows the
fulfilling of those words in these persons, that they might not mistake them,
as to the persons he warns them of, and that we in after-ages might know them,
saying, These be they that separate themselves (divide themselves from the
company and fellowship of the true worshippers and Confessors of the Doctrine
of Christ, as not one in faith with them, or as seeking to avoid those
sufferings and persecutions, that they were then exposed to, probably
pretending more holiness, but really casting off Christ's government, yoke, and
discipline in his Church.) sensual (or led by their carnal understanding and
imagination, having no higher principle to guide them, and so savouring of such
animal or sensual things only) not having the Spirit. (The Spirit of faith to
make them live by faith in the hope and expectation of the coming and Kingdom
of Christ, which these deceivers denied, and made a mock of, and so of the
eternal life that God has promised to those that worship him, and trust in him
by Jesus Christ. ver. 19.

Now after all these things having so variously and abundantly both described
these Deceivers, and admonished the right Believers of them, he comes in these
20 and 21 verses to exhort and counsel them to what might be of greatest
concernment to themselves, and one another in opposition to the way and
practice of those ungodly persons, and that they might be kept from their
infection and the dangerous fruits thereof. But ye Beloved, building up your
selves on your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost, keep your selves in
the love of God, waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal
life. ver. 21, 22: wherein we have

A serious and heavenly counsel given to faithful and unfeigned believers for
their preservation in the Grace of God, and attainment of eternal life and
happiness and; wherein is

1. The compellation, term or title wherewith he addresses himself to these to
whom he wrote. Ye Beloved.

2. The Distinction of them from, and opposition of them to those ungodly
Deceivers before described. Those ungodly ones were such as separated
themselves, forsook the Assemblings of themselves together, being sensual and
not having the Spirit. But ye Beloved. Ye are not of them.

3. The main thing counseled to, and to be aimed at by them, and that is in
verse 21. Keep your selves in the love of God.

4. The means and course to be taken and used by them to attain that end, and
that is in ver. 20. and that is twofold. 1. Building up your selves on your
most holy Faith. 2. Praying in the Holy Ghost keep, etc.

5. The manner, posture, or frame of heart in which they were to do all these
things, viz. in proposing to themselves the ultimate end, Eternal Life, to have
their hearts and minds exercised to, and waiting for the most necessary means
as from Christ toward them as to their attaining thereof, namely, the mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ, without which nothing of those other great things
exhorted and directed too, could be to any purpose either done, or attempted by
them. Waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal life.

The two former, the Compellation, or Title given these persons to whom this
Epistle was writ, and their distinction from the ungodly and deceivers before
described and warned of, we shall not insist upon much, only we might note from
the first,

Obs. 1. That such as abide in the Truth of God and walk therein, when others
turn from it, abuse or oppose it, are worthy of, and are to be respected with
more love by those who are over them in the word of the Lord, and minister the
knowledge of God amongst men, than such as slight and depart therefrom, and so
they were Beloved of the Apostles and Servants of Christ, as well as of Christ
himself in their Ages:

For, This word (Beloved) signifies not only pitied, commiserated, or persons
for whom good is desired, for so much love may and should be testified to
others whilst there is hope for them that they may be saved: as Paul testified
such love to the unbelieving Jews, who stumbled at the stumbling stone, and
submitted not themselves to the righteousness of God, Romans 9.33. and 10.1, 2,
3. and it is to be testified to all that have not sinned to death, 1 Timothy 2.1,
2. with John 5.16. but (Beloved) is, more intimately affected, valued,
esteemed, owned, delighted in, and desired: as, so Christ is called God's
Beloved, one in whom his Soul is well-pleased, Isa. 42.1. with Matt. ^.12.18.
and 3.17. This is my Beloved, or, well-beloved Son, etc. Cant. And so Christ is
also called by the Church his Spouse, Her Beloved One, Cant. 1.13, 14, 16. It
is a word implying and signifying more indearedness of affection toward the
persons so spoken to and styled: and therefore usual in the writings of the
Apostles to Brethren in the faith and confession of Christ: and never to
strangers from, or much less the enemies to it. By their use of which, they
signified, either

1. That the Brethren, Believers in Christ, were dearly cared for, valued, and
prized of God and Christ, objects of their especial care and affection, and
partakers of his Grace and Love, or

2. That they were especially amongst men cared for, owned, valued and
delightfully affected by them the Apostles, and their fellow laborers: they
being therein of the mind of God and Christ, to love and affect especially
those who with special care and affection are embraced of Christ, and of God in
and through him. All men are to be honored, but the Brotherhood in a special
sense to be beloved, 1 Pet. 2.17. not only (though specially also) with a love
of Charity, but also with a love of Brotherly kindness, a love of Brethren, 1.
Pet. 3.9. Hebr. 13. 2 Pet. 1.7. even as Christ preferred such before his
natural Brethren, Mother, and Sisters, as such only, Matthew. 12.48, 49, 50. So
did the Apostles and Servants of Christ prefer the hearty believers of the
Doctrine of Christ before all other persons, and so demeaned themselves in word
and deed toward them; owning them as their Brethren and beloved; carrying
themselves to them as Fathers toward their children. 1 Cor. 4.14, 15. 2 Cor.
12, 14. yea, as a Tender Nurse or Foster-Mother toward her little ones, as,
These. 2.7, 8. They were gentle toward them as a Nurse that cherishes her
children, so kindly affectionate to them that they were willing to impart their
lives and Souls to them. And so they instructed the Elders and Ministers
ordained by them to be especially careful of, and watchful over such. Act.
20.28. 1 Pet. 5.4 2, 3. and exhorted them to be kindly affectioned one to
another. Romans 12.10. yea, and this from the difference between these and
others. For,

Obser. 2. As there is a great difference between hearty believers in Christ,
and others that believe not, and much more those that are turned aside and
endeavor to corrupt others from the faith of him; so the Apostles used, and
others that are the Servants and Ministers of Christ should use in their
ministration to put a great difference between them also: for The righteous is
more excellent then his neighbor, Prove. 12.26. More excellent, both as to his
root, which is Christ and God in him, in whom he is by faith planted, and
stands, and grows; and in respect of his branches, or what issues and springs
up from the faith of Christ in his heart, as his thoughts and estimates of, and
affections to God, his Truth, Ways, People.

Though there may be much of the flesh cleaving to him in these, and rendering
these so imperfect, that he has no cause to boast of them in the presence of
God, yet in these the righteous, believing person is far otherwise, and better
than his Neighbor that is unrighteous, and has nothing of the sap, virtue and
Spirit of Christ in him. And then in his fruits and usefulness to others in
word, and work, and for the glorifying of God to and amongst them, and showing
to them the way of righteousness, which being righteous, he does also practice
and exercise himself to: His lips feed many, and his tongue is as choice
silver, Prove. 10.20, 21. He is furnished for others good and helpfulness so as
others are not; and his estate and condition is far more excellent; Better a
little that he has, than the great riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37.16. Yea, he
is more noble and honorable in his birth and descent as righteous, as being a
Son of God, John 1.12. More rich, as being an Heir of God, and of the Kingdom
that he has promised to them that love him, Romans 8.17. James 2.5. He is more
safe and secure, as more out of the reach of danger, as being infolded in the
everlasting Arms of God; and in all respects is furnished with, and interested
in far more durable and excellent enjoyments than his Neighbor is, i. e. then
any other man that is not righteous, or that is out of the Faith of Christ; and
therefore much more than the wicked Apostates and Deceivers, that are Trees
twice dead and plucked up by the roots, as this Apostle says, for they are
corrupt, and their hearts wicked, and their works and fruits abominable and
wretched; being fallen from God and his Truth, there is less hope of them than
of any others; For better it is never to have known the way of truth, than
after the knowledge of it to turn away again from the holy Commandment, 2 Pet.
2.21. Their root is rottenness, and their blossom goes up as dust, because
they have cast away the Law and Doctrine of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the
Word of the Holy One of Israel, Isai. 5.24. Though they may profess that they
know God, yet in deed they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and unto
every good work reprobates; bunglers at the best, and void of judgment, Tit.
1.16. Now as there is such difference between them, so it is the part and
practice of Christ's Apostles and Servants to separate and put difference
between them in their ministration, as Jude here does, To say to the Righteous,
It shall be well with him, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings, and to
pronounce woe to the wicked, for he shall (in going on to be so) surely dye, the
reward of his hands shall be given him, Isai. 3.10, 11. and so to separate the
precious from the vile, encouraging, confirming and strengthening the one in
the Lord, and so in the way of righteousness, and reproving, discouraging and
fighting against the other in the way of his wickedness; that he might be
filled with shame, and either be turned from his wicked way, or be weakened and
confounded however in it, that he may not be able to do hurt to others, and
hinder them in the way of righteousness and salvation, Jerem. 15.19.

But (as I said before) I shall not enlarge further upon these things, but
proceed to consider the Council and Exhortation here given, for the direction
and preservation of Believers. But ye beloved, building up your selves on your
most holy faith, etc.

In speaking to and considering of which I shall, God willing, observe the
order above propounded, first speak to the main thing directly exhorted to, and
then to the means and manner thereto and thereof prescribed, as God shall
afford his assistance and help to me: And so I shall consider,

1. The matter mainly or directly exhorted to, and see what it implies and
signifies unto us, that is, Keep your selves in the love of God: In which is
signified,

Obser. 3, 4. 1. That unfeigned Believers in Christ are in the love of God.

2. That it greatly behooves them, and it is required of them, that they keep
themselves therein.

Indeed those words [In the love of God] may be so construed, as to signify
either the way in which we are directed to keep our selves, namely, from the
error of the wicked, and the dangers and woes attending it, and then the sense
might be, Keep your selves from those persons and evils forementioned, by
taking heed to the love of God; or else (which I judge the righter, as to the
intent of the Apostle here) the way, state or condition, in which the Believers
at that present were, this, I say, I judge the righter: for the other sense
representing those words (in the love of God) as if they signified (in minding
the love of God) or the like, is included in the words, Building up your selves
on your most holy faith, as we may see in considering that phrase; and
therefore I conceive the Apostle would not speak the same thing twice in the
same breath as it were; besides that, his sentence should be somewhat defective
in omitting the word (minding) or the like; whereas in the other sense all
things are plain. And the former Observation from these words evidently appears
to be employed, namely, That unfeigned Believers are in the love of God; Obser.
3.
where we shall mind,

1. What is meant by the love of God here, and then,

2. Show that, and how, the Believer is in it.

1. By the love of God is sometime meant and signified his loving, merciful,
pitiful and compassionate affection, in which he wills and desires the good
of the party loved, and does that that he sees needful and conducible thereto;
yet so as not in the mean while liking or approving or taking into fellowship
with himself the party loved, because of the unfitness and incapacity in the
present condition for it. A Love of pity, commiseration and well-willing, but
not of owning and delight; and so it is said John 3.16. God so loved the world
that he gave his only begotten Son that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life, which is only meant of such a pitying and
well-willing love, not of owning and approving love. For it is not said, That
God so loved the world as that he approved its state and way, or owned it to be
his peculiar people, his portion, and the heirs of his Kingdom, or admitted it
into fellowship with himself. No, the world being there plainly persons not as
yet believing in him, or in his Son, but in such a condition as needed his Sons
being given to do that for it, and receive that power and fi^ness thereupon to
help it as might render him an object to be believed in by it; were in such a
sinful, wretched, ungodly State as in which it was liable to perish in its
wickedness or sinfulness; and therefore God could not as in that state in which
he is yet said so to love it, as to give his Son, approve of it, or admit it
into his presence to the enjoyment of fellowship with him, and life therein.
And that is evident, for could God as then and in that state have delighted in,
owned and approved of it, and so admitted it into fellowship with himself, and
had God accordingly so have loved it as so to do, then was it in no danger of
perishing, much less in no such danger as that it needed the coming forth and
death and sacrifice of Christ to save it therefrom, unless we could imagine
that God sent Christ only to preserve the world in his owning, approving love,
and not to procure that it might be so loved, or have a way to be brought into
it which is contrary to the Scripture, which both tell us that the world was in
a state of enmity to God, and therefore not in an approved state; and that
Christ was sent forth for its reconciling to him, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in
Christ reconciling the World to himself, etc. and every where implies a need
for his doing so, that it or any man in it might come into such a state by him,
as that it might be owned and accepted, which needed not if it was accepted
before. For if it was owned of God and approved, notwithstanding the sin of
Adam and that sinfulness which thereby entered upon it and defiled it, then why
might it not still have been always accepted and approved whatever it might sin
in, by the power or virtue of that its corrupted state, that its sinning
notwithstanding: for if the root hindered it not of God's favor to it, why
should any fruit springing from that root, and so Christ's coming had or should
have been in vain or needless; yea, and all calls to believe in him, and acting
of faith toward him; which so pulls up all the Gospel by the roots, and
abrogates the Grace of God that it may by no means be endured. And therefore it
may in no wise be understood of an approving, owning, and (as some are pleased
to speak) a tantamount justifying love from eternity, but only (as we said) of
a love of pity and well-willing, in which God beholding its wretchedness by
reason of its sins against him, and his curse against it, did mercifully devise
and find out a way to help it; and where through any of it might (if not
obstinately choosing their own ruin) be actually saved and brought ^o
happiness. Such a love as this may be in a Father toward an ungracious child
who has provoked him to cast him into prison, where he yet remains in his
crooked conditions and in danger there to perish; he may out of pity use means
to set him free, and reclaim him to a beter demeanor of himself, while yet he
cannot like of his present either demeanor or concondition, or own and delight
in him as such. And as David loved Absalom greatly, even while he was in open
arms and rebellion against him, so as that he was not willing he should perish
or be slain therein; yea, so as he could have found in his heart to have died
for him, so he might have lived and come to good; when as yet he could not own,
approve, or delight in him, or like to have his company in that his condition.
Such a love God loves sinners and ungodly men with, while yet they be such. But,

2. By the love of God is sometime meant and signified his owning, approving,
tenderly affecting, and delightfully favoring or embracing a person or party
loved, as when it is said, The Father loves the Son, and gave all things to
him, John 3.36. and again, Therefore my Father loves me, because I lay down my
life, that I may take it again, John 10.17. that is, he owns, approves, and
delights in the Son, as in Matthew. 3.17. This is my beloved Son in whom I am
well-pleased, and as Mat. 12.18. Behold my servant whom I have chosen, my
beloved in whom my Soul is well-pleased, or as Isaiah has it, Isa. 42.1. in
whom my soul delights. He so loved and loves Christ not only as his eternal
word as brought forth before the mountains and hills rejoicing always before
him, and his daily delight, as Pro. 8.29.30. but also as man of the seed of
Abraham and David after the flesh, and ^s because he was obedient to him, did
his will, and kept his Commandment in laying down his life a ransom for us,
and taking it again, as John 15.9 10. with 10.17, 18. that he has in all cases
stood by him, upheld and helped him, owned and approved his doings and
performances, accepted him into his presence, given him honor and glory, and
taken up his delight and well-pleasedness in him for ever. After that manner
loved he not the world, he owned it not nor approves its works, nor takes it
into his favor and acceptance, because it and its works are all evil. But with
such a love God and Christ loved his Disciples, as in John 15.9, 10. As the
Father has loved me, so have I loved you; (so that after such a sort with such
an owning, accepting, approving love) continue ye in my love: and John 16.27.
The Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that
I came out from God. Surely, God loved them before they loved Christ, but that
was with a pitying, well-willing love, desiring their good, and affording that
to them that might conduce to their good, both as to the making them good, and
bringing them to be capable subjects of his special goodness, while they were
yet of the world he loved them, as he loved the world, and with such a manner
of loving them; and so gave Christ for them and to them as an object fit to be
believed in by them, that they might believe in him, and be saved out of the
condition of the world, in which he found them, and in which they lay before
their believing in him: but now there he speaks of an higher and other manner
of love or streaming, forth his love upon them, as persons in Christ, loving
him and believing him to be the Son of God sent forth into the world by him.
Such a likement of them as a result of the greatness of his love to Christ, as
not only on the accompt^ of Christ's intercession and praying for them (I say
not, says Christ that I will pray for you) but in approvement of their faith in
and love to Christ, and out of his respect upon that account to them, he would
hear and help them; yea, as our Savior himself says in his prayer for them in
the next Chapt. John 17.23. the Father loved them even as he loved Christ; for
so are the words, That the world may know that thou have sent me, and that thou
have loved them as thou have loved me. Loved them, not the world, for he did
not love the world as he loved Christ, though he so loved it, as to give Christ
for it, to be the Savior of it; but by (them) its evident he means the
Disciples and believers on Christ, who are said to be loved as Christ, not in
immediateness, height of testimony, and fullness as Christ, but in respect of
the account upon which he loves them. Not as Adam, or, as branches only of him,
and so with a love issuing out of his love to him, as he may be said to have
loved the world, that is, to have pityed them, and desired their good as his
Creatures, but as Christ, as branches of him the true Vine, and with a love
centered upon him, reflecting from his love to him, and with respect to him as
loved for his obedience to him in laying down his life and taking it up again:
and so as he loved Christ, even with a love answerable to, or after such a
manner, as, his loving him, that is, reckoning them in and after him,
approving; owning, taking pleasure in them, etc.

2. Now the hearty believers on Christ, and retainers of his Truth, and walkers
therein, may be truly said to be in the love of God in both these senses,
significations or manners of the acting of the love of God; that is,

1. In the love of pity and well wishing, and that both

1. As they were in Adam, not only standing and as there owned and approved as
his innocent Creatures (for of his loving men there we have nothing here to
say, the object of his so loving men as such being long since ceased in Adam's
sinning) but as fallen, and yet pitied of God, and not left destitute of his
care of him to help and rescue him, for so they were parts and members of the
World, or of that lump of mankind fallen in him whom he sent his Son for, and
who stood in need of his Sons coming and saving of them. In that love (as we
noted) in one sense all men are, till any of them slighting it, and rebelling
against God, as exercising his love to them, are therefore blotted out of the
Book of Life, and reprobated and reckoned after Satan, as incorporated into
him, that is, all men, as fallen; were, and are, till then, the objects of that
love: God would not that any man should perish, but that all might come to
repentance and be saved, 2 Pet. 3.9. He would that all men be saved, and come
to the knowledge (or acknowledgment*) of the truth; for there is one God, and
one Mediator of God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom
for all, a testimony in due time, 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. Such Grace or Good will was
in the heart of God toward the whole World, or every one that there through
Christ was sent forth for them, and tasted death for every one, Heb. 2.9. by
which (bearing upon himself the sin of the World therein) he took it away, John
1.29. obtained such a release of that judgment that was upon all for one
offense to condemnation, that there is justification to life, and righteousness
in him for all; Romans 3.22. and 5.18. He being risen again a Conqueror over sin
and death for our justification, and being as a reward and recompense of his
services and sufferings taken up to the right hand of God, He is by him made
Lord and Christ, Phil. 2.10, 11. Acts 2.36. Lord of all, both of the dead and
living, Acts 10.36. Romans 14 9. And anointed and filled with the Holy Ghost and
power, that he might be the light to lighten the Gentiles, and Gods salvation
to the ends of the earth, Isai. 61.1. and 42.1, 7, 8. and 49.8, 9. The great
Prophet and Teacher of the Truth of God to men; the Great High Priest, who
having offered up himself an acceptable Sacrifice to God, is in the virtues
thereof the Mediator of God and men, the propitiation for the sins of the whole
World, 1 John 2.1, 2. 1 Timothy 2.5. So as that mercy and goodness, patience and
forbearance is by him extended from God to the whole World, in the day of his
grace and patience to lead them to repentance, Romans 2.4, 5. Psalm. 145.8, 9, 10.
and there is in and through him a way of access for any of them to God, and of
acceptance with God in their repenting and coming to God by him, Heb. 7.25. and
10.19, 20. John 14.6. and 3.16, 17. Who is also the Great King over all the
Earth, who are given him for his inheritance and possession, Psalm. 47.7. Jer.
10.7. Psalm. 2.8. And in the exercise of these his glorious Offices, He is the
Savior of all men, and especially of them that believe, and through him God
his Father is so also, 1 Timothy 4.10. All things are ready in him for men, even a
feast of fat things for all people, Mat. 22 4. Isai. 25.6. And both he and the
Father in him is ready to entertain thereto all that come to him in the
strength and virtue of his grace and gracious call preventing them: which is
therefore also extended to them generally by God and Christ in his works about
them, or words to them, with his Spirit there through working to convince,
reprove, and move them to seek after and turn to him, Isai. 55.1, 2, 3, 6, 7,
8. and 45.22. Prove. 1.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Psalm. 50.1, 2. Prove. 8.1, 5. and 9.1,
6. John 6.37. Such love has God to all generally, and to those that believe he
testified the same to draw them to believe and come to him, they also being
before their believing, Children (that is, fit for and worthy) of wrath even as
others, Ephesians. 2.3. Tit. 3.3, 4, 5. Yea, and now that they believe, having nor
wholly put off the fruits of the sin of the first Adam, but being as men still
defiled with sin dwelling in them, and mortallity and death upon them, as such,
they are objects still of that love of pity to mankind, and stand in need of
the exercise of it to their salvation; they are not by believing passed out of
that love, much less blotted out, but are yet continued in it, though also
advanced higher, and so not only as all other men the objects of that love, but
also

2. As brought unto Christ they are in a further sense in that love too, so as
other men are not; that is to say, they are in the understanding, belief and
knowledge of that love of God to man; that is, they in some measure understand,
believe and know it, yea, have it in their hearts so as they are also begotten
to God and Christ thereby, are born of it, and have the foundation, ground or
beginning of their faith and hope in God in it; for it is in the discovery and
perception of that love of God to man, that the heart is overcome and framed to
trust in God, and brought out of it self, and out of its former false
confidences into Christ; not the sight of special love to it self above others,
but the sight and knowledge of Gods love to the World. Therefore when our
Savior had preached to Nicodemus the necessity of regeneration to the entering
into the Kingdom of God; or seeing and enjoying it, he did not afterward, for
effecting that regeneration in him, tell him of some peculiar electing love of
God toward him in particular, but of Gods love to the World in general, John
3.3, 5, 15, 16. Even as it was not the lifting up the Brazen-Serpent in some
special fashion for this or that particular person of the Israelites stung with
the fiery Serpents, and their beholding it as in some such special fashion
lifted up for them, by virtue whereof this or that person of them was healed,
but by its being lifted up for all of them in general, this or that man
beholding it as so lifted up as a common Medicine for their healing, received
healing by it, and perished not. And as Moses lifted up that Serpent in the
wilderness (the only common Medicine for all that were stung,) so must the Son
of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life. So the Apostle Paul says, Tit. 3.3, 4. that it was the
effect and product of the love and pity of God our Savior toward man, and not
as toward themselves only, or in some special manner, that they were pulled
out of the state of the world and saved. While any man knows or takes heed to,
and minds the Name, fame, or Doctrine of God, that sets him forth in his
greatness, power, love, mercy, faithfulness, etc: he will trust in him. That
Name known and minded (though it be but one and the same in it self, for and to
all men as considered alike) will beget and frame the hearts of such as know it
to trust in him. It is the sight, understanding, or perception of the General
love of and goodness of God to all, even to sinners and enemies, that overcomes
any, whiles sinners and enemies to turn to God, trust and hope in him, and in
his mercy for their salvation.

The sight and perception of the goodness of God to believers, as such may make
a man to wish himself to be such, and more diligently to listen to what may
make him such that he may partake of that choice goodness: and it is very
useful also to be propounded in the hearing of others; as our Savior did
propound the blessed state of his Disciples to them in the hearing of the
multitude, Matthew. 5.1, 2. with Luk 6.20, 21: but it is the sight, knowledge, or
perception of God's graciousness to sinners, in his (being upon the account of
Christ and his sacrifice and mediation) ready and willing to accept any poor
sinner turning to him, forgiving his sins (and not retaining his trespasses
against him to bar him out from his favor) that draws and persuades a sinner
and ungodly one to turn unto him, and hope and believe in him, yea, and it is
the flesh of Christ given for the life of the world, that the believer also
feeds on. Now all men are not in this sense in the General love, goodness, and
gratiousness of God: they do not see, perceive, and believe it, much less are
their hearts taken with it, and living in it, sucking in virtue and power from
it to trust in God, and to renew them into his image and unto his obedience.
But the believers are in this sense in it too, in the words and Doctrine of
Christ, John 8.31, 32. feeding upon it even upon the flesh of Christ given for
the life of the world, John 6.51. Christ given to be the ransom for all, and
there-through the Savior of the world, is the root, spring, and foundation of
their hope and faith toward God: and then.

2. They are also there-through in the special love of God. The love wherewith
he loves Christ comes upon them, and they are in it, included in it, and
enclosed with it; because through the discovery of Christ and the Grace of God
in him, for all men they are brought into Christ. Being baptized into him they
have put him on, as Gal. 3.26, 27. and are looked upon of God, as in him, as his
Branches, John 15.1, 4, 5, his Members, Ephesians. 5.30. and so they are reckoned
after him, according to their New Birth, of and into him. 2 Cor. 5.16, 17,
Being in Christ, they are no more known after the flesh: After what they were
in Adam and derived from him to be disowned of God by reason thereof, but they
are new Creatures, old things are passed away, and all things are become new,
they are now in another, a new State and condition, from what other men are in,
out of Christ, and that from what themselves were in before they were in
Christ, or believed in him, they were amongst others in the state and
fellowship of the world, Branches of the same Wild-Olive (as it were) with
them, ungodly sinners, children of wrath, such as deserved wrath and were
obnoxious to it, as well as the rest, but now, through the blood of Christ, and
by faith in him, they are made partakers of Christ the second Adam, the root of
righteousness, the plant of renown, the Son of God, and his dearly beloved One;
and so they are.

1. Justified and acquitted from all their former sins and trespasses, none of
them remain upon them as imputed to them, there is not only righteousness in
Christ for them, as for all, Romans 3.22. but it is also come upon them, so as
they are in it. By Christ all that believe are justified, acquitted, and set
free from the charge and imputation of, all things, wherefrom they could not be
justified by the Law of Moses. Act. 13.38, 39. even from such sins as the Law
of Moses provided, or allowed no Sacrifices for, as Murder, Adultery, etc.
what ever they were before, they are now justified, sanctified, washed, or made
clean therefrom in the sight of God, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. and they are now reputed and reckoned
righteous in Christ, and so styled, and spoken of by the Spirit of God in the
Scriptures.

2. They are now also owned and accepted of God into a nearer relation and
station to him* they are now in Christ become his, not only his in a common
sense, as all the earth are, but his in a more special and peculiar sense, not
only his, because his Creatures in Adam, and so he their Sovereign Lord to rule
over and dispose of them as he pleases, but also his, because his new
Creatures, Created as his workmanship in Christ Jesus unto good works, which he
has ordained for them to walk in: his people, his Subjects, his purchased
ones; not only as generally ransomed from under the power and tyrannous
jurisdiction of Satan and Sentence of curse, to be under Christ's Lordship, and
dispose as all are: but also as through his love therein testified and made
known they are purchased and procured to a voluntary subjection of themselves
to his Government, to own him for their Lord, and themselves to be his Subjects
and and Servants, and so are translated out of the Kingdom and jurisdiction of
Satan and the power of darkness, as to their living therein, and obeying
thereofi, nto the Kingdom and gracious Government of his Dear Son, Exodus 19.5,
6. Ephesians. 2.10. 1 Pet. 2 9. Col. 1.11, 12, 13. Yea, they are made of his family
and household in the choice sense: Fellow Citizens with the Saints, of the
Heavenly Jerusalem, the City of God, etc.

3. Yea, God so loves these that he adopts them to himself for Sons, being in
Christ his Son, and, made members of him, whereas before were they others
Servants, servants of sin and heirs of death. To them that received him, he
(that is, Christ) gave this liberty, freedom or dignity, to become the Sons of
God, even to them that believe in his Name; being begotten and born thereto,
not of bloods, or of the will of the flesh, or of the will of man, but of God,
whose work it is to bring a man to, and make him in Christ by and through the
word of truth, declared to men, and listened to by them: John 1.12, 13. Jam.
1.18. thence, that also, ye are all the Sons of God, by faith in Jesus Christ,
for as many as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ, Gal. 3.26,
27. It is a fruit and consequent of men's being in Christ; a privilege
resulting from Christ the Son of God by nature and generation that any obtain
this Grace and favor to be reputed and owned of God as his Children; and
therefore also it is common to all believers, that are truly such without
difference or respect of persons: it is nothing that the carnal parentage or
natural blood or birth of better or worse parents; or that the desires of the
flesh to be honored of God, or will of this or that man has any thing to do
in, or makes any difference in. All that are in Christ being born thereto, and
therein of God, and reckoned after Christ, in whom they are, as Gal. 3.28, 29.
with John 1* 13. signifies: and then from and as a consequent to this,

4. God so loves them as to give them the Spirit of the Son, both his Spirit to
open the knowledge of Christ his Son to them, and the disposition, liberty,
boldness toward and affection to, and affiance in him, in some measure. The
same Spirit that dwelt in, and yet dwells in Christ, and led him as man in the
days of his flesh, to have confidence in, and boldness toward his Father, and
so to go to him upon all occasions as to his Father, he gives also to the
believer in him, to let him know Gods Fatherly love to, and care of him, upon
the account of Christ, and to lead him in hope and confidence to depend on and
call upon him, as also to guide, instruct, comfort, strengthen and help him on
all occasions. To this purpose is that in Gal. 4.5, 6. Because ye are Sons God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father;
and so many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, and the
Spirit it self helps our infirmities, etc. Romans 8.15, 16, 26, 27. and this he
gives both as a pledge of his love and acceptance, and as an earnest of the
Inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. 2 Cor. 1.22.

5. Yea, and as he gives them the privilege of Sons, and the Spirit of his
Son, so also the respect of Sons; so as that as he heard and helped Christ his
only begotten Son in the days of his flesh, in all that he called upon him
for, and took care of him to provide for and protect him, so does he also to
those that believe in his Son; The eyes of the Lord are open upon the
righteous, and his ears are open unto their cries, and his face is set against
the wicked, that hate and oppress them, 1 Peter 3.12, 13. He is nigh unto his
people in all that they call upon him; for as our Savior also promises, John
15.7. Abide in me, and let my words abide in you, and ask what ye will it shall
be given you; and that as a testimony of his great love to them, in which he
imbraceth them in Christ his beloved one, in whom they are accepted, Ephesians.
1.16. See also John 14.13, 14. Psalm. 145.17, 18, 19. as our Savior testifies,
John 16.27. saying, In that day ye shall ask the Father in my Name, (namely,
when they had received the promise of the holy Spirit, to be a Spirit of grace
and supplication in them) and I do not say, that I will pray the Father for
you, for the Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have
believed that I came out from God. Yea,

6. In his love he teaches them by his holy Spirit, and leads them into all
truth as is good and needful for them, John 14.17, 26. Prove. 1.23. teaches
them how to walk, and how to pray, guides and leads them in the way that they
should go, makes known his words, shows them his mind, the Mysteries of his
Kingdom, etc. So Psalm. 25, 8, 9, 12, 14. Good and upright is the Lord,
therefore will he teach sinners the way; the meek will he guide in judgment,
the meek will he teach his way, i. e. those that being convinced of their own
poverty and emptiness do meekly receive his words; The secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant: And Matthew. 13.11.
To you (says Christ to his Disciples) it is given to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of God; and I have called you not Servants, but Friends, for all things
that I have heard of my Father have I made known to you. He takes care of them
that they may not wander out of the way of life and righteousness; yea, he
shows them those delights and pleasures of his ways, and gives them a glimpse
too of the glory of the end of it, even of the glory of his Kingdom, so as that
they are thereby made to love his way, and walk in it comfortably and with
great delight, Prove. 3.17. Psalm. 119 32, 165.

7. In love also he nurtures them as his Children, giving them chastisement as
he sees needful and good for them, not leaving them to their own counsels,
ways and wills, as he does those that coutemn his counsels, and submit not to
him. He is faithfully reproving and warning them, and timely ch^stening them
with his afflictions, that he might teach them his Law, and they might keep his
Statutes, Psalm. 94 12. and 119 67, 71. as a Father that loves his Child, and
therefore spares not his Rod, Prove. 13.24. for he knows that a Child left to
himself comes to misery, and shame; nor yet does he in afflicting smite them as
he smites these that smite them, and are his and their enemies, but as a Father
chastens the Son in whom he delights, Prove. 3.11, 12 Isai. 27.7, 8. that is
he does it in measure and judgment, not in fury, so as he sees they may bear,
and as may be for their profit, Isai. 27.8, 9. Heb. 12.10. He is faithful and
will not suffer them to be tempted above what they are able, but with the
temptation or trial will give an issue that they may be able to bear it, 1 Cor.
10* 12. For he pities them as a Father pities his Child, knowing their mold and
temper, and that they are but dust, and therefore does not deal with them after
their sins, nor reward them according to their iniquities, but punishes them
less than they deserve, is slow to wrath toward them, and abundant in goodness
and truth, and does not chide them always, nor retain his anger for ever,
Psalm. 103.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. yea, and with his chastisements affords his
supports and consolations to refresh their hearts, Psalm. 94.18 19 yea, and
turns again and has compassion according to the multitude of his tender
mercies, Lam. 3.32. Yea,

8. He takes pleasure in them, in them that fear him; and in them that hope in
his mercy, Psalm. ^47.11. The Lord takes pleasure in his people, Psalm 49.4. It Is
his design and delight to make them happy, and to beautify them with his
Salvation, to make them as a Crown of Glory, and as a royal Diadem in his hand;
therefore he calls them Hep^zibah, that is, my delight or pleasure is in her,
owning them together in Christ as his royal Spouse and Consort; as Isai. 54 5.
with 62 2, 3, 4. it rejoices his heart to see them thrive and prosper, for he
has pleasure in the prosperity of his Servants, Psalm. 35.27. Yea, and though
they have their failings, weaknesses and spots that might render them unlovely,
yet having given Christ to them to be their covering, their righteousness and
salvation, they being in him, he in him beholds them, and through and in him
rejoices in his love toward them, yea, and will joy over or in behalf of them
with singing, Zeph. 3.17. though their goodness gives him not rest, yet his
love to them does, He shall rest in his love, and in his love also he has
abundantly provided for their perfect cleansing and conforming to him, that
there may be no spot in them, but they may be perfect and without blame before
him, Ephesians. ^. 26, 27. having appointed his only Son (who is faithful to him in
all things) to wash and sanctify them, and conform them to his mind.

9. Yea, such is his love that he deals with them further as his Children, in
providing all things for them, and taking care to supply all their wants to
them, and give them whatsoever he sees good for them through Jesus Christ, both
for the things of this life, pertaining to their bodies, and in the things of
eternal life pertaining to their souls; therefore also he would have them with
carefulness, as knowing that he takes care for them, and as a Father knows and
considers their needs, both for food, raiment and protection, and so for gifts
or comforts, etc. Your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these
things, Matthew. 6.32, 33. and without covetousness, as knowing and believing
that he stands by them, is at hand to help them, and will never leave them nor
forsake them; so that we may boldly say, The Lord is on our side or is our
helper, we will not fear what man can do unto us, Heb. 13.5, 6. He is a Sun and
Shield, and will give Grace and Glory, and no good thing will he withhold from
them that walk uprightlly with him, Psalm. 84.11.

10. Further yet, He causes all things to work together for their good, Romans
8.28. All his ways are mercy and truth to them that love him and keep his
Covenants and Testimonies, and that think upon his Commandments to do them,
Psalm. 25.10. He is Lord of all things, and rules in the Hosts of Heaven and
Kingdoms of men, and will and does dispose of all Providence for the glory of
his Son, and so for the profit and advantage of all that are in him, and do
trust in and love him. To this purpose it is that he says to Sion, that he
has engraven her upon the palms of his hands, and that her walls are
continually before him, as signifying, that in all his works he has respect to
their commodity and advantage, and his eyes are always watching for them, and
spying out what may avail and profit them, Isai. 49.16. and that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or
Cephas, or world, or life, or death, things present, or things to come, all are
yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods; that Christ went away from his
Disciples, it was because it was expedient for them, and that he takes away any
outward comforts from us, and orders any afflictions to us, it is because he
sees it good for us, if we believe and walk with him, John 16.7. Psalm. 119.71.
For

11. They being in Christ, they are his Elect in him, his Elect and chosen One,
Chosen in him before the foundations of the world, to be holy to him, (his holy
Lot, Portion, Inheritance, his Garden, Vineyard, etc. Deuteronomy. 32 9. Jer. 10.16.
Cant. 4 12. and 8.11.) and to be blameless before him in love, Ephesians. 1.4. they
are his, the people whom he has fore-known in Christ, that is, fore-owned, or
purposed to own in all Ages, and therefore also has foreordained or
predestined to be confor med to the Image of his Son (in sufferings and
obedience to him therein, and so in holiness and happiness) and therefore
orders all things so as may conduce to bring them thereto. He has
fore-appointed them to sufferings, but only so as may conduce to bring them
into conformity with Christ, to which therefore he calls them, and therein
justifies, supports and owns them, and will in due time glorify them, as he
has done to Christ, and to those in all Ages that have believed in and loved
him; therefore they are precious to him and honorable in his sight, Isai.
43.4. after the pattern and similitude of Christ the First born amongst many
Brethren, who is elect and precious in the sight of God, however rejected and
despised of men, 1 Pet. 2.4. yea, and as he is the living Stone, so are they in
him and through him; as he is the Priest, the high Priest of God, and his holy
Foundation and Temple, in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, A
Priest after the order of Melchisedek (who was both King and Priest) so they
also in him are built up a spiritual house, an holy, yea, a royal or Kingly
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices to God, acceptable to him by Jesus
Christ, in whom all they are built up an holy Temple, an habitation for God by
his Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.5 9. Ephesians. 2.20, 21. Yea, and as God is delighted in
Christ, and tender over him, so as whosoever is incensed against him shall be
ashamed, and those that rise up against him he will destroy; so also they that
believe in him are so dear to him, that whose touches them touches the apple
of his eye, and do provoke Gods sore wrath against them to their destruction,
Psalm. 2.3 4.11, 12. and 89.21, 22, 23. Zech. 2, 8. Isai. 43.4.

12. And to conclude, they are so in the love of God, and beloved of him, that
he has prepared for them, gives unto them, and will (if they abide) possess
them of an everlasting and most glorious Kingdom and Inheritance. He gives
himself to Abraham and his Seed (and such are all that are Christ's, Gal. 3.29.)
to be their God, their Shield, and their exceeding great Reward, Genesis 15.1. and
17.1.7. as they are his portion, so he also is theirs, Jer 10.16 and all his
infinite power, greatness goodness, is for their defense and helpfulness in
their obeying him, 2 Cor. 6.17. and he has prepared a City for them, a City
that has foundations whereof he himself, in a peculiar sense, is the Builder
and Maker, Heb. 11 10, 16. Whence that of our Savior, Fear not little Flock,
it is my Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom, Luke 12.32. And I
appoint unto you a Kingdom, s^ my Father has appointed unto me, etc. for if
Sons, then Heirs, Heirs of God, joynt-Heirs with Christ, if we suffer with him,
that we also may be glorified with him, Romans 8.17. the new and heavenly
Jerusalem, and therein to eat of the Tree of Life, in the midst of the Paradise
of God, and to drink of the River of the waters of Life, pure and unmixed
pleasures, and to be free from all curse, sorrows, temptations, cryings, death*
and to be filled and satisfied with all fullness of Good in the presence of God
and of the Lamb for ever, see Revel. 21. and 22.1, 5. Yea, in a word, the love
of God in Christ Jesus is unspeakable toward them, and passes all
understanding and conception. But I shall say no more here of it, but pass to
the use of what is already said.

Use. This Truth thus opened and considered, may be of good use to us diverse
ways, as

1. To such as are yet unbelievers, and unacquainted with Christ, it serves to
provoke them to give diligence to know and believe in him, to let go all their
Idols, and lying refuges, their false hopes and confidences, that they are and
shall be well enough, because of some good birth of good Parents, or
privileges, works, and worth of theirs, that they think well of themselves
for: and all taking content in, or earnest pursuit after the enjoyments of the
world, and learn the knowledge of Christ, and close with, and submit to him
that so they may be by him brought into the love and favor of God, as to the
special actings of it toward them, that they would hear and mind the Gospel,
and therein the love of God testified toward them, as and while yet sinners,
in having no pleasure in or desire to their destruction, but providing in
Christ for their escape from misery and obtaining mercy, to which also in his
Gospel he is exhorting and inviting of them; that so through the knowledge and
belief of his general love toward them and all men in the ransom given for
them, they may be persuaded and overcome to believe in Christ, and in God
through him, and submit themselves to his Heavenly Doctrine and Government;
that so they may receive, the life in him the forgiveness of their sins, and
the inheritance with those that are sanctified by faith in him. Who is also
given for a Covenant to the people, for a light to the Gentiles, that he might
be Gods salvation to the ends of the Earth. That so whosoever listens to, and
obeys him might be by him made at one with God and be in Covenant with him. To
every one while yet the day of Grace lasts it affords motive and
encouragement to seek the Lord while he may be found, and to call upon him
while nigh at hand; to let go their evil ways, and false thoughts and
imaginations (as of being well enough without the hearty knowledge of and faith
in Christ, or as if they might not certainly obtain favor by closing with
Christ or the like) and to turn to God, to hear and believe what he says to
them by Christ in the Gospel, and tells them there, that he has done for them
in and by him, that so they being in the mindfulness and belief of that his
love and grace may be begotten there through to trust in him and depend on him,
and so may find everlasting life. Repent and believe the Gospel. Hear
instruction, and refuse it not, for blessed is he that hears the instructions
of Wisdom, watching at her gates, and waiting at the posts of her doors; (using
all he can appointed of God for seeking her) for they that find her (as all
that heartily seek her attending to God in his ways shall) find life, and shall
obtain favor of the Lord (namely, the choice mercy, and love of the Lord,
which is the portion of the unfeigned believers, the inheritance of the Saints,
and holy ones.) But who so sin against her, wrong their own Souls: all they
that hate her and so slight and put away her instructions, and refuse to turn
at her reproofs, love Death, Prove. 8.32, 33, 34, 35. Isa. 55.6, 7. Surely, the
favor of God is worth the most earnest seeking after, for what like it can
make us happy? What else can so satisfy the Soul and make it safe? If the
light of the Kings countenance is so beneficial and comfortable that it is
compared to a Cloud of the latter rain, sweetly refreshing and bringing forward
the fruts of the earth, and if in his favor is life, as Prove. 16.11, 12. Oh
then, how much more advantageous and comfortable and enriching is the favor of
God* if he be for us, who is he that can be against us, or that can harm us, if
he be our Shepherd, what good thing that he sees good for us can be wanting to
us, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and the delight of whose countenance
is better than light it self. Verily, in what he has done for All men in the
death and resurrection of Christ, he has opened a way for us to look up to
him, and hope in him, notwithstanding the guilt of that sin that excluded us
from his presence, and the death, and curse thereby sentenced upon us And in the
glory given him at his right hand, the power and Lordship over all things in
Heaven and Earth, and power to mediate for us, and obtain for us and obtain to
give to us in the virtues of his Sacrifice the forgiveness of our sins; yea,
even of sins committed by us in our persons against his Grace and goodness upon
our hearty Repentance and turning to him, there is great encouragement, to
betake our selves to his teaching and Government (especially considering his
great mercifulness unto sinners and promises to receive them that come him, and
faithfulness in his promises,) and to rely upon him for what ever may be for
our welfare and happiness. Who so desires then to be in the love and favor of
God, and to have him a sure defense and shelter from all evil and mischief and
from everlasting destruction; yea, and a gracious Father to him, to take care
of him and afford his blessing to him for here and for hereafter, let him let
go all other ways of seeking rest or good to himself, and betake himself to
Christ to learn and embrace his heavenly Doctrine and walk therein: So shall he
be at peace with God, and good shall assuredly be his portion.

2. It is also very useful for reproof to those that slight the Doctrine of
Christ, and take no heed thereto or rest in an empty formal profession
thereof, not heartily embracing it and submitting themselves to it. Surely, it
discovers them guilty of great folly and madness for what do they deprive
themselves of? how inestimable a treasure? what unspeakable advantages and
blessings? even of no less than the special savor and love of God, and so of
his protection, promises, presence, and of eternal life, which stands in the
knowledge and enjoyment of him and of the light of his countenance. And what is
there that a man can set his heart upon and desire and endeavor after, that is
worthy to be compared with so great benefits, much less to be preferred: are
not all other things infinitely below the favor of God, either as to our
safety or satisfaction? Can we be any where so safe as in his custody and
protection^? Or any where so well provided for as in his blessing? The life and
happiness of the Soul stands in its having his love and favor toward it, and
its enjoyment of his blessing: therefore without that the Soul is without life
and happiness; and if that be lost the Soul is lost, and what is that in the
world whereabout men busy themselves, so as therefore to neglect God and
Christ and excuse themselves from their coming to and closing with, or living
up to Christ and his Doctrine, that can give them any valuable compensation for
the loss of the Soul, Matthew. 16.26. what a folly is it for a man to feed on
husks or ashes, when he might have good and wholesome bread and other cheer to
feed on: or what a madness for a man to take a deal of pains and cost to hew
out a Cistern to keep him some water in for his use, which when it is hewed too
will hold none because it is broken; when as he might take as much as he will
and that exceeding good for any use for which he needs it, and at all times
freely, without cost or expense at a spring or fountain that is so hard at hand
to him: and yet such, or rather far worse is our folly and madness when
neglecting Christ and turning our back upon him and his Doctrine, and refusing
to walk in the faith and direction thereof, we yet multiply either works and
services of our own or other men's invention or prescription for attaining
righteousness and peace otherwise, or desire and endeavor after the riches,
honors, and pleasures of the world, or whatever we conceive may satisfy our
lusts, seeking peace and rest and content in them. To such the Holy Ghost
directs his Council with reproof after this wise, in Isa. 55.1. Ho every one
that thirsts (that lacks and desires peace, content and happiness) Come ye
to the waters (the Son of God and his Heavenly Doctrine, John 7.37, 38.) yea;
he that has no money, come and buy, yea, buy wine and milk without money and
without price (God requires nothing of gain, profit or worth to be given to him
by us as in exchange; but only let go and part with what we have that harms us,
our evil thoughts and ways as ver. 7.) Why will ye lay out your money for that
that is not bread, and your labor for that that satisfies not? hearken unto
me, and eat that that is good: that which Christ sets before us in his word and
Doctrine, even himself, his flesh and blood, his abasement and sufferings for
us as therein commended to our faith, and as the great evidences of God's
gratiousness to us, procurers of our happiness, and engagements to obedience)
and let your Souls delight themselves in fatness. See also reproofs of this
nature in Psalm. 4.2. Jer. 2.13. John 5.40. etc. Yea, also,

3. Hence we might note the equitableness of Gods wrath against and judgments
upon men that neglect to know and believe in Christ; that it is a just thing
with God to separate them from his presence and blessing unto everlasting curse
and misery, because they both slight and reject the good he has done for them,
and Grace showed them in Christ: trample him, the great gift and evidence of
good will, under their feet, and do set at naught his love and favor toward
them; even himself in Christ, who would be their portion, and protection;
matter not his promise, nor the sweetness, safety, and satisfaction that they
might have his presence and in the light of his countenance, preferring lying
vanities before so great mercies as God tenders to them, and despite that
gracious Spirit that invites and allures them after him. He that values not his
favor how can he think himself injured if he feel his wrath? and he that
regards not his presence and blessing, but rather chooses to listen to and walk
after Satan, how can he complain of injustice, if he therefore bid him depart
from him and his presence to be tormented and destroyed with Satan: so that
God will be justified in his sayings, and be found just in his judging them
that despise and set light by him, and rebel against him. But,

4. It is also of great use to such as are in Christ, that have fled for refuge
to him, embraced his Doctrine and yielded up themselves to be Governed by him,
it affords singular matter of use to them, and that,

1. By way of comfort and encouragement against all that does exercise and
afflict them; for what are all things that stand against them or are grievous
to them in comparison of the love and favor of God toward them? If God be for
us, if he love and favor us, if he accept and own us, if he be our friend and
Father, and set himself to help us, have who or what are they that are against
us. Is it the sins we have committed in times past, which we are turned to God
from and have repented of; why, they are pardoned and forgiven through Jesus
Christ believed in by us. For to him give all the Prophets witness that through
his Name whoever believe in him shall receive remission of their sins, and by
him all that believe are justified from which we could not be justified by the
Law of Moses, Act. 10.43. and 13.38, 39. Is it sin yet remaining in us, and
warring against us, and hindering us that we cannot serve God and live to him so
as we would? Why, There is now no condemnation to them are in Christ Jesus (no
not from the fleshes or sins being in them to them) that do not walk after the
flesh but after the Spirit. If we walk in the light, as he (God) is in the
light (is in his truth affording his presence and strength unto us) then have
we fellowship one with another; and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses
us from all sin. Romans 8.1. 1 John. 1.7. And if God justify (as he does them
that are his Elect) that is, those that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the Flesh but after the Spirit, Who then is he that condemns? or who shall
lay any thing to their charge? Does the Law of God find us in many things
faulty and failing, so that according to its righteousness or rule for
justifying (which is to justify all those that continue in it in all things to
do it, but otherwise upon any failing or sin to curse them, Gal. 3.10. we are
not able to stand in judgment but it condemns us?) Why, but It is Christ that
died, yea, rather that is risen again; and is on the right hand of God, and
also makes intercession for us, and if we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousnes Romans
8.33.34, 1 John 1.9. Does the Devil rage against us, and roar upon us, tempting
us and assaying by his fiery darts to destroy us? Why; he is a conquered enemy,
and though he be for strength and eagernes to harm us as a roaring Lion going
about daily seeking whom to devour, yet God who loves us is stronger than he,
and none can pluck the sheep (or followers of Christ) out of his hand. Yea,
Christ our Shepherd is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and he has spoiled
Principallities and Powers, and triumphed over them openly in his Cross. He is
stronger to defend us than Satan to devour us; and he was manifested on
purpose to destroy his cursed works, 1 Pet. 5.8. John 10.29, 30. Col. 2.14.15.
1 John 3.8. hold we fast by him and Satan cannot harm us, however much he
malice us, Christ both can and will surely defend and save us from his rage and
malice. Does the world frown upon us, hate, reproach, threaten and abuse us? Be
of good courage (says our Lord) I have overcome the world: and stronger is he
that is in (or amongst) us, than he that is in the world, John 16.33.1. John
4.4, 5. Nor can any hardship that may here befall us, tribulation, or distres,
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword cause God and Christ
to cease to love us, Romans 8.35. He is a shield and sure defense against all
these enemies. His truth abides that in us shall be shield and Buckler to us;
so that what is therein Earth or Hell that may discourage or affright us, Psalm.
91.3. He is such a place of defense to every one that uprightly cleaves to
him, that nothing can pierce through him to annoy or harm him, as in Isa.
33.6^. He shall dwell on high (so high as none can overtop him to storm him) his
place of defense shall be the munition of Rocks (so that no undermining him or
blowing him up) oh, but perhaps we may be starved or famished out for wants.
No, not so for it follows, bread shall be given him, his waters shall not fail.
Ah, but perhaps such a strong Castle and well victualled may be so close and
scant of air or other delightful accommodations, as to force a man to yield to
get breath or air. No it follows, that there is both pleasant sight, and fair
prospects to delight for v. 17. thine eyes shall behold the King in his beauty,
and thou shall see the Land that is very far off. So then neither need we fear
evil will befall us to harm us; o^ that good will be wanting to us to supply and
satisfy us. For if the Lord be our Shepherd how can we want any good thing?
He is a Sun and shield and will give Grace and glory, and no good thing will he
withhold from them that walk uprightly with him, Psalm. 84.11. and 23.1. He will
supply our inward wants, Give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him, Luk 11.13.
to lead them into his truth, fill them with hope and peace, and comfort them in
all their troubles and afflictions, teach them also to pray; and therein (and
otherwise) help their infirmities, subdue their corruptions, and sanctify them
throughout in Body, Soul, and Spirit, etc. John 16.13. Romans 8.26, 27. and
15.13. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23, 24. And he will supply all our outward wants so far as is
good and needful for us. Seeking first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, all those things shall be added to us. The Lions shall lack and
suffer hunger, but they that fear the Lord are sure to want no good thing,
Matthew. 6.33. Psalm. 34.9, 10. He gives food to them that fear him, he will ever
be mindful of his Covenant, Psalm. 111.5. And he will every way do what is good
for us till he have fitted us for, and bring us to the eternal inheritance. So
that here we have everlasting consolation and good hope through Grace: 2 These.
2.16.

2. It Is useful also by way of instruction and exhortation to diverse duties
that this great grace and love of God toward us, does challenge of us, and
afford good ground for as,

1. To love him again that has so loved us, and yet so loves us, as Psalm.
31.23. Oh, Love the Lord ye his Saints^ for he preserves the faithful: those
that believe in him and are constant in cleaving to and serving him. It is but
a meet return to him, love for love; that we love him because he loved us
first, 1 John 4.19. to delight our selves in him, whose delight is in his
people, and accepts us in his Beloved One, and will give unto us in so doing
the desire or satisfaction of our Souls, Psalm. 37.4. we cannot set our loves
and affections upon either a more deserving or a more lovely object. None there
is to whom we are so much engaged, or has so much in it to content, satisfy
and save us; we may be sure not to loose our loves by loving him, for he is not
only infinitely before hand with us, but also keeps mercy and Covenant for ever
to them that love him, and keep his Commandments: we may loose our loves in
loving any thing else besides him, but not in loving him.

2. To hope and trust in him, for seeing he loves us so, who is so strong and
mighty to save us, a Great King above all Gods, in whose hands are all the
corners of the Earth and the strength of the hills is his also. The Sea is his
(and so all troubles and afflictions) and he has made it, and his hands have
prepared the dry land (a stable port and safe haven of refuge) we may be
confident that he will not suffer any harm to befall us if we stay upon him and
his Grace to save us: yea, though he may correct and nurture us, yet he will
take care of us to support and save us. Oh, trust in him then at all times, ye
people, (especially ye his people and inheritance) pour out your hearts to him,
he is a refuge for us, Psalm. 62.8. Yea, trust in him at all times, for in the
Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, Isa. 26.4. especially too seeing in his
great love he has made great and precious promises to us both for this life
and the life that is to come, and has confirmed them in the blood of the Lord
Jesus his only begotten Son, and appointed him to be the Mediator of them for
us, to take away the sin and unworthiness that might hinder us of them, and to
obtain a dispensation of them to us. Surely we have in Christ great ground and
cause of hopeing and trusting in God, seeing God did therefore raise him from
the dead and give him glory, that our faith and hope might be in God, 1 Pet.
1.21. and seeing through him his favor does compass about the righteous as a
shield from what might harm them, Psalm. 5.12. as it is also a Sun to give
light and all refreshing influences to us, even Grace and Glory, and all good
things to those that walk uprightly with him, Psalm. 84.11. whence also that
Counsel, Philip. 4.6, 7. In nothing be careful, but in all things make known
your requests to God by prayer and supplications with thanksgiving, and the
peace of God that passes all understanding shall guard your hearts and minds
in Christ Jesus.

3.To rejoice in God, and give thanks and praise unto him continually for his
great love and favor to us; may they not well joy that are in so good a plight
as to have so great a Friend, so mighty a Father and Savior as God is? That
have such a fountain to supply them with living water ^ such a Castle and
Fortress to defend them? Yea, upon this account it is that it is said, Let them
that love thy Name be joyful in thee: for thou Lord wilt bless the Righteous,
with favor will thou compass him as with a shield. Psalm. 5.11, 12. and that
exhortation of the Apostle is to the same purpose, Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the
Lord always and again, I say, rejoice: and so for thanksgiving they are put
together, Psalm. 97.11. Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, and give thanks at the
remembrance of his holiness. And so in 1 Thessalonians. 5.16, 17, 18. Rejoice evermore,
pray without ceasing, in all things give thanks, for so is the will of God
concerning you in Christ Jesus. Joy in his love, and bless him for it.

4. To moderation in griefs, fears, cares, and to contentation with what God
gives us here, and submission to what he lays upon us. I put them together, for
brevity sake; his love to us might persuade us also thereto. For as Elkanah
said to Hanna, too eagerly desiring desiring after, and too sadly bearing the
want of Children, Am not I better to thee than ten Sons? 1 Samuel 1.8. So may God
say to his servants and people. Am not I better to you than all those things
that you are so careful and sollicitous about, so mournful after, or covetous
for? Should they be covetous for the world that have God to enrich them? Is not
God a portion sufficient to content and satisfy our Souls? Should we be
covetous of the honors, riches, pleasures, enjoyments of the world, if we have
God at hand to give us better things than the world can? and who loving us will
not withhold from us any thing that is good for us in the world, or delay us of
any thing that he has promised to us and is needful for us, beyond the due
season wherein it may be best for us: to this purpose are those sayings, Let
your moderation be known to all men the Lord is at hand. In nothing be careful,
etc. Philip. 4.5.6. And, Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be
content with such things (either for maintenance or protection) as ye have: for
he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; so that we may boldly
say, The Lord is on my side I will not fear what man can do unto me, Hebr. 13
5, 6. As also the contrary to these sayings be reprovable hence; as upon this
ground David reproves and checks his distrustful immoderately sorrowing
thoughts, Psalm. 42.5. Why art thou so cast down, O my Soul, and why art thou so
disquieted within me, hope still in God, etc. So our Savior upon like ground
checks the fears and distrusts of his Disciples about food and raiment. Mat.
6.25, 26, 28, 30, 32. Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat or
drink, or for your body, what ye shall put on. Consider the fowls, are ye not
much better than they? Consider the Lillies, etc. If God so cloth the grass,
will he not much more cloth you, being your Heavenly Father? O ye of little
faith, etc.

5. To obedience to God for his love and favor to them and to a cheerful
yielding up themselves to serve him with all their Talents and abilities
received from him, as persons that owe themselves and utmost service to him, so
Romans 12.1. I beseech you Brethren, by the mercies of God (in which, namely, he
has given his Son for you, called you to his Son, and justifies and owns you
in his Son, as the former Chapters had showed) Offer up your body a living
Sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service. See
the like Romans 6.11, 12, etc. and 1 Cor. 6.18, 19, 20. Your bodies are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost which ye have of God, and ye are not your own, for ye
are bought with a price: therefore Glorify God with your bodies, and with your
Spirits which are God's, peculiarly owned and possessed by him; as also in
order to their retaining and abiding in the love of God and Christ toward
them; as in John 15.9.10. As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you,
continue ye in my love. If ye keep my Commandments ye shall continue in my
love, as I have kept my Fathers Commandments, and continue in his love: which
is another thing it instructs too, namely,

6. To abide in Christ, and so keep our selves in the love of God, both in the
views and enjoyments of it: seeing his love is so precious, enriching and every
way advantageous to the Soul, and seeing it is the portion of the believers in
and cleavers to Christ, it is folly to turn away from believing in and obeying
Christ, to forfeit God's love and favor, and a point of greatest wisdom to
abide in Christ, that we may abide also in the love of God, yea, and as that
was one great engine and trick of the Devil and his messengers for drawing men
out of Christ, or from the simplicity of him into some corruptions from the
faith preached and urged by the true Apostles, to insinuate to them, that they
were not in a justified estate with God, not owned, loved and approved of him,
by their believing in Christ, but that to obtain that they must be circumcised
and keep the Law of Moses: or receive some Traditions and Commandments of men,
worshipping of Angels, or the like: So it was the great motive and argument
used by the true Apostles with them for preserving them in Christ, and
persuading them to abide in him, namely, that in him they were complete; were
justified, loved, known and accepted of God, and had everlasting life: and that
out of him, or in departing adulterously from him, in joining some other ground
of hope and trust in him, they deprived themselves thereof; as in Col. 2.2, 3,
8, 9, 10. Gal. 3.7, 9, 29. with 4.6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 30. and 5.2, 3, 4. John 2.24.
and 5.11.12, 13. In Christ are bid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge;
this I say, least any man should beguile you with enticing words. And, Let no
man spoil you with Philosophy and vain deceit for in Christ dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, and in him ye are complete. They they that are
of the faith are blessed with faithful Abraham. They that are baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ, and are the Sons of God by faith in Jesus Christ,
and so heirs according to promise, known of God, etc. But turning aside to the
Law, to be, or seek to be justified thereby, they are abolished from Christ,
and fallen from Grace; that is, from God's favor or favorable acceptance of
them, etc. It behooves us therefore to continue in the faith of Christ, that we
may abide in the love of God. Which leads to the next point. Keep your selves
in the Love of God.

Whence we may note further:

Obser. 4. That it is the business of the greatest concernment to believers in
Christ to keep themselves and one another in the love of God, I say, themselves
and one another, for so I look upon the force of the word [your selves] here;
The Apostle speaks to them, as a Community, Body, or select Society, whose
privileges and concernments are common, and by a common consent and joint
endeavor to be prosecuted and pursued. Therefore as when any Message is sent
to a Town or Corporation from a Prince or General to look to themselves, that
their enemies break not in upon them; the Message concerns them in common, and
it suffices not that every man look to his own house or person, but that with
one consent and joint counsel and endeavor they each one seek the safety of
the whole Corporation or Town; so it is the case here, Believers in Christ are
as the Body of Christ; and as it is in the natural body, if one member suffer,
all are grieved, and if one be in danger, all endeavor the defense and safety
of it, and every member in its place endeavors, not only its own private and
particular safety and welfare, but the safety and welfare of the whole body; so
is it or ought it to be amongst Believers. Every one is to take care of
himself, and of the whole body or society, according to his capacity, Looking
diligently least any fail of the grace of God, or any be guilty of an evil
heart of unbelief, or be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.12,
13. and 12.15. especially those that are Guides to the rest, or are endued with
greater understanding in the grace of God, or gifts for usefulness to others
(as the eyes or hands in the natural body) are concerned to take heed to their
brethren of less abilities.

And in such a sense, I say, to keep themselves in the love of God, is the
business of greatest concernment to all unfeigned Believers. To that purpose we
may observe, that as it was the great business, care and endeavor of the
Apostles toward or with the World to preach Christ and the love of God in him
to them, to draw and persuade them to accept thereof, and so to believe in
Christ, that they might be in the l^^e and favor of God, that they might
obtain favor (...) the Lord, as Pro. 8.33, 34. be justified and accepted of
God, and adopted into the number of his Sons, and so that it might be well with
them for ever; that they might be reconciled now and saved in in the great
Judgment, etc. as 2 Cor. 5.10, 11, 19, 20. with 6.1, 2 16, 17, 18. Isa. 55.1,
2, 3, Act. 13.37, 38, 39, 40. So with the Churches that had already through the
Grace of God believed, and had obtained the mercy and favor of God in Christ
(as these to whom this Apostle here wrote) their great business was, that they
might be kept therein by abiding in the faith of Christ, and obedience to him:
to which purpose is that of the Apostle Col. 2.1, 2, 3. etc. I would ye knew
what great conflict I have for you, that your hearts might be comforted, being
knit together in love, to the riches of the full assurance of understanding to
the acknowledgment of the mystery both of God the Father, and of Christ, in
whom (or in which mystery) are bid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
This I say, least any man should beguile you with enticing words: and ver. 18.
Let no man beguile you of your reward through a voluntary humility in
worshipping of Angels, etc. and so to the Corinthians I am jealous over you
with a godly jealousy, lest as the Serpent beguiled Eve, your minds should by
any means be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ Jesus: and, Watch
ye, stand ye fast in the faith, quit ye like men, and be strong, 2 Cor. 11.3.
and 1 Cor. 16.13. to the same purpose is that in Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, and be not entangled again in the
yoke of bondage: for I Paul say unto you, ^^^t if you be circumcised, Christ
shall profi^ ^^u nothing. So again, to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10.1, 12. I
would not have you ignorant, that all our Fathers were under the Cloud, and all
of them passed through the Sea, and were baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and
in the Sea, and did all eat the same spiritual meat, etc. but with many of
them, God was etc. let him therefore that thinks he stands take heed lest he
fall: and to the Romans, chap. 11.20, 22. Thou stand by faith, he not high
minded, but fear. And to the Ephesians Finally, my Brethren, be strong in the
Lord and in the power of his might. Put you on the whole Armor, of God, that
ye may be able to resist in the evil day, and having done all to stand, etc.
Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12, etc. And so the Apostle John, in ^ John 2.24, 25. Let that
therefore that ye have heard from the beginning abide in you: if that which ye
have heard from the beginning abide in you, ye shall continue in the Father and
in the Son; and this is the promise, which be (God) has promised us, even
Eternal life: and ver. 28. And now, little Children, abide in him, that when he
appears we may have boldness, and not be ashamed at his appearing: and so 2
John 8. Look to your selves that we loose not the things which we have wrought,
etc. and Rev. 3.11. Hold fast that which thou have, let no man take away thy
Crown. And indeed, what can be of greater concernment to the believer than
this, to keep himself in that state of safety and happiness to which by the
great sorrows and sufferings of Christ, and by his great goodness in bringing
his salvation to him, and striving with him with much long suffering and
forbearance he has brought him? What can be of greater concernment to a man
pursued by deadly enemies that hunt for his life, when he has gotten into a
strong hold that cannot be taken by any storm or assault, and that is every way
well provided for, for his preservation and defense, than to keep himself
therein, and not by any means to venture out of it, no not upon the fair
pretenses and flattering persuasions of pretended friends; lest he fall into
the hands of his enemies. Such is the believers case here, seeing in the love
and favor of God he is most safe and happy, but out of that nothing but misery
is to be met with, it stands him in hand to keep himself well while he is so.
Keep your selves in the Love of God.

But now in this Observation that follows fairly from the words as the main
thing here directly exhorted to by the Apostle, there are diverse things implied
that we shall take distinct notice of, as to say:

1. That possibly believers may go out of, or from the love of God: they may
not abide in it. Yea,

2. That there is no necessity that he must do so, he may keep himself therein:
and then,

3. There is great danger if care be not taken of, and in turning out of it, or
from it.

4. That it is expected from him, and in some sense lies upon him as his work,
to keep themselves and each believer his Brother therein.

1. Point. 1. That such as do believe may possibly go out from the love of God.
This will on every hand be granted, concerning such as are fained,
false-hearted believers, counterfeit Christians, and hypocrites; if it might be
granted, as it may not, that such are in the love of God, in that choice sense
of the word (Love) here understood and meant; but indeed such, as and while
such are not, nor can be in his love. He cannot own, justify, and approve of
such, and therefore to say, such may fall from it is to speak absurdly and
inconsistently with the Truth. They were not such that the Apostle here wrote
to, but such as were sanctified of God the Father, preserved in Jesus Christ,
and called; and therefore were wholly of another stamp from those hypocrites,
false pretenders and Deceivers, of whom and of whose ways they were warned and
admonished; and from all such as men commonly say, may fall from the Grace of
God, which they must be in before they can fall from. These were beloved of God
and his Apostles, and yet to such he writes, to keep themselves in the love of
God; which would have been a needless labor for him to have taken in hand, a
needless exhortation to be given them if they could not but be in it, could not
turn aside from it, or go out of it. It is to be understood then of true and
right believers, such as God does own and approve that such may possibly go out
of, or f^ll (...) favor of God

And that this is true also of such, as his anger or wrath is, or may be
opposed to his love and favor; that they may so demean themselves, as instead
of his approving them and their ways, he may reprove and fault them, and
instead of smiling upon them, he may frown upon them, and chide them; yea, be
very much displeased with, and smite them, it will easily be granted, too;
seeing many instances thereof are found in the Scriptures. As that God was
angry with Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, David, and Solomon, and other holy men; so
as that he inflicted great punishments upon them, as appears in these
Scriptures: Numb. 120 12^. and 27 14. Deuteronomy. 1.37. and 3.26. 2 Samuel 11.27. and
12.1, 9, 10. Psalm. 32.3 4 and 38.3, 4. 1 King. 11.9, etc. Moses and Aaron
amongst his Priests, and Samuel amongst those that called upon his Name, they
called upon the Lord, and he answered them. He spoke unto them in the cloudy
pillar, they kept his Testimonies and the Ordinances he gave them. Thou
answeredst them, O Lord our God, thou wast a God that forgavest them, though
thou tookest Vengeance on their inventions. Psalm. 99.7.8. Yea, how often does
the Scripture tell us of God's wrath and anger against his people, even his
Zion and Israel, as Psalm. 80.4. Oh Lord, how long will thou be angry against
the prayer of thy people? thou feedest them with the bread of tears, and give
them tears to drink in great measure, etc. and Psalm. 85.5. Will thou draw out
thine anger for ever, or be angry to all generations? So Lam. 3.1. I am the man
that have seen affliction by the rod of his anger, etc. Yea, the Fathers in the
Wilderness whom God highly favored, and brought in love and mercy out of
Egpyt, and were highly privileged by him, yet how did they provoke him to
displeasure by their unbelief and murmurings, so as they most of them were
destroyed in his judgments, and their carkases fell in the wilderness, and they
are propounded as admonitions and warnings to us, even to such as were
justified, sanctified, and washed from their sins in the Name of the Lord
Jesus: Yea; the Apostle Paul himself looked upon their falls, and the disfavour
that they procured to themselves as warnings to him. See 1 Cor. 9.16, 24, 25,
26, 27. with chap. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and 6.11. and from the consideration of
what befell them, he lays down this general caution. Wherefore he that thinks he
stands, take heed lest he fall. c. 10.12. And if it were only possible for
believers in this sense to go or fall out of God's love into his wrath and
anger, considering the dreadfulness of his wrath and the sad consequents
thereof upon the objects of it, that might be a sufficient motive to move us to
take heed to our selves, that we sin not against him, but keep our selves in
his love and favor; considering also on the other side how sweet and
advantageous his Love is. But that seems not to be all, that believers may
possibly fall into out of the love of God. Nay, indeed, love in a high sense
may consist with anger, so far at least as still to own and acknowledge for his
the person with whom he is angry; yea, and his in near relation too: though
there be not an approving of the way and action that causes the anger. As a
man may be angry and greatly displeased with his Son or wife whom yet he does
not disinherit or cut off. So God is angry with his Children and people often,
yet he owns for his Children and people. So Psalm. 78.59, 60, 61, 62. When God
heard this (the the unfaithfulness and Idolatry of his people) he was wroth,
and greatly abhorred Israel, so that be forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh, the
Tent which he placed amongst men, and delivered his strength into Captivity
(that is the Ark) and his Glory into the enemies hands. He gave his people over
also unto the sword, and was wroth with his inheritance, etc. they were still
his people though given over to the sword, and his inheritance, though he was
wroth with them.

There is something worse than all this yet implied as possible, namely, an
utter rejection and disowning, if men be not careful to keep themselves in his
love, as is implied in Ezekiel. 33, 13. When I say to a righteous man, thou shall
surely live, (note by the way, that God does not say so to any seemingly,
outwardly righteous man only, that is not so indeed; he promises not life to
the hypocrite or mere moral man, but only to those that are righteous in and
through Christ) if he (that righteous man) trust to his own righteousness (to
his being righteous) and commit iniquity, all his righteousness shall not be
remembered, but for his iniquity which he has committed, he shall surely die;
whereas the life promised to the righteous is eternal life, and not this
transitory life only which the wicked may enjoy, and often do as long or
longer, and more prosperously than the righteous: so the death befalling the
Apostate from his righteousness (which Apostacy also, its implied, befalls men
as a fruit of their being lifted up by and trusting in their righteousness) is
an answerable Death that is threatened to the wicked, and which he by turning
from his wickedness may escape, v. 14 which is eternal death. And lest any
should say, this is but a supposition, and proves nothing: it is true, if that
such a thing be, such a thing will follow; but when is that, or that cannot
follow. It might be as rationally replied on the other hand that then it might
be said to the next Verse, When I say to the wicked thou shall surely die, if
be turn from his evil way he shall live, that, that is but a supposition too
and so proves not that a wicked man may ever repent unto eternal life, which is
manifestly false; and yet the former is as well supposed as this latter. But
besides, Solomon tells us, that by the evil adulterous woman (whether literally
or figuratively also taken for the false Church, or false worldly Spirit that
lays in wait to deceive) many have bin cast down wounded; yea, many strong men
have been slain by her. Whereby wounded and slain cannot rationally be
understood a bodily and literal wounding and slaying, but that that is
spiritual and of the Soul; and what can the slaying that mean but a quite
bereaving it of some spiritual life; yea, of such spiritual life too, or degree
of spiritual life as made strong, and more firm and able therein those that it
was in; as if he should say, many has she cast down into sadness and distress
of mind, or wounded in their Consciences by tampering with her; yea, many
strong in the faith and power of God by listening to her enchantments and
pleasing allurements, have been outright slain wholly bereft of spiritual life
by her, Prove. 7.28. To which we may consider what the Apopostle says of the
Galathians, both as to their receipt of the Grace of God, and as to their
dangers (at least) they had then brought themselves into by listening to, and
closing with the false Apostles. They were not only called into the Grace of
Christ, but had also so received it, that they therethrough were made the Sons
of God; and God had so owned them or known them, as to send into their hearts
the Spirit of his Son, so as they did run well, Gal. 1.6. and 3.26. and 4.5, 6,
9. and 5.7. and yet Paul tells them he was afraid of them, Gal. 4.11. but no
ground for fear where there was no possibility of miscarrying, as there was not
if that be true, that once a Son of God and ever so, and that it is impossible
for a believer that is rightly so, and approved of God, to miscary. Ah, but
there might be danger of falling under anger (as before) but not of falling
away wholly to destruction: to that let it be minded what the Apostle says in
Chap. 5.1.2. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again in the yoke of bondage. It was their not
standing fast in that liberty without doubt that he was afraid of, and that
they would again be entangled with the yoke of bondage, as appears by comparing
it with chap. 4.9, 10, 11. How is it that ye turn again to the weak and
beggarly rudiments or elements whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage. Ye
observe days, and times, and months, and years, I am afraid of you, lest I
ha^ bestowed upon you labor in vain. Now how far the evil of being entangled
in the yoke of bondage, again might reach as to the damage they might sustain
thereby; whether only (as some conceive) to the incurring some displeasure and
anger, or else to the utter destruction of them for ever: the second verse of
Chapter 5. with what follows, may show, where the Apostle adds: Behold, I Paul
say unto you, that if ye be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing. For I
testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to the
whole Law. Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are
justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace. What can be more full and
significant, that they might possibly be drawn to circumcision, and to seek
justification thereby, although formerly known of God the Apostles fears of
them, and earnestness in arguing against their yiedling to it, clearly implies
that he believed; for who will fear and be serious to endeavor to prevent what
he believes cannot possibly happen? now that their being so led aside would not
only engage some wrath from God without impairing their state of Sonship with
God, but would wholly exclude them from the favor of God and the fruits
thereof, is clear, in that he says Christ would profit them nothing. Surely, if
Christ did keep them nothwithstanding their such falls, in the favor of God
and from a possibility of falling finally, though they might suffer great
testimonies of displeasure from God, he should then profit them very much, even
as much as such a foundation would profit a house which notwithstanding its
being shaken and shattered in the thatch and tiles by the winds, should
preserve it from being blown down or overthrown. And who would say that in case
the foundation should suffer the winds to impair the covering of the house, it
should profit the house nothing, though it keep it from falling? Yea, the
Apostle says further, they were or should be, in that case feared by him,
abolished from Christ, as a house removed from its foundation, so should they
be from Christ, they should be bound to keep the whole Law for righteousness,
as much as if Christ had done nothing at all for them; or else they must
perish, they should have no help, nor benefit as to their Justification and
Salvation by him, they were fallen from Grace, that is, from the favor of God.
So that this clearly implies a great deal more damage by letting go the faith
of Christ, a worser loss of Gods love, than only an incurring his anger for a
time here; yea, and the same is implied in chap. 4.11. in his saying, I am
afraid of you, least I have bestowed upon you labor in vain: no cause to fear
that of any that were the Sons of God, and known of God, if that were true,
that being once made Sons they must be ever so, and could by no means possibly
be otherwise; for sure what ever displeasure and wrath they might incur by
their turning to the Law, yet the Apostle should have an abundant fruit of his
Ministry in them, in that thereby they were notwithstanding their fall and what
wrath might follow upon it, yet in a safe state, the Sons of God, and sure in
respect of their state, of eternal life. Sure that cannot be in vain the main
desired end of which is obtained and accomplished, And that was the main desire
of the Apostles for those they preached to, that they might obtain eternal life
through Jesus Christ, of which, if they that are once in the favor of God can
never possibly fail, they must have been sure in the issue, whatever for a time
might be acted by them, or come upon them.

Object. But it might be said, How can the love of God, wherewith he loves the
Believer, then be said to be such as wherewith he loves Christ, seeing he loves
him certainly with an unchangeable, eternal or everlasting love, even as in the
nature of man, but this love toward Believers may cease to be toward them.

Answ. To this I say, God in Christ never fails or ceases to love him that
believes on him, with an owning approving love, and so as to stand by and help
him; but when any turns out from the faith, he cease to be a Believer, and if
God should still love him in that sense, then he should not love a Believer but
a Runnagade and Apostate from the Faith. Let men then keep the Faith and cleave
to Christ, and they shall be sure to find Gods love cleaving to them. The
difference then between Gods loving Christ and loving the Believer is nothing,
except as to priority and degree, which Christ is certainly always preferred
in, because in all things he has the pre-eminence, but there may be difference
between Christ and other Believers, as to their abiding the subjects of Gods
love personally considered; that is, there may be difference in their abiding
in the Truth. Christ was loved of the Father always, and ever shall be,
because he always abode in the Truth, and did the Fathers will, verily, had
not Christ done so, as man, could he or should he have disobeyed his Fathers
will, and not laid down his life. at his appointing, the Father would not, nor
could so have loved him; for Theref^^e does my Father love me, says he,
because I lay down my life that I should take it up again, John 10.17. which
implies, that his Father had not so loved him if he had not so done; for that
cannot in any good sense be said to be done because of another thing, which had
been equally done without that other thing alleged as its cause. Let the
Believer then abide in his faith in Christ, as Christ abode in his obedience to
his Fat^er, and he shall abide as everlastingly in the love of the Father as
Christ does. There is no difference in the Fathers love, if there be none in
the Believers faith and obedience from Christ's, as to its point of continuance:
To this purpose is that of our Savior himself, John 15.9, 10. As the Father
has loved me, so have I loved you, continue ye in my love. If ye keep my
Commandments ye shall continue in my love, as I have kept my Fathers
Commandments and continue in his love. Where Christ's continuing in his Fathers
love is made the consequent of his keeping his Fathers Commandments, and upon
those terms also he assures his Disciples of a continuance in his love, which
is also undivided from his Fathers love, the Father loving whomsoever the Son
loves, and e contra; therefore in 1 John 2.24. they are jointly mentioned, Let
that which ye have heard from the beginning abide in you, and then ye shall
continue in the Father and in the Son; that is, in the love and favor of them
both; so also 2 John 9.

And this truth here employed and supposed, viz. That the Believer may possibly
not keep himself in the love of God, or possibly may go or turn out of it, so
as to the depriving himself thereof, may be looked upon both as one reason or
ground of the Apostles exhorting them to keep themselves therein, and as one
motive to incite and provoke the Believer to care and diligence thereabout; so
as to make it his business of greatest concernment or importance, were there no
possibility to fail or deprive himself thereof, it were altogether needless for
any to exhort him to keep himself therein, or for him to regard such an
exhortation, or do any thing with an eye to such a business; for what wise man
will be sollicitous to avoid what he judges impossible to happen? This then is
a fundamental suppose all couched in all such cautions and exhortations, that
those that are in the love of God at present may possibly, if they keep not
themselves therein, fall out of it, that is to say, true and right Believers,
(there being no others in the love of God, in the sense of it before spoken to
and opened) may, if not watchful, loose Gods favor toward them. It were a
senseless thing to think the Apostles would counsel or persuade any to keep
themselves in the love of God, that were never in it, nor are at the present in
it, and as senseless it is to think that they writ to them to keep themselves
in the love of God, who they supposed cannot fall out of it, only because some
others fall out of it, that we^e never in truth in it, as they that hold the
contrary Assertion are often out upon it to say, while they seek to evade the
force of these Scripture intimations. But again this saying implies,

Point 2. That there is or may be great danger of, and in turning out from the
love of God: I say, danger of and in turning out.

^. That there is not only possibility of turning out from the love of God, but
also great danger of it that such a thing may be. It is not only possible, but
many do attempt and seek to reduce that possibility into act in the Believers,
many that are potent and subtle in their attempts; so that unless Believers do
use diligence and vigilance in standing upon their guard, and using the means
of their preservation which God has propounded to them, they may be soon
turned aside: And then

2. There is great danger in turning aside; the danger that a person incurrs in
turning aside is wondrous great, or the evils and mischiefs that attend upon a
man's so doing are very grievous.

Something we may note as to either of these, they being both of them
intimately here signified. For

1. Though there were a possibility of loosing the love and favor of God, yet
if there were no great danger of it, no great likelihood by any means, there
would be the less need of admonishing of it, or of taking heed to such
admonitions, when afforded. As it is possible for a man to poison himself, or
to cast himself down a steep place, it is possible for any sober man so to do,
yet there is no great danger ordinarily of it, and therefore no great need to
give serious cautions ordinarily to such men against it. But when there are
persons that set themselves to poison men's meats and drinks, that so while men
think only to feed themselves with wholesome food, they might instead of
wholesome meat take down poison, then there may be greater need to admonish men
to take heed what they eat or drink, and for men to be cautelous what they eat
or drink, and from whom they receive their meat, because then there is not only
possibility but danger of it too, it may too too easily happen else, that they
poison themselves, and so when of diverse meats propounded to them, and lying in
their way, diverse of them are mixed with poison. The like may be said when there
are crafty and naughty persons, that set themselves on work to intoxicate men,
and make them drunk at unawares, and then to lead them amongst Rocks and
Precipices, whence they may break their necks.

Now if it appears that there is danger of men's loosing or turning out from the
love of God, unless they be careful to keep themselves in it, then it appears
more dearly yet to be a principal business or work that men that are therein
should bend themselves to, to keep themselves therein, otherwise not; they need
not set themselves to keep themselves from those things which are barely
possible, and of which, though they be careless, there is no great danger that
they should befall them, or come to pass. I say, though they be careless, for
indeed there is no danger of any Believers loosing or falling from the love of
God, if he be diligent and careful to take heed to the means and way of safety,
provided of God for his preservation therein. The danger asserted is only in
case of carelessness or presumption, and so there is danger.

1. In respect of the many enemies that lie in wait to subvert and withdraw us
from Christ. As,

First, Satan, who endeavors it what he can, and Goes about as a roaring Lion
seeking whom he may devour. And although he be a conquered enemy, and Christ
that is with the Believer is stronger to preserve the Believer from his wiles
and assaults, than he is to assault and hurt, and Christ also is as well
faithful as able, yet his faithfulness is engaged for the helpfulness of the
Believer, and for overcoming for him in the diligent use of the means, the
Believers putting on and exercising himself in the armor of God, provided and
afforded, of which if he be careless and neglective, and slothful in the use of
means, and so grow from slothfulness to deep sleep (as Slothfulness does cast
into a deep sleep, Prove. 19.15.) then is not Christ in point of faithfulness
engaged to save him; but as the Apostle implies in E^^s. 6.13, 14. 1 Pet. 5.8,
9. Satan may prevail upon the unsober, unwatchful, sleepy and unarmed Soul to
overthrow and devour it.

And that the Soul may very possibly be unso^, secure, careless or
presumptuous, and so through slothfulness fall into a deep sleep of
sencelesness, either of the Grace and Goodness of God brought to it in Christ,
and the excellent advantages thereby afforded for its attainment of happiness,
or of the dangers that either others or it self is in, of being led away by the
deceitfulness of sin, and so lie open to Satan's malice and malicious
enterprises; the many exhortations to watchfulness, and cautions against
slothfulness and negligence propounded in the Scriptures to the Believers (as
well as the experience of the sleepy decaying tempers that have often befallen
Believers) sufficiently testify. See the exhortations and warnings in these
Scriptures, Matthew. 24.42, 43, 44, etc. and 25.13 and 26.41. Mark 13.33, 35,
36.37. where it is said by our Savior, that what he there said was both to the
Disciples, who were generally real Believers, and to all besides, viz. Watch.
So also in Luke 21.34, 35, 36. Ephesians. 6.11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. 16.13. 1 Pet.
5.8, 9. Heb. 3.12, 13. and 6.12. and 12.15, 16. Revel. 3.2, 3. and 16.15.
Instances of sore decays by heedlesness, and thereby of great danger
signified: See in Revel. 2.4^ 5. and 3.1, 2, 13, 14, 15, 16. and the reason of
it is partly from other enemies: As

2. The flesh with its affections and lusts warring against the Soul, and
lusting against the spirit, that endeavors the good of the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11.
Galat. 5.17, 18, 19. it lusts after ease and pleasures, riches, honors and the
enjoyment of this present world, the love of which cannot consist with the love
of the Father, but will by degrees choke it and eat it out of the heart; No man
being able to serve two Masters, but that he must either love the one and hate
the other, or lean to the one and forsake the other; and that it is very
possible and easy for a Believer to walk after and mind the flesh, as well as
to mind and walk after the Spirit, or at least if not so easy to the
conscience and renewed mind, yet easy enough in respect of the natural
affections and desires, is sufficiently proved by every ones own experience,
and by all those serious watch-words, counsels and provocations to watchfulness
there against it, and to deny it and not walk after it, Not to love the world
and the things of it; the many falls of the Servants of God, as David, Peter,
etc. and reproofs for their walking after it, seeking to make themselves
friends of the world, etc. as partly appears in the Scriptures before quoted
under the former Head, and further in these Scriptures, Romans 6.11, 12, 13, 14,
15, etc. and 8 12.13, 14. and 13.12, 13, 14. Galat. 5.13, 14, 25, 26. Ephesians.
4.17, 18, etc. 1 Cor. 5. and 6. and 10. and 11.17, 18, 20, 21, 22. James 2. and
3. and 4.4, 5, 6, etc. Revel. 2.4, 5, etc. to which also add,

3. The World, both in the seeming good and desirable enjoyments of it, and in
the persons of it, pretending piety, knowledge of God and friendship to
Believers persons, as also the examples and customs of it, and of many
Professors of the Gospel in it, prove oftentimes very great baits and
inticements to their lusts, and put vigor and force into them, while wistly
looked upon and considered by them with a carnal eye, as appears in Prove. 2.12,
13, 15, 16. and 5.3, 4. etc. and 6.25, 26. and 7.10, 11, 18, 21, 22, 23, 26,
27. and 23.20, 21, 26, 27, 28, 31, etc. Luke 8.14. and 12.15, and 21.34. and 2
Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. Jam. 4.4, 5. etc. and also in the threats and frowns of the
great and mighty persons of it; the harsh and bi^ter afflictions and sufferings
they are often exposed to in and from it, which being viewed do affright and
scare from the stedfastness of the faith and of the profession of it by
believers, as it is intimated in These. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Matthew. 13.20, 21. Heb.
12.2, 3, 4. and therefore in both these cases we are exhorted by our Savior to
pluck out the right eye where it offends, and cast it from us least by gazing
with a carnal judgment and mind upon the things that are seen, we should either
for the love or fear of them neglect things unseen, that are objects of our
faith only; as also thence David prays God to turn away his eyes from beholding
vanity and quicken him in his way, Psalm. 119.36. But again besides there are
also,

4. False Teachers or false Prophets that come in Sheeps-cloathing, in great
shows and appearances of piety and holiness and wisdom, men oft-times that have
the approbation and countenance of the world, and are of great learning as to
the Learning of the the World; yea, and many that seem to be skillful in
Mysteries, and to have a kind of Spiritual force in their teaching, so as that
the sheep, if not very wary and watchful may easily mistake them for true
Shepherds or Teachers of the Truth. Yea, and these so earnest, fervent, and
industrious oftentimes that they will deceive if possible the Elect, Matthew.
7.15, 16. and 24.24, 25. where note that those words (if possible) for the
words (it were) are n^ in the Greek Text, do not employ an absolute
i^possibility of their being deceived; but a greater difficulty, and therefore
greater diligence used by the Deceivers to deceive them if possible; even as
the same words (if possible) used in Act. 20.16. and Romans 12.16. where it is
said that the Apostle Paul hastened if it were possible for him to be at
Jerusalem by the Feast of Pentecost: and exhorts us if it be possible, so much
as in us lies to have peace with all men, do not argue an utter impossibility,
of either of those things, but only some difficulty there may be, or were
therein, and therefore greater earnestness used or required: such is the
intimation of the phrase in that of Matthew. 24. Indeed this may be implied, that
they the Deceivers are so specious in their pretenses, and so diligent and
earnest in their endeavors, that it was only because it was not possible for
them to do it, that any of the Elect are not deceived by them, even such as are
not deceived by them would have been deceived by them also had it been possible
for them to have been deceived; and so it may signify an impossibilty of somes
being deceived, as indeed it is not possible for Satan or any of his
instruments to deceive those that are not only called and chosen, but also
faithful, as in Rev. 17.14. those do overcom all their enemies through the
power of Christ with them, and cannot be overcome possibly by them; that is,
such as faithfully cleave to Christ, and use the means, and walk in the ways
he has appointed them to go in, and promised his presence and helpfulness to
them in no possibility, much less danger where there is not a remiss negligence
or carelessness (...) presumption in departing from him, or not ^ng the weapons
and ways of safety appointed to them. But otherwise they may possibly, and
there is danger too, especially if after often warnings to awaken up to more
faithfulness and watchfulness, yet men be slack therein. Now these false
Teachers are manifold. nor may I speak of them in this place. For many deny or
corrupt the Fundamental Truths of the Gospel or some one or more of them, as in
denying the person of the Son of God, his Deity, or humanity, or the
preciousness, and vertuousness of his death and sufferings to make atonement
for our sins: or the extent of that atonement, or the Resurrection from the
dead, and the last Judgment, or the personal and glorious appearance of Christ
thereunto. Or else corrupt the Doctrine of Justification, and so the
compleatness of the faith of Christ alone for justifying us in the sight of
God; yea, or for making us wise to salvation, or for sanctification, or the
like. Nay, I conceive those are not the least dangerous false Teachers that
teach men to believe that every man ought to judge himself Elect, and then that
none of the Elect, or real hearty believers that are once such, can possibly
fall finally and totally away by any sinning from the Grace and favor of God;
for this directly tends to open a gap for their boldly closing with and
following after that temptation of Satan: If thou be the Son of God cast thy
self down from the pinnacle of the Temple; for it is written, He shall give his
Angels charge over thee, and they shall bear thee up in their hands that thou
dash not thy foot against a stone: that is, however thou may precipitate thy
self into any sin or danger of sinning, or neglect the means of preservation,
yet thou can not, being a Son of God, possibly hurt thy self thereby, at
least not to destruction. And indeed he that well minds the Scriptures of the
Prophets and Evangelists, may see that those were of the most dangerous sort of
false Prophets amongst the people of Israel, and that one of their most
dangerous errors and false Prophecyings, whereby the people were born in hand
and persuaded, that because they were the Children of the Patriarks, the
Children of Abraham, the Elect, chosen and beloved Nation, therefore they
should have peace, and no disinheriting or destruction could befall them; yea,
though they walked after their own imaginations or served Baalim; their
apprehension and persuasion of their being in such a sure safe infallible state
of Covenant, Grace, or favor with God, as that by no means they could be
rejected or cast away, occasioned the fall, rejection, and destruction of
multitudes of them. See Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19, 20. Jer. 7.4, 5, 6. Mic. 10, 11, 12.
and thence it is that the Apostle warning us Gentiles by their fall, tells us,
that our standing is by faith, and wishes us not to be high minded, as if
because made of the choice people of God, grafted in upon and the Root of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the Covenant made with them, through the faith
of Christ, therefore we could not fall, nor might God harden, and reject us,
but fear and take heed to continue in his goodness, or else we however grafted
into the stock of Israel by Christ shall be cut off by him who hardens whom he
will. Now that which makes these false Teachers (as all or most of the rest of
them) so dangerous to the flock of God is their great pretenses to, and
appearances of piety, holiness, orthodoxy, or righteous judgment, or rather
their boasts thereof, even as those false Prophets who u'sd to cry peace, peace
to the Jews, notwithstanding their great wickedness styled themselves the
Prophets of the Lord, reproached and persecuted those who were such indeed,
because they prophesied otherwise than themselves, dealing faithfully with the
people to warn them of sinning against God, and show them the danger thereof,
as madmen and Deceivers, as may be seen in Jer. 18.18. Come (say the false
Prophets) let us devise devises against Jeremiah, for the Law shall not perish
from the Priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet, etc.
as if they were the men that were the true and right Priests, wise men and
Prophets, and the Law, Wisdom, and word of God were intailed on them: and in
Jer. 29.26. we read that Shemajah the Nehelamite writ to Maasiah the Priest and
to all the Priests, that God had made him Priest and them Officers in the ^^se
of the Lord, for every man that is mad and makes himself a Prophet, to put him
in prison and in the stocks: and faults him for not reproving Jeremiah who made
himself a Prophet, as if Gods true Prophet^ had prophesied falsely to them, and
had been a false Prophet and a Deceiver, because he foretold the length and
continuance of their captivity beyond what they dreamed and bare the people in
hand it would be; and as if they who were indeed false Prophets and Deceivers
had been in the right; yea, Satan is sometimes so transformed into an Angel of
light, and his Messengers into Ministers of Righteousness, and come with such
deceivableness of unrighteousness, as renders it very difficult to discern
them, and to avoid their snares and temptations; as also the sayings of the
Scriptures, which have any appearance (as sometime they have) to countenance
their mistakes, are so wrested and made use of by them, as they thereby
endanger such, as have believed, to fall, and be perverted, and spoiled by
them, in case they be not more earnest with God, and watchful over themselves
and one another, in taking heed to the Gospel-doctrine for preservation, such
be their enemies and their dangers from them: As also,

2. In respect of their own weakness and inabillity in themselves, to defend
themselves from and against those enemies, whether those within them, or those
without them, there being nothing in them, as of them, that can do any thing to
purpose against them, In them, that is, in their flesh, there dwells no good
thing; their natural or artificially acquired wisdom is far too short of the
wisdom or subtlety of the Serpent that endeavors to delude them; yea, it is
full of inclination to side and agree with him, by reason of the great
blindness and depravedness of it that it has de^^ved from him; for the wisdom
of the flesh is not only foolishness to God, but also enmity against him, 1
Cor. 3.19. Romans 8.7. So that if the Believer (or he that has believed)
neglecting the testimony of Christ, the Word of God, the ^^eaching of the Cross
(which is the Power and Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24.) and not taking heed or
having recourse thereto, trust in his own wisdom and understanding, he will
soon be overreached and perverted, and often is by the subtlety of Satan
overthrown; therefore the Wisdom of God, in Prove, 3.5, 7. counsels her Children
thus, Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own
understanding. Be not wise in thine own eyes, fear the Lord and depart from
evil: for as the Lord says of some in Jer. 8.9. when the Word of the Lord is
rejected by men, what wisdom is there in them? The like may be said of their
own strength, power and abillity, in their own resolutions, to withstand
temptations and enemies, it is but weakness it self. Even the best and most
unfeigned Belivers have no sufficiency of themselves, as of themselves, but all
their sufficiency is of God, and without him and his help and strength, and so
neglecting him and hi^ counsels, and so going in their own strength, and
without his, they can do nothing, as our Savior says to his Disciples,
Without me ye (even ye my Disciples, who are branches of me, yet without me,
neglecting me, or not looking to and relying on me, and so taking me along with
you) ye can do nothing, John 15.5, 6. Thence those counsels, to abide in
Christ, in the same Chapter, and elsewhere, to be strong in the Lord and in the
power of his might, to put on the whole armor of God, that so they may be able
to withstand in the evil day or day of trial, and having done all to stand,
Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12, 13. and in 2 Timothy 2.1. To be strong in the Grace that is
in Christ Jesus; as implying, that otherwise we have no power or strength to
withstand them, or to stand in the Grace and savor of God, and so to go
through the various trials that attend us in Gods way and service. Its only in
Gods armor, strength and power that we may prevail, and not be overthrown or
harmed by them. And indeed the want of strength proceeds from the want of
wisdom, or the insufficiency in their strength is from the insufficiency in
their own understanding; we have no power of our selves, because no wisdom that
may give us power, for it is the wise man that is strong, and the man of
understanding that increases strength, as Solomon tells us, Prove. 24.5.

Now this weakness in the Believers understanding and strength, may be the
reason why they are often in the Scripture called Children, and little
Children, as in John 13.33. 1 John 2, 1, 18, 28. For as Children, little
Children, are weak in both those respects, so are Believers in themselves, yea,
in their seize from God and Christ, if they be relied on, and he
neglected; for though God has given forth such an heavenly testimony as is
able to make wise the simple, Psalm. 19.7. and has given gifts to men, some
Apostles, some Evangelists, some Prophets, etc. that we might not be as
Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every blast and wind of
Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.11.14. And the Apostle would have the Believers not to be
children in understanding, but men, 1 Cor. 14.20. Yet the same Apostle both
signifies, that in the state of this life, the growth and attainment of
Believers, even the perfectest of them here, is as far below the state of
absolute and complete perfection, which is the state of the life to come, as
the state of a Child, a little Child, is short of the state of manhood, 1 Cor.
13.11, 12. and also more frequently implies, that only in attending to, and
relying on Christ, and taking heed to his testimony, we may be delivered from
the imputation, inabillity and weakness of Children, in deriving wisdom and
strength from ^im, and so in being supplied with his wisdom and strength by his
Spirit, in the receipt of the gifts given, or Word and Testimony, as given forth
by them; so that if we do in the conceit of our sufficiency in what we have in
our selves, neglect dependence on and attendance to Christ, in and by the said
gifts, or the testimony thereby given forth, it will fare with us, as it did
with Sampson, when parting with his Locks, in which his strength lay, he became
as weak, feeble and as unable to make resistance against the Philistims, his
enemies, as other ordinary men; we shall be found to act like weak and simple
Children, and be easily abused, circumvented and overthrown by our spiritual
enemies, in their attempts upon us to that purpose; indeed as it is with
Children that have wise and able Parents or Guardians, however weak they are of
themselves, yet if they will not listen to their subtle enemies, in their
^rafty suggestions, but first advise with their said Parents and Guardians,
that are wiser then they, ^r if they will not venture to come near them, but in
their hands, they are, and may be safe enough, notwithstanding the strength or
subtlety of those that would either cheat or hurt them; so it is here; the
weakest Believer, calling upon God, and cleaving to the instruction and counsel
of Christ and his Spirit, is safe enough, and shall be preserved from falling;
but as the Child neglecting the Fathers hand and counsel may be undone, so is
it here; whence Wisdom so frequently advises, Hear O ye Children the
instruction of a Father, ^d attend to know understanding, and keep my
Commandment and live, and my Law as the apple of thine eye, and depart not
from the words of my mouth, and many the like, Prove. 4.1, 4, 5.6. and 5.1, 2,
6. and 7.21. Whence we may further note, that the Believers danger lies not
simply, or so much in his own weakness, as in his being liable to think himself
wise or strong, and so to be puffed up with pride, and so to trust to and in
himself and his own righteousness (as in Ezekiel. 33.13.) or beauty (as Ezekiel.
16.17.) or that he is Christ's* (as in 2 Cor. 10.7.) that he is rich and
increased with goods, and needs nothing, and so grow lukewarm, and carelessly
indifferent whether he look to Christ or not, yea, neglect to buy of him what
is necessary for him, (as Revel. 3.14, 18.) or say, he is now become a Lord
himself, an owner of much in himself to live upon, and so matter not to come to
Christ; like them in Jeremiah 2.3. that said, They were Lords, they would come
no more at God. This, this is that which mostly indangers those, especially
that are more abundantly gifted, enlarged and exalted above others; even as the
Child, that conceits its self strong while it is not, so v^^^ring to go alone
gets a fall, and many presuming on their own sufficiency of wit and parts to
neglect their Fathers and Friends advice, are over reached by subtler heads:
Thence Solomon observes, that there is more hope of a fool, than of one that is
wise in his own conceit, Prove. 26.12. Peter conceiting himself strong enough to
follow Christ whithersoever he was to go, and thereupon following him
unwarrantably into the High Priests Hall, got a sore fall in his denying him
thrice: Yea is most probably, if not assuredly believed, that ^^e fallen Angels
fell through reflecting upon their own created excellencies, and lifting up
themselves thereby above their places, and from that subjection to God, and
dependence on him, in which he set them: but certain it is, that the Church of
Jerusalem this way f^ll to play the harlot from him that had espoused her to
himself, and provoked upon her self such judgments from him, as the Law and
usage of the Countries allot to Harlots, Ezekiel. 16. so true it is that Pride
goes before destruction, and an haughty mind before a fall, Prove. 16.18.
Whence the Wiseman adds, that it is better to be of an humble spirit with the
lowly (with those that stand below, that are mean in parts, gifts, esteem, and
are content with their low conditions) then to divide the spoils (do great
exploits, atchieve great victories and successes, and get the honor and
respect of men for their gifts, graces, actings, etc.) with the proud, verse
19. Now that Believers also may possibly be puffed up with pride, not only the
cautions given by Moses to Israel, Deuteronomy. 6. and 8. and his fore-prophecy of
him, Deuteronomy. 32.15. and the Apostles warning Beleivers to take heed of it, and
not be high-minded but fear, Romans 11.22. and the Lords giving to Paul a thorn
in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet him, to prevent it in him, 2 Cor.
12.8, 9. but also the Instances above hinted in Jerem. 2. Ezekiel. 16. Revel. 3.
do plainly evince it. Therefore blessed is he that fears always, with a fear
opposed to high-mindedness, Prove. 28.13. and good to say with good Jehosaphat,
We know not what to do, O Lord, but our eyes are up to thee, for we have no
might against this great company that comes against us, 2 Chronicles. 20.12.

3. And then the holiness and severity of the Lord, who resists the proud,
against those who neglect and withdraw from Christ, compleats the danger; for
were our enemies never so many and mighty, and we never so weak, or through
conceit and pride liable to fall, yet if God would always forgive, and
continue to own us, there were yet no danger; but the case is not so, but as in
the Son of God is life, and as in abiding in him there is abiding and
continuing favor from God unto everlasting happiness to be met with, out of
that infinite respect that God shows to him (namely to Christ) and the delight
he has in him; so on the other side, out of the same respect to, and delight
in him, he will be provoked to wrath (though slow to it) and give up men to
their own lusts and delusions, for slighting and turning from him; and there is
no respect of persons with God. The just now shall live by faith: but if any
man (or (...), as it is in the Greek) if he (the just man) draw back, my soul,
say^s God, shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.39. If ye walk after the
flesh (says Paul, Romans 8.13.) ^e dye, but if by the Spirit ye mortify the
deeds of the body ye shall live. Thence the Apostle couples in himself, of
whose right believing there can be no doubt, and says, How can we escape, if
we neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2.3. And if we sin wilfully after the
knowledge of the truth received, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, etc. Heb. 10.26,
27. And so generally the Gospel tells us as well of indignation and wrath
toward men upon their departures from God, as of his special favor and grace
in their cleaving to him. And as the Grace and Mercy of God is more abundant
toward us under this clearest dispensation of the Gospel, by the personal
appearance and ministration of Christ, than it was under the Law, so also the
terrors of God and his wrath is answerable to the Rejectors of it, or Apostates
from it; to that purpose is that in Heb. 10.29. If they that despised Moses Law
dyed without mercy under two or three witnesses, of how much sorer punishment
shall he be thought worthy, who has trod under foot the Son of God, and
counted the blood, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done
despite to the Spirit of Grace: And that in Heb. 12.15, 16, 17, 18. Look
diligently least any man fail of the Grace of God, least any root of bitterness
springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled. Least there be any
fornicator or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of bread sold his
birthright, for ye know, how that afterward when he would have inherited the
Blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place for repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears. For ye are not come to Mount Sinai, but to
Mount Sion, the City of the living God, etc. Where the graciousness of the
Gospel dispensation now is made an Argument for expecting the greater terror
against any of us, if we fail of Gods Grace, or withdraw from it. So also Hebr.
2.1, 2, 3. whence also that warning, Chap. 3.12, 13. Take heed least there be
in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing (or standing off) from
the living God, but exhort one another, and that from the consideration of Gods
dealing with Israel of old: Which Instance of their revolting from God, losing
his Grace and favor, and incurring his displeasure and wrath, is often
mentioned in the Scripture by way of admonition to Believers now, as is to be
seen in Heb. 3.7, 8, 9, 10, etc. and 4.1, 11. 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 11. Jude
5. and indeed it is very pregnant, for they were a people highly favored above
all the people on the earth, saved out of Egypt by a wonderful salvation, led
through the Sea and preserved safely therein, and provided for abundantly of
all necessaries for their travel to Canaan and preservation therein in a most
eminent and miraculous way and manner, no people more favored than they, and
yet with many of them God was so displeased (yea, with Moses, Aaron and many
famous men of that Congregation) as that after all his goodness toward them,
he suffered them not to enter into the Land of Canaan, and destroyed many of
them in the Wilderness; few of them entered the Rest that he had promised to the
Fathers, which was a type of Heaven, or of the heavenly Inheritance and Kingdom
of our Lord Jesus. And indeed that consideration, that of six hundred thousand
men that came out of the Land of Egypt, but two of them all (that were men of
twenty years age or upward at their coming out of Egypt) entered into the Land
of promise (their after sinnings in the wilderness, hardening their hearts in
unbelief against God and rebelling against him, deprived all the rest:) this
confidetion alone, I say, of so many people so highly favored of God going out
from it, and by their sins loosing it; and so few retaining it and enduring to
the inheritance, may represent it (were there nothing else in the Scriptures to
ruin it) as a matter of great danger, namely, that there is danger, great
danger of loosing Gods favor if men be not careful to take heed to God's
Counsels and directions for retaining in: and as there is great danger of it, so

2. Great danger in it; nay, indeed nothing but danger, evil and misery in
loosing and not keeping our selves through Grace in God's love and favor: for,
as in his favor is life, so in his anger and displeasure, especially when
provoked so highly as to disown us, there is nothing else but misery and death;
a giving up to wrath and judgment, or a making way for his wrath and judgment
to fall upon us. For if the wrath of a King be as the roaring of a Lion, or as
the messengers of death, how much more the wrath, yea, the hatred of God, as he
is said to hate all the workers of iniquity, as they must needs be that depart
away from him after they have known him, or rather have been known by him, as
the Apostle says, All they that are far from him, says David ( Psalm. 73.27.)
shall perish, even all that abide in their alienation and estrangement from
him, and never heartily close with and obey him. Thou have destroyed (he adds)
all them that go a whoring from thee: they that never come at him must
necessarily perish, because there is life and salvation only in him, and in
the knowledge and enjoyment of him, without which enjoyment (and far off from
it) they must needs be that are f^r from him: but as for them that go a whoring
from him, they are also to be destroyed by him; they not only deprive
themselves of that safety that is only in him, as the others do, but also do
more directly and severely engage him and his wrath against them, as doing him
more disservice and dishonor, than those that never knew him, nor had any
acquaintance wi^h him; even as a wife that plays the whore from a loving
husband, does not only deprive her self of the maintenance and comfort she
might have from and in him, as they do or did that would not accept him for her
husband; but as she does more disgrace and wrong then husband than they, so she
provokes such wrath from her husband against her, and such punishments in his
wrath as he will not exercise toward and execute upon others. They that have
known the way of truth, and escaped the pollutions in the World thereby and are
afterward entangled and overcome again, and turn from the holy Commandment are
in a worse case than they that never knew or believed the truth, as 2 Pet.
2.20, 21. in this case there is an, How can we escape? and of how much sorer
punishment shall he be counted worthy, etc. as we have seen, Heb. 2.3. and
10.29. so that the danger here is very great.

1. Danger of being left and given up of God to walk after out own counsels,
lusts and pleasures, as Israel were, Psalm. 81.11, 12. and the Gentiles, Romans
1.21, 22, 24, 28. to a reprobate and stupid mind void of judgment, sense or
conscience, to serve vile affections, and do things most evil and inconvenient,
adding iniquity to iniquity, so as not to enter into Gods righteousness, Psalm.
69.27.

2. Danger also of having stumbling blocks laid before them to occasion their
falling, and being thereby broken so as to perish, as Jer. 6.21. to have some
such providence ordered of God as will either suit the corrupt desires of
wandering rebellious sinners, and afford maintenance and encouragement to them
in their sinful courses, as the prosperity of fools destroys them, Prove. 1.32.
or else occasion offense and stumbling at God, his words, people, ways, so as
to turn wholly from those in John 6.66. that took offense at Christ's Doctrine
and turned so away as to walk no more with him; and as Christ himself were in
his meanness reproaches and sufferings to the rebellious Jews. 1 Cor. 1.22, 23.
Romans ^ 33.

3. Danger of being given ^^ to Satan and to strong delusions, hardening and
intoxicating them in their sins, and entering in upon Soul or body, or both to
hurry them to destruction, as befell Judas falling from Heaven and becoming a
Devil? and as befell Ananias and Sapphira in part, John 13.30. Act. 5.3. and as
is threatened in 2 These. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. That God will send strong delusions to
them that obey not the truth (and they are said not to obey it, that abide not
in the obedience of it, Gal. 3.1. and 5.10.) but have pleasure in
unrighteousness, that so they might all be damned. The wrath of God being very
sore and hot against the abusers of his Grace in Christ, that withhold it in
unrighteousness, as Romans 1.18. and therefore there is,

4. Danger of not entering into God's rest, or coming into his righteousness,
and so into eternal life, or the Kingdom of God, into which no unclean thing
can enter, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5. thence those warnings to take heed
lest we fail of the Grace of God, or of the rest, that yet remains for his
people after the same example of unbelief, as befell the Israelites that sinned
in the wilderness, Heb 4.1.11. Yea, in a word,

5. Danger of utter perdition and destruction from the presence of God, and
from the enjoyment of his Glory, and so of being cast out into everlasting
misery and torment with the Devil and his angels, for so much is implied by the
Apostle, in saying, we are not of those that draw back to perdition, but of
those that believe, etc. where it is implied, that perdition and destruction is
the dangerous consequence of men's drawing back from God: Oh unspeakable and
unconceiveable misery and danger?

And this consideration in both branches of it affords a second and third
motive to quicken up the believer to diligence in taking heed to the Grace of
God, and the instructions thereof, and so to keep himself in the love of God;
seeing there is not only possibility, but some danger of falling from it, if he
be careless therein, by reason of his many enemies, his own inability to
deliver himself from them, and Gods severity against the abusers of his
goodness and neglectors of his Son and his salvation. And great danger; yea,
unspeakable misery in falling therefrom, answerable to the greatness of the
love abused and Grace slighted. Great need to give great diligence to avoid
such dangers, yea, to do it with all our might and earnestness. To encourage in
and unto which here is also further signified.

Point. 3. That there is no necessity that a Believer must fail of or fall out
from the love of God. He may through the Grace of God preserve himself and be
preserved therein as well as at first brought thereunto.

This is evident in that the Apostle exhorts them to keep themselves in the
love of God. Sure as he would not exhort them to a work that could not be
undone, or to endeavor for that that they must necessarily and inevitably
have; so much less would he exhort them to a thing impossible, the love of God
therefore may be kept or continued in, as also our Savior both implies in so
often exhorting Believers to continue in his words, and to abide in him, and
let his words abide in them, John 8.32. and 15.4, 5, 6, 7 and more plainly
asserts, that his sheep hear his voice; and he knows (that is, approves and
owns them) and they follow him, and he gives unto them eternal li^e, and they
shall never perish, John ^0.27, 28, 29. and again, As my Father has loved me,
so have I loved you, continue ye in my love; If ye keep my Commandments ye
shall continue in my love, as I have kept my Fathers Commandments, and continue
in his love, Joh. 15 9 10. as to the same purpose is that in 1 John 2.24, 25.
Let that therefore which you have heard from the beginning abide in you. If
that which ye have heard from the beginning abide in you, ye shall continue in
the Father, and in the Son; and this is the promise that he has promised, even
Eternal life. So Caleb and Joshuah kept in the favor of God all the way
through the wilderness, and entered into the land of Canaan. So Paul fought the
good fight of faith, kept the faith to the finishing of his course, 2 Timothy 4.8.
And many other good men have through faith and patience inherited the promises,
Heb. 6.12. have lived and died in the faith, and so in the love and favor of
God, and are at rest with Christ and God, otherwise men should be never the
better but the worse rather for believing and coming to partake of the Grace of
God. For, better never to know it at all, than to fall from it after the
sweetness of it is once known and tasted. The sin being then the greater, and
the misery incurred more dreadful and unbearable, as in 2 Pet. 2 20, 21, 22.

But now this possibility of being kept in the love of God is not from any
strength, wisdom or faithfulness in man, as of himself, no more than his being
brought into the love of God was by his own fleshly wisdom or strength, but
both the one and the other are by and of the Grace of God. Its true in both
senses (both of saving at the first from the state of sin and death into the
state of life and righteousness, by being brought into Christ, and of saving in
continuance in the love of God, and being preserved from falling back again) By
Grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2.5. and ye are saved by Grace through Faith, and
that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, verse 8. For in us, though
Believers, that is, in our flesh, there dwells no good thing; nor have we
sufficiency in our selves, as of our selves, to think any thing, Romans 7.18. 2
Cor. 3.5. We have before noted the inability in man, even in Believers, as men,
and so in and of themselves (yea, or in their inherent graces received) to
stand and maintain themselves against the power of their enemies, but only in
the Grace that is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.1. In the Lord, and in the power of
his might, in the whole armor of God, as Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12. But such might
power and sufficiency there is in the Grace of God, afforded in and by Jesus
Christ, such fullness in Christ himself, and in God in him, and such a presence
and power of God and his holy Spirit, in and with his Doctrine and Gospel, and
such Armor of Righteousness given the Believer in him, as that there through
he may be kept in the love and favor of God, maugre all the power, malice and
subtlety of the enemy, and notwithstanding that great weakness and inability to
keep himself, or to vanquish the enemy that is in him self.

Thus the Apostle Paul confesses that he was not only furnished for and
strengthened in his labors (I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I
but the Grace of God that was with me, and by the Grace of God I am that I am;
and his Grace that was bestowed upon me was not in vain toward me. 1 Cor.
15.10.) but also when tempted and buffeted of Satan and in danger to be
harmed; he crying to Christ for help, Christ answered him that his Grace was
sufficient for him, his favor relied upon and looked to, would afford all
supplies for safety and satisfaction to him, for therein a man has God and
Christ with him and for him in whom there is all things that may preserve him.
As,

1. Infinite power, able to subdue all things to the Believer that rise up
against him, and to support him in and under the greatest trials and troubles
that may possilby befall him; for he is the Almighty God, all things are far
inferior to him, no work too hard or difficult for him: He that made the
Heavens and Earth by his Word, and upholds them by the Word of his power, what
cannot he create and accomplish for the help and safety of his people that wait
upon him? and what cannot he strengthen too by his glorious power to do or
undergo in the way of salvation? there is nothing Almighty but he, neither
sin, nor Satan, nor world, nor any thing or creature, All the Inhabitants of
the earth are to him as the drop of a bucket, he takes up the Isles as a very
little thing, a small inconsiderable thing. If he then be for us, who is he
that is against us? None is able to pluck (or by force or power to take)
Christ's sheep out of his hands. John 10.27, 28, 29. Because God that gave him
them is greater than all, and n^ne to be compared with him. If a man hearken to
his voice, and then obtain his favor, he can soon subdue his enemies, Psalm.
81.13, 14. Philip. 3.21 because he can subdue all things to himself by his
mighty power; yea, the strongest and violentest corruptions. He will subdue our
iniquities, says Micah, 7.18, 19. He that made all things at the first is able
to make the heart and Spirit new, and put his fear into it to keep a man from
sinning against him, Jer. 32.41, 42. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Greater is he that is in
the believer (that is God and Christ by his Holy Spirit) than he that is in the
world, 1 John 4.4, 5. greater in power and might: as also,

2. Greater is he in Authority than any of the enemies. He rules over all
things. All power and Authority is his and o^ him, and all his Authority is in
the hand of his Son our Savior, so as he commands all Creatures at his
pleasure to be for the furtherance of the safety of his servants that believe
in him. He has an innumerable number of Angels attending on him and ministering
to him, which he sends forth for the help of those that are heirs of salvation.
And these he makes to pitch their tents about them that fear him, Psalm. 34.7,
and to bear them up in their hands from harm, and all the Devils and evil men
are under his control, so that he can abate their rage, bridle their fury and
malice, take them off from the assaults and enterprises against them, according
to his pleasure; None can say unto him, what dotb he. Yea, and,

3. In him is infinite wisdom and understanding to see and foresee what may
either hurt or help his servants, and to order all things for good to them. All
fullness of Wisdom dwells in him for ever, his understanding is boundless,
Psalm. 147.5. He sees what is in the dark, all the subtlest contrivances of
Satan are manifest to him: and the light (to disperse and scatter all Clouds
of error and deceit that might entangle our minds) dwells with him, Dan. 2.22.
so that he is every way able to keep him from falling, the Soul that looks to
and believes in him, Romans 16.25. Jude 24. able to build up the Soul and bring
it to the inheritance of his everlasting Kingdom, Act. 20.32.

4. And as he is able in respect of his Authority, power, and infinite wisdom
(which was able to find out a way to ransom us when lost, and therefore surely
is able to find out how to save us when found again and brought back to him) so
he is so good gracious, and loving, especially to those that are the objects of
his favor, the members of his Son, his Disciples and followers, that there is
no Question to be made of his willingness and readiness to improve his Power,
Authority, and Wisdom for their preservation in his favor: they that are
upright with him and depend on him, shall experience his all-sufficiencie
exercised for their safe keeping. As his love to mankind when yet sinners and
lost (leading him to give his only begotten Son to be their Savior, and to
that purpose to deliver him up to Death for their offenses, and make him the
propitiation for their sins, and glorify him to be Lord and Christ, to the end
that men might believe in him, and believing in him, become the Objects of his
favor and be saved by him) may assure us of his readiness to care for, and
keep those that answer his end therein in believing on his Son; that having
justified us by his blood, he will much more save us from wrath to come; and we
being reconciled by his Sons Death, we shall much more be saved by his life,
Romans 5.9, 10. and having delivered him up for us all (for all men) he will also
freely with him give us (us especially who have received him) all things that
may conduce to our salvation and happiness, Romans 8.32. So also he has through
his Son made and confirmed many precious promises of taking care of, keeping
and saving those that trust in him: as that, Surely, In blessing, I will bless
thee (said he to Abraham and his seed. Those that be of the faith of Abraham
are also blessed with him, Gal. 3.7, 8, 9.) Heb. 6.13, 14, 15, etc. he has
said of Christ and his Seed, that he would establish them. His Seed also will I
make to endure for ever, and his Throne as the days of Heaven, Psalm. 89.29, 30,
36. and again, I will be with thee, I will never leave nor forsake thee, Deuteronomy.
31.6. Josh. 1.5. Heb. 13.5, 6. again, Thou art my Servant (says he to Israel
his people) I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away. Fear thou not for I am
with thee, be not disdismayed, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea, I
will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee by the right hand of my righteousness,
Isa. 41.9, 10. thence also it is said, They that trust in the Lord are as mount
Sion which cannot be removed but abides for ever. As the mountains are about
Jerusalem, so is the Lord round about his people from henceforth and for ever.
Psalm. 125.1, 2. Yea, and these promises he has made good to his people in all
ages; they that trusted in him have found his goodness and faithfulness
therein. Which leads, us to another consideration, namely,

5. That he has engaged his word and promise to his people to keep them and
bless them; (yea, he has confirmed his promise too with his oath, as we might
have added; I have sworn by my self, says God, Surely in blessing I will thee,
Heb. 6.14.15 with Genesis 22.16, 17. as also in Psalm. 89.3, 4, 35, 36.) And he is
faithful that has promised, cannot, will not lie, nor alter the word that is
gone out of his mouth. He is the faithful God that keeps Covenant and Mercy.
Deuteronomy. 7.9. His Word and Oath are two things in which it is impossible for him
to lie, Heb. 6.17, 18. faithful is he that has called you, who also will do
it; namely, will sanctify the believer throughout, and see that his whole
Spirit, Soul and Body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, says, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23, 24. To which purpose also,

6. He has appointed his only begotten Son, the Lord Jesus Christ in the
virtues of his most precious blood and sacrifice, and invested with the
Authority, Power, and Glory of God, to be as the Savior of all men; so
especially, and after a special sort of them that believe, his Church, his
Body, his Sheep, to be their Shepherd, husband, and head, to take care of
them, feed them, guide, protect, and lead them, and to keep them in the fat and
fruitful pastures of Israel unto everlasting life. This is the will, says he,
of him that sent me, that he that sees (beholds) the Son, and believes on
him should have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day, John
6.40. And again, I am the good Shepherd, and know (that is, take care of) my
sheep, and am known (approved) of mine. My Sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me, etc. John 10.14, 27. the Shepherd and Bishop of our
Souls, 1 Pet. 2.25. To which purpose, that he might preserve those that follow
him; he is both furnished,

1. As a Prophet, with Authority, power and Spirit to teach them and lead them
safely in the way that they should go, to make known to them his mind and the
will of his Father, and so to Guide the meek in judgment, and to teach the meek
his way, yea, and to reveal by his Spirit the mysteries of his Kingdom, the
secrets of the Lord, and feed them with the choice comforts and consolations,
the fresh and fat pastures of Israel, to make them like, love and delight in
the way he leads them in, and to show them their wanderings, reprove them for
them, and recover them from them.

2. As a Priest, to mediate with God for them by way of intercession in the
virtues of his perfect propitiatory Sacrifice, thereby to obtain of God mercy
to pass by and pardon their defects, weaknesses and wanderings, or in mercy and
measure to judge and correct them for them, and so pass over them, and still
bestow his grace and favor upon them, and continue it to them, in blessing
them, and giving such further dispensations to them of his Spirit and spiritual
blessings, as may be good for them, and further their salvation. And in respect
of the perfection of his Sacrifice to God, and Priesthood before God, he is
able to prevail with God for whatsoever he makes request for to him; and being
an everlasting and ever-living Priest, after the order of Melchisedeck, he is
able to save to the utmost (from wrath and judgment, and in the grace and
favor of God) them that come to God by him, because He (He so high, and holy,
and undefiled an one) ever lives to make intercession for them, Romans 8.26, 27,
34. Heb. 7: 24, 25, 26, 27. And then also,

3. As King and Lord over all, he is able to protect, and hide them, and safely
keep them from the power and malice of their enemies, controuling their
enterprises, defeating their plots, and overthrowing their power, and
confederacies, and turning them about as he pleases, sustaining and upholding
all his Servants and followers under all their trials and sufferings, and
giving issues and deliverances to them out of them, as he sees good for them,
so as that no man can pluck them (or take them by force) out of his hands, nor
any sin of weakness and infirmity cause him to disown them.

And also as Christ, who is thus appointed and furnished to save them. So

7. He is faithful and merciful, can pity and sympathize with them in their
ignorances, trials, sufferings and temptations, and knows how to succor them,
having himself had experience of sufferings and temptations, and will
faithfully discharge the trust committed to him of his Father, and the
oversight he has taken of them. He is faithful in all things, as Moses was,
yea, and more because Moses was but faithful as a Servant, but Christ as a Son
over his own house or household, Heb. 2.17, 18. and 3.1, 2, 5, 6. He will not
fail nor be discouraged till he have set judgment (truth and righteousness) in
the earth, till he have accomplished the whole will of God committed to him. He
is the Author and Finisher of the Faith, his hands have laid the foundation,
and his hands too shall finish the building, Isai. 42.1, 3, 4. and Zech. 4, 7,
9.

So that all these put together make it appear, that the love and grace of God,
or God and Christ in his favor and love to his people, is a strong and sure
refuge for them, and defense to them, so that they may in betaking themselves
to him, and abiding in their faith in him, be surely kept in his love, there is
not only a possibility of it, but an assured certainty also, they may trust
boldly in him at all times, and contentedly sit down and solace themselves in
his shadow, and rejoice in his love, and sing with cheerfulness, The Lord is
our refuge and defense, a present help in time of trouble, therefore will we
not fear though the earth be removed, and though the Mountains be carried into
the midst of the Seas. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our
refuge, Psalm. 46.1, 2, 6. Whence they be blessed that trust in him at all
times, or exercise faith in and relyance on him, their dwelling is on high (so
as no enemy can overtop or storm them, so as to get to them to harm or pull
them out, except they were greater then God, and could overtop him, and be
above him in strength and power) their defense is the munition of rocks, so
that no undermining them, or digging through their defense by policy or
industry, unless they could outvye God in wisdom and strength, and pluck away
his everlasting arms from about them, and strike through his sides as it were
to pierce them) bread shall be given them, and their waters shall not fail, (so
as there can be no starving of them out. Other strong Holds may be either
stormed, or undermined, or batterd down, or else they that be in them may for
want of provision of bread and drink be forced to yield themselves to their
enemies; but God in Christ is such a strong Hold, his Name such a strong Tower
of defense, as the enemy can do none of those things to them that are in him.
He is a very Fountain of provisions for them, the Fountain of living waters, of
most quickening comforts and consolations, and there is plenty of bread with
him, even of whatever may support and strengthen the heart to cleave to him,
and resist the Adversary that sets himself against him: Yea, and whereas other
strong Holds, in case they had all those beforementioned properties, strength,
height and provision of victuals, yet possibly, through the closeness and
unhealthiness of them, for want of air or prospect, might be very uncouth, and
as close prisons to those that should abide long in them; neither is there that
convenience here, for it follows) thine eyes shall behold the King in his
beauty, and thou shall behold the Land that is very far off, Isai. 33.16, 17.
Thou shall have the sight of the beauty and excellency of Christ the King of
Glory, to refresh thee. He will manifest himself to thee, John 14.21. and thou
shall see the things that are to come, something of the Glory to be revealed,
as Moses had respect to, and therefore a view in some measure of the recompense
of reward, Heb. 11.26. So that God and Christ is every way a place of
mavelous safe^y to the believing Soul; so as it may well be said, as in Deuteronomy.
33.26, 27, 29. There is none like to the God of Jesurun, who rides upon the
Heaven for thy help, and in his excellency on the Sky. The eternal God is thy
refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms, and he shall thrust out the
enemy from before thee, and shall say, Destroy them. Happy art thou, O Israel!
who is like to thee! a people saved by the Lord! etc. But again,

8. Whereas the enemy being subtle, uses many stratagems to draw us out from
our strong Hold, either by withdrawing our minds from God, or assaulting our
confidence in God, or the like, and God requires of us in keeping to it to make
resistance against him; that we might not be as naked men against him, he has
provided for us, and gives us in the Doctrine of Christ, and so in and through
Christ, as set forth therein, Armor of righteousness for our defense, both on
the right hand, against spiritual deceits and allurements of the world or
flesh, and on the left, against grosser deceits, or affrightments and fears
proceeding from Satan and the World; which we taking to our selves, putting
them on, and making resistance in them, will be able every way to secure us
against all such assaults. His Gospel-Doctrine is the power of God to
salvation, (preservation and safety) to every one that believes, Romans 1.16.
because that presents such evidences of God and his Righteousness, such strong
engagements, motives and arguments for cleaving to Christ, and such a presence
of the Spirit of God breaths therein, as that they that be not careless in
attending thereto shall be thereby strengthened and fortified against all
insinuations and suggestions of the Adversaries; there are such discoveries of
the excellency and compleatness of Christ, such evidences of the vanity and
emptiness of all things besides, whether of the flesh and fleshly privileges,
wisdom, righteousness; or of the worldly advantages, profers, enjoyments; such
strong engagements from the mercy and love of God in Christ toward us, such
profit and benefit to be met with by us, in cleaving to him; and such and so
great terrors of the Lord against the rejectors of, and Apostates from his
government, over them, and Grace brought unto them, as being minded and taken
heed to, will abundantly provoke them to cleave unto the Lord, and resist those
temptations and suggestions that entice them from him.

They have 1. The truth as a girdle to bound up their minds unto God and his
ways, unto Christ and the Grace in him, and keep them from scattering them to
vanities, and so to strengthen the Soul to walk with resolution and courage in
the ways of Gods Commandments, and to stand it out against the enemies, yea,
to bind and fasten all other parts of the spiritual armor about them, so as to
be therein fenced against all assaults of the Adversaries.

The Truth of God and Christ, both as to his declarations of his mind in the
Word, and the Word of Truth it self, which is the Truth, and as to his
faithfulness in performing all his great and gracious Promises, so as that the
mind being girded up herewith* the Soul will be able to run with patience the
race set before it, and perform the service of God with freedom and
cheerfulness.

They have 2. The righteousness of God declared in his Word, even the
Righteousness which is of Faith (Gods gracious pardoning their sins, and
accepting and justifying their persons in and through Christ and his
righteousness, in forgiving sins upon their confessing them, and turning from
them to him, and to cleanse them from all unrighteousness) to be as a
breast plate to (...) to defend their hearts from fainting, or being pi^^ced
into with desperate grief and sorrow, by reason of the consideration of their
sin and sinfulness, and of the iniquities of all their services and holy things.

They have 3. The preparation of the Gospel of peace, or the alacrity and
cheerfulness that it puts into their hearts, while it speaks peace to them from
God and with God, and sets before them an abundant provision for their
helpfulness and satisfaction in all things, made ready for them, and Gods
gracious readiness in all things to do them good; to be as shoes upon their
feet, to fortify their affections, and keep them from being either dirtied
with these lower objects (and so also to keep their ways and walkings from
being so^led and polluted) or offended and turned aside by any of the hard
things, the stones or rocks of offense that they may meet with in their way,
but that they may go on both clean and safe, and walk, yea, run through all
difficulties with patience and cheerfulness the way of Gods Commandments.

They have also 4. The Shield of Faith; the Faith as a Shield, or rather God
and Christ as therein declared and set forth as an object of Faith to be
believed in and trusted to; as a Shield to compass them about and defend their
whole man, running into the faith of him, and so unto and into him as it were
by faith, and so by faith opposing him, and what is in him against the fiery
dar^s and assaults of Satan; which he will be casting at them, to pierce, wound
or destroy them. He will be as a Shield to them, such as shall stave off and
quench them, so as none of them shall be able to pierce through to them to
poison or to wound them.

They have as 5. An Helmet on their heads (to keep them from being beaten down
by the force of any blows given them, either from Satan, as an enemy,
suggesting fears to them, even from their Fathers righteously judging them, or
on other accounts, or from the world persecuting them) the assured hope of Gods
salvation, or the salvation of God, Gods sure protection and defense of them
here, and his bringing or delivering them out in his due time, as set before
them by way of promise in the Gospel, and so an object and matter of hope to be
looked for by them. And then,

They have 6. The Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, as a two-edged Weapon
fit and forcible to do them service, both by way of defense to themselves, and
by way of offense to their enemies, so as that thereby they may both be
preserved from the lies of Satan and his Instruments, and from all his lying
and wicked suggestions, and they may beat them away and drive them from them,
yea, and cause the enemies of Christ and of their faith, by their powerful
convincements thereof to fall before them; so Christ kept himself from the
wicked one, that he touched him not by any of his temptations, Matthew. 4. and so
both he and his Servants have confounded their Adversaries, and convinced and
converted many of them.

And then lastly, They have free access to God through Jesus Christ by Prayer
and supplication, to make known their needs and requests to him, either for
supplies and help to themselves and one another, or for rebuking, taking off,
or weakening their Adversaries and Exercises. And they have through Christ the
Spirit of grace and supplication, to instruct and help them to pray, and direct
their desires and petitions for them; and Christ himself with God as their
Mediator, High Priest and Advocate, to make their Prayers acceptable to God;
and this is a mavelous, powerful and effectual Weapon being filled with
Faith, to obtain any thing from Heaven needful for their defense and safety,
and to batter down the Forts and Strengths of their Adversaries, by pulling
down judgments from Heaven upon them.

This is as the Christians Bullets of Ordnance, that he storms Heaven by, as it
were, and takes it by force, and that being shot up toward Heaven from a
fervent faithful heart, falls down again upon the wicked Adversaries, and does
great execution and slaughter upon them: so we may see how the Prayers of the
Saints, being offered up by the Angel, who had many sweet odours to make them
acceptable ( Revel. 8.3, 4, 5.) procured fire to be cast upon the earth, with
voices, thundrings, lightnings, and a great earthquake, whereby the judgments
of God upon the Adversaries were employed and signified.

Now all these things being considered, it will evidently appear, that it is
very possible for the Believer to be kept in the love of God, nay, that it is
certain he shall be so if he be not greatly neglective of the means of his
safety and preservation, so many and so effectual for that purpose; yea, indeed
a man might marvail, these things for the Believers defense being well weighed,
how it should possibly be, that he should fail of the Grace of God, fall out of
his love and favor, and perish from his presence by any means; but that we
have seen the possibility and danger too thereof before asserted, which also
may further (as to the reason of it) be made manifest in the next
consideration, wherein it is further noted as employed, that he being so
strongly and well fortified and furnished for his safe keeping in the love of
God.

Point 4. It is expected from him, and in some sense lies upon him, as his
work, to keep himself, and each Believer to keep his Brother therein.

Though as he did not bring himself into Christ, and so into the love and
favor of God by his wisdom, will, power or goodness, but he was called into
him, and made in him of God; so neither is it his work in his own power, wisdom
and strength to keep himself there, or defend himself from what would entice
him or force him out: Yet as it was his act in and by the Grace of God in
Christ, to believe and come to Christ, and so into the love and favor of God:
So it is his act also, subordinately in and by the same Grace to keep himself
in Christ, and so in the love of God; whence our Savior so often requires it
of his Disciples. Abide in me, and let my words abide in you; and continue ye
in my love, Joh. 15.4.9. Hold fast what thou have, let no man take away thy
Crown, Rev. 3.11. with which agrees many passages of the Apostles, to stand
fast, quit themselves like men; let that they have received, abide; abide in
Christ, and the like; as also that assertion in 1 John 5.18. He that is born of
God keeps himself that the wicked one touches him not. In which keeping a
man's self in the love of God is signified as to the act of it.

1. That the Believer be and abide in that state and way he is already in
through the Grace of God, not departing, voluntarily leaving or going out
therefrom, keep himself well while he is well, being content with Christ,
confident and well assured of his well doing and happiness in so continuing: to
that purpose are those phrases, of abiding, continuing, not departing or
withdrawing from the living God, as in John 8.32. and 15.4, 5, 6, 7. Col. 1.23.
1 John 2.24, 28. Heb. 3.12. and 10.35, 38, 39. as implying, that no man
heartily believing in Christ can miscarry, but through a voluntary neglect of,
or departure from him. It is no violence done to him can force him but by his
own consent. The case of a Believer, as we showed before, is like the condition
of a man, that though very weak and unable of himself to resist or stand
against the power of his enemies, yet has a strong Castle or Tower, in which
he is so strongly fortified, and so every way unattachable, by either storming,
undermining, or starving of him, that there is certain safety for him in
abiding in it, and no possibility for his enemies catching of him, unless he
voluntarily go out of it. Such is the Believers condition being in Christ and
God, nothing can come upon him to harm him (none can pluck or take him by force
out of it) unless he willingly sin and depart from God and Christ after the
knowledge of the Truth received; against which departing and drawing back from,
and forsaking God, and so their own mercies, the Spirit of God therefore by his
Servants is diligently provoking and exhorting them; as, Take heed Brethren,
least there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the
living God; and let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering;
for he is faithful that has promised, Cast not away your confidence, etc, Heb.
3.12. and 10.23, 35.

2. That because Satan by himself and Instruments is crafty, subtle and
vigilant, to entice, allure and tempt Believers to make a voluntary defection
from God and Christ, either to avoid the difficulties and troubles in and to
the flesh, that he endeavors to fill them with, and which God, for the trial
of their faith in him, and love and obedience to him, exercises him with, or
permits and orders to come upon him, or else to gain the sweetness and profit
of other carnal or worldly enjoyments set before him; therefore that he take
and make use of all those weapons of defense, those Arguments of the Gospel,
and observe those ways and rules appointed him therein (with watchfulness
thereunto, and against the wiles and workings of the Adversary) with which God
has furnished him, and unto which he has directed him in Jesus Christ, taking
heed of listening to, and being moved by any of those subtle Arguments, brought
by the Adversary to him, to dissuade him from his stedfastness in the faith,
and constancy of his profession; whether from the dangers threatened him,
should he hold fast his purpose and way, or the insufficiency either in
himself, or in God and Christ to defend him from them, or from the many sweet
and pleasant enjoyments to the flesh or spirit in some other ways to be
obtained by him; but minding what answers thereto, and there against the Word
and Testimony of God does afford him, diligently to take heed to them, and
oppose them there against, and so to take heed of walking in any such ways, as
in which the Adversary may find him out of Gods protection, and naked, and open
to his temptations.

To this purpose are those many counsels, to Watch and stand fast, quit
themselves like men, and be strong, 1 Cor. 16.13. To take heed to themselves
and put on the whole Armor of God, and therein to resist Satan, and yet still
to stand, to walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, etc. Unto which
things God having in his favor abundandantly furnished them, expects and
requires their care and diligence, and exercise of their powers and faculties
for their own defense: and that because,

1. God has not called us to Christ to be idle and do nothing, but to be
active and obedient, he has called us not to glory, only so as Christ should
without us necessitate us to it, but also to virtue, that we might in the
strength of Christ given us travel in his ways toward the enjoyment of it, and
with his spiritual Weapons fight manfully and valiantly against all those
Adversaries that would spoil us or cheat us of it. We are Gods workmanship
created in Christ Jesus to good works, foreordained by him, that we might walk
in them, and as trees of righteousness, that we might bear and bring forth the
fruits of righteousness unto his glory, and be a peculiar people for him,
zealous of good works: And therefore he expects from us, and requires of us,
in the strength, virtue and power that he gives us to walk and war, to do good,
bring forth fruits, abound in good works, etc. And if being so furnished by him
with his Grace, as that we may do and abound in these things, we do fail his
expectation and desire, sit still instead of marching on toward the heavenly
Canaan, or draw back again toward Egypt, fling down our Weapons, or like
Ephraim, being harnessed, turn our backs upon our enemies in the day of battle,
and so yield up our selves to the power of their temptations, not exercising
our selves to good works, nor bringing forth good fruits, but the contrary: How
can the most holy and pure Majesty, that hates iniquity, slothfulness and
cowardliness, approve or own us, especially if through our sloth and
cowardliness we yield our selves to his and our enemies, and let them do what
they will with us, and so take part with them against him, who has done so
much for us, and put so great engagements to him upon us. For

2. He has called us to glory also, that we may be a glorious honorable
people to him, and he have glory by us, that we might be for a name and for a
praise to him by our vertuousness, fruitfulness, strength, courage, wisdom and
well doing in the power of his Grace; now he should be dishonored and
disparaged by us, and we be an inglorious, shameful people our selves, if being
so fortified and furnished for resistance against our enemies, we should yet do
nothing against them, but be always merely passives; as those that are always
Babes and Children, that have received from Christ nothing of manhood and
courage in us, that must have all done merely for us without us, and we do
nothing in and by Christ, in which he may have glory by us; Herein is God
glorified, that we bring forth much fruit; and so that we by the help of his
right hand do valiantly, quitting our selves like men, and being strong,
behaving our selves wisely, and not doing as fools, to be frighted from our
station by every or any bugbear, or allured to part with our safety or
happiness for the desire after some gew-gaw or trifle that looks somewhat
bravely; therefore having so every way furnished us, he expects something
therein from us, and puts something in the virtue thereof upon us; Working in
us of good pleasure to will and to do: He wills us to work out our own
salvation with fear and trembling, and to do all things without murmuring or
disputing, that we might be blameless and harmless, the Sons of God, without
rebuke and blame in a crooked generation, Phil. 2.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. That the
courage, wisdom, power, virtues of God appearing in us, no Momus or Carper
might find any just ground of reviling us, as being saved of God, but wholly
destitute of the virtues of God, and unserviceable to God, as having nothing
but a righteousness imputed to us, without any power or life of God working in
us, or wrought forth by us. Yea, and

3 Otherwise the gifts and furniture of God, his spiritual weapons, provided
for us and brought to our hands, should be in vain, if he should so do all for
us, as to leave us wholly idle, and put nothing upon us in his strength, and
power, and by his Weapons of righteousness to be done by us. Sure God gives the
manifestations of his Spirit to his people to profit with, 1 Cor. 12.7. He
gives us not his Armor, Shield and Sword to lie and rust by us, but to be put
on and used by us; yea, he gives us life and bread to nourish our life, and
strength with our life, and wisdom with our strength, to the end that we might
use them in his way, work and service for our own defense, and the defense of
his Truth, against his, its and our enemies. He gives us not talents to hury up
in the earth, but to trade with for his honor and advantage. He lights not a
candle to put it under a bed of sloth, or hide it under a bushel, by some
scanty limiting it to some few, but to be set upon a Candlestick that it may
give light to all that come into the house. In a word he does nothing, he gives
nothing to us in vain but for use and service. And to what better use, or of
greater concernment can we employ what he gives us, than to keep our selves and
one another in the love of God, seeing therein lies our welfare and happiness,
and out of that nothing but woe and misery can befall us.

It is true that it is his work to keep us safe but in our hearing and
following him and his Counsels, and so in keeping to him; as it is the Castle
and strong hold that keeps the man that flies to it, but it is in his keeping
within it, and not departing out of it, because of any assaults made against
it, or flatteries of the enemy that would entice him out of it. Yea, it is the
goodness, strength, and every way commodiousness of the strong hold considered
by him that is in it that arms him also against those fears or inticements from
without that endeavor to make him leave it. Even so it is only Christ abid in
by men that every way secures the Soul against all assaults it from men or
Devils; and it is the diligent consideration of Christ as the great Savior,
and means, yea, Author of safety and happiness provided for us of God, and the
infinite excellencies and preciousness of him, as delivered up for our
offenses, and raised again for our justification, and glorified at Gods right
hand, as Lord and Christ; that being considered by us, prevails with the Soul
to abide in him: whence to that purpose, the Apostles every where make it their
business to set forth the fullness and faithfulness of Christ, the infinite
abiding virtues of his Sacrifice with God and for men; his wonderful mercy and
compassionateness, the fullness and compleatness o^ the righteousness, and the
abundance of the Redemption in him the infiniteness of his power and wisdom
etc. to move and persuade believers to abide him, and not listen to the enemy
or wander out of him after any other way, name, thing or person in whole or in
part from him, Col. 2.1. ver. 3.4, 8, 9.10, Gal. 3, 7, 9, 13, 14, 26, 27, 28,
29 as also to that purpose they exhort us to consider him and the excellencies
in him as Heb. 3.1. and 12.2. Consider the Apostle and High Priest of our
Profession Jesus Christ, who was faithful in all things to him that appointed
him as Moses also was; and consider him who endured such contradictions of
sinners, least ye be weary and faint in your minds: So Heb. 4.14, 15, 16. and
10 14, 15, 19, 20, 21, 35, 36, 37, etc. the want of which or slothfulness in it
lays open the Soul to the power of Satan's temptations and false Teachers
seducements. It is his work to keep us then, but in his way to be sought for
and waited for by us: which being our work (though that also in his power and
strength) we may well be exhorted to keep our selves that the wicked one touch
us not. According to that in Prove. 4.6. Forsake her not and she shall preserve
thee, love her and she shall keep thee. Wisdom will keep us in our cleaving to
her, and depending upon her to keep us; she will preserve us in our loving her
and observing her instructions, to which also her goodness and the goodness of
her instructions will allure us, if considered by us, and if proved and tried
by us in our listening to and obeying her Counsels. Its his work in our looking
to and obeying him: its our work in the strength and helpfulness afforded to us
by him and in his keeping us. He keeps those that trust in him as a hen that
defends from the Kite the Chickens running under her wings; but as there if the
chickens straggle and come not not when she clocks, they may be catched up and
devoured: so unless we come and stay under the wings (in the Doctrine and
obedience) of Christ, or at his clock or call return again to him from our
strayings from him we may be devoured by the adversary of our Salvation.

Use. All which things being duly considered by us may both confute and
admonish us of diverse vain, evil, and false conceptions, that betray men's Souls
into the snares of death, and may awaken and provoke us to diligence in taking
heed to our standings, and taking to us and making use of the whole armor of
God to resist our Adversaries: as,

1. It reprehends and shows the falsehood of that conception, that if a man be
once in the love and Grace of God, he must of necessity abide so always, no
possibility of his falling therefrom. Once a Son and always so, no sin can
un-son him that is once a Son of God: whomsoever God loves once, he loves for
ever, and the like; for which they usually quote that in John 13.1. which is
but, That Christ having so loved his own that were in the world loved them to
the end: that is, he loved his Disciples to the end of the time of his being in
the world with them. He loved, that is, took all occasions to testify also his
love, and accordingly even till his death testified it in his words and works
to them; yet so as he bids them abide in him, and continue in his love. Take
heed least any deceive them, as implying that for all this his great love
toward them, they were not out of all possibility of being deceived or
departing from him, if they should be careless as conceiting such a thing
impossible, they might be circumvented and not continue in his love. Yea, he
tells Peter, that except he wash him he should have no part in him, John 13.8.
and sure all his exhorting them to keep his Commandments and abide in him, etc.
imply at least a possibility of their doing otherwise, ^ no need to have been
so earnest to exhort them to such things. Again, we have seen before what the
Apostle said to and of the Galathians, whom he asserts to have been Sons and
known of God, what fear he had of them, what warnings he gives them, and what
he supposes might, yea, and affirms would befall them if they went on to follow
after the false Apostles who had begun to seduce them.

Indeed all the Scriptures do show sufficiently the certain attainment of
eternal life by those that are careful to wait upon God, and look diligently to
him by Jesus Christ for his supplying, keeping and saving of them: that wait
upon him and keep his way: that hear Christ's voice and follow him, and do not
presume to turn away from him or sit loose from his instructions by which they
may and should be kept close to him; but though the just do live by faith, yet
if he draw back, the Soul of God shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.39.

2. Again, such conceptions and sayings as import that God works so altogether
and irresistibly in the believer as that he leaves nothing upon the Believer to
do in order to his preservation in his love and favor; to which they allege
that in Phil. 2.12, 13. That it is God that works in you to will and to do
of good pleasure. Where the Apostle asserts that not as an evidence or argument
to prove that there is nothing therefore left for the believer to do in which
he may possibly fail, and to which he needs to be exhorted; but as the reason
and ground wherefore the believer should be careful, to work out his own
Salvation with fear and trembling; for which there would be no room or ground
if God wrought all things in the belieliever; yea, and his working out too
irresistibly, nor any need for to have exhorted them, if they could not choose
but so work upon the account of God's working in them. But the Apostle plainly
implies, that because its God that works in and through the Grace revealed to
and received by the believer of good pleasure, so as not bound or obliged so to
work but only of his mercy and good will, therefore it behooves believers to
yield up themselves to and in his operations to will and do and so to work out
what he is working in them: and not to resist and quench his operations least
so they should provoke him who is a free agent, and works only of good will, to
be offended with them, and withdraw his operations and good Spirit by which he
is operating and working in them from them, and then they can do nothing toward
their salvation, but be in danger to go back to destruction. As also the
argument used ver. 16. to enforce that instruction upon them seems clearly to
imply, in that he says, That I may rejoice in the day of Jesus Christ that I
have not run in vain, nor labored in vain: for to what purpose should he
mention such a thing with respect to them, if there had been no possibility of
their failing of the Grace and happiness to which he labored to bring them
instrumentally: or if there was nothing to be done by them that might conduce
to their obtaining the end of his running, and laboring amongst them, at least
that could possibly be neglected and left undone by them, so as therethrough to
endanger their failing thereof, and so a disappointment of the Apostles desire
and hope concerning them? The whole Scripture, as it were suspending the tenor
of the continuance of believers in Gods love and favor upon their keeping his
Commandments, and exhorting therefore to diligence in observing and keeping
them, shows the vanity of such apprehensions, and that there is something
required on man's part to his being preserved in the Grace of God. Forsake her
not and she shall preserve thee: love her and she shall keep thee, Prove. 4.6.
If ye love me keep my Commandments, and I will pray the Father, etc. And be
that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he
that loves me shall be loved, (that is, continue to be loved) of my Father,
and I will love him (continue to love him, as John 15.10.) and I will manifest
mine own self to him, John 14.21, 23. Keep your selves in the love of God.

3. Again, it reproves and discovers the evil and naughtiness of those high and
presumptuous thoughts which are the issue and fruit of the two former
mentioned, Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19. wherein men having believed and being pronounced
righteous, and so being under the sentence of life, as Ezekiel. 33.13. thereupon
presume to commit iniquity, and say in their hearts, that though they do so,
and add drunkenness to their thirst, satisfy their vain and sinful desires and
lust never so greedily, yet they are safe enough, they cannot miscarry but
shall have peace and favor with God still; or if they may provoke God to some
displeasure against them, so as to chastise them, yet that shall be the worst
that shall or may befall them. These thoughts also contrary to what is
foreshewed, and to many serious threats in the Scriptures, as that the Lord
will not spare such an one, but then his wrath and his jealousy shall smoke
against him, and the Lord shall blot his name from under Heaven, Deuteronomy. 29.20.
and that he who when God has said unto him as righteous, thou shall surely
live, shall thereupon trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity shall
surely die, Ezekiel. 33.13. and therefore even believers are admonished not to be
high minded but fear, Romans 11.20, 21, 22.

2. It also serves to exhort and provoke believers to watchfulness, care, and
diligence in taking heed to the Grace of God, and cleaving thereto and quitting
themselves as men, that they may continue and abide in that state of love and
favor to which they are freely chosen of God in Christ, making their calling
(...) and election thereto firm and sure, as 2 Pet. 1.10. to that purpose,
adding to, or in their faith virtue, or courage for God and his truth, and
against Satan, sin and all that stands cross to their well-doing: and in
virtue knowledge, to direct and guide all their zeal and courage aright: and in
knowledge temperance, sobriety in thoughts of themselves, not aspiring to pry
into things above their reach, or that they have not seen in the testimony of
God: as also temperance in use of the mercies of God in the things of this
life, and of their liberties thereto to which their knowledge makes way; least
by undue use of their liberties offend other ^. and in their temperance
patience, both to continue therein, denying themselves, and abstaining from
fleshly lusts, and also in enduring whatsoever sufferings and adversities may
befall them in their way; and in patience Godliness, an acknowledgement of God
and his power and goodness, and a depending on him, and looking to him in all
things, and making him the Alpha and Omega of their lives and actions,
receiving all from him, and living in all things to him by Jesus Christ; and in
godliness Brotherly kindness; an hearty entire love of the Brethren, being kind
and courteous and of one mind with them, loving as Brethren and Heirs together
of the same Grace and inheritance; and in Brotherly kindness charity, a free
and gracious affection and love to men, not for any goodness in them rendering
them worthy of love as in Brotherly kindness, but because of Gods free and
gracious love and affection both to us and them: so loving others, even all
men, as we are loved of God as men, seeking to win by love those that are
without and to do them good even as he has done to us though unworthy of love
from him, If we do those things we shall never fall: if we go on thus, adding
Grace to Grace, Growing in Grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. To such like purposes, both our Lord himself and his Servants
have given manifold exhortations and Counsels, As to watch and pray that we
fall not into Temptation. To take heed least our hearts at any time be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, etc. to take heed of false
Prophets, and that no man deceive us. To give all diligence that we fail not of
(or fall not off from) the Grace of God. To beware of flothfulness, because
that casts into a deep sleep of Spiritual security and carelessness; and then
a man lies open to the enemy to fall upon him and destroy or devour him, but to
follow the steps of those who through faith and patience have inherited the
promises: exhortations and warnings, and provocations by manifold Arguments to
all diligence in this matter are every where obvious in the Scriptures to
believers: and that that is said and showed before both of the possibility and
danger of failing otherwise of the Grace and love of God, as to its
continuance; and the fearful things that befall in such a case, as also the
certainty of abiding in it, and obtaining unspeakable joy and happiness in our
care and diligence in depending on God and Christ, and expectance of such
diligence and earnestness in us, may incite and provoke to the diligence,
circumspection, and watchfulness exhorted too, and reprove that too great
carelessness, negligence and slothfulness in these matters of so great
concernment, too ordinarily found even in Believers: as it was found and
reproved in the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, leaving his first love; and in
the Angel of the Church of Sardis, that had almost quite lost all his strength,
so as that he was ready to die: and in the Church of Laodicea, or the Angel
thereof grown Lukewarm, and therefore ready to be spewed out of Christ's mouth;
unless he awakened up to zeal and diligence, and repented of his indifferency
upon Christ's reproofs of him, Rev. 2.4, 5. and 3.1, 2, 14, 15, 16, 19. Oh, it
is a great shame for us to be careful and diligent to keep or increase our
Estates, or Honors here in this World, which after a while do what we can,
must be taken from us from us, or we from them: and to be so indifferent and
negligent about retaining that Grace and favor of God whereto he has admitted
us by Jesus Christ, as if it were not of that worth and excellency as those
other poor, fading, and uncertain matters, when as it is the source, spring and
fountain of all blessedness and happiness.

But I shall pass from this first and main matter of the Text to the next:

The way and mean to keep our selves in God's love, and that is edifying our
selves in our most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost: whence we may note,
That,

Observe. 5. The way for Believers to keep themselves in the love of God is to
edify themselves on their most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost. Here be
two means.

1. Edifying themselves on their most holy Faith: 2. Praying in the Holy Ghost.
Let us, if God permit, consider them in order: And first,

1. Diverse things as to the first of them are to be explained for better
understanding and usefulfulness of the Proposition as to that Branch of it, as
to say,

1. What is meant by the Faith here on which Believers are to build up
themselves and one another.

2. Why is it called their Faith.

3. Why is it called their most holy Faith.

4. What that is that is to be builded on it.

5. How the believer is to be builded on it. And,

6. What that signifies that they build up themselves, and how that they may do
that.

7. How the building up themselves thereon conduces to the keeping themselves
in the love of God.

1. For the Faith here mentioned, what it is or signifies, we are to mind that
the word Faith is is used two ways; either,

1. For the act or habit of believing, and so it often signifies, as in these
expressions, Lord increase our faith: and if ye had faith as a grain of mustard
seed, ye should be able to say to this Sycamore tree, be thou plucked up by the
roots, and be thou planted into the midst of the Sea, and it should obey you,
Luke 17.4, 5. Your faith is spoken of throughout the world, Romans 1.5. Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing is of the word of God, Romans 10.17. After I heard
of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and love to all the Saints, Ephesians. 1.15. and
many others.

2. For the Doctrine of faith, and the matter and object of faith in it
contained; to that purpose is that of Paul, Gal. 1.22. He that persecuted us,
now preaches the faith that he destroyed. So Gal. 3.2. Received ye the Spirit
by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith. So verse 5. and 7. and 9.
They that he of Faith, the same are the Children of Abraham, and are blessed
with faithful Abraham. Now in as much as the Faith or Doctrine preached is also
called the preaching of Christ, or of Jesus Christ; Acts 9.20. Romans 16.25. 1
Cor. 1.22, 24. We preach Christ crucified: And 2 Cor. 4 5. We preach not our
selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord: Therefore even Christ himself, as preached
and declared in the Gospel, may also be contained in the signification of the
word Faith, when taken in this second sense and meaning.

Now that the word faith is not meant here in the former, but in the latter
sense is evident, because it is here represented as the foundation to be built
upon, or matter wherewith they were to be built up, but that is not faith, as
it signifies the act or habit of believing; for that is something built rather
upon the foundation, or at most the way or means of building, or being built on
it. Christ himself, as held forth in the Apostles Doctrine, or also the
Apostles Doctrine, as holding forth Christ in it, is the foundation, and is so
spoken of in the Apostles Writings, as in 1 Cor. 3, 11. Other foundations can
no man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. What more plain,
than that Jesus Christ is the only foundation laid of God, and of his Apostles
in their Doctrine. To this purpose it is, that the Apostle Peter quotes that
Scripture of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 28.16. and applies it to Christ, in 1
Pet. 2.4, 6. where having called him the Living stone, chosen of God and
precious; he says, Wherefore it is contained in the Scriptures, behold I lay
in Sion a chief cornerstone, elect, precious, and he that believes on him
shall not be confounded: Unto you therefore which believe he is precious, etc.
This is that foundation which the Apostle speaks of to Timothy, when he says,
2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure ((...), or firm) having this
seal, the Lord knows them that are his, etc. For therein God seals to it,
owns and approves or knows all that be his, the foundations namely, or knows
the foundation it self, as peculiarly his, as Christ is, and others that are
his in him, by virtue of him known and owned by him, as also in this, that he
allows not any in iniquity that name his Name; though by virtue of Christ held
forth in the Apostles Doctrine, that also may secondarily be called the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, as in Ephesians. 2.20. Built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
cornerstone.

That Doctrine then (or Christ himself as therein preached, as the Son of God
and Savior of the World, delivered up to death and crucified for our offenses,
and raised again from the dead for our justification, and glorified at' Gods
right hand for our salvation, and that our faith and hope might be in God, and
so as appointed to be Lord and Christ, the Judge of all, who shall come again
to judge both the quick and the dead) is the faith here meant, whereon
Believers are to edify and build up themselves, and not their act, acts or
habit of believing, which may be added to and builded up, being imperfect, upon
this foundation, so as this foundation cannot upon any thing else; yea, that
Christ, as so laid and held forth in the Cospel, is the foundation to be built
on is plain. For

1. Christ was the first thing appointed or laid of God for fallen mankind, as
to his purpose and promise of him; and he was the first thing preached to him,
in order to his return to God: This was the Doctrine first preached in
Paradise, after our first Parents had sinned, and were convicted thereof: I
will put enmity between thee (the Serpent) and the Woman, and between thy seed
and her seed: He (her Seed) shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his
heel. Though Christ was not as then actually manifested in the flesh,
crucified, dead, buried and raised again, yet all that was intimately preached
from the beginning, as a thing to be accomplished in its time and season.

2. And as this was the first thing or Doctrine preached, so it was the
foundation and ground of all other dispensations of God after to fallen man. It
is upon that account of Christ's having interposed between God and us, as the
bruiser of the Serpents head, the destroyer of his work, the taker away and
abolisher of Death, that God now deals mercifully and graciously with men, is
inviting and leading them to repentance by ^is goodness and forbearance, and
lades them with his benefits, and sends forth his light and truth to men, to
call them back to himself and to his Kingdom, to be under his government and
protection, from which they were banished for their iniquity; and so it is the
ground and foundation of his Ordinances, witnessing of Christ, and of himself
in Christ unto men, and appointed as mediums for men's approaching to him, and
seeking of him, and of Gods raising up and judging all men according to their
works hereafter; for there would have been no resurrection from the first death
to any new judgment, much less to life, if Christ had not come and dyed for all
men, and risen again, 1 Cor. 15.12, 17, 18. Acts 10.42. and 17.30, 31. The
final rewards and recompencings of men then, (as also his present chastisements
in mercy and measure now) and accepting and justifying, saving and honoring
those that believe in him, and serve him, stand upon Christ, and his death and
sufferings for all men, and rising again, and being appointed Lord of all, and
Mediator of God and men, the propitiation for our sins, even for the sins of
the whole world, as their proper ground and foundation. Yea,

3. He, as so set forth, is the ground and foundation of all right repenting
and turning to God from our our sins, and of all right believing, hoping and
trusting in God for his mercy and blessing, of all prayers and praises to be
made to God, and so of all true piety and religion in fallen men; for had there
not been such a Ransom found out, and Sacrifice offered for us, there could
have been no approach for us to God, or acquaintance with God: God sent him,
that the world through him might be saved, and raised him from the dead, and
gave him glory, that our faith and hope might be in God, John 3.17. 1 Pet.
2.21. So that he, and the Word of the Gospel as setting him forth, is meant by
the faith here, on which Believers are built, and to build up themselves and
each other.

2. Now this is called their faith, not because it is of them, of their
invention, broaching, or preparing, as a foundation for themselves or others,
but because it is owned, received and confessed by them; it is that that they
have and believe in their hearts unto righteousness, and with their mouths
confess to the salvation of themselves and others, as Paul sometimes calls the
Gospel he preached, his Gospel, as in 2 Timothy 2.8. According to my Gospel: And
so Romans 2.16. Not because it was of him found out or invented, or set on foot
by him, as if he had preached any thing for Gospel that he had not received
from God and Christ, but because it was ministered and preached by him; even so
this faith after the same manner is called the Believers faith, as elsewhere,
The faith of Gods Elect, Tit. 1.2. because made known and delivered to his
elected and chosen Servants, such as he chose to be his Servants (the holy
Apostles and Prophets) to be declared and published by them, as accordingly it
was published by them, and as it is called, The faith once delivered to the
Saints, in this Epistle of Jude, ver. 3. because it was delivered to them, and
preached by them, it might be called their faith, though otherwise it is the
faith of God and Christ: Yea, and in calling it the faith of these believers,
the Apostle intimately distinguishes it from the false saiths or false
doctrines of the false Teachers and Seducers, of whom he had been warning them;
as if he should say, it is not their faith, they have corrupted themselves and
fallen away from it, and have received, or devised, and broached another faith,
doctrine or foundation different from, and repugnant to yours, with which I
would have you have nothing to do, much less build your selves thereon, for
that would not render you an house or habitation for God, and so objects of his
favor, but Synagogues of Satan, and objects of Gods wrath and anger; but build
ye up your selves on your faith, which he also, the better to induce them
thereto, calls their most holy faith. Which leads us to the third particular.

3. Why it is called the most holy faith.

1. It is holy, that is, it is pure, faultless, no falsehood or corruption in
it, for so holiness is sometimes opposed to uncleanness or filthiness: as, We
are not called to uncleanness, but unto holiness, 1 These. 4.7. Cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear
of the Lord, 2 Cor. 7.1. So this Doctrine delivered to the Saints, preached by
the holy Apostles and Prophets, and witnessed to by the holy Spirit, and so by
the holy God, who bare witness to the Preachers of it, both with Signs, and
wonders, and diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 24. is a holy,
pure, clean Word; The Word of the Lord (as the Gospel of Jesus Ghrist as
preached by the Apostles, is often called, as in Acts 6 2, 7. and 8.25. and
12.24. and 13.5, 7, 12, 44, 46 49.) is pure as Silver seven times tried in the
fire, Psalm. 12.6. No dross or mixture in it; it is not yea and nay, but yea,
yea, or yea and Amen, as in 2 Cor. 1.18, 19. As God is true our word toward you
was not yea and nay, for the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among
you by us, was not yea and nay, but in him was yea, for all the promises of God
in him are yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us. The Apostles did
speak in simplicity and sincerity what they had heard and received from God and
Christ, and did not, as the false Apostles, sophisticate and corrupt the Word
of God, as the Apostle also says, 2 Cor. 2.17. But as in sincerity, and as of
God they spoke in Christ in the sight of God. Even as Jesus Christ himself, the
matter and subject of their word, the faith or foundation of faith, the object
to be closed with, and rested or built upon, is the holy One (the holy One of
Israel) and so is frequently styled, as Acts 3.14. Ye denied the holy One and
the just. So 1 John 2.20. Ye have an Unction from the holy One, and ye know all
things: And Heb. 7.26. He is holy, harmless, undefiled, etc. a spotless one, a
Lamb without blemish; his nature, and life, and death, and sacrifice, and
person, altogether blameless, sinless, and undefiled; even so the Doctrine of
the Apostles concerning him was pure and clean too, like to pure water. No soil
or mud in it. Yea, and

2. It was and is set apart, separated and devoted to God, and for his glory,
to be the foundation, ground and way of our believing, and so becoming an holy
habitation and people for God. Jesus Christ, the main matter and subject
treated of in the Gospel, is in that sense holy to God, chosen by him,
separated and set apart for him, to be his salvation to the ends of the earth;
the Lamb of God to take away the sins of the world; his righteous Servant, in
whose hand his pleasure shall prosper; his Elect, in whom his Soul delights;
who has sanctified himself, and given up himself to him to do his will in all
things; to be his Prophet to declare his mind, and bring forth judgment to the
Gentiles, and light to the people; to be his High Priest, as it is said, The
Lord has sworn and will not repent, Thou art a Priest to me for ever, after
the order of Melchisedeck, Psalm. 110, 3, 4. to make atonement for the sins of
the people, offer up their gifts and sacrifices, and make intercession for all
that come to God by him, Heb. 2.17, and 5.1. and 7.25. and bless them in his
Name, Heb. 7.6, 7. His King, whom he has set upon his holy hill of Sion, Psalm.
2.6, 7. being wholly holy unto God to do his pleasure in his presence for men,
and from him to and with men, Romans 6.10. his Foundation, namely, that he has
lay in Sion, to be the foundation and cornerstone of his holy building, an
habitation for his Holiness and glory, by virtue of whom it is that the whole
building becomes an holy House to God, and an habitation separated unto him to
dwell in by his Spirit, as Ephesians. 2.20, 21. And so the Doctrine or Faith
concerning him is holy, separated and set apart for Gods use, for drawing men
into the knowledge and faith of Christ, and so to himself by and through him,
and therefore it is called, The power of God to salvation to every one that
believes, Romans 1.16. The Medium that he made choice of for saving those that
believe it, and so through it believe in him, 1 Cor. 1.21. so that in this
respect too it is holy. As also,

3. In respect of the effect and fruit of it, it makes holy those that receive
it, and are united with it, and built upon it: So Jesus Christ, the main matter
and subject of it, the foundation properly laid in it and by it for men to
believe in and be built on, is not only holy in himself, sinless and set apart
for God; but also is made of God holiness to us, the cause of holiness to us.
He in and by virtue of whom we are holy to God, 1 Cor. 1.30. He being the holy
Temple and habitation of God, makes us so too in being united with him. He
being the holy foundation makes all the building holy. And so the Doctrine of
the Apostles preached and published concerning him, and received and held fast
by these Believers, was holy in respect of the effect and fruit of it in
Believers, who are said to be sanctified by the faith in Christ Jesus, Acts
26.28. Sanctified (or made holy) through Gods Word, which is the Truth, John
17.17. and to be made clean through the Word spoken to them, John 15.3.
Sanctified and washed by the washing of water (the Love, Grace and Knowledge of
God held forth) in the Word, that they might be presented a glorious Church,
not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it might be holy, and
without blame or blemish, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. as also the holiness of the new man
is therefore, in Ephesians. 4.22. called, according to the Greek, (...), The
holiness of truth, because the effect or product of the Truth believed by men:
To this purpose are those sayings of David, in Psalm. 119.9, 11. Wherewith shall
a young man cleanse his ways? By taking heed thereto according to thy Word:
And again, I have hid thy Word in my heart, that I might not sin against thee,
etc. Yea,

4. It is called the holy Faith, to signify the great care that God has of
it, its acceptableness to him, and his respect to and care of it; as in that
sense in Jer. 2.3. Israel was said to be holiness to the Lord, being his
people, his peculiar portion, he had an especial care over them to defend them,
so as that all that devoured them, offended, evil came or shall come upon them.
So is Christ holiness to the Lord, very dear and delightful to him, and
therefore especially cared for and defended by him; as in Psalm. 89.21. With him
his right hand is established, and his arm strengthens him, so as the enemy
shall not exact upon him, nor the son of wickedness afflict him, he will beat
down his foes before his face, and plague them that hate him. Yea, therefore
they that believe not in him shall be condemned and perish, and they shall be
destroyed that will not hear and obey him: Mat. 28.18, 19. with Mark 16.15, 16.
Acts 3.22, 23. And so God has a singular watchfulness over, and care of his
Name and Doctrine; the Gospel of Christ preaching and declaring him as the
foundation of God for men, so as that he will not bear that it should be
slighted, rejected and disobeyed by men; It shall be easier in the judgment for
Sodom and Gomorrah than for those that so do, Matthew. 10.15. with John 12.48, 49
50. His presence is in and with it, and it is a ministration of life,
righteousness and spirit, as in 2 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc. thus the Faith is
holy. But

2. Its also called the most Holy, to signify,

1. The superlative holiness, and more abundant excellency of it above other
holy things; as to say,

1. There were many things or persons types of Christ, holy to God under the
Law, and some of them more holy, and more set apart than others; as there was
the whole people holy to God, The holy people, Dan. 12.7. and Deuteronomy. 7.6. The
holy seed, Ezra 9.2. The Levites were yet more holy, as being chosen and taken
out of the people, to do the service of the Tabernacle in liew of the
firstborn, which God hallowed and chose for himself, to be peculiarly his
above the after-births of them, Exodus 13.^. with Numb. 3.12, 13. and yet the
Priests were more holy than they, as having liberty to the holy Place, and to
go into the Tabernacle, and offer upon the Altar, which the Levites might not
do; and yet the High Priest was more holy than they, as only having liberty to
enter the Holy of Holies, Levit. 21.2, 6, 8, 10, 11, etc. But Jesus Christ is
more holy then them all, the most holy Person, that appears where Aaron or none
of them might, even in the Heavens themselves, and by the virtue of his own
blood to make intercession for us; none holy like him, who is the Lord, nor any
Rock like our God, 1 Samuel 2.2, 3. Yea, there were many things holy, as the Land
was the holy Land, Zech. 2.12. and the portion of it set apart for the
Sanctuary more holy, Ezekiel. 45.1. The Chambers of the Priests holy, Ezekiel 42.13.
Their Garments holy, Exodus 28.20. and 29.29. The Crown put upon Aaron was the
holy Crown, Levit. 8.9. The Altar was holy, yea, most holy, and whatsoever
touched it was holy, Exodus 29.37. The Sanctuary and all the Vessels of it holy,
Levit. 16.33. 1 Chronicles. 22 19. Yea, the Trumpets and other Instruments, Numb.
31.6. The Oracle or inner-place of the Sanctuary and Temple was most holy, and
therefore called the Holy of Holies, and the most holy place; as the Ointment
made to anoint and sanctify them, and the Priests, was most holy: but yet
Christ was more holy than they or any of them, the most holy One, the truth of
them all, they were but types and figures of him, and their holiness of his;
yea there were holy Prophets, and holy Apostles, but yet he more holy than
they, the most holy One, none so pure, spotless o^ undefiled; the holiest
Places and Vessels contracted soil and dust, and needed cleansing sometimes,
and were sometimes defiled with Idols and other pollutions, and needed an
atonement to be made for them, and at last, because of the pollutions wherewith
they were polluted, they were given up to spoil, to fire, and to Captivity;
none of which can befall the Son of God, though he was once put to death for our
sins which were charged upon him, yet being raised he dies no more, death has
no more dominion over him; in that he died once he died unto sin, but in that
he lives, he lives now unto God, holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from
sinners, made higher than the Heavens who needs not daily as those other
Priests, to offer first for their own sins, and then for the sins of the
people; for this he did once, etc. Heb. 7.26, 27.

The holiest Priests had their sins, properly their own to offer for, he never
did sin, nor was guile found in his mouth; the holy Prophets and Apostles had
their sins and failings. Moses the meekest man on earth, yet once spoke
unadvisedly with his lips, in his anger, and provoked God to deprive him of
entering into the Land of Canaan. Aaron the Saint of the Lord made a molten calf
also at the instance of the people. David the man after God's own heart, yet
fell very grievously. So did Solomon the wisest; yea, none of the Patriarks but
in offering Sacrifices for sins therein, confessed themselves to stand in need
of mercy and forgiveness. The Apostles confessed sins in them; and tell us, if
they had said there was no sin in them, or that they had not sinned, they
should have deceived themselves and the truth had not been in them. But Christ
was the perfectly spotless One in whom is no sin. Nay, the very Angels vail
their faces, and cover their feet in his presence, as appears by, what Isaiah
says, when he saw his Glory in a Vision, and spoke of him, Isa. 6.1, 2.3.4.
with John 12.40, 41. so that he is absolutely the most Holy One; and therefore
also the most consecrated and devoted unto God; the Levites might come nearer
to the Sanctuary, and so to God as dwelling in it, than the generallity of the
people, and the Priests nearer than the Levites; and the High Priest nearer
than the rest of the Priests; but Christ, comes nearer than any. For he is not
entered into the Holy places made with hands as they did, but into Heaven it
self, there to appear in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. Yea, neither
Saint nor Angel is so devoted to God, or admitted so near to him, as Christ;
they are about the Throne, but Christ is in the midst of it: yea, and though
the four Beasts figuring the Camp of the Saints or their Leaders be said also
to be in the midst of the Throne as well as round about it; yet the Lamb is in
the midst of them, as the most inmost amongst them, Rev. 4.4 6. and 5.6, 11.
and therefore also the most Holy, both as to his efficacy and virtue for
conferring holiness upon others: it being He only that is made to us of God
wisdom, righteousness, holiness, and redemption. No man or Angel has that
honor with or besides him: the holy, and holy-making Spirit is fully and
immeasurably only upon him, and sent forth by and from in his name. Saints and
Angels have not that honor and power as he; and therefore also as to Gods
tender care of him, or height of love to him they are below him; For to which
of the Angels said he at any time, sit thou on my right hand or thy Throne, O
God, endures for ever? etc. So that in all respects none holy as he, none else
the foundation, the holy foundation of God's holy building but he. Other
foundations can no man lay but him, 1 Cor. 3.11. and so,

2. In a sense the Doctrine or faith of him, as setting him forth to and for
men is most holy in all these respects; more holy than any other vessel,
utensil or instrument made use of by God, or at his appointment under the Law
and legal dispensation; though there were diverse and some more holy than
others; yet the Gospel is above them all. The most choice medium of God's power
both spotless and pure in it self, as being his word, and most chosen, and set
apart to be his arm for salvation to all that believe, and therefore fuller of
divine efficacy for making holy, and more choisely cared for and defended of
God, being the Everlasting Gospel, and the neglects and contempt of it, most
severely punished, Matthew. 10.15. Some things under the Law conferred an
holiness unto other things that touched them, or that they were applied to, as
the Altar or the holy Ointment, etc. but nothing (...) so confer holiness as
the Gospel does them that attend to it and receive it. Its the Unction, the
holy Ointment, the Name of Christ therein held forth is as an Ointment poured
out, Cant. 1.3. which sanctifies, consecrates and makes holy to God all that
receive it. as Act. 26.18. Sanctified by the faith that is in me, and 1 Cor.
6.11. Ye are sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God. The Law was holy, and the Commandment holy, and just, and good, but not
able to sanctify and make the Conscience perfect, because of the flesh that it
could nor subdue: but the Gospel faith is so holy and set apart for Gods use
and service as the medium for his sanctifying and saving men, that his presence
and Spirit, even the Holy Spirit is in or with it, and his influence or
operation ministered by it, to the sanctifyng and devoting the hearts and
Spirits of all that receive it unto God; Sanctify them through thy truth, thy
word is the truth, John 17.17. Yea, and as it is now plainly and fully opened
and preached since the coming of Christ, it is more full of Spirit and divine
power for sanctifying and making holy, and therefore also requires and calls
for more holiness in the hearers and professors of it than any former
dispensations. For now in these last ages God who in former times spoke to the
Fathers by the Prophets, and to them by Angels, Dreams, and Visions has spoken
his mind most fully to us by his only begotten Son, whom he appointed heir of
all things, and by whom he also made the Worlds, Heb. 1.1, 2. and therefore now
requires more strict obedience and more exact conformity to his mind, and more
severely punishes the neglectors and abusers of his Gospel and the Grace
thereof, than he did in former times exact or expect from men under the
Mosaical dispensation, and then he punished the neglectors and abusers thereof
or of any holy things then in use, Heb. 2.1, 2, 3. and 10.26, 29. and 12.18,
19, 24, 25. If the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression
there against ^ received a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape, if
we neglect so great salvation which at first began to be spoken by the Lord,
and afterward was confirmed to us by them that heard him: So the Faith of the
Saints is the most holy faith, and so called here, as also because of,

2. Its most absolute compleatness and perfection. It is so holy that nothing
can be added to it, to make it more holy, perfect, pure, or apt and fit for the
purpose to which it is ordained: as, to be the foundation of Faith, hope, love,
obedience, etc. and the mean or medium for effecting them; and so of making
holy to God those that receive it. Christ is the most full and complete
foundation of Gods Building, who is so perfected through sufferings, as to
become the Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9.
Yea, so as all the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily, and in him we
are complete, who is the Head of all Principallity and power, Col. 2.9, 10.
made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness, holiness, and redemption, 1 Cor.
1.30. a most sure foundation and precious corner stone, so as that he that
believes on him shall not be confounded, or make haste from him for any thing
that threatens to shake or ruin him. The Soul that believes in him finds so
much holiness and preciousness in him, Isa. 28.16. 1 Pet. 2.6, 7. there can
nothing be added to the excellency of his person, being the only begotten Son
of God, nor to the virtue and preciousness of this Sacrifice, having offered up
himself a spotless Sacrifice, through the eternal Spirit, by which he has at
once perfected (or perfectly prepared all things for) the sanctified for ever,
Heb. 9.14. Heb. 10.14. Nor to the dignity and perfection of his Priesthood,
being consecrated of God by the word of his Oath, an High Priest for ever after
the Order of Melchisedech; even according to the power of an endless life, Heb.
7. nor to the fullness of his Prophecy, or prophetical Power and Office, being
acquainted with the whole mind of God, and filled with the fullness of the Holy
Spirit, to declare it, and to make the declaration of it powerful and
effectual, and all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge being hid (or
treasured up) in him, and his Mystery, Col. 2.3, 4. Isa. 42.1, 2, 3, 4. and
61.1, 2, 3. nor to his Power and Authority, as Lord and King; the fullness of
Gods Power and Authority being given to him, even all power in Heaven and
Earth, a Name above every Name, that at his Name every knee should ^ow, both of
things in Heaven and things in Earth, and things under Earth, etc. Angels and
Principallities and Powers are made subject to him, Philip. 2.10, 11. 1 Pet.
3.21, And so the Doctrine of faith that sets him forth is the most holy Faith,
to signify that its the most complete, pure and perfect Doctrine, nothing to
be added to it, nor taken from it. The Doctrine of the Law that was very good,
holy, and useful in its kind, but it was a ministration of Death, and in
respect of the shadowness and typicalness of it, it was to pass away, as in 2
Cor. 3. is showed; and so the Testimony or Covenant made therein, Heb. 8.8, 9,
13. but this ministration of the Gospel as it came forth first in Paradise: so
it is to continue and abide to the end; it is the everlasting Gospel that shall
not pass till all be fulfilled and accomplished: indeed before the coming of
Christ in the flesh it was not fully revealed as now it is in these last days
by Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and therefore till then the Vision was not
sealed, Dan. 9.24. nor the Law and testimony fully bound up, Isa. 8.16. but now
it is fully revealed, so as no more is to be added till the personal appearance
of the Lord Jesus in glory; when that that is perfect being come, that that is
in part shall be done away: and there shall be no more need of teaching or
saying to one another, Know the Lord, for all shall know him from the least to
the greatest; therefore these are called the last times, because no other
change is to be made, no^ any thing added till faith be turned into sight and
fruition; and therefore the Apostle says, if not only any man or Angel from
Heaven preach against or contrary to, but if we or any man or Angel preach
anything beside (or different from or as adding something as matter of faith or
foundation, to what we have preached, and ye received, let him be Anathema,
Gal. 1.8, 9. and the Apostle John to the same purpose, If any come to you and
bring not this Doctrine receive him not to house, neither bid him God-speed,
for he that bids him God-speed is partaker also of his evil deeds, 2 John
10, 11. Clearly implying that he that brings another Doctrine beside this faith
once delivered to the Saints, recorded in the Epistles and writings of the holy
Apostles and Evangelists does evil therein; whatever works or deeds of zeal and
piety he may do or seem to do with and in countenance of another Doctrine, they
are altogether evil deeds, and not approved of God, nor to be approved of men.

3. And indeed the main reason why the Apostle calls the faith of these
Believers the most holy faith, was to commend it to them, and move them to
abide in it, hold it fast, and not suffer themselves by any pretenses of
Deceivers and false Apostles and Teachers to be waved therefrom. For the false
Apostles used that artifice to supplant the Believers from the belief of the
truth, and turn them aside from the faith, that the Serpent used at the first
with our first Parents to turn them from their belief of, and obedience to Gods
word to them, as the Apostle so signifies in 2 Cor. 11.2, 3, 13, 14. that is as
the Serpent to beguile Evah, pretended some want in their state that God had
set them in; and some great defect in that great provision or allowance that
God afforded them; even so the false Teachers, as Messengers of Satan did use
to insinuate to the Believers of the Apostles Doctrine, and so in and on Christ
as set forth therein, that there was some defect and want in that object of
their faith, and in the way in which they sought justification and the favor
of God; it was not a perfect and full way: but would they listen to them, they
would show them a more perfect faith or doctrine, and so a more full and
perfect object and ground of faith and confidence and way to happiness than
Christ's Apostles had done, even as the Serpent persuaded Evah, that there was
some more excellent virtue and quality in the forbidden fruit to advance them
and make them like^ God, than was in all the other enjoyments that God afforded
them in Paradise. Therefore in opposition to that subtle and false insinuation,
and to fortify the Believers minds there against, the Apostle there styles it
the most holy says, as implying the perfection of it, that none can or may
add any thing to it, to make it holier or better; the adding to it is the
corrupting, marring, and perverting of it, so that whatsoever Doctrine should
add to, or alter it, should be not the more but less holy, nay indeed unholy:
even as the adding any thing to the holy Ointment under the Law spoiled it and
rendered it unclean. This was an argument often made use of by the Apostles to
arm the Believers against the false suggestions and canning slights of the
false Apostles, as may be seen in diverse passages of their Epistle. As so the
Apostle Paul minds the Colossians, That in Christ, and in the Mystery of God
Father and Christ, are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and,
that in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, to keep them from
being seduced from the simplicity in Christ, or from the said mystery of God
and Christ (which is the same that the Apostle calls the most holy faith here,)
by any enticing words, or vain Philosophy and deceit, Col. 2.2, 3, 4, 8, 10.
and the Apostle John tells the believers, that that which they had heard from
the beginning abiding in them, they should abide in the Father and in the Son,
and so enjoy the promise of eternal life: and that they had received an Unction
from the Holy One which abiding in them they should not need that any should
teach them, but as that taught them of all things, meaning, that the Doctrine
of Christ and the Spirit therein received were the only sufficient and perfect
guide, so as no teaching disagreeing from that was needful or behooveful for
them, and this to arm them against those that seduced them, 1 John 2.18, 24,
25, 26, 27. as also in Chapter 5.11, 12, 13. he there minds them, that God has
given us eternal life, and that this life is in his Son, and that he that has
the Son has eternal life, and he that has not the Son has not that life; to
the end that the believers to whom he wrote might be assured, or might know
against all the subtle, secret, and lying suggestions of the false Apostles to
the contrary, persuading them that that Doctrine of Christ and that faith in
him that they had, would not suffice to eternal life, but that it was needful
that they should turn out to some new form of Doctrine and object of faith or
add something (as the observation of Moses Law) thereto, if they desired to be
saved; I say, contrary to this, he tells them, he that has the Son has life,
and he that has not the Son has not life; that the believers might know that
they have eternal life, that they might know that they were in a sure and
certain way to it, and were at present by virtue of Christ believed in and had
by them, heirs of it, and that in turning out from him and letting him go, they
would deprive themselves of it, that so they might believe (that is, yet
believe or continue to believe) in the name of the only begotten Son of God,
and not turn from him after any thing else, that the false Teachers might
propound to them as better for them and more full and certain; that being the
way to deprive themselves of the good they were in, and of the life and
happiness they were in Christ, heirs of; as also to the same purpose is that in
2 John 9. where having warned them of deceivers, and wished them to look to
themselves, he adds, Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of
Christ he has not God; but whosoever abides in the Doctrine of Christ has
both the Father and the Son; yea, whereas it was a false suggestion of the
false Apostles, that the Doctrine of Paul and of other his Brethren, and so
Christ as held forth therein was not able to make the receivers thereof holy or
perfect, though it might do well to enter them into the way of life, yet
something else was needful to be added to it, and further observed by them to
perfect them, as is implied in that passage Gal. 3.3. Are ye so foolish, having
begun in the Spirit, are ye made perfect by the flesh, those passages before
recited (of letting that abide in them that they had heard from the beginning)
namely, (in the first preaching of the Gospel to them, and their hearing it) or
what was delivered first of all, or in the first things (as Paul says, 1 Cor.
15.2, 3.) and that therein they should have both Father and Son, and eternal
life; (as also this expression of the Apostle, that the faith on which they
were founded, is the most holy Faith) meets with and opposes that false
conception of those deceivers, and implies, that there is nothing holier than
this Doctrine, or Christ as held forth in it; nothing like it able to make them
holy, to sanctify and devote them to God, and render them his chosen and
beloved people; as the nature of holiness stands in being separated to God, and
so owned, chosen of and appropriated to him, nothing comparable in those
respects to this holy faith of theirs, your most holy faith; yea, and as the
Apostle having said to the Galatians, If we, or an Angel from Heaven preach
unto you besides what we have preached, let him he accursed, adds in the next
verse, as I said before, so say I again, If any man preach any other Gospel
than what ye have received, let him be accursed? least some false Apostles
should say, that they preached no other Gospel or Doctrine than Paul and his
fellow Apostles preached, only they gave them a better understanding of it than
what they had received; they had received the literal notion, but they would
tell them a more spiritual or full understanding of it: even so here he does not
say, only the most holy faith, but your most holy faith; to signify that the
faith and Doctrine they had received and as yet retained was the most holy
faith and complete doctrine. Such as would build them up to the inheritance, as
to that purpose Paul told the Elders at Ephesus, Act. 20.32. and therefore no
need for them to listen too or tamper with any additions to, or pretended
perfectings of the faith by any false Teachers.

4. To imply and signify to them, that this Faith or Doctrine is not to be
professed with an unholy, unclean or profane heart or practice; it comes to
require and effect the most perfect holiness in them that receive and profess
it, otherwise it is received and professed in vain, and to no good purpose. Let
every one that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity, says God, as a
seal of the holiness and sureness of his foundation that he has laid in Sion
for us, 2 Timothy 2.19. and therefore all those filthy practices of the false
Teachers and their followers, mentioned and reproved in this Epistle, are to be
fled from and avoided by the believers and confessors of the Name and Faith of
Jesus, as most unsuitable to the purity and cleanness of the faith professed by
them, and most unbecoming them and their profession; suitable to that charge
given prophetically in Isai. 52.11. Depart ye, depart ye, (namely, from
Babylon, the World, or pollutions of the worldly Church) go ye out from thence,
touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, ye that
bear the vessels of the Lord: With which agrees that in 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. and
7.1. Come out from amongst them, and be ye separated (namely, from the
pollutions of the world unto God) and touch no unclean thing, and I will
receive you, etc. as also all those many exhortations, to walk worthy of God,
and of his call, wherewith he has called us to his Kingdom and glory, and to
let our conversations be such as become the Gospel, that as he who has called
us is holy, so we may be holy in all manner of conversation; and that as the
Gospel and Faith we are called to, and profess is the most holy, clean and pure
faith, so we also may be the most holy, clean and pure peculiar people to God,
Denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and living soberly, righteously and
godly ^^ his present world, Ephesians. 4.1, 2. Philip. 1.27 ^ Peter 1.15, 16, 17.
and 2.9, 10. Titus 2.11, 12, 13, 14.

5. To imply and signify the very exceeding great danger of either corrupting
or departing from this faith, or dishonouring it by a contrary, an unholy and
unclean conversation, or any way impugning or opposing it; for in saying it is
most holy, he implies (as before) that it is most tenderly and carefully
respected of God, so as he will by no means suffer it to be wronged or injured
by any, either by persecuting it, he will surely retribute wrath to them that
oppose it, and disturb his Servants in their profession of it. He that falls
upon this stone shall be broken, but upon whomsoever it shall fall it shall
grind him to powder; only where men do it in the ignorance of their unbelief,
they may upon conviction and repentance find mercy, as Paul did, or by
corrupting it, thence the blackness of darkness is as the portion of those
Teachers, who are as wandering stars, and abide not in the faith of the Truth,
and their heresies are damnable and destructive, They bring upon themselves
swift destruction, as well as also they occasion the destruction of all that
receive their doctrine and follow their pernicious ways; or by dishonouring
it, crucifying Christ to themselves, and putting him to an open shame, by their
profane, unclean, unrighteous conversation in and with the profession of it,
which occasions God to cut men off from the faith, and give them up to strong
delusions, yea, and in a sort to send them strong delusions, that they might
believe a lie, and be damned, as in 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. or give them up to
all unrighteousness, to practice ^^cleanness with greediness, and to do things
mo^^ convenient and dishonorable, and at last to destroy them everlastingly
from his presence. The sins and evils men do, while ignorant of God and his
Gospel, and before the profession of it, God can wink at, and upon sight of his
Truth and Goodness, men repenting thereof, he freely forgives; yea, and what
men at unawares, and through some sudden and violent temptation, commit after:
but if we sin willingly (or wilfully) after the knowledge of the truth
received, if yet we go on in a course of sin and commit iniquity, that is most
dangerous, and renders a man's condition worse than if he had never known the
truth, provoking God more highly to execute vengeance and not spare, as in
Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19, 20, 21. Heb. 10.25, 26, 29. whence that Caution Look
diligently, least any man fail of the grace of God, least any root of
bitterness spring up and trouble you, and thereby many be defiled; least there
be any fornicator or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold
his birthright; for ye know how afterward, when he would have inherited the
blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place of repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears; for ye are not come to Mount Sinai, the Mount
which might be touched, and which burnt with fire, etc. but ye are come to
Mount Sion, the City of the living God, etc. See that ye refuse not him that
speaks, for if they escaped not who refused him who spoke on earth, how shall
we escape if we turn from him that speaks from heaven? Heb. 12.15, 16, 17, 18,
22, 25. Where the Apostle from the heavenliness, and so by consequence the
holiness and graciousness of the Gospel ministration, warns us to take heed of
all profaneness, and implies the severity of Gods judgments against the
prophaners of it, and the turners of the Grace of God into wantonness: The more
the Grace of God is set before us in any Doctrine, the more it teaches us to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and ingages to holiness in heart and life.

Now the Grace of God is most fully set forth in the Gospel, as now since the
ascension of Christ published to all Nations for the obedience of faith, and
therefore as it is the most gracious, so upon that account the most holy faith,
but now where God bestows most grace, he expects most holiness in return for
it, and therefore there he is most displeased with men's unholiness and
ungraciousness, especially, when that that is given to produce holiness, is
made use of to encourage men to looseness and profaneness; The more holy any
thing is, the more severely the abuse of it is punished by him: (as might be
seen in Gods punishing Bel^^shazzar's abuse of the consecrated Vessels of the
Temple of God to drink and quaff in profanely, amongst his Queens and
Concubines, Dan. 5.) therefore this being the most holy faith, the abuses and
prophanations of it shall be most severely punished.

The use of all which might be to provoke us to carefulness in keeping to and
holding fast this faith, not suffering it to be perverted or profaned; and
especially to take heed of perverting and profaning it our selves, as we would
avoid Gods sorest and severest judgments, but receive it with all gladness and
acceptance, and wait upon it, and upon God in it, for his power to sanctify
us and make us holy; and as God is working in it to that purpose, both to will
and to do, so work we out, what God works in us, and so our own salvation with
fear and trembling, least we should receive his Grace in vain, withhold it in
unrighteousness, or turn it into wantonness.

But I pass on to the next particular to be inquired into, viz.

4. What that is that is to be built upon or with this most holy faith, and
that is your selves.

1. Not the faith it self, that is not to be built up, for that is already
perfect and pure, most holy, it cannot be mended or made better, every addition
to it, or alteration of it mars it and prophanes it, that therefore is to be
believed, received and let abide, as it is laid of God for us, both in the
things done to the person of Christ, and in the Doctrine and declaration of
Christ by the Apostles and Prophets; that is the foundation of the building, and
it is perfectly laid of God already, Isai. 28.16. 1 Cor. 3.11. that is not to
be built up, but to be built upon, to be held fast as most absolute and
complete, nothing therein to be removed or altered, that stands firm and sure,
and has this seal, The Lord knows th^se that are his; the Lord like owns and
approves it highly as it is his, which he would not do if it was defective and
imperfect; he found fault with the first Covenant, Priesthood, Sacrifices, etc.
upon the account of their defectiveness for making perfect the worshippers, and
therefore cast them by in due time, took them away to bring in this New
Testament, the most holy Faith, the most perfect and acceptable Sacrifices, and
most perfect Priest, To whom he has therefore sworn, and will not repent and
alter it, as he did the former Priesthood and Law. Thou ar^ a Priest to me for
ever, after the order of Melchisedeck, Heb. 7.11, 12, 19, 21* and 8 7, 8, 9,
13. and 10.9. All is complete and most holy here in this faith; that therefore
is not the thing he exhorts them to build or add to, as the false Teachers were
wont to do, or pretend to do, to make the Doctrine taught by the Apostles more
full and perfect by their additions, by which they corrupted it: But letting
that lie as God had laid it, the exhorts them to build up.

2. Themselves, their persons, hearts, hopes, etc. therein implying,

1. That Believers are Gods building, as the Apostle calls them in 1 Cor. 3.9.
Those that receive this most holy Faith, they are thereby united with Christ,
the precious, sure foundation and cornerstone, and so as living or lively
stones inlivened by that living Stone Christ, to whom they are come, They grow
up into an holy spiritual house, an holy Temple and habitation for God by his
Spirit: Yea, as Christ is both the House and Temple of God himself (For in him
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily) and the foundation also of the
House or Church of God; so every Believer is both as the Temple of God, by
virtue of Christ in whom he is (yea, their body is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost) and is also a stone in the great Temple or spiritual building, and as
God dwelt of old in his Temple of old at Jerusalem, between the Cherubims of
glory, not as to the comprehension of his Essence or Glory, but as to a signal
and more especial manifestation of his Power and Presence, so God dwells in his
Church and People that are in Christ, by way not of the comprehension of his
Essence, but manifestation of his gracious presence and dispensation of his
blessings. Christ, as held forth in the Apostles Doctrine, is the only
foundation of this building. He is laid or built upon none of them, or their
virtues, works or doings, but they are all brought to and built upon him by the
holy Spirit. And therefore also they ought carefully to cleave to Christ as
their only Foundation, their Upholder and Sanctifier, by virtue of whose
firmness and infinite strength and fixedness, all they that abide or continue
upon, or in the faith of him, are firm and strong also, yea, As Mount Sion that
can never be removed, but stands fast for ever, Psalm. 125.1, 2. and by virtue
of his holiness and sanctity, being Gods holy foundation, they are holy too to
God, as an holy Temple or building, and therefore ought also to be clean, and
chaste, and holy in all things to him, as he that has appointed it for his
habitation and dwells therein, is holy.

2. In that the Believers are the matter to be built upon that most holy Faith,
it is employed too, that they yet are imperfect and not complete in themselves,
or in their conformity to Christ, and seize from Christ; their faith is
most holy, no blemish, or imperfection, or defect in that, but they that are in
or upon it are not so, they need to be builded up and perfected; they may, yea,
its but meet and right that they should acknowledge their own shortness in
holiness or goodness, that so they may attend to grow in Grace and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; but they may not fault the
faith once delivered to the Saints, or accuse it of want or defect, or bear
that it be faulted, added to or altered; they are to let that alone as it is in
that respect, but attend, that they themselves may be added to in their
believing, living righteously, godlily and soberly in this present evil world,
though they be complete in Christ their Head, Root and Foundation, Col. 2.10.
yet in their seize of the knowledge of Christ, and conformity to him in
holiness and happiness, they have not yet attained, neither are already
perfect, as the Apostle says of himself, Philip. 3.14, 15. They see but
darkly, and as in a glass, not so as they are seen; they know but in part, and
prophecy but in part; that that is perfect in those respects is not yet come,
but to be waited for by them, 1 Cor. 13.9, 11. they may yet and ought to add in
their faith virtue, and in virtue knowledge, and in knowledge temperance, and in
temperance patience, and in patience godliness, and in godliness brotherly
kindness, and in brotherly kindness charity, 2 Peter 1.5.6, 7. It will do us no
hurt to acknowledge our own shortness and imperfection in our seize, so
we also acknowledge the fullness and perfection of the most holy faith, for
perfecting us, and bringing us to the inheritance: yea, as it is dangerous for
Believers, and leads to their destruction, to admit an imperfection and defect
in the faith, for that will lay them open to impostures to corrupt them
therefrom; so not to acknowledge their own imperfection and defect, to say they
have no sin, or have attained all fullness of knowledge and goodness, or with
the Church of Laodicea, that They are rich, and increased with goods, and need
nothing, is very dangerous and destructive to them also, laying them open to
pride and puffings up in themselves, as also to slothfulness, covetousness and
security, and by that means to sail of the Grace of God, and to be deluded and
carried captive of Satan to their own destruction. It implies further.

3. That their perfection in conformity to Christ, and seize by Christ,
is to be sought for in abiding in their most holy Faith, and so by and from it,
as it signifies the object or foundation of it, which is Christ; and by and
through the the faith, as it signifies the Doctrine holding forth Christ. They
are not to seek further growth and perfection by going away from that to some
other doctrine as better fitted for that purpose, for then should not this be
the most holy faith, but that other doctrine should be more holy than this; nor
should they build up themselves thereon; but besides this, as quitting and
forsaking this, that they might be built up, or build up themselves on some
other thing: but here they are to continue holding fast that which they have
heard and received. And to that purpose it is that the Apostle being about to
leave the Elders of Ephesus and the Churches thereabout, commits them to God,
and to the word of his Grace, as able to build them up, and to give them the
inheritance, Act. 20: 32. and tells the Corinths, that they should be saved in
keeping in memory what they had received in the Gospel preached by him from the
beginning, or in the first things of it, 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3. and 1.22, 23. So
the Apostle John too, 1 John 2.24, 25. for this doctrine is not like that of
the Law or first Testament, that made nothing perfect, but perfection is herein
and herethrough to be attained, so far as we be capable of attaining it here;
yea, to the inheritance it self, also it is only Christ as herein set forth
that does bring men. The Doctrine then or faith once delivered to the Saints,
is not at any time to be waved, or altered by us, but suffered to abide, and to
be abid in by us; and on that Believers are to build up themselves, who are yet
in themselves imperfect, and stand in need of building. Its the foundation laid
for them that upholds them and bears them up from sinking; all their faith,
hope, stay, comfort springs therefrom and stands thereupon; but it self stands
upon none of them, nor is added to or made more holy by them, yea, they
themselves as to their Spirits and spiritual conditions stand upon it; are what
they are, as a Building for God from and by it, and in union with it; and
besides, that there is no standing for them or any man; nothing to support,
relieve or comfort them against the accusations of the Law, and sin, and
Satan, nothing else to secure them and keep them from perishing in the wrath
to come; no other Sacrifice for sins to be found but what this presents, nor
otherwise than as this presents, and therefore no forgiveness, justification or
salvation, but upon and according to this faith and doctrine. All the blessing
and fullness of God is here dwelling, and sure to be met with by those that
there seek and wait for him; and nothing but lies and emptiness can any find
to uphold them, if this be turned from. No work or worth, no prayers or tears
or acts of a man can help him that has rejected and is besides this
foundation; all the Building therefore is to be on this: but then its to be
inquired:

5. How the believer is to be built thereupon, and how to build up himself, and
what that implies? to (...) we may say,

1. The building themselves upon this, is the firming themselves in the belief
and acknowledgment of this most holy faith; a growing more into it, and in
union with it, more to believe it, and discern and see into the truth, fullness,
and abundance in it, more to love it, and adhere to it, as having all things of
worth and excellency in it, and as thence seeking and expecting them: and then,

2. The deriving virtue from it, strength, courage fortitude, patience, and so
the divine virtues in it to an increase and augmentation in all holiness, and
conformity to Christ; and so an ascending up, or mounting up more heavenward
and God^ ward, in affections to him, and hope and con^dence in him, and so a
growth in fitness for his service, and for the enjoyment of the promised
inheritance, and so for his inhabiting and dwelling in us and with us by his
Holy Spirit, and filling us with his Glory and glorious virtues.

3. Yea, and as the believers are a society amongst themselves in union with
Christ, and with one another by virtue of the common faith and salvation: so
this building up themselves, or their being built up has in it a joint growth
in the knowledge and faith of Christ and of the Grace of God in Christ, and
firmness in their adherence to Christ and dependence on him, and in love one to
another; and so a growth in union and affection one with another, and by that
which every joint supplies from the head, and every stone, from the foundation,
or Holy Faith, a growth up into God, into the knowledge and love of him,
confidence in him, conformity to him, fitness for fellowship with him, and the
inhabitation of him by his Spirit in them, and the enjoyment of his Glory with
and amongst them. And all through and by virtue of the foundation and corner
stone Jesus Christ, in whom all the building fitly compacted and framed
together grows up into an holy Temple in the Lord, for an habitation of God,
by (or in) his Spirit, Ephesians. 2.21, 22.

To which we may add also:

4. The multiplying themselves by the d^yly addition of others from the world
into unity of faith and confession with them: for as there is an ^ward increase
and growth of every particular believer in faith, love, holiness, etc. in this
building up; and a joint inward increase of the whole Society by that which is
imparted amongst themselves to each other in the same heavenly virtues and
seize, so there is also an external and outward growth as to number and
greatness of the society, while others are daily added to them; which makes the
House of God grow larger in its latitude it has in the world; a way of growth
that believers have heartily desired after and rejoiced in when they have
obtained it; a blessing included in the blessing of Abraham, wherein God
promised to multiply and increase him and his seed, Heb. 6.14. not only as his
natural, but also as to his spiritual seed, the great thing that the Apostle
Paul endeavored, not pleasing himself, but becoming all things to all men, and
pleasing them in all things, not seeking his own profit but the profit of many
that might be saved, 1 Cor. 10.13. And it was the thing that David was better
pleased with and more rejoiced in, to hear many say who will show us good?
Lord, lift up the light of thy countenance upon us, than if he had seen them
prosper in the world in their wealth and riches, for thereupon he adds, Thou
have put more joy and gladness into my heart (namely, for, or concerning those
that said as above) than when their corn and their wine increased, Psalm. 4.6,
7. and therefore it may well be included in this edifying themselves here
exhorted to, viz. the endeavoring to add and increase the number of believers
by new conversions of others to the faith to partake with them in the Grace of
God, as well as to increase and further themselves and one another in their
inward growth upon the faith, especially too, seeing that the exercise of our
selves in charity to seek the conversion and salvation of others, is a way in
which God will add his blessing to, and enlarge our selves; as it is said, The
liberal Soul shall be made fat, and he that waters shall be watered also
himself, Pro. 11.25. which as well respects the helpfulness of others spiritual
instruction, as by distribution of worldly goods, for the relief of men's
outward necessities.

6. Now in that it is said, Build ye up your selves on your most holy faith,
and not only passively, being built up upon it, it is further signified both

1. That as the believers are not yet perfect or most holy, as the foundation
or faith is; so their growth up to perfection is gradual, not all at once
attained, or in a moment but by degrees, in which they may be daily and always
growing more and more: for this counsel or exhortation is for a continued
usefulness, a business that they are always to look upon as their business,
till they be brought to the actual possession of eternal life, or so long as
they live here amongst men in the world. There is in this growth up into an
holy Temple for the Lord, a going on from strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7, 8.
a being changed into the image of the Lord, from Glory to Glory, as by his
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.18. so that believers may not at any time say, we are edified
and built up so fully already that we can build up our selves or be built up no
further; though they are to be at a stay in respect of their foundation, the
holy faith they are not to straggle from that, yet as to their knowledge of it,
and faith in it, and seize from it, they may say as the Apostle Paul of
himself, that they have not yet attained, while here, neither are already
perfect: but this thing they do, forgetting the things that are behind (the
things they have let go for Christ) they press on forward toward the mark, for
the prize of the high calling of God, in Christ Jesus: and to press forward
still every day more and more, that they may apprehend that, for which they are
also apprehended of Christ Jesus, Philip. 3.12, 13, 14. and so as the Apostle
says to the Thessalonians, edify themselves still, even as they do, 1 Thessalonians.
5.11. they did edify one another, and yet he exhorts them still to do so;
there is ground for it, there is need of it; for as our Savior says, So is the
Kingdom of God, (the Grace of God in men's Souls in respect of the efficacy of
it there) as when a man casts seed upon the earth, and he sleeps and wakes
night and day, and the seed grows up and is increased no man knows how, for the
Earth of its own accord brings forth fruit; first the blade, and than the ear,
and than the full Corn in the ear, etc. Mark 4.26, 27, that is, the growth of
the Grace of God in a man, or of a man in that Grace is secretly,
indiscernably, and leasurely, not altogether, and at once, but by diverse steps
and degrees; so that neither is any man to be discouraged, if he do not
sensibly feel or perceive his growth in Grace, or that others so grow, but to
go on edifying and furthering himself and others therein, in time their
profiting will appear to all men. Nor are they to put a stop to their standing
in the earth, the Holy faith, or to their growth therein, but still go on and
abide riping and building, and building up themselves till the Husbandman when
he sees them fully ripe (as follows in that Parable ver. 29.) when the fruit
yields forth it self, or is brought forth, straitways puts in his sickle
because the harvest is come, that is, till Christ take us away by death, we are
to abide and grow. That Is one thing implied: and then,

2. That this building up or edifying on the most holy faith, is a thing to
which the believer is to be active not passive only. It Is a work in some sense
put upon and required of the believer, not so to be wrought in and upon them,
as the building of a temple of wood and stones is a work wrought upon it, so as
it contributes nothing thereto by way of action, only is built up, but builds
not it self: both phrases are used of believers, they are built up, says Ephesians.
2.21, 22. Col. 2.7. and yet also are said to edify, and willed to build up
themselves, as here, and in 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. The former, because believers have
not power and sufficiency of themselves, as of themselves to build up
themselves for God, more than to bring themselves to God; but their
sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. and it is he that works in them to will
and to do of his good pleasure; they are in that sense also Gods Building; not
only built for God, but built of God too; The Sanctuary that God has pitched,
and not man, and yet the latter phrase of edifying and building up themselves
and each other is also used; because they are not dead stones, like the stones
in Solomon's Temple of old that had neither life nor motion in them, but by
virtue of Christ the living stone, to whom they in believing are come, they are
made living stones that have life and motion in them; not only natural as men,
but also spiritual and divine as Believers in, and partakers of the life and
Spirit of Christ, and therefore are capable of receiving and obeying
exhortation and of acting spiritual things; yea, are enabled by the Grace of
God to what he requires of them, 1 Pet. 2, 3, 4, 5. And God who gives them his
Spirit to inliven and empower them to holy and good actions, gives them it not
to be idle in them, or that they should be idle in or with it; but living in
the Spirit, he would have them walk in the Spirit too, and do the works that
his Spirit requires of them and leads them to the working out their own
salvation, and not being therefore secure and slothful, because it is God that
is working in them to will and to do. It is the Believers work then in the help
and strength, motive and motion of the Grace of God, to edify and build up
themselves. And it is the work of God and his Spirit, power, and strength in
the obeying him, to build them up too. And in their doing in his power and
strength what he requires of them, and moves and inclines them too, he also
will not all to do all his good work in them, so as they shall be built up and
prepared for an habitation for him by his Holy Spirit. Now that which they are
to do in the helpfulness and operation of Gods Grace in them for edifying
themselves and each other, is;

1. Diligently to heed and mind the most Holy faith, on which they are built
and have their standing, exercising themselves and provoking one another to
consider it, and all that is in it, as it is discovered to and set before them,
taking heed to those things which they heard and learned therein; and to draw
waters out of those wells of salvation; even to suck and receive that
nourishment in faith, and encouragement to hope and love and live upon and unto
God that it presents to them feeding upon the words of life, and Christ
crucified as set forth therein; and receiving in the sweetness, strength, and
virtue thence afforded. Considering Jesus Christ the Great high Priest and
Apostle of our Profession both in his Person and that dignity and greatness of
it, that he is the Son, the only begotten Son of God, who was in the form of
God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God; and as to his undertakings
and performances in what he has already done for us, as that he accepted and
undertook to do the will of God for ransoming us from that wretched state of
sin and death, and therein of slavery to Satan that we by our sin had plunged
our selves into, and to that purpose abased himself to be made flesh for us,
partaker with us in flesh and blood, made of a woman, and made under the Law
for us, that the curse of the Law might fall upon him for us, as also it did,
to the death of the Cross, wherein he bare our sins on the tree, and died for
us, the just for us unjust, that he might bring us to God: so making peace for
us by the blood of his Cross, and ransoming us from under the Law and Curse, to
be under his own gracious Government and dispose, who also in the virtues of
his sufferings and Sacrifice, is able and ready to save to the utmost from all
our following sins, even against his Grace and goodness, all that see and
confess them and turn from them, and so do come unto God by him, and so from
all dangers and inflictions of wrath and judgment, and be the Author of
eternal salvation to them that obey him; who being now raised from the dead,
and ascended and sit down on the right hand of Majesty in the highest, is made
Lord and Christ, the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, Thrones, Dominions,
Principallities and Powers being put under him, and all the fullness of the
Godhead dwelling bodily in him. And he is made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption; one in whom all these things are for us, so as
in believing in him to become ours and to be enjoyed by us: the Great Prophet
anointed of God and filled with his quickening Spirit, to give forth light and
bring forth judgment to the Gentiles; able so to speak as to cause the dead to
hear, and in hearing to live, able to open the eyes of the blind, and cause the
simple to understand knowledge, and guide the Believer into all truth, as he is
also appointed of God, and has promised to do. The great High Priest that has
offered up the acceptable Sacrifice by which he has made an atonement for our
sins, and in the virtue of which he is become the propitiation for our sins,
even for the whole world; and now ever lives to make intercession for, and be
the Advocate of al those that come unto God by him. The great ruler and
disposer of all things, and the protector and Defense of all those that believe
in and obey him, the Judge of quick and dead, who shall raise all men out of
their Graves, and bring them before him to receive of him according to their
works; everlastingly rewarding with eternal life and Glory all those that
submit to and serve him: and everlastingly destroying all their enemies, so as
they never be able more to oppose or trouble the^, A merciful High Priest that
can be touched with the feeling of our infirmities and temptations, while yet
we are under the vexations of Enemies, and one that will most faithfully see to
us, and accomplish all things for and about us that may conduce to our
preservation and safety here, while under trials; and to our eternal happiness,
when fully freed from them.

The considering and minding him and the testimony of God concerning him, as
also what it it says and testifies of us, ou^ vileness, sinfulness, helplesness
and misery in our-selves, and of our welfare and happiness in him, as founded
in him, and what it testifies of the world, of sin, of righteousness, life,
death, etc. with all the Heavenly instructions, reproofs and consolations of
it; is one, yea, the chief way of edifying our selves on our most holy faith,
while we therein and therethrough draw virtue from Christ (as the poor woman by
touching his garments) to the nourishing and strengthening our Souls to trust
in him, love him, cleave to him and obey him; and so to oppose and stand
against the assaults of Satan, evils of the world, lusts of the flesh, or
whatsoever might endeavor to allure or affright us from him, yea, and derive
all Heavenly Grace and virtue from him, to the enlarging our Souls toward him,
and fitting them for and filling them with every good thing. Therefore the Holy
Ghost in the Scripture is so frequent in commending to us, and provoking us to
the study, mindfulness and meditation of the Law and Doctrine of the Lord, the
Gospel of our salva^^n, pronouncing that man happy and blessed that delights
himself therein, and gives up himself thereto. As also the minding others of
it, and of the instructions, reproofs, and consolations of it, is the way to
edify them also, both by removing the rubbish that hinders their close
cleaving to Christ the foundation, and more firmly cementing them to, and,
uniting them with Christ, through his love and goodness discovered to them and
put to their minds, and more firmly joining them through the same love one to
another, and furthering their hope in and conformity to God and Christ, in
which they are edified and built up for him. And as furtherance also hereto, a
further means and way is,

2. A diligent and faithful exercise of their spiritual gifts for the
helpfulness of each other; for the manifestation of the Spirit (some useful
gift or other in which the Holy Spirit manifests his presence and influence,
and whereby he fits each member of Christ for the good of the whole Body) is
given to every one (namely of the Members of Christ) to profit with, 1 Cor.
12.7. that is, to do good too, and edify the Church or body of Christ with, as
to one is given by the Spirit a word of wisdom, for directing and counselling
what is best in doubtful matters, to another a word of knowledge, to inform
men's minds of the things of God, and nature of his Creatures, works,
Providence, etc. To another faith, a gift of believing and trusting in God
more eminently; or of encouraging to faith and confidence, or also of
faithfulness in keeping secret things committed to them, not divulging the
temptations, failings, and miscarriages of others imparted to them. To another
the gifts of healings, either of the inward wounds and distempers of the
Spirit, or of bodily diseases by a miraculous way. To another the working of
Miracles, or operations and efficacies of powers or powerful things; such as
the inflicting diseases, deaths or such sad punishments upon men, as when the
Apostle Peter inflicted death upon Ananias and Saphirah at his word, Act. 5,
and Paul blindness on Bar^Jesus the Sorcerer in Act. 13.10, 11. as also the
casting out Devils or the like. To another prophecy, either the foretelling
things to come, as Agabus did, Acts 11.28. or the opening and unfolding
Doctrine and speaking out of the Scriptures, to exhortation, edification and
comfort, 1 Cor. 14.3. To another the discerning of Spirits, the discerning the
Doctrines of men though never so craftily counterfaiting the truth, or
discerning men's tempers and dispositions, whereby they are fit to admonish and
warn their Brethren of what may harm them, or of persons not safe for them to
trust. To another diversity of Tongues. To another a gift of Interpreting
Languages. Diverse gifts from one and the same spirit of Christ, distributing to
every one according as he pleases: but all given for the helpfulness and profit
of the Church, and therefore also to be to that purpose exercised, as the
Apostles also instruct and teach, as in 1 Pet. 4.10. every one as he has
received the gift, so let him minister one toward another as good stewards of
the manifold (or various) Graces of God. So in Romans 12.6, 7. Having gifts
differing according to the Grace that is given unto us, whether prophecy, let
us prophecy according to the proportion of says, or ministry, let us wait on
our ministry (as Joshuah on his ministering to Moses, Exodus 24.13. and John to
Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13.5.) or he that teaches on teaching, or he that
exhorts on exhortation, etc. surely in such exercising their spiritual gifts
and employing and improving their Talents, they may be useful and helpful for
edifying themselves and one another: for while they are faithful in doing good
with what they have received and are betrusted with, God gives his blessing
with them, and increases them themselves, the liberal Soul here shall be made
fat, and he that waters shall be watered also himself, and he shall profit
and edify others also: as the Apostle exhorting Timothy to take heed to
himself and his ministry, and to continue in them, tells him, so should be save
himself, and them that heard him: add,

3. A walking in Charity, for knowledge (without that) puffs up, but Charity
edifies, 1 Cor 8.2, 3. that is the most profitable way, the Grace or virtue that
will lead us to be most useful and edifying to others; for that will lead us to
be ready at all times to exercise our gifts, and improve our Talents for the
good of others, and to mind their concernments and what may further their
happiness, and not to look on our own things only. Charity suffers long from
others, before it will be tired out, or suffer him, in whom it is, to turn away
from seeking their good: and is kind in the mean time, free to do good to
others, while it suffers great indignities and abuses long from them. It envies
not others good, nor the imparting our gifts to others for their good. Does not
vaunt it self, nor is puffed up, to the grieving and discouraging the
neighbor, or dispising his meaner condition and worth. Does not behave it self
unseemly to offend and stumble the weak Brother, and to turn him out from God.
Seeks not her own, but the good of others. Is not easily provoked against
another, or to leave off pursuing his good and benefit. Thinks not (or surmises
not) evil. Nay, if it discern evil, it is willing to pass it by, and not impute
it to the withdrawing his good offices of love from his neighbor. Rejoices
not in iniquity (harm, evil, or deceit) 'but rejoices in the truth; and
therefore also endeavors the prosperity and spreading thereof, that the mouth
of iniquity might be stopped. Bears all things, all burdens put upon it.
Believes all things that God has discovered, and that he has any ground to
believe concerning the good of others. Hopes all things that may further their
good; and endures all things that it meets with for exercise of its patience, 1
Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7, this will lead us to deny our selves and our own things to
do others good, and so to use our liberties in things indifferent, as may tend
to the good and profit of others, and forbear the use of it where it might
prejudice them; as S. Paul who would not eat flesh or drink wine till the world
stood, or do any thing whereby the Brother should be offended: if he knew such
things would offend him, weaken him in, or stumble him from the truth, 1 Cor.
8.13. with Romans 14.21. this will lead men to do all things for edification and
nothing for destruction to any; this therefore is a most useful way of edifying
and building up one another in the most holy faith.

4. And in a word, the walking as becomes the Gospel of Christ, and so the
showing forth his virtues in our conversations, in an innocent abstinence from
all ungodlines and fleshly and worldly lusts, and walking soberly, and
righteously, and godlily in this present World, and in a patient bearing and
suffering, and so overcoming with goodness all the injuries and abuses done to
us, especially for the Gospels sake, for that also tends exceedingly to the
furtherance of the Gospel and the confirming and strengthening one another in
the belief and confession thereof. Philip. 1.12, 13, 14, 20, 27. After such a
sort are we to build up our selves, and one another on our most Holy Faith.

Now such a building up our selves thereon, tends to keep us in the love of
God, because,

1. They that build up themselves thereon, keep or abide thereon, and are not
waved or turned aside from that precious foundation, to which the love, special
respect, care, and approbation of God are as it were intailed. Christ is the
first, prime, and immediate object of Gods delightful love; so that a man being
and abiding in him does in, through and by virtue of him abide also in his
love. Now a building up our selves on that foundation, is a firming us more in
and fastening us more upon him, who is that foundation whereon his love is
inseparably placed. The foundation of God (Jesus Christ as held forth in the
Apostles Doctrine, for other foundations can no man lay) is a firm and sure
foundation, and stands sure, having this Seal (or confirmation) the Lord
knows them that are his. It is known of God as his, and therefore cared for,
owned, and loved by him; and all that are his (the foundations or Christ's) are
therefore also known, owned, and accepted of God. If Christ's, then Abraham's
seed and heirs according to promise, etc. Gal. 3.29.

2. The building up our selves on that foundation, the most holy faith, is the
way to keep our selves untouched of the adversaries of it; and

3. To do Gods Commandments, using our gifts and talents to those ends and
intents to which God has given us them, and as he has given us Commandments,
and in this way he has promised his presence, and blessing with us, and favor
toward us. If we have Christ's Commandments and keep them (as we do in thus
doing) then are we lovers of Christ, and God will love us and Christ will love
us, and manifest his own self to us, John 14.21. and if we keep his
Commandments we shall continue in his love, John 15.10. If we do these things
(add in our faith virtue, etc and so edify and build up our selves on our
most holy faith) we shall never fall, for so an abundant entrance shall be
administered to us into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, 2 Pet. 1.5, 10; 11. It is the idle Soul shall suffer hunger; the barren
and fruitless branch that the husbandman takes away, not the diligent and
fruitful in good works, Joh 15.2. This therefore is the way for us to keep our
selves in the love of God. Not to be careless and secure, and say in our hearts
we cannot miscarry; our standing depends not on our working and diligence, and
therefore we will do nothing but give up our selves to mind and walk after the
flesh, and do our own pleasures; for we are sure of eternal life, nothing can
deprive us, Christ will keep it for us, and give it to us what ever we do,
having closed with him and believed on him, no sin of ours can un son us, nor
no carelessness or neglect of ours provoke God to neglect us. Take we heed of
such abusive reasonings and actings, and exercise we our selves to Godliness,
to build up our selves on our most holy faith. (for through slothfulness and
negligence the house may else drop through) so will God be with us, love us,
own and delight in us to dwell with and amongst us: But then add we still the
second way or means of keeping our selves in the love of God, which is also to
be practiced all along together with the former, and not after we have done
with that, for that is never to be done with while here, but always to be
practiced, and so is this second too: namely,

2. Praying in the Holy Ghost. Where we have to consider:

1. The exercise it self, and that is praying. 2. The way or manner of it, and
that is, in the Holy Ghost.

In speaking unto which let us inquire into and consider: 1. What it is to
pray. 2. What it is to pray in the Holy Ghost. 3. What is implied in the
exhorting Believers so to pray. 4. How that conduces to the keeping themselves
in the love of God.


1. And first. To pray is more than to say or read or frame a prayer, for that
may be as to the two former, an exercise of the tongue and lips, in which the
heart may be altogether unexercised; yea, and it may be other men's desires or
needs that we say or read over and not our own. And as to the last expression,
the framing of a prayer it may be but an exercise of the brain and parts, not
of the heart and Spirit of a man; yea, the Stage Players have done all this in
derision of prayer sometime; whereas to pray is,

To exercise the heart in minding, uttering, or pouring out unto God through
Jesus Christ its needs and desires, or the needs of and its desires for others;
let us view the particulars, and so,

1. Prayer is an exercise of the heart thence, When God said, seek ye my face,
my heart (says David) said, thy face, Lord, will I seek Psa. 27.9. and a man is
said in prayer to pour out his heart, as in Psa. 62.8. Trust in God at all
times, ye people, pour out your hearts unto him: He is a refuge for ^^, So 2 Samuel 7.17. David says, He found in his heart to pray this prayer to God. It is
true, the heart may be exercised in reading or saying a prayer, so as to join
in the words of it heartily, as what it sees it needs and desires be, and the
exercise of the heart, so in reading or saying a prayer may be and is a
praying: but whether men read or say, or frame and compose prayers by their
parts, if their hearts be not engaged therein, but only their lips and tongue
or brains, its not a praying, there may be the carcass or form of a prayer, but
the inside of it is wanting, and its but a dead image. But when the heart is
exercised, though there be nothing read or said outwardly and audibly to the
ear of man, yet it may be a right and fervent praying, as in the case of
Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.13. who spoke in her heart, and only her lips moved; the heart
may do well enough in prayer without the voice of the lips and tongue, but they
without it signify nothing in Gods reckonings. Its a vain worship when men
draw nigh to God with the lips, and honor him with the tongue, but the heart
is removed far from him, Isa. 29.17. It Is an exercise of the heart, that is the
first thing.

2. It Is an exercise of the heart, in which the heart minds the needs of it
self or others; indeed this alone may be without praying, but yet praying
cannot be without this in one branch of it, as it is for it self, it minds its
own needs or wants, and as it is for others, it minds their needs, either more
generally, or in particular, for there can be no hearty desire of supplies
where there is no heart-minding of the needs to be supplied. The heart first
gathers and takes into it self by its consideration or mindfulness, the needs
to be supplied before it, can pour them out in expressing them to God, or
desiring supplies for them. And this is one thing in the preparation of the
heart to pray to God, mentioned Psalm. 10.19. that God brings to mind, and
makes it sensible and apprehensive of the needs or wants of it self or others,
and helps it to consider or lay them to heart: an inconsiderate heart can never
be a good praying heart, thence also Solomon thus expresses himself, 2 Chronicles.
6.37. If they shall bethink themselves -- and turn and pray, etc. yea, thence
also prayer is sometime called a Meditation of the heart, as in Psalm. 5.1.
Consider my Meditation. That Is the second.

3. It Is an exercise of the heart uttering and pouring out its needs, which it
may do either by the mouth and lips, also employed, as, hear the prayer that
proceeds not out of feigned lips, 17.1. and again, I cried unto him with my
mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue. And, I cried unto God with my voice
unto God with my voice did I cry, etc. Psalm. 66.17. and 77.1. or it may be
without the voice, as was noted above of Hannah, for the heart has a secret
speech and cry too, audible to God, when yet men hear nothing thereof. But
whether with audible voice or without, this pouring out or uttering the needs
from or by the heart is essential to prayer; which therefore is called the
pouring out of the heart, as Psalm. 62.8. before noted, and the pouring out of
the Soul, 1 Samuel 1.15. or, of the complaint, Psalm. 142.2.

4. It is an uttering the needs and desires of the heart, and that is it which
most properly renders it prayer, the breathing forth desires by way of
petition, request, or humble supplication for the supply of our needs. It is
not only this I need or want which may be without prayer properly so called;
But, Lord, give or grant me this, or that the need whereof I am sensible of, as
in Solomon's prayer for Wisdom, 1 King. 3.7, 8. O Lord my God, Thou have made
me thy servant King in stead of David my Father, and I am but a little Child, I
know not how to go out or come in (there is the uttering his need, and then ver.
9.) Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, etc.
So in Psalm. 60.11. Give us help from trouble for vain is the help of man: yea,
sometimes the goodness of the thing may be more in the praying begetting
desires of it than simply the want of it, as he that asks a thing, that he
has tasted the sweetness of more out of delight in it, than need of it, thence
prayer is expressed by asking, seeking, knocking, making known our requests, etc.
as Matthew. 7.7, 8. Philip. 4.6. It Is an uttering or pouring out desires, that is
the fourth thing.

5. It Is an exercise of the heart pouring out its needs and desires unto God,
that's the praying here required, and to be spoken too; for though there may be
prayers and petitions made to men, Kings, or Magistrates, or others, as in Dan.
6.7. a Decree was made against asking a petition of any God or man, except of
King Darius for thirty days space, and so we read of Jeremiahs presenting his
supplication to the King, Jerem. 37.20. and 38.26. yea, and there were prayers
made by the Heathens to their Idols, as is said Isa. 44.17. He falls down and
worshippeth it, and prays to it, and says, Deliver me, for thou art my God^:
yet these kind of civil or Idolatrous prayers fall not under our consideration
as prayers to which the Scripture exhorts us: much less under the name and
notion of prayer, as when it says, pray continually pray without ceasing,
watch unto prayer, or the like. Its a Divine exercise of the heart, breathing
forth the desires to God, the only true God, as God has said, Call upon me in
the time of trouble, Psalm. 50.14, 15. Let us go and pray before the Lord,
Zech. 8.21. He is the object to whom our prayers, desires, or requests are to
be made known, etc. as Philip. 4.6. make your requests known unto God, etc. It
must be to God; that's the fifth particular.

6. Through Jesus Christ, as the Mediator of God and men, the way of approach
to God. It is not God as absolutely in himself considered, and immediately
looked upon, that we are to direct our prayers to by our selves, but God as in
Christ as he has in him been reconciling the world to himself, not imputing
their trespasses; and as he has prepared in him for us by his Death and
Sacrifice forgiveness of sins, and appointed him as the great High Priest to
present our suits for us and render them acceptable to him, making intercession
for those that come unto God by him, Heb. 7.25. and 10.19, 20 21, 22* and 1^
15. whence our prayers are to be in Christ's Name, as in John 14 13, 14. and
16.23, 26. though this may be more properly referred to the manner of praying
here required, the praying in the Holy Ghost.

Lastly, I added the needs of or its desires for others, to signify that this
praying required is not to be limited or confined to our selves and our own
needs and wants, and desires for our selves but extended to the praying for
others also; here being no limitation of the subject to our selves in the Text,
but it is only said, praying in the Holy Ghost; and it is praying, as well when
we pray for others as when we pray for our selves; whether it be for all men,
as 1 Timothy 2.1. or for some sorts of men only, as for Kings and all in
Authority, ver. 2. or for some particular Cities and people, as Abraham prayed
for the Sodomites, or as Samuel prayed for Israel, as Moses also and David and
Solomon, and others did, Genesis 18.23. Exodus 32.11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Samuel 12.23. 2 Samuel 24.10, 17. or for some particular persons, as Moses prayed for Pharaoh
Exodus 8.8, 9, 12, 29, 30. Elias for the widow of Sarephath and her child, 1
King. 17.20, 21. the Church for Peter, Act. 12.5. and the Churches for Paul,
Romans 15.30. Ephesians. 6.19. Col. 4.3. or for enemies, as Moses for Pharaoh, and as
Christ commands us in Mat. 5.44. or for brethren, the Saints and Churches, as
Ephesians. 6.17. supplication for all Saints.

Such is prayer as more strictly taken for Petition and request unto God, and
so as it is distinguished from thanksgiving as often they are distinctly
mentiond, as pray without ceasing, in every thing give thanks, 1 These. 5.17,
18. So, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made
known to God, Philip. 4.6. And so distinctly taken, it includes supplications,
prayers or petitions, and intercessions, in 1 Timothy 2.1. Supplications, humble
confessions of our sins, and earnest deprecations of wrath and judgments,
prayers or petitions, requests for favors, blessings, and good things,
intercessions, interposings of our prayers for others, standing between them
and judgment and pleading humbly with God for them: as Moses for Israel,
Abraham for the Sodomites, etc. but when thanksgiving is not distinctly
mentioned, the word (prayer) may include thanksgiving too, and so sure the word
(praying) here may include thanksgiving also; and in such a large sense of the
word to pray may take in somewhat more than in the description above given,
namely, an exercise of the heart, or of the man speaking unto God by way of
request and supplication, and by way of confession or thanksgiving in behalf of
himself or others; but this consideration of thanksgiving in prayer may also be
taken in under the manner of praying here expressed, viz. praying in the Holy
Ghost, of which next. And so,

2. To pray in the Holy Ghost, or in the Holy Spirit (the Spirit of God and
Christ, which is a Spirit of Holiness dwelling and resting fully on Christ, and
from him and God in him breathed forth in and with the most holy faith unto the
heart of the believer; or breathing forth, witnessing and speaking of, and
glorifying Christ to the Soul, taking the things of him and showing them
thereto, and therewith guiding it into Christ and the truth of Christ,
sanctifying it to God, and framing it to his mind in all things) does signify,

1. To pray or utter our desires and needs, or the needs of others in the
light, direction or guidance of the Holy Spirit. Not as our own natural hearts,
imaginations, or affections would lead, or as men by their wisdom and will
might suggest unto us, but as he, the Holy Ghost instructs us; and that both,

1. As to the things to be prayed for, not such as the flesh and the wisdom and
affections of it aff^ct and move after, or the Spirit of this world, such as be
riches, honors, pleasures of the flesh, fuel for our corruptions, evil to our
enemies, etc. as the Gentiles seek after, and the carnal uncircumcised hearts
of men delight in, such as Solomon requested not, 1 King 3. -- But,

1. Such things as Gods Name and Glory are concerned in, or that conduce to,
and are necessary for the manifesting and magnifying thereof, that the Gospel
may have a free passage, the word of God run and be glorified, 2 These. 3.1,
that his way may be known upon the earth, and his saving health amongst the
Nations, Psalm. 67.1, 2, 3. and to that purpose, that God would send forth
laborers into his harvest, Matthew. 9.38. and bless and prosper those he sends,
giving them utterance so to speak the word and mystery of Christ as they ought;
and deliverance from the hands of unreasonable and wicked men, a Col. 4.3, 4.
Ephesians. 6.18. 2 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2. that he would bless and help his people, and make
them blessings in the world Joh. 17. Psa 67. and 28.10 and 132.8, 9. giving
them boldness and courage, etc. Act. 4.29.

2. Such as the coming and Kingdom of Christ is and includes, as, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly, Rev. 22.20. Thy Kingdom come, Matthew. 6.10. Oh, that the
salvation of Israel was come out of Sion, Psalm. 14.8. Remember the Children of
Edom, O Lord, etc. Psalm. 137.7. and so for Babylons fall and ruin, etc. the
hastening of the day of God, performance of his promises, that the earth may be
filled with the knowledge of the Lord, and his will be done in earth as it is
in Heaven, Matthew, 6.10, 11.

3. Such as the Kingdom of God and his righteousness ^ now consists in to be
granted to us or others, as wisdom and understanding in the knowledge of God
and Christ, Prove. 2 1, 2, 3, 4. If thou cryest after knowledge and liftest up
thy voice for understanding: Jam. 1.3. If any man want wisdom let him ask it of
God, etc. So the forgiveness of sins, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
them that trespass against us, Matthew. 6.12. Cleanse me from my secret sins,
Psalm. 19.12. Deliver me from all my transgressions, and make me not a reproa^h
to the foolish, Psalm 39.8, 9. The Spirit of God as a Spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of Christ, the guide into all truth, the Comforter,
strengthner and sanctifier of the Soul: as Luc. 11.13. Ephesians. 1.17, 18. John
14, 15, 16, 17. Ephesians. 3.16 etc. Mercy, Grace, and peace from God, and our Lord
Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 1.2, 1 Timothy 1.2. and 2 Timothy 1.2. Psalm. 85 7* victory over,
and deliverance from corruption, and from Satan and his temptations, Psalm.
19.13. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins, etc. order my footsteps in
thy word, and let no iniquity have dominion over me, Psalm. 119.133. Lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from evil, Matthew. 6.13.

4. Such supplies for the necessities of this life, support and help under, or
freedom, and deliverance from the troubles of it, and from the plots and malice
of wicked men in the world against us, as be necessary for us, for our
subsistence while here continued, or for our serving and glorifying God, and
usefulness amongst men, as Prove. 30.8. Feed me with food convenient for me,
Matthew. 6.11. Give us this day our daily bread. O, deliver me not into the will
of mine enemies, Psalm. 27.14. Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man, and
preserve me from the wicked man which imagine michief in their hearts, etc.
Psalm. 140.1, 2. Pray that your flight be not in the winter nor on the
Sabbath Day, Matthew: 24.20. and the like for others as for our selves, 2 Thessalonians.
3.1, 2.

5. In particular wants, exercises and temptations for such things as the Holy
Spirit knows to be most profitable for us and others, and most agreeable with
Gods will, in which we know not usually what to pray for; but the Holy Spirit
that God gives to his servants and worshippers does, and that helps their
infirmities and makes intercession for them with groans that cannot be uttered,
Romans 8.26. and leads his people in such cases to pray according to Gods will;
as Abraham for Ishmaels life: O that Ishmael might live before thee, Genesis
17.18, 20. Isaac for children, Genesis 25.21. Elijah for the life of the widow of
Sarephaths child be restored, 1 King. 17. and so Elisha for the Shunamite, 2
King. 4, and many the like obvious in the Scriptures.

In a word, the Holy Ghost shows what things are agreeable to the will and
holiness of God, and conduces to the promoting his Glory, and our own and
others good, and directs us to pray for them as they be wanting and blesse^ God
for them, as granted to us.

2. As to the manner of praying, both

1. As to the way of approaching to God, that it be not in our own
righteousness, name or goodness, as if we deserved any mercy of him to our
selves, or were worthy upon the account of our righteousness to obtain any
thing, but in the name and upon the account of Christ, and so through and by
him, his Sacrifice and Priestly intercession for us; the new and living way to
God, Heb. 10.19, 20. and so in Gods goodness, mercy, and righteousness through
him. So David praying to God goes not in his goodness but in Gods, Psalm. 5.7.
As for me I will come into thy house, in the multitude of thy mercies, etc. and
in Psalm. 25.6. According to thy mercy think thou upon me, for thy
goodness-sake, O Lord; and Daniel Chap. 9.17, 18. For the Lords sake, and we do
not present our supplications before thee for our own righteousness, but for
thy great mercies. So the Holy Spirit instructs and directs us to come unto God
by Christ, as in Heb. 7.25. and in his Name to make our prayers and petitions,
John 14.12, 13, 14. and 16.23, 27.

2. As to the expressions, not studying quaint and elegant words and
expressions as if God delighted in them, but to utter our needs and desires in
such words and expressions as the Holy Spirit leading us to mind the greatness
and goodness of God, the declarations of his ^inde, and and will, and our own
vileness, and meanness, and wants helps us with, as knowing it is the faith and
fervencie of the heart, and the rightness of the frame of Spirit in our prayers
that sounds best in Gods ear: A braken or contrite heart, O God, thou will not
despise. He that studies quaint words to please men, prays rather to men for
their applause, than to God for his Grace and blessing; and so it leads not to
use vain repetitions, as placing holiness, goodness, or the acceptableness of
our prayers in such and so often reiterated expressions, or as thinking to be
heard for or in our much speaking, Mat. 6 7. though the Holy Spirit lets us see
sometime ground and need for praying longer, and sometime shorter as our cases
may be, as Christ was in prayer all night sometime, Luc. 6.12. before he chose
his Apostles, and yet sometime was very short, as when he raised up Lazarus,
John 11.41.42.

3. As to the earnestness in praying. The Holy Spirit leads to be chiefly
earnest for those things that are of greatest concernment, more earnest for
what tends to promote Gods Kingdom and righteousness, and to his Glory, than
for things in which our lib^rty, ease, health or the like are only concerned,
and to be most indifferent for those things in which Gods Name, Kingdom, or
Glory are least concerned.

^. As to the encouragements and motives to pray. To pray in the Holy Ghost is
to pray in the encouragements, motives, and motions which the Holy Spirit
gives. And they be such as the Gospel and Doctrine of Christ presents unto us;
as,

1. The gracious goodness of God testified toward us in Christ Jesus, in whom
he has declared and manifested himself a lover of us, as his Creatures, as
mankind; yea, though sinners, and while so, in that he was pleased to appoint
and send him, even his only begotten Son into the world for us, that we might
live through him, even through him, as made and become the propitiation for our
sins, as in 1 John 4.9, 10. Having not spared his Son, but delivered him up to
the Death for us all, the Holy Spirit incourages us thereupon to hope, and in
that hope to expect that he will also with him freely give us all things, and
in such encouragement and upon such ground moves us to ask of him what is
needful and good for us, Romans 8.26, 27, 28.

2. The compleatness of Christ as our Mediator and High Priest with God for
obtaining Grace and mercy of him for us, and to that purpose making
intercession: and of his Authority with God to dispense and hand unto us (as
well as of wisdom to discern and see) whatever may be good and needful for us:
Heb. 4.14. Having such a great High Priest, Jesus the Son of God passed into
the Heavens for us, let us go boldly to the Throne of Grace, So Heb. 10.19 20,
21, 22 Seeing we have boldness or liberty to the Holy of Holies by the blood of
Jesus (that is, by such a complete, full, and perfect Sacrifice, as that he
has offered for us, such as infinitely goes beyond all the Sacrifices under
the Law, as the foregoing part of that Chapter had largely showed, such as in
which is perfection for the sanctified for ever, ver. 14. plenteousnes of
Redemption forgivenes of sins, and a powerful voice to speak for our
acceptance, Col. 1.14. Heb. 12.24.) by a new and living way which he has
consecrated for us, through the vail his flesh, and having an High Priest over
the House of God, such a one namely as Christ is, who is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separated from sinners, made higher than the Heavens, a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedeck, a King, and Priest, and that too the Son
of God himself, consecrated by an Oath for ever and ever, living to make
intercession for us; in all which respects he is infinitely better and greater
than the Priests under the Law, and abler to make us and our prayers acceptable
to God, c. 7. as also having an High Priest so merciful to us, and so faithful
both to God and us in all that concerns us, one that can be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, and can succor those that be tempted, because he
himself suffered and was tempted; as Chapter 2.17, 18. and 4.15. one that can
pity and have compassion on those that are ignorant and ^ut of the way, Heb.
5.1, 2, 3. Let us therefore draw near with true (sincere) hearts, in full
assurance of faith, our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our
bodies washed with pure water. In these encouragements the Holy Ghost moves and
incourages us to draw nigh and to pray to God; as also is showed Romans 8.34. in
that Christ has died for us, yea, rather is risen again, who also is at Gods
right hand, and makes intercession for us.

3. The infinite power and alsufficiencie of God in Christ, and of Christ in
God to hear, help, save and satisfy us, and to fulfill all our petitions that
are according to his will, power belongs unto God, Psalm. 62.11, 12. therefore
trust in him at all times, ye people, pour out your hearts before him, he is a
refuge for us: So in Job 5.8, 9. I would seek to God, to God would I commit my
cause, who does great things, etc. I am God Almighty, Genesis 17.1. this
encouraged Christ in the days of his flesh to pour out strong cries and tears
that his Father was able to save him, all things were possible to him, Heb 5.7,
Mark 14.36. and this through the love he has manifested in Christ, and the
greatness, faithfulness and mercifulness of Christ as our High Priest, and the
infinite virtuousness of his sacrifice for us, for obtaining favor and
acceptance for us with God is of great usefulness to encourage us also, that
he that so loves us, and with whom we have such a Priest and Sacrifice to
befriend us, is able to help and save us, as Psalm. 57.2. I will cry unto God
most high, unto God that performs all things for me: this encouragement the
Holy Ghost propounded to and by Paul as a motive to pray to him. That the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is be of whom all the family in Heaven and
earth is named, and that in him are riches of Glory, and that he is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all we ask and think, Ephesians. 3.15, 16, 20. indeed,
this without the other would be little encouragement, but rather terrify us
from him; but with and through it, it gives exceeding much encouragement, to
consider that he is able both in respect of wisdom and knowledge to discern our
wants, and in respect of Power and Authority to supply them.

4. His Covenant and promises made and confirmed in Christ for hearing and
helping those that come to him by Christ, and for perfecting all that concerns
them, both as to salvation from evil, and satisfaction with good. Its his
Covenant in Christ to write his Law in the heart, and to put his fear into
them, and their iniquities and sins to remember no more, etc. and so it is to
hear their prayers, and to save them. So Psalm. 50.14, 15. Call upon me in the
day of trouble and I will deliver thee and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 91.14,
15. He shall call upon me, and I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver
him and honor him; with long life will I satisfy him, and show him my
salvation, and so by our Savior, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
Name, I will give it you, John 16.23. Godliness has the promise of this life
and of that that is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. to which add,

5. His infinite truth and faithfulness through Christ to keep his Covenant and
mercy for ever; this encouragement is also propounded, and was often made use
of by the servants of God: as the Apostle to move the Believer to draw nigh to
God uses this amongst others: Faithful is he that promised, therefore let us
hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering, which is done as well by
our persevering in prayer and continuing to draw nigh to God, Heb. 10 23. this
was made use of and pleaded by Nehemiah, c. 1.5. The great terrible God, that
keeps Covenant, and mercy for them that love him and observe his
Commandments; and so by those good Levites mentioned in Neh. 9* 4, 5. in Verse
32. and by Daniel, Dan. 9.4. as also it is propounded as an encouragement to
call upon God, and to seek him, and seek his face, Psalm. 105.1.4, 8. He has
remembered his Co^ont for ever, etc.

6. The Relations that they stand in to God and God to them, that the Holy
Spirit also makes use of to encourage to pray, and to call upon God: So in
Matthew. 7.11. If ye that are evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give good things to them
that ask him. So again in Luke 11.13. and this also the holy men of God have
been encouraged by to pray to him: as Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our
Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, etc. Thou, O Lord, art our Father,
our Redeemer, thy name is from everlasting, etc. So Jer. 14.8. O the hope of
Israel, the Savior thereof in time of trouble, etc. (...) very often David
makes use of this encouragement, that God was his God, and his King, his Rock,
Refuge, etc.

7. The often proofs they have had of his Goodness, and Power, and Mercy in
former times: Call to mind (says the Apostle, amongst other motives and
encouragements to draw nigh to God, and to hold fast the Profession of the
Faith) the farmer days, in which after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great
fight of afflictions. And this is often made use of, and found as an
encouragement to the servants of God in former times; as, Psalm. 4.1. O God of
my righteousness, hear when I call: Thou have set me at liberty when I was in
distress, have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer* and in Psalm. 18 3. we have
David resolving to call upon the Lord, worthy to be praised; and assuring
himself, that so he should be delivered from his enemies: And see what
encouraged him to that assured expectation, and so to that holy resolution,
Verse 4 5, 6. The sorrows of death compassed me, etc. In my distress I called
upon the Lord, and cried unto my God: he heard my voice out of his Temple, etc.
Like to which is that in Psalm. 116.1, 2. I love the Lord, because he has heard
my voice and my supplication: because he has inclined his ear unto me,
therefore will I call upon him so long as I live.

8. The experience of Gods goodness and mercy to other in former or present
ages, the cloud of witnesses that have gone before us, and found God gracious
to them in their crying to him; as in Psalm. 22.4, 5. Our fathers trusted in
thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them: They cried unto thee,
and were delivered; they trusted in thee, and were not confounded. To that
pu^^se also, the examples of Gods goodness to others are propounded by him, to
move men to taste and see by their trusting in, and calling upon God, how
gracious God is, Psalm. 34.4, 5, 6. I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and
delivered me from all my fears; they looked unto him and were enlightened, and
their faces were not ashamed. This poor man cried and the Lord heard him, etc.
Whatsoever things were written beforehand being written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4.
God being one and so the same for us in and through his Son, as he was for and
to any others before us; and there is no respect of persons with him. He is
rich to all that call upon him, Romans 10.12.13.

Such the encouragements which the holy Ghost gives for praying and he that
prays in the holy Ghost prays not in the encouragement of his own parts wisdom,
works, or the like; but in such encouragements as these abovementioned, as to
such purpose that fore-quoted from Dan. 9.18. is pertinent, We do not present
our Supplications before for our righteousness, but for thy great mercies. So
that in Psalm. 5.7. and 143.1, 2.

4. To pray in the holy Ghost is to pray in the operation of the holy Ghost,
and so in such a frame and temper of Spirit, as the holy Ghost, being minded
and yielded up to in his testimony, frames the heart unto. And so,

1. Not in pride, as the Pharisee, despising his neighbor, and lif^ing up
himself in Gods presence.

2. Nor in self-confidence, and reliance on a man's own righteousness, as he
also did, Luke 18.10, 11.

3. Nor in wrath and anger, as the Disciples, that would have called for fire
from Heaven upon the Samaritan^ that would not receive Christ, pretending Elias
for a warrant to them therein, Luke 9 54. for that was not in the holy Spirit
of Christ, for all that pretense; for our Savior tell^ them, They knew not
what manner of Spirit they were of, ver. 55.

4. Nor in vainglory, as the Pharisees that prayed to be seen of men that they
might have glory of them, Matthew, 6.5, 6.

5. Nor in ambition, seeking great things to themselves, and to be lifted up
above their Brethren, as the two Sons of Zebedee and their Mother did; not
knowing what they asked when they requested, that they might sit the one at
Christ's right hand, and the other at his left in his Kingdom, Matthew. 20, 20,
21, 22.

6. Nor in strife and contention, as those in Isa. 58 2, 3. who fasted and
prayed for strife and debate, ver. 4.

7. Nor to establish to themselves a righteousness in their praying, and so not
submitting to the righteousness of God in Christ, as the Jews that had a zeal
of God, and instantly served God day and night, hoping by their works of that
nature to attain the righteousness of the Law, Act. 26 7. with Romans 9.30, 31.
and 10.2, 3.

8. Nor in Covetousness, as they that howled upon their beds for corn and wine,
Hos. 7.14.

9. Nor in a doubtful, distrustful frame of Spirit, that is not fixed in Gods
goodness and persuaded of his truth, for such a man is like the wave of the Sea
tossed to and fro, double-minded, and inconstant in all his ways, and let not
such an one think to receive any thing at Gods hands, Jam. 1.6, 7. 1 Timothy 2.8.

10. Nor in an impatient unsubmmitted frame of Spirit to Gods Government,
frowardly hasting out of affliction: such as Jonah was in when he having
prophesied the destruction of Niniveh, and God seeing their repentance spared
it, he was exceedingly displeased and very angry, and prayed God to take away
his life from him, Jonas 4.1, 2, 3.

11. Nor in a flat, cold, formal temper of Spirit, as they that draw nigh to
God with their mouth, and honor him with the lips, but the heart is far away,
Isa. 29: 17. or the like: but,

1. In a believing frame of heart, minding and giving credit to Gods word and
testimony, the Gospel of Christ; and from the belief of that calling upon God;
and in that sense, prayer in the Holy Ghost is the prayer of Faith, Jam. 5.15.
and prayer proceeding out of the belief of Gods sayings, believing and not
doubting about them, as Jam. 1.6. But let him ask in faith, nothing doubting,
speaking to God because they believe his word, as in Psalm. 116.10. I believed,
therefore have I spoken; which may have reference to speaking by prayer as well
as to speaking by preaching or confession thus David from a belief of Gods word
to him by Nathan, found it in his heart to pray unto him that prayer, in 2 Samuel
7.18, 27. for the holy Ghost is a Spirit of Faith, as 2 Cor. 4.13. and
therefore breaths faith into the heart where he has the rule, and makes it
breath in faith; yea, in a full assurance of faith, as believing verily the
truth of God concerning Christ; yea, and Gods hearing and granting its
petitions that he helps the Soul to breath forth, Heb. 10.22. Mark 11.24. 1
John 5.^4, 15. and a cleaving, adhering frame of Spirit, cleaving to, and
trusting in God for his hearing and helping it according to his will, and the
Souls needs as resolved and fixed to depend upon, trust in and wait for God, as
Mic. 7.7. I will look to the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation, my
God will hear me; as Jacob of old, wrestling with God, and resolved not to
leave him till he had blessed him, Genesis 32.26. So our Fathers trusted in thee,
they trusted in thee and were delivered, they cried to thee and were delivered,
they trusted in thee and were not confounded, Psalm. 22.4, 5. such a frame of
Spirit the holy Ghost leads to pray in a believing, trusting frame. And,

2. With a fervent desire and frame of heart, the Holy Ghost is compared to
fire. He sat on the Apostles like cloven tongues of fire. Thence, Quench not
the Spirit; and therefore when men pray in it, it puts heat and life into them,
an earnest desire after those things which it directs absolutely to seek of
God. Thence it is said, The effectual (or operative) fervent prayer of a
righteous man avails much, Jam. 5.16. They that only say over prayers, or
pray luke-warmly, coldly and formally, pray not in the Holy Ghost; though this
fervor of Spirit in prayer stands not in the loud speaking and straining the
voice, or in much repetitions, but in the earnestness of the Souls desires and
ardencie of affection to the things prayed for, begetting importunity in
asking; like that of Jacob, in which was both faith and fervencie. I will not
let thee go unless thou bless me, or that of the widow to the unjust Judge, and
the Elect crying day and night unto God, Luc. 18.1, 7. or of the Syrophaenician
woman that followed after Christ against all discouragements, till he granted
her Petition, Matthew. 15, 22, 28.

3. With love and charity, without wrath as well as without doubting, 1 Timothy
2.8. (the Holy Ghost being a Spirit of love, 2 Timothy 1.7. and discovering the
love of God in Christ to us) and therefore not despising others (as the
Pharisee the Publicane) in our Prayers, nor being quick to take notice of men's
offenses to seek revenge for them, or aggravate them to God against them, but
making intercession for the passing of them by; and yet exercising goodness and
mercy toward them to overcome their evils, and bring them to repent of them,
as Christ did, even for his crucifiers, Luc. 23.34. and Stephen for his
persecutors, Act. 7.60. praying for them that hate us and despite^^lly use us,
as our Savior teaches in Matthew. 5.44, 45. yet especially exercising love in
our prayers to those that are beloved of God, and when other men's welfare
cannot consist with their safety and welfare, then praying for the peace of
Jerusalem with confusion to their enemies; yea, preferring the welfare of the
Church of God before our own private concernments; yea, and the good of the
world, before any advantages of ours in the world.

4. In a holy pure heart and Spirit, breathing after holiness, and after those
things conducing thereto, rather than what conduces to the ease and liberty of
the flesh, not making provision for that in our prayers, to fulfill the lusts
thereof, nor seeking any where, or in dependence on any thing, but only God and
Christ, making him and his Glory the end of what we ask, all which may be
included in that phrase, Heb. 10.22. Let us draw nigh with a true heart (not
double or guileful in the object of our trust, or running out from the designs
of God and Christ, and what may conduce to his Glory and praise, nor with a
heart set toward or for something besides God and Christ, so as to be set in
competition with him. The Spirit of God is the Holy Ghost, an Holy breath in
and from God, discovering in the Gospel Gods perfect hatred and abhorrencie of
sin, and therefore breaths after and for God, and what may be for Gods Glory,
and in an holy, pure, and chaste disposition of heart.

5. In an humble and lowly frame of spirit, for the spirit of God is not proud
nor lofty, nor loves pride and haughtiness. Its one of the seven things that
are an abomination to God. Prove. 6 17. and 16.7. He resists the proud, but
gives Grace to the humble, Pro. 3.32. therefore a proud haughty heart or frame
of Spirit is not of him, and they that pray therein, vaunting themselves of
their excellencies, pray not in the holy Ghost. The holy Ghost in glorifying
Christ, and setting forth to us, his great love toward us, discovers the great
humility of Christ; yea, and of God in Christ to humble himself, to take notice
of the things in Heaven and in earth, to raise up the poor from the dust, and
the needy from the dunghill, to set them on the Throne with Princes, Psalm.
113.5, 6, 7, 8. especially as manifested in the person of Christ who being in
the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but emptied
himself, humbled himself, and made himself of no reputation, but took upon him
the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of man, and being found in
fashion as a man humbled himself to the death, the death of the Cross, in which
he also discovered the great cause we have to be humbled, low and little in our
own eyes, for in testifying the love of Christ to us, that he died for all, he
testifies also of us all, that we were dead, dead at Law, and such as deserved
to have died, and were thereto condemned: so that had not Christ died for us,
we should have perished. Our misery was such, that no lesser price could
ransom us therefrom, no lesser Sacrifice could make an expiation for us. He
that prays in the mindefulness and sense of these things will be abased and
laid low in the presence of God, as knowing not only the great disproportion
between God and him as his creature, dust and ashes (as Abraham had the sense
of that with him in his speaking to God when he said, Behold, now I have taken
upon me to speak to the Lord who am but dust and ashes, Genesis 18.27.) but also
the wretchedness and sinfulness of our natures, and that what we are or have
that is good, we are and have it only and wholly of his Grace. In us in our
flesh, there dwells no good thing; nothing worthy of Gods acceptance; yea, that
all our righteousnesses are but as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. And so he that prays
in the Holy Ghost prays in all lowliness of mind, and such reverence of the
outward man as becomes God's height and goodness, and his own vileness,
confessing his own sins and sinfulness, though yet with confidence in Gods
mercy through Christ Jesus, as above.

6. Yea, He that prays in the Holy Ghost prays in an acknowledgment of the
Grace and goodness of God toward mankind and toward himself in particular
with thankfulness; and so joins thanksgiving for his mercies and benefits with
his prayers and Petitions for further mercies that he wants; and does not so
pore upon his wants and troubles, and desire freedom from them, as to set
nothing by all Gods benefits before conferred. So the Apostles, as was also
noted above, exhort to join thanksgiving with our prayers, as most clear to
that purpose is that in Philip. 4 6, 7. In nothing be careful, but in all
things by prayer and supplications with thanksgiving let your requests be made
known to God. An unthankful, murmuring complaining temper, is not of the Holy
Ghost.

7. In a submissive frame of Spirit (which also also is a fruit of humility
before spoken of) in which though the heart be filled with earnestness and
confidence in God for what he sees needful and good for it self and others, yet
it resignes it self to Gods will as for time and way; yea, and in things not
absolutely needful for Gods granting or withholding them, even as Christ though
earnest in praying that the Cup might pass from him, yet submitted his will to
his Fathers, Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from me, yet not my
will, but thy will be done, Matthew. 26, 39. to which we may also refers a
patient tarrying the Lords leisure, and not making haste or turning away from
God, or ceasing to pray to him, if we have not presently granted the thing that
we ask. For as the Spirit of God is a spirit of Faith, so also of patient
waiting, that being a fruit of faith. He that believes makes not haste, Isa.
28.16. Such is the praying in the holy Ghost, not to mention any other
particulars. And that is the second thing inquired.

3. The third is; what is implied in exhorting believers so to pray. And that
is diverse things, as,

1. That believers are not able or sufficient of themselves, as of themselves
to keep themselves in the love of God, or to that purpose to edify or build up
themselves on their most holy faith. They need the help and furtherance of God
and his Grace thereunto. In all their minding his Grace, exercise of their
gifts, walking in Charity, etc. they need to look to God for direction and
guidance and for his strength and assistance they need him to build them up in
their building up themselves, and to keep watch over them, in all keeping
themselves and watching over themselves and one another. Except the Lord build
the house (in this sense too) they labor but in vain, that build it. And
except the Lord watch over the City, the watchman watches but in vain, Psalm.
127.1, 2. their strength being so small, and their enemies so many and so great.

2. That there is sufficient Grace in God and Christ for their helpfulness
therein, and that also communicable to them by him: by which they may be built
up and so be kept in his love, all the oppositions from without them or from
within them, notwithstanding. If they had sufficiency in and of themselves, or
in what they have already received, then need they not cry unto God continually
for more from him; or if there were none in him for them, to be afforded to
them, than no ground or encouragement for their crying to him, however much
they might want, but in willing them to pray in their building up themselves
both are implied, we need like the builders of the wall in Nehemiahs time to
fight with one hand and to build with the other, and the former by praying to,
and calling upon God; for so shall we be saved from our enemies, Psalm. 18.3.
for we are not led to pray to a God that cannot save, but to him who is mighty
in power, able to save us, one that can perform all things for us as being
Almighty, able to do all things,, and has made ready in Christ all supplies
of Grace and Blessing for us: all things are ready that may conduce unto our
protection and preservation in his Grace, and the edifying our selves in our
most holy faith, as well as for bringing us at first thereunto.

3. That yet God will be sought unto and depended on for the supplies of his
Grace to us: he will have us in that way exercise our faith in him, in calling
upon him, though he could give us without our asking, and does give us and do
much for us before we ask, to move and encourage us to look to him and ask of
him for more; yet he will have us accustom our selves in that exercise of
prayer to him; to that purpose are many passages in Scripture, as, Call upon me
in the time of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me,
Psalm. 50.15. so in Jer. 33.3. Call unto me and I will answer thee, and show
thee great and mighty things which thou know not, Ezekiel. 36: 37. God having
promised to do great things for Israel, yet says, For this he will yet be
inquired of by them. And our Savior bids ask, seek, knock, and so they should
receive, find, and have it opened to them, Matthew. 7.7, 8. And this God will
have his people do:

1. That they might therein exercise and show forth their faith in him, and
dependence on him for his Grace, while they go to him for all things, as a
child to his Father, or as a wife to her Husband. Therefore it is noted in
Scripture as a fruit and consequent of faith, with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and then with the mouth confession is made to Salvation, for
whosoever calls upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved, Romans 10.10, 11, 12,
13.

2. That they may have more acquaintance and intercourse with God, and not live
as strangers from him, but by calling often upon him, and receiving answers of
Grace from him, have a holy familiarity and communion with him; as persons
daily resorting to the Court and speaking to the King, and presenting Petitions
to him, and receiving answers from him, thereby get more knowledge of him, and
acquaintance with him; and so are fitted the better for going out and
publishing to others the manner of his entertainment of men's suits, and the
virtues and goodness they discern in him. Children that scarce ever come and
speak to their Father grow strange to him; and so do men that make little use
of this privilege of coming nigh unto God; whereas such as come daily to him
to ask favors of him gather good acquaintance and proof of his love and
faithfulness to them; David implies this, in saying, Oh, taste and see that the
Lord is good, Psalm. 34.8. and Eliphaz in saying to Job, Acquaint (or accustom)
thy self now with God, Job. 22.21.

3. To keep them in a more reverend awe of him, lest they should offend him,
and so put a bar against their own petitions to him; for as Children that have
often occasion to come before their Parents will be more careful of dirtying or
soyling their clothes, or tearing and renting them, or of doing any thing
unbecoming them, if they know their parents cannot like to see them in such a
case; whereas they that seldom come into then sight, grow more loose and
careless, dirtied and torn, etc. even so God foresees that if we did not come
often to him we would be little careful of our conversation before him; whereas
seeing we call upon the Father, who without respect of persons judges every
man righteously according to his works, therefore it behooves us to pass the
time of our sojourning here in fear, and take heed that we regard not iniquity
in our hearts, because that will provoke God to hide himself from us, and not
hear our prayers. That he might make us therefore stand in awe of him, and be
perfect with him, he makes us to be often waiting upon him in his presence and
begging at his door for Grace and Mercy to help us in our needs, 1 Pet. 1.17.
Psalm. 66.18.

4. To give us more experience of his care over us, and notice taking of us,
and so of his love to us, in that he hears our prayers and helps us. Did we not
pray unto him we should not have that experience, that his eyes are open upon
us, and his ears attentive to our prayers, we should look upon mercies as
proceeding from some other causes, and be more obnoxious to atheistical
principles; whereas the experience of his nighness to us gives us a more full
proof of his care over us, and so of his being, power, goodness, etc.

5. To incite us to a more love and thankfulness to him, as we have more
acquaintance and familiarity with him, and experience of his kindness to us;
and so also to forgive and do good to one another: as knowing that we do often
need and receive forgiveness from him, and manifold benefits and favors upon
our asking; yea, ofttimes above what we either ask or think.

6. To provoke us to more humble and lowly demeanor of our selves before him
and toward one another, while we are always as beggars, acknowledging our own
wants and weaknesses, and insufficiency of our selves, and our dependence for
all good things upon him, and have often experience of the distempers of our
own hearts and occasion of confessing and bewailing them that we might not bear
up our selves as Lords, that need to be beholding to God in nothing.

7. That we might have more proof and experience of the vertuousness of Christ's
Sacrifice and Mediation for us in making our prayers acceptable, and procuring
Grace and blessing for us, and gracious answers to us; for these and the like
reasons God will be sought unto by us; which was the third thing implied in
that phrase.

4. Here is also further implied and signified to us, that of and by our
selves, though we have need to pray to God continually, yet we know not how to
pray as we ought, but are apt to offend and go wrong therein, to vent forth
our passions, or our corrupt and carnal desires and affections, ambition,
pride, revenge, covetousness, distrustfulness, murmurings, or the like, and
therefore need the directions and helpfulness of another, wiser and holier than
our selves, even the Holy Ghost, the breath and Spirit of God, to infuse light
and truth into us, and direct and guide us thereby, and frame our hearts aright
therein, that we may pray acceptably to God by Jesus Christ our Lord, and no^
loose our labor in praying, or procure a curse to our selves in stead of a
blessing.

5. That God has not left us, nor does leave us unto our own wisdom, parts and
abilities to guide us in our prayers, and frame our prayers and desires for us;
nor yet leave us to prescribed forms, and external directions and impositions
of others to supply our weaknesses and inabilities to pray, but gives his holy
Spirit to those that believe in him and obey him, to help them in their prayers
to him, that they may offer up spiritual Sacrifices in him acceptable to God by
Jesus Christ, Act. 5.31, 32. Joh. 7.37, 38. Romans 8.26, 27. 1 Pet. 2.5. which
Holy Spirit being in and with God in Christ and proceeding thence is acquainted
with the mind of God, Romans 8 26, 27. 1 Cor. 2.10. and discovers to the
believer what the mind and will of God is in those things that concern him to
pray for; so far at least as to direct to pray acceptably thereabout to him, he
being a Spirit of wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of Christ, Ephesians.
1.17, 18. and frames the heart according to the mind and will of God in
praying, and begets longing desires and groans that cannot be uttered in them.
So that he that has blessings to bestow on us, and has revealed it to be his
mind that we should seek them of him, and has opened a way for us in and by
his Son for approaching to him, and pouring out our hearts before him, pitying
our ignorances and inabilities, has provided, promised, and faithfully affords
his own holy Spirit in the teachings, operations, and efficacy of it, to
enable us to pray to him in that way, and for those things that he has
prepared for us, and set before us: and for such spiritual Sacrifices or
prayers, Christ is appointed also the High Priest to take away the iniquities
that cleave to them, as there is in them any thing of our ignorance, error, and
mistake, and to make them acceptable to him, 1 Pet. 2.5.

6. That God having done all this for us, and affording such help to us as is
suitable to his holiness, and our needs requires of us, not to neglect this his
Grace, not to worship in the oldness of the Letter, in form and fashion, and
outside only, or in our own wit, parts, and wills, etc. but in Spirit and
truth in all things, watching unto and in prayer, that we pray in and according
to the light and direction that he gives us in the Gospel, asking only such
things, and in such way and manner as the Gospel instructs us; and in such a
frame of Spirit as the Holy Ghost therein begets and nourishes in us in
attending to the Grace of Christ as therein set before us, and keeping that
(which is the ministration of the holy Spirit, the very air as it were in which
it breaths) in our hearts and minds to direct and lead us. They therefore do
evilly that neglect the Gospel and the holy Ghost, as breathing therethrough in
us, and take up other ways and helps in stead thereof, and especially such as
would tie up men to other helps, as forms and impositions of words and frames;
as if God gave not his holy Spirit now to help his servants. And it may be
observed that since the giving of the holy Spirit to those that believe in
Christ, we find no forms of prayer invented, proposed, or imposed by Christ
or his Apostles upon men as there were before he was given so to them, and
received by them. Though in case of the ignorance and insufficiency of the
Ministry (which yet the Bishops ought not to suffer, but provide and put in
such as are sufficient and well qualified according to those rules in 1 Timothy 3.
and Tit. 1) or to prevent men's disorderly prayings that some good and
unexceptionable forms may be prescribed for public Assemblies. I do not
utterly deny that in Matthew. 6.^. upon some such accounts it may seem that
Christ prescribed.

7. That possibly men may, yea, believers also, and too often do, neglect the
help of the Holy Spirit, yea, and may too often neglect prayer it self,
restraining prayer before God, and not pouring out their hearts therein to him;
but seek by other means to defend and keep themselves, against the assaults of
enemies, and that if they do pray, yet they may not pray in the holy Ghost, in
what light and instruction he gives them in and by the Doctrine of Christ, and
in his operations therethrough in their hearts: and so in such faith, love,
charity, humility, resignation of themselves to the will of God, earnestness
and for vencie as becomes them, and as the Grace of God and his Gospel
instructs to; and his holy Spirit therethrough believed and minded, uses to
work in men, and frame their hearts to, but may possibly, as too often they
do, rest in some forms, or if not so, yet pray in their own selfish, ignorant,
carnal spirit, asking those things that suite their wills and humors and
lusts, their own advancement, glory, ease, etc, and not those things that tend
to the glory of Christ and furtherance of his Name, praise and Kingdom in the
world, and in such an evil, selfish; peevish, uncharitable, proud, passionate
distemper of spirit, as the wisdom or will of the flesh begets or produces in
men; and not in such a frame and efficacy as is of Gods spirit, which kind of
praying is displeasing to God, who being a Spirit, will be worshipped by men in
spirit and truth, and cannot accept or like of that that is not of his holy
spirit; and therefore also is unprofitable to men and tends not to build them
up in the most holy faith: whence need for exhorting believers, and for
believers to accept the exhortation, both to pray, and to see that they do it
aright, not in any spiritless, formal way, or in any carnal and unholy Spirit,
but in the holy Ghost.

8. That this praying in the holy Ghost is a good means to edify the believers
in their most most holy Faith, and so for keeping them in the love of God; for
therefore this clause is joined with them, and joined with them in such a
manner of speaking, as clearly denotes and implies it to be a means to them.
For in saying, Building up your selves on your most holy Faith, praying in the
Holy Ghost, he shows, that the building up themselves on their most holy faith
would not go well on, if trusting to their own power and skill, therein they
should neglect Gods help, or neglect to pray and call upon God for it in such a
way as he might accept them, and send them help. Therefore they were to do
that with the former action as a means to it, and then in coupling the counsel
to both those, and that absolutely by a Verb or word of command or counsel,
Keep your selves in the love of God; and mentioning both of those by a
Participle, as having reference to some further end, namely, that expressed in
that following counsel: he implies, that they be both of them means to that
great end; or that such a building themselves on their most holy Faith, as is
exercised with praying in the Holy Ghost, will much conduce to, or is the means
to preserve and keep themselves in the love of God: Which leads us to the next
enquiry, namely,

4. How the praying in the Holy Ghost conduces to the keeping our selves in the
love of God. To which it is to be minded (as was noted above) that the love or
peculiar favor of God, and his blessing, is fixed upon the foundation, or most
holy faith in the first place. It firstly fastens upon, and embraces Christ his
beloved delightful one, who is the great subject of the Gospel Doctrine, and
for his sake it is, upon or with that Doctrine also, as it sets forth and
contains his name, and is the means to glorify him to men, and to draw in men
to him, so as his eye and heart is thereupon as a most holy thing to him, the
slighters of which he will slight and punish with more intolerable judgments
than those upon Sodom and Gomorrah; as in Matthew. 10.15. and those that receive
and embrace, that are embraced and beloved of him, so as to be rewarded with
life everlasting, John 5.24. He that hears my words (which he gave to his
Apostles, and they preached in his name) and believes on him that sent me,
has everlasting life, etc. and Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is baptized
(namely into Christ) shall be saved, etc. Thence it follows that that which
furthers men's being edified and built up on that most holy faith, does also
further their being and abiding in that love and favor of God which he bears
toward those that are thereupon for the sake thereof. And so praying in the
Holy Ghost, conduces to the keeping men in the love of God, as it is a means to
keep them on their most holy Faith: And a means thereto it is, both,

1. As there is no praying in the Holy Ghost, but by and from the most holy
Faith, Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine^ of him taken heed unto, and minded by
men: Praying in the H. Gh. then, argues a being on the most holy Faith, and
exercises men to it, even to the holding to, and minding of it; because the
Holy Spirit is not otherwise to be met with to breath in us, and frame our
hearts to spiritual and right desires and prayers, but on that most holy Faith;
for the Holy Spirit is only that way ministered, namely, By the hearing of
Faith, and not by the works of the Law, much less by any inventions and works
in obedience to other Laws, or in any lawless courses, Gal 33.3. The Holy
Spirit dwells and rests upon Christ, and is sent forth in his name unto men,
Isa. 42.1. and 6^.1. and 11.12. John 14.26. and that to witness to Christ, lead
them to, and unite them with him, John 15.26. and 16.13, 14. 1 Cor. 6.^7. for
he is so dwelling in Christ, as not to be separated from him, and therefore all
that he dwells in, must be one with Christ also; for it is by virtue of Christ,
and in union with him, that he that dwells and rests on Christ, the head dwells
in them as his members also. And it is in the Name and Doctrine of Christ, as
Christ is therein named and set forth, that the Holy Spirit breathes unto and
in men therein, and makes it a Ministration of Spirit, or a means of conveying
the light, power, presence and influence of the Spirit; which is therefore no
further abiding in men, and leading and framing them, than that Word and
Doctrine of Christ in which he is ministered, and Christ as held forth therein,
is received by, and abides in men, and they in them. Whence that in 2 John 9.
Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God
(to wit, by his Holy Spirit in and with them; for so God dwells in Believers,
namely by his Spirit, as in Ephesians. 2.21.) Whosoever abides in the doctrine of
Christ, has both the Father and the Son; namely, in and by the influence and
presence of the Spirit of both in and with them, as well as in other
considerations for them. So then he that prays in the Holy Ghost, being on
the most holy Faith, and so in Christ, in whom and for whose sake God so loves
and favors men, as we have showed, must needs be in the love of God, and the
praying in the Holy Ghost, a means to keep men in the love of God, because it
is a way to keep men in Christ, and a fruit of their keeping in him.

2. Again, it must needs be a means to preserve Believers in the love of God,
as it is a means to obtain further grace from God, for more building up
themselves on their most holy Faith, where the love of God runs, and is
certainly enjoyed; for what men ask of God, believing in Christ, and in the
name of Christ, as the Holy Spirit instructs and moves them, they do surely
receive it of God; as Christ has promised, saying, Whatsoever ye ask the
Father in my name, I will do it, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.
If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it, John 14.13, 14. and again,
If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ask what ye will, it shall be
done to you, John 15.7. and again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever
ye ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. Ask and ye shall receive,
that your joy may be full, John 16.23, 24. And thus the Apostle Paul implies of
the prayers of the faithful, put forth in the Spirit of God, when he speaking
of the Spirit it self making Intercession for us, with groanings which cannot
be uttered, adds, And he that searches the hearts knows (which may signify
also, approves) what is the mind of the Spirit, because he makes Intercession
for us, according to the will of God, Romans 8.26, 27. Now this is one main thing
that the Holy Spirit instructs and leads such as be led by him in their
prayers, to desire and pray for, That they may be more confirmed, rooted and
built up on their most holy Faith, and ^o be preserved in the Grace of Christ,
and love of God; and that such Spiritual mercies and blessings may be extended
to them, as may further them therein. So that the praying in the Holy Ghost, as
it springs from the being on the most holy Faith, or rather from that faith
abiding i^ us, and exercising the heart thereto, wherein the love of God is
certainly enjoyed: So it also obtains of God, through Christ, a further
rootedness, therein, and growing up thereon, and so by consequence, an abiding
in, yea, an increase of this grace and favor of God upon them.

3. Thereby also is obtained of God, through Christ, power and grace to
withstand the assaults of Satan, and deceits of all his Instruments and Engines
employed by him to draw men out of the most holy Faith, and so out from the
grace and love of God toward them; and therefore (as we see before) this
praying with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, is mentioned as the
last piece of the whole Armor commended to us by the Apostle, as of main use
or force to preserve us in the evil day or time of temptation, from being
overcome of Satan, and turned aside from the truth of Christ, and love of God,
Ephesians. 6.18. according to that of David in Psalm. 18.3. I will call upon the
Lord who is worthy to be praised, so shall I be saved from mine enemies: and
the practices and experiences of the servants of God, often mentioned in the
Scriptures, as Psalm. 22.4, 5, 24. and 34.3, 4, 5. for the effectual fervent
prayer of a righteous man avails much with God (the God that has styled
himself, a God hearing prayers) both for himself and others. Let no man
therefore (as also Bernard says) despise prayer; for if it be in faith and in
the Holy Ghost, it is heard and recorded in heaven as soon, as (if not before)
it proceed out of thy mouth here. And one of these two things (says he) we may
assuredly expect, namely, either ^^at God will give us what we we ask, or what
he knows to be better for us, and more profitable than what we ask.

Use. What we have considered about these means of keeping our selves in the
love of God; viz. The building up our selves on the most holy faith, and
praying in the Holy Ghost, might be diversely useful. I shall only hint at some
uses of it.

1. It may reprove and tax the too great sloathfulness and negligence found
with us, and many Believers in every place, in not minding to build up our
selves on our most holy faith; and to that purpose, to exercise our selves to
the mindfulness of that faith, and often speaking one to another, and thinking on
the Name and Doctrine of God, exhorting and furthering the faith of one another
therein, and conformity thereto: There is too much minding other things mean
time in us, the present world, our own names, honors, ease, lusts, wills, etc.
and too great aptness to let those things, as noxious roots spring up and ^hoak
the good seed in us, so as that it brings not forth in us fruit to perfection.
Thence a too great aptness to forsake the assembly of our selves, unto such
purposes as to exhort and edify our selves; a fault reproved, Heb. 10.25. as
also the abuse of such liberties to assemble together to edify our selves,
which is too general or common; when Believers coming together, come not for
the better, and for edification, or do not so improve their assemblings, but
rather for hearing and telling news, if not (which is worse) for contention and
strife, and what tends to destruction: A fault reproved, 1 Cor. 11.17, 18.

2. In not stirring up our selves to call upon God^ and be much in prayer to
him, both in private for our selves and others, and publicly or altogether, as
was practiced by the Apostles and Believers, Acts 1.13, 14. and 2.41 and 6.4.
and 12.5, 12. and 13.2. There is too great an hanging down of the hands every
where among Believers, instead of a diligent lifting up pure hands, in the name
of the Lord, without wrath and doubting, as we are exhorted, 1 Timothy 2 8. a
fault reproved, Isa. 64.7. There is none that calls upon thy name, or that
stirs up himself to take hold on thee; and bewailed by Daniel, Chap 9.13.
All this evil is come upon us (as we may see and say much evil is come upon us)
yet made we not our prayer before the Lord our God, that we might turn from our
iniquities and understand the truth: Too great a fault in restraining prayer
are we guilty of, and that also much hinders our edification and profiting in
the most holy faith, and deprives of much experience of the love of God, and
lays us open to vanity, and many assaults and snares of sin and Satan, to the
procuring wrath and displeasure from God upon us.

3. It may also reprove and fault the formality and faultiness of our prayings
and exercises of our selves in our assemblings together (as praying here may be
put for all exercises of seeking the Lord, as praying and seeking him be put
together, Zech. 8.21 22.) that we pray so much in our own spirits, and so
little in the Holy Spirit; so much with an unholy frame and temper of spirit,
as holding fast iniquity, corruption and deceit, and refusing to return from
it, taking the name of God in vain, or seeking perishing meat to our selves in
our pretensions to follow after Christ; as seeking therein a name and honor, or
followers to our selves, or the coloring over our love of vanity with an
appearance of piety, or thinking to bribe Gods justice and our own consciences,
for our lusts and iniquities, by multiplying prayers and professions, or
praying out of strife, vainglory, hypocrisy, wrath, or the like: which are
not prayings in the Holy Ghost, but far of another nature; such prayings be
often reproved in the Scripture; as Isa. 1.12, 15. Matthew. 6.5 6. James 4 3.

4. It may reprove also those high thoughts and conceits we are apt to have of
our selves, cases, conditions, seize, etc. as if we were rich, and full,
and needed nothing more, either as to the building us up on our most holy
faith, or as to experiments of Gods love and favor to us: which is a great
cause of that sloathfulness in building up our selves, and in praying before
reproved: Laodicea's conceits of her self, was the cause of her lukewarmness,
and not looking out to Christ, and buying gold and white raiment of him: The
full soul loathes the honey comb, a conceit of sufficiency of attainment, or to
attain what is wanting without our own care and diligence, makes us negligent
in seeking to grow, or in looking to God in his Holy Spirit for what may make
us grow and further build us up. High conceits of our selves usually produce
sloathfulness, and sloathfulness casts into a deep sleep, and then the building
may soon decay, and through idleness of the hands, the house may drop through,
as Rev. 3.14, 15, 16. Prove. 19.15. Eccles. 10.18. Again,

5. It reproves the instability in the faith of the Gospel too much, and too
often found amongst the Professors thereof, and an aptness thence to be
building besides the holy faith; which is indeed, with the foolish woman, to
pull down the house instead of building it, Prove. 14.1. And so the itching ear
after new matters of faith, besides, and swarving from the Apostles Doctrine, a
fault prophesied of and reproved in 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. and admonished of in Heb.
13.7, 8, 9. as if we did not judge the Doctrine of Christ most holy, and
therefore seek holiness and perfection some other ways, as Gal. 3.2, 3. Isa.
66.17.

6. It reproves those also that prohibit and hinder the Assemblies and
Exercises of the fearers of God, for building up and furthering themselves and
one another in their most holy faith, forbidding them to meet together, speak
to, Contrary to Psalm. 111.1. and Mal. 3.16, 17.
or exhort one another, and tying them up only to forms of praying, and to hear
their Parish Ministers read Prayers, and preach (it may be, things that tend
not to their helpfulness; they being in many places ignorant, rude and enemies
to the Holy Spirit, and all that is truly spiritual and holy) punishing men for
seeking out for, and using other and better means of edification than they
afford them: imitating therein the Jews and Pharisees, opposers of Christ and
of his Apostles, and the Christians in their private Assemblies; as in Acts 4.
and 5. and 8. and 9. and 17. etc. Such are faulty in so doing.

7. It reproves too such as think there is no profit in praying to God; no gain
in godliness, a vain thing to serve him, and to keep his Ordinances, as in Job
21.15. and 22.17. Mal. 3.14, 15. as if he had said to the house of Isral (and
so to us Gentiles) seek his face in vain. This is an evil and impious thought
in the places above cited, taxed and reproved, and the contrary abundantly
showed in the Scriptures, and proved by the Saints and holy ones of God, that
there is no gain like to that of godliness, which has the promise of this
life, and of that to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. to which purpose is that of Eliphaz in
Job 22.21. Acquaint now thy self with God, and be at peace, so shall good come
unto thee Receive I pray thee the Law from his mouth, and lay up his words
within thee (that is the way to acquaint our selves with him, and be filled with
his Spirit, that we may pray in the Holy Ghost: and then it follows) If thou
return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up, thou shall put away iniquity
(that is, sorrow, pain and evil, as the fruits of iniquity) far from thy
tabernacle. Here Is the way to be built up, the turning to, and so acquainting
our selves with God, in receiving the Law from his mouth, and laying up his
words (the most holy faith) in our hearts: and then the profit that follows
will be great, Then shall thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir (even
the gold tried with fire, which Christ gives to those that wait upon him) as
the stones of the brook: yea, the Almighty shall be thy defense, and thou shall
have plenty (or enough) of silver (what is good for thee here also:) Yea, and
that that is more desirable than silver, which will give content to our hearts,
and make us content too with that portion of outward goods or comforts that he
is pleased to give us here, be it more or less; for, Then shall thou have thy
delight in the Almighty, and shall lift up thy face unto God. Thou shall make
thy prayer to him, and he shall hear thee, and thou shall pay thy vows, etc.

8. It may also reprove those more abundantly, that profess themselves
Believers in, and followers of Christ, and frequent private Meetings of
themselves together, pretendedly to call upon God and edify themselves on
their most holy Faith, but under such pretenses do seditiously and rebelliously
plot mischief against Authorities and Powers over them, because they put them
upon some things cross to their desires, and perhaps in some places do really
discountenance better exercises in which case (if any do so) they ought to
exercise faith and patience, and yet pray for those that hate and persecute
them, and not pray, much less plot against them, fretting themselves to do
evil and practice treason and sedition; that's not the way to edify themselves
or others on the most holy faith, but an exceeding wicked abuse of their
meetings and Liberties, thereto by providence enjoyed, and a mavelous
deviation from the most holy Faith; which condemns all such practices, and
instructs to Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him, till he order the
hearts of Authorities to favor and protect them, or break the yoke some way of
his own gracious finding out from of their necks; and as followers and
imitators of the Lamb to fight only with his weapons, and only against what he
opposes, that is, the pride, tyranny, injustice, profaneness and wickedness of
men, by spiritual weapons: the blood of the Lamb, the word of their testimony,
patient bearing of injuries, not loving their lives unto Death, not being
overcome of evil, to render evil for evil, but to overcome evil with goodness;
this is the way Christ would have us to walk in, in such cases, and not in a
way of rebellion to resist evil, offending Authorities, and putting a sword in
their hands to slay those also that are better principled and minded, and
assemble together to better purposes: Woe to the world because of such
offenses, it cannot be but that offenses come, but woe to that man by whom they
come: the Lord preserve and keep us that we be not of them in any thing, but
that in all our carriages and conversations we may be blameless and harmless,
the children of God in the midst of those amongst whom he sets us, building to
our selves on our most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost.

Use 2. It may exhort and provoke us to take this course to keep our selves in
the love and Grace of God, where we are in it, to build up our selves, as has
been before showed, on our most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost, to which
what has been noted, affords both motive and encouragement.

1 Motive, From the consideration of the end of so building up our selves, and
the fruit and consequents of it:

1. The end is, that we may be habitations for God by his Spirit, for that's the
end as has been noted of Gods building; and therefore the end both of his
having laid such a foundation as the most holy Faith to be built upon, and of
his calling, drawing, and (as it were) laying the Souls of men to and upon it;
and of his bidding us to buil^ up one another, and giving gifts and advantages
to those purposes. It is that we being built up, he might dwell in us by his
holy Spirit, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. and so fill us with his presence, blessing, and
Glory, as he did the Temple of old, a Type hereof; and the more we grow up into
and are built up upon Christ, the more he will inhabit and dwell in and with us
by his Spirit, and afford us his presence.

2. A second and further end is, our being kept in the love of God, under his
special care and protection, for as God said of old of the Temple built up and
dedicated to him, the like will he say of, and perform toward this his
spiritual building; yea, and so much the more and the rather, by how much he
being a Spirit, is more delighted in spiritual things, than in bodily and
carnal, as that old Temple was; whereas his people built upon Christ are a
spiritual house, 1 Pet. 2.5. with John 4.24. and by how much the truth and
substance is beyond the type and figure or shadow. Now he said of that material
Temple in 2 Chronicles. 7.16. Now have I chosen and sanctified this house that my
Name may be there for ever, and mine eyes and my heart shall be there
perpetually: and then,

3. The fruits and consequents hereof must needs be excellent and glorious,
such as may move us to mind this work and business of self edification with
cheerfulness and diligence, as,

1. Gods dwelling and delighting in a people will be their safety and defense,
so as no harm or mischief shall befall them from all that are enemies to them
and seek to harm them; for he is mighty to save, and will surely be as good or
better an inhabitant of his house than other men are or can be of theirs. He
will put forth his power and greatness for the defense of it; thence that in
Isai. 12.6. Cry out and shout thou inhabitant of Sion, for great is the Holy
One in the midst of thee: and that in Zeph. 3.14, 15, 16, 17. Sing, O Daughter
of Sion, shout, O Israel, be glad and rejoice with all thy heart, O Daughter of
Jerusalem, the Lord has taken away thy Judgment, he has cast out thine
enemy. The King of Israel, even the Lord, is in the midst of thee, thou shall
not see evil any more. In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, fear thou
not, and to Zion, let not thine hand be s^ack. The Lord thy God in the midst of
thee is mighty, he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy, etc. It is
true, that those things are spoken of the Church and people of God when they
shall be fully built up and gloriously inhabited of God in the last times, or
in the Kingdom of his Glory; but yet there is a measure of it, a first fruits
now to be met within Gods dwelling by his Spirit in his people built up in a
measure for him; whence the like rejoycings, or gloryings in his presence with
his people now in the days of trial (or rejoycings near of him at least
thereto) in Psalm. 46.1.6. God is our refuge and strength, a very present help
in trouble, therefore will we not fear though the earth be removed, and though
the mountains be carried into the midst of the Seas, though the waves thereof
roar, etc. and then in verse. 4, 5. showing the ground of this fearlesness, he
adds, There is a River the streams whereof make glad the City of God, the holy
place of the Tabernacles of the most High. God is in the midst of her, she
shall not be moved; God shall help her, and that right early: and as a proof of
his helpfulness he adds. The Heathen raged, the Kingdoms were moved, he uttered
his voice, the earth melted. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is
our refuge. Selah. And Psalm. 48.3. God is known in her Palaces for a refuge,
speaking of Gods Church as his City; as Gods people are called in the Scripture
both his House and City, as Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21, 22. His presence in his House
and City is their safety, nothing can harm them, unless their defilements of
his House, or of their Hearts and Societies causing him to abhor and loath
them, as in the Type, Psalm. 78.58, 59, 60, 61, etc.

2. Gods dwelling with and in his people as his house and delighting in them
will afford them all fullness of supply and satisfaction, his House and household
(for they are both Ephesians. 2.19, 20.) shall want nothing good and needful for
them, for their maintenance, upholding, and abundant rejoicing. Whence David
preferred the being in any the lowest place in Gods house, though but at the
threshold, before the most settled dwelling he might have in the most sumptuous
Palaces of the wicked, called by him to signify the flittingness of them) the
Tents of the ungodly; because the Lord God is a Sun and shield, and will give
Grace and Glory, and withhold no good thing from them that walk uprightly with
him. Thence also partly it is, that his City or dwelling place is called upon
so much to rejoice for his presence with it in the places above cited. He makes
a feast in his house, and satisfactions to their desires 9.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 36.8,
9, 10. He will fill his house with all all materials and provisions good for
it, and,

3. He will adorn and beautifi^ his habitation that he loves as well as fill
and satisfy those particular Souls that are therein. He will beautify the
place of his Sanctuary, and make the place of his feet glorious, Isa. 60.13. He
will beautify the meek with his Salvation, because he takes pleasure in them,
Psalm. 149.4. He will have his House and habitation glorious, answerable in some
sort to his own glory and greatness; that it may be said of it as in Jer.
17.12. A glorious high Throne from the beginning is the place of our Sanctuary;
Glorious from the beginning or foundation of it, from Christ who is the the
beginning of the Creation (especially of the new Creation) of God. Rev. 3.14.
It has all its glory and beauty in, and from his beauty and comeliness put upon
it, as it is said in Ezekiel. 16.14.15. and both these last mentioned fruits and
consequents of Gods dwelling in and loving his people, are spoken of Psalm.
132.13, 14. etc. where under the name of Sion it is thus spoken of the Church
of God, The Lord has chosen Sion, He has desired it for his habitation. This
is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it; wherein is
implied both his love of it, and dwelling in it, and then follow the benefits
thereof. I will abundantly bless her provision, I will satisfy her poor with
bread. There Is his bounty and liberality, as the great house keeper in or
amongst them. I will also clothe her Priests with Salvation (with Christ the
Salvation of God and his virtue and efficacy in and with them for saving
others) and her Saints shall shout aloud for joy, there is his adorning her, as
also that which is the result of them all, her exceeding joy and gladness; yea,

4. Honor and Dignity, hence also accrews to them as his house and habitation
beloved by him, ver. 17. There will he make the horn of David to bud, that is,
the Kingdom and power of David, or the Son of David, Christ, as to his power
and Kingdom shall there spring forth, and there shall be a lamp or light for
his Anointed. It is an honor for an house to be the Palace of the Prince, and
to a City to be the City of some great King, this honor have the Saints, by
being Gods house, and City, built up for him, and inhabited by him, whence also
it is called, the City of God, the new Jerusalem, as well as the house and
Temple of God, holy and honorable by its relation to him, and his presence in
it; such the motives to this building up our selves on our most holy faith and
to that purpose praying to God to help us therein.

2. The encouragements to and in it are diverse. But I shall take notice
especially of these in the Text, viz.

1. That it is the holy, yea, the most holy faith, that we are called to and
built upon. Its a right and good foundation, so strong and steady that nothing
can remove it; and therefore what is thereon built cannot be overthrown by any
force or violence that may come against it, that's one encouragement in building
to build on and go on in it with courage and cheerfulness when we know the
foundation is so well laid, so strong and steady that it cannot be moved, and
that it will keep up the building from falling, if well laid upon it, and
cemented to it; as it is a great discouragement, and may weaken the hands to
suspect the foundation not good and firm; but here is no cause to doubt of that,
The foundation of God stands firm, having this Seal, the Lord knows them that
are his, etc. 2 Timothy 2.19. we may go on boldly to believe on him, and to
exercise faith, and encourage our hearts in hope from the consideration of him:
For he that believes and hops in him shall not be ashamed, because he is a
precious cornerstone, a sure foundation, Isa. 28.16. His person is so great
and honorable, none may compare with him; we cannot doubt his power and
ability to save us, his graciousness with his Father in all his addresses to
him on our behalf to him, because he is his only begotten Son; yea, and because
he being such an one has perfectly obeyed him and offered up himself in
Sacrifice to him through the eternal Spirit, wherein he has so pleased God his
Father, made such an atonement for our sins, obtained such a Redemption, such
forgiveness of sins, is so powerful an High Priest in the virtues of it with
God for us, and is so faithful and so merciful to us, and what he has in
obeying his Father for us, and minding our interest to the Death, the Death of
the Cross, is so full of virtue and he is so full of blessing upon the account
thereof, and so able and alsufficient to confer it upon us, to the saving us
from all evil and satisfying us with all good: that there is great, yea, most
perfect reason and ground for us to look too, and close with him, believe in
him, come to and rest upon him, and so to go on, listening to and obeying him,
and holding fast the profession of our Faith concerning him. There cannot be a
better, surer, and fuller foundation for us to build on, no Rock like him our
God; none so able to save us, none beside him provided for us, and given to us.

2. Yea, He is not only the most sure foundation, so perfect as nothing can be
added to him to make him more sure and firm, and so to add firmness to us from
him, but also the most holy, most consecrated, divine, acceptable to God, known
and approved, and beloved of God; so holy, as that he, by and through the
knowledge of himself in this Doctrine that sets him forth is most meet and fit
to infuse holiness into us, and devote us to God, and make us to be owned and
approved of, also by him, and to be delighted in, and inhabited of him. We have
all the encouragement therefore here to build, that a foundation can possibly
give us, we cannot have a surer, stronger, more blessed ground than this is;
therefore build we up our selves here on your most holy faith.

3. Yea, this also is a great encouragement to us that we have nothing to do
but to build up our selves on it; we have not the foundation to lay, a ransom
for our Souls, and Sacrifice to make atonement for our sins to get, or seek
for, for our selves, a Savior to provide or procure it for us, no^ all things
of that nature are done to our hands. The dinner is prepared, the oxen and
fatlings are slain, and all things are ready for our entertainment and
nourishment, the ransom is found out and given and accepted, the Lamb for a
burnt offering provided and offered up in sacrifice and accepted, peace is
made, righteousness is wrought, and Redemption; even eternal Redemption is
obtained for us; yea, all things pertaining to life and Godliness made ready,
and provided for us, ready to be given us; we have a Savior, and that a mighty
and merciful one, appointed and anointed for us, perfectly furnished with all
things that may render him every way able and sufficient to save us to the
utmost, able and furnished with the fullness of the Spirit of wisdom and
understanding to teach us and show us the way to life. Yea, he is so become a
quickening Spirit, as that he is able in calling us to him, to inliven and
quicken us from the dead and make us hear his voice, perceive the truth and
goodness of his instructions, and close with him and his grace, able and
authorized as the great High Priest over the House of God, and furnished with
the Spirit of power and might (all the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him
bodily) to subdue all our enemies, and save us and confer upon us the blessings
he obtains for us; yea, to keep off dangers and mischiefs from us, support us
under trials and sufferings, raise us out of troubles and death, both bodily
and spiritually, and advance us to glory and happiness. None of these things
have we to do or prepare for our selves. The foundation, a sure and firm
foundation is laid for ^ to our hands: no, nor yet have we it put upon ^ to
bring our selves to and lay our selves upon that foundation, that also is Gods
work to make us in Christ Jesus; and tha^ he has done, inasmuch as he has
brought us to know and believe in him, through his Gospel preached to us, and
by his Spirit effectually, in some measure, wo^king in and upon us, but only
to build up our selves on that foundation on which he has, in some measure
laid us. Yea, and also,

4. This we have to encourage us therein, that he has not only, in and
through the most holy says, given us some furniture of gifts, understanding,
etc. for the edifying our selves and one another thereon; but also stands ready
in and through his blessed Son, further to assist, direct and help us, and to
carry on the building in, and for us, by his own grace and power supplied to
us: Which we may also have and receive from him according to our needs, upon
seeking it of him, and calling upon him by prayer and supplication for it,
according as our Lord has said, Ask, and ye shall receive, seek, and ye shall
find; knock, and it shall be opened to you: for every one that asks,
receives; and he that seeks finds; and to him that knocks, it shall be
opened, Matthew. 7.7, 8. And if ye that are evil, know how to give good gifts to
your children, how much more will your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to
them that ask him, Luke 11.13.

5. Yea, and whereas we are foolish and brutish in, and of our selves, and not
only want ability to build up our selves of our selves, but also skill to pray
unto God for his help and holy Spirit as we ought: he to help us there also, in
and through the foundation we are upon, even the most holy faith, gives us the
Holy Ghost to help our infirmities, and teach us how ^o pray, yea, and to make
Intercessions in and for us, according to the will of God, with sighs and
groans that cannot be uttered, Romans 8.26, 27. So that as we have him in his
gifts, and operations, and virtues in us, to enable us to build up our selves
on our most holy faith: so we have him also to help us to look unto and call
upon God for further Dispensations of him, and his assistance and help by him,
for building up our selves thereon, and for blessing, strengthening and
confirming what we build. So that what remains, but that we up and be doing,
building up our selves on our most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, and
to keep our selves in the love of God.

To which the Apostle adds in the next place,

The manner how we are to do all this, or the posture we are therein to stand
in; and that is, waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal
life: In a waiting posture for further mercy, even the mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ unto Eternal life. Where we have, 1. The Posture it self, Waiting. 2.
The Object to be waited for, Mercy: Which is further declared what it is by, 1.
The Author of it, or Fountain of it, whose, and whence it is; viz. The mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. The Tendency, issue and end of it, Unto Eternal life.



1. In that it is said, Waiting, it is implied and signified,

1. That Believers so edifying themselves on their most holy faith, praying in
the Holy Ghost, may and should hope and look for the further grace, mercy and
helpfulness of Christ, and God in Christ: for waiting for a thing, implies
hoping for it, as Romans 8.24, 25. If we hope for what we see not, then do we
with patience wait for it. Believers are under the hope of good; for Good is
always the object of hope; and waiting, something that the soul looks upon as
good for it, and it is real good that the soul is instructed of God, to look
after and wait for. Now hoping also implies,

1. That what the soul waits for, is not yet accomplished. The soul has not an
enjoyment of all that is good for it, though it be in the love of God, the
fountain of all good and mercy, yet it has not an actual enjoyment or
possession of all the good that flows forth from that fountain. Hope is of
things future, not yet seen or enjoyed; for that that is seen is not hope, for
what a man sees, why does he yet hope for, Romans 8 15. The Believer, though in
the love of God, and his favor, yet is not fully built up, as we see before,
and therefore is not possessed all that he is building up for, or that is
intended to him when built up. We are saved now by hope, not by actual sight
and enjoyment. The hope of further good, is that that bears up the soul
against, and under the sight and feeling of present evils. The condition of the
Believer here, is not to be above or beyond hope, but to be in hope; a lively
or living hope, by or through the Resurrection of Christ, as 1 Pet. 1.3. not a
dead, empty hope, that puts no activity into the soul. Hope is the anchor of
the soul, that enters into the Mercy-seat and Glory within the vail, that stays
the soul now up from sinking under any discouragements in the building time,
from enemies within or without that oppose and threaten it, or from any trials
or pressures that may lie upon it.

2. It implies an apprehension of some good ground of the expectation of the
good that it yet has not, but waits for, and so it believes that good will
come to it that it yet has not: And indeed, the most holy faith affords it
good ground for such an expectation of good; for faith is the evidence of
things not seen, and the ground of things hoped for, Hebr. 11.1. Therefore
being on that ground, it must needs see reason and cause to hope: For therein
is discovered and declared,

1. That God so loved and pitied them, while in and of the world, as that he
sent his only begotten Son, and delivered him up to death for us all, even
while ungodly, sinners and enemies against him, to the end that believing in
him, they should not perish, but have everlasting life, Job. 3.16.17. And if he
spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with
him freely give us all things, Romans 8.32. Having when we were enemies,
reconciled us to himself by the death of his Son, how much more shall we be
saved by his life, Chap. 5.10.

2. That Jesus Christ, according to the will of God his Father, has actually
come forth and been manifested in a body of flesh, and dyed for our sins,
suffering the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being made a
curse that he might redeem us from the curse of the Law, and from under the
obligation too of seeking righteousness by the Law, and so of living or dying
according as we fulfilled or fell short of that, that so we might receive the
adoption of children, that we might be taken into Gods house, and into more
near relation to him, and be provided for of all things good for us freely by
him. And he that dyed for us to these ends, to take away those evils that
hindered and stopped up the passages of all good, is risen again as a person that
has done and completed his work he undertook to do by dying, has paid our
debts, satisfied for our sins, and is therefore acquitted and justified of God,
and raised up again to prosecute and pursue our good further in the power of
God; and this, that our hope might be in God, as in 1 Pet. 1.21. Now seeing
that he in Christ's death has removed what might hinder, on his part, good from
us, and has raised up him that had such love to us as to die for us, to remove
what might hinder our good, on our parts and to be the Author of good to us;
the soul sees good ground thence of lively hope, and is begotten to a lively
hope of a glorious inheritance by the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, 1
Pet. 1.3. wherein it was made manifest that Christ has abolished the death,
and obtained life and righteousness for us: Especially, since,

3. That Jesus Christ that dyed for us, and rose again, is now on the right
hand of God, Angels, and Thrones, and Principalities being made subject to him,
so as he has supreme power over all things for our good; yea, and also lives
ever to make request or intercession with God for us, even for such as come to
God by him: And that in the virtues of his most perfect and acceptable
Sacrifice, that prevails and prospers for whatsoever he asks: As also, he
shall come again in the power and glory of God, to raise and judge all, and
give eternal life and an everlasting Kingdom to all that obey him, 1 Pet. 3.21.
Rom 8.34. Heb. 5.9. and 7.25. Matthew. 25.31.36. Heb. 9.28.

4. That God of his great mercy, and in his goodness, has called the now
Believer to the faith of his Son, and brought him, in some measure, to know and
believe on him, and so has taken him into his house and family, to live upon
his Son and his Grace in him: Has delivered him from the power of darkness,
and translated him into the kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1.12, 13. in whom
there is the redemption forementioned, and such fullness and sufficiency to save
him, and to perfect what concerns him, and has already so loved as to suffer
for him, while a sinner and enemy (as before.) And faithful is he that has
called, to do what yet is needful further to be done, for and in us, 1 Thessalonians.
4.23, 24. we being through his death reconciled, how much more by his life
shall we be saved, Romans 5.10. being brought upon that foundation that is most
holy, and that is laid strong and sure for the upholding and sanctifying to God
all that is built upon it, how shall he not for that foundation sake, and by
it, confer upon us his further grace and blessing, to prepare and fit us for
his inhabiting us, and filling us with glory. Seeing also,

5. That God now by virtue of this foundation, or holy faith, loves the
Believer, owning him as his, embraces him as his son, and is become a Father to
him; and if God justifies, who is he that shall charge or condemn? If God be
for us, who is he that it against us? That is considerable in comparison of
him, Romans 8.31 38. To which add,

6. That he has made many gracious and precious promises, in Christ, to the
believer in him, abiding on that foundation, and building up himself thereon
and praying to him in the Holy Ghost; yea, promises for his administering grace
to him for his abiding, strengthening and building up; as that he will be with
them, and bless them, never leave them nor forsake them: that he will be their
God, and they shall be his people: He will be a Father to them, and they shall
be his sons and daughters; yea, godliness has the promise of this life and that
that is to come: for the performance whereof, both Christ's Mediation with his
Father, and the faithfulness of God are engaged, both by his word and oath (in
which two it is impossible for him to lie) in and through Christ are
interested; and faithful is he that has promised, who also will do it, 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. Heb. 10.23. And Christ the great Apostle and High Priest of our
Profession, is faithful in the performance of his undertaking for us also,
Hebr. 9.15. and 3.1, 2. But besides that, hoping.

2. This waiting implies further, a tarrying for the good hoped for, a patient
abiding and staying in the way to the enjoyment of what it expects: In which
also two things are contained,

1. That God does exercise the believer under a want, and with a delay of what
mercy and good he has provided for him, and promised to him. He does not
presently possess the soul of all the good he intends it, nor presently perform
all that he has promised. Though he gives what ever he sees good and meet for
its present case, according to that method in which his wisdom has ordered to
lead it, yet the great things he has prepared for it he does not presently
confer. The vision (the mercy discovered and promised in the Gospel) is for an
appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie or fail, though it
tarry, wait for it (says Hab. 2.3.) because it will surely come, (viz. at the
appointed time, beyond which) it will not tarry; but its for an appointed time,
till which it will tarry and not come, or be accomplished. And this God does,

1. To try and exercise the Believers faith to see and prove whether he does
believe in him or not; and to draw his faith out into exercise, while it
grapples with delays, and non appearances to sense and reason, that so it will
be, as is said to it. So the word of the Lord tried Joseph, while it was not of
a good time performed to him; yea, while it seemed improbable to the eye of
flesh and blood or carnal reason that ever it should be performed, Psalm.
105.19. So God exercised and tried Abraham's faith concerning a child, making
him wait 25 years after his coming into Canaan, before he performed the promise
thereof to him; and so he tried David, as pertaining to the Kingdom, etc. for
that's an evidence of the Souls believing God and trusting in him, when it yet
holds fast its confidence, though he seems to forget his word, and makes no
haste to perform it to it.

2. To try and exercise the love of the Creature to God, and to the mercy
promised, whether it will yet wait upon him, and stay for his promise or
embrace some other more present enjoyment that is more at hand and in its power
to attain; it men love not God, nor the mercy promised at some high rate; they
will let it go, and not stay or tarry for it, they will with Demas embrace this
present world; but if they love him and his mercy, they will wait and tarry for
it, how ever long it be that he delay it, as Jacob that loved Rachel, was
willing to wait and tarry for her seven years, rather than not enjoy her, and
counted it but a small time for the love he had to her, Genesis 29.20.

3. To draw out the desire and affection of the Soul more after him and his
mercy that it might long for it, and pray and be earnest with God for it, that
so it might not come before it be heartily welcome and acceptable to the Soul,
that so also the Soul may be more thankful for mercy, and better prizes^ use it
when it comes; what men come easily and suddenly by they often as little value
or regard, but what they long for and earnestly desire and seek after, and yet
do not presently find, that they more prize when they do obtain: Abraham and
Sarah being long delayed before they obtained a child; when at length God gave
one to them, they called him Isaac, because of the joy and laughter that then
they had in him, Genesis 21.6. And Hannah having obtained a Son after long seeking
and waiting, dedicated him to God in thankfulness to him, 1 Samuel 1. and 2.

4. To humble and meeken them in their hearts and spirits, that so they might
not lift up themselves in the mercy enjoyed, as if they had it, either by
themselves, or for some worthiness in themselves; but know that they receive it
of the Grace of God in his time and at his pleasure, that so he might therein,
and therefore be glorified. Should God give men favors and mercies so soon as
they desire them, they might be apt to be lifted up in and for them, as if
their worthiness was such, that God gave them with respect thereto; or as if
their desires did fetch them down, and so after a sort by their power they had
obtained them, but when God withholds his mercies for some time, he gives his
people in that time to see and prove the many weaknesses of their endeavors,
and the many distempers and frowardnesses in their hearts, the murmurings and
faintings that they are apt to fall into, and how soon they are apt to tire and
be weary, if God did not in mercy pardon and quicken them, by which means they
prove that it is not for their own worthiness that they are at last supplied
and satisfied, but out of the great goodness of God toward them. Or also that
it is not by the power of their endeavors or desires, but by the power and good
will of God that they are saved. Thus Moses tells Israel from God that he had
led them forty years in the wilderness to humble them and prove them, that he
might do them good in the later end, that they might not attribute the Lords
giving them the good land to their worthiness, but to his goodness, Deuteronomy.
8.2.3.16. and in Chapter 9. minds them of their many failings and great
iniquities committed by them in that time of trial, that so they might not say
when brought into the Land of Canaan, that for their righteousness he had
brought them into that Land. Yea, he goes over it twice or thrice, that not
for their righteousness, or the uprightness of their hearts they did go in to
possess that Land, but for the wickedness of that people God drove them out,
and to perform his words sworn to their Fathers, etc. which he demonstrates
from the many proofs of their stubborness which they had given in that time of
exercise and trial ordered to them, Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5, 6, 7, etc.

5. In a word, God does thus to prepare his people for mercies, and make them
more meet and fit for the enjoyment of them, and more thankful for them while
they see they are at his pleasure, and in fittest time bestowed on them, that
patience having its perfect work in them, they might be entire, wanting no good
thing, James 1.3, 4. for,

2. There is also in this tarrying a patient bearing that delay, or deferring
of comforts, and a still retaining their confidence that they shall be granted,
and a keeping the way in which they are directed to expect them; even as he
that waits for a man, both goes to the place in which he has promised to meet
with him, and in the time of his not coming stays there for him till he come:
not turning and going again though at his first coming and for some time after
he there finds him not; yea, and though he sustain some troubles by so staying.
He that believes makes not haste, Isa. 25.16. He casts not away his confidence
as they that draw back to perdition, but exercises patience till he have done
the will of God therein; and so through faith and patience inherits the
promises, Heb. 6.12. with 10.35, 36, 37, 38. and both those things are joined
together in the Lamentations as answering to waiting for the Lord, Lam. 3.25,
26. for having said, ver. 25. The Lord is good to the man that waits for him
to the Soul that seeks him, it follows by way of inference, It is good for a
man both to hope, and quietly to wait (or tarry) for Gods Salvation, v. 26.
yea, in waiting is further implied,

3. An earnest desire and seeking after the mercy and salvation of God, as from
that ^ference now mentioned as the consequent from the assertion of Gods
goodness to the soul that seeks him is implied. And indeed the heart cannot
tarry and wait in hope and expectation of any thing that it has no desire to
enjoy or see. However the outward man might be forced and constrainedly made to
stay in a place till such a thing come, yet the heart is gone from it in case
it has no desire after it. An earnest desire then for, and a seeking after
this mercy and Grace of God is here also commended to us in this waiting
posture exhorted to, that our affections should be after and upon that eternal
life in Christ, and that mercy of Christ that is needful to bring us thereunto:
and so that we be not slothful nor take up content and satisfaction in what is
already attained, as if we had enough and needed no more, Laodicea-like: but
with our Souls be desiring after God, and with our very spirits longing for him
till he satisfy our souls with his goodness, as was David's posture of waiting
for God expressed, Psalm. 130.5, 6. I wait for the Lord yea, my Soul does wait,
and in his word do I hope. My Soul waits for the Lord more than they that
watch for the morning, I say, more than they that watch for the morning; a
waiting in which is also a watching for what is waited for; yea, a most
diligent and desirous watching, such as that is of those that being benighted
and bewildred for want of light, do long for the morning light. And indeed such
a waiting for Gods mercy becomes those that are building up themselves on their
most holy faith, and praying in the holy Ghost: for men may pray formally, or
put their life and Religion in saying over prayers, and yet have their hearts
dead and void of any living desires of Gods presence and favor; but the
praying in the Holy Ghost cannot stand without it, as may appear in what we
have said thereabout; yea, this waiting may have in it further:

4. A waiting upon God in Christ as well as a waiting for him, or for something
from him; a patient attending to him and following after him whithersoever he
goes, and to be ordered and directed by him in what ever he requires; as Psalm.
123.1, 2. Unto thee lift I up my eyes, O thou that dwell in the Heavens.
Behold, as the eyes of servants are upon the hands of their Masters, and the
eye of the maiden unto the hand of her Mistress, (namely, to be at their
appointment, and see and mind which way they direct them to run, as well as to
mind what they will give them) so our eyes wait (or are) upon the Lord our God
till he have mercy upon us: in such a sense as that phrase in Prove. 27.18. He
that waits upon his Master shall be honored. He that attends upon him to
know his pleasure and to do him service; and this may be included also in this
waiting for his mercy, and in that seeking is therein implied, though the other
things seem to be more properly and directly signified.

2. Now the Object to be waited for, is expressed to be the Mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ unto Eternal life. Eternal life is the end but necessary thereto,
as the way to bring us to it is the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Mercy. But not any or every kind of mercy: There are the tender mercies of the
wicked that are cruel, Prove. 12.10. and there is the mercy or kindness of men
that are not wicked, but the best of men are but servants to this Lord whose
mercy is to be expected. It is the mercy of the Lord whose mercy will reach to
more profit than those of a servant; but yet its not the mercy of every Lord
neither, but of him who is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, the Lord Jesus
Christ, the anointed Savior, the only begotten Son of God, whom he sent into
the world for us, made of a woman, made under the Law, that he might redeem us
who were under the Law, that we by the faith of him might receive the adoption
of Sons; who being anointed with the Holy Ghost and power went about doing
good, and obeyed his Father to the death, the death of the Cross; and therefore
is again highly exalted, and has a Name (an Authority and power) given him far
above every Name (or power) that at his Name every knee should bow both of
things in Heaven and things in Earth, etc. and that every tongue should confess
that he is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father, Philip. 2.10, 11. The Lord of
all, Act. 10 36. The Lord of men, even of the dead and of the living, by virtue
of his Death, Resurrection, and living again, Romans 14.9. and the Lord of
Angels; for Angels and Principallities are made subject to him, 1 Pet. 3.22.
the Lord of Life and Glory, Act. 3.15. 1 Cor. 2.8. as having the Sovereign
Power in and with his Father, to quicken and give life to whom, and as he
pleases, John 5.20, 21, 22. being upon the right hand of Majesty in the
Highest, filled with all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. the
fullness, the immeasurable fullness of the Holy Ghost being, resting, and
dwelling upon him, and so anointing him and furnishing him with power and
sufficiency of wisdom, understanding, counsel, strength, etc. for the managing
the Government and Kingdom of God over men, and over all Creatures, so as in a
way of saving mankind from sin, death, devil, and destruction, being the
Savior of all men (able, willing, and ready to save all of them upon
submission to him; yea, and actually so saving them from manifold evils both
within and without, so that they are engaged to, and might submit to him;) but
especially the Savior of them that believe. It is the mercy of this great Lord
and our Savior Jesus Christ, who being one with the Father, and glorified with
the Fathers own self, upon the account of his obedience to his Father, and love
to and sufferings for us men, is often joined with the Father in the Object of
the Apostles prayers for and so in the dispensations of Grace and Mercy unto
men, as may be seen in the Salutations of the Churches in their Epistles to
them. Grace be to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ,
Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2. Gal. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.2. Philip. 1.2. Coll. 1.2.
1 These. 1.1. 2 These. 1.2. Philem. 1.3. or Grace, mercy, and peace from God our
Father and Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Timothy 1.2. or, Christ Jesus our Lord, 2 Timothy
1.2. or, the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior, Tit. 1.4. and surely his mercy must
needs be of exceeding great concernement unto us above all things; for it is
the mercy of God, so as that where he has and exercises mercy, God also, even
the Father exercises mercy in and by him. And where he shows not mercy, neither
does God the Father show mercy; nor can the pity and mercy of men, be they
never so great or mighty or many, advantage a man, any thing in comparison
hereof; the Sovereign power of life and death, yea, of everlasting life or
death being in and with him. So that whom he saves and blesses, they are and
shall be saved and blessed; and whom he destroys or rejects from his mercy they
shall perish everlastingly, for his judgment is true and righteous and takes
place and stands fast for ever. His Mercy therefore is worthy the waiting for,
and most earnestly to be sought after, as without which there is no salvation
or happiness injoyable by us, and as that which is the fountain and wellspring
of all blessing and happiness. But here let us view,

1. What is meant by this Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. What that phrase or term of Mercy to be waited for, signifies and hints to
us.

1. To the first. Mercy is either an affect in the heart, or,

An effect in its work: to take in both of them.

Mercy is properly an affection or frame of heart, in which it pities and
compassionates another misery and affliction, leading to spare one where there
is power to harm him, and to succor him in necessities and indigencies, where
there is power to help him.

And this is attributed to God and Christ that he is merciful and full of
compassion, ready to forgive offenses and relieve in wants and miseries, and do
what is good for the Creatures deliverance from evils, and conferring safety
and happiness, as may be abundantly seen in the Scriptures, Psalm. 103.8. The
Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy. Yea, this
his Name, The Lord, Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, abundant
in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, etc. Exodus 34.6, 7. And so
it is said of Christ, that he is a merciful and faithful High Priest, in Hebr.
2.16, 17. And indeed God and Christ have abundantly manifested their merciful
heart toward poor sinful afflicted Creatures many ways. As,

1. God has manifested himself merciful:

1. In taking pity on mankind when fallen from him into a state of exceeding
great sin and misery, in that he did not then cast him off and destroy him: but
on the contrary devised a way and means for his redemption and recovery; yea,
such a way of recovery as the translating our sin and misery upon his own only
begotten Son, appointing and in due time sending him forth into the world to be
the propitiation for our sins, bearing them on his own body on the tree, that
through his stripes we might be healed, both abasing him thereto, and exalting
him to the height of Glory and Majesty, therethrough at his own right hand,
that he might by the virtues of the former, and in the exercise of the latter
upon that account bring us back again to God. Herein he has showed himself
loving and merciful to us beyond all question or expression; as it is said,
Through the tender mercy of our God, the day spring (Christ the bright and the
Morning Star) from on high has visited us, etc. Luke 1.78.

2. God has also manifested himself merciful to us in freely justifying us
(mankind) by his Grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, not
imputing to the world their trespasses, but preaching peace to us by him, and
through his blood, and opening his Kingdom for us and to us, with gracious
calls and counsels and invitations to enter thereinto, and be made partakers of
the blessed privileges thereof unto everlasting life, and in freely admitting
and accepting all that obey his calls and counsels therein, however otherwise
and formerly sinful and unworthy, as may be seen in Mary Magdalene, the
Publicans, harlots, and prodigals whom upon their coming to him, he has freely
pardoned and accepted and made partakers of his righteousness and blessing, as
if they never had been so vile and wretched, Romans 3.23, 24. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20,
21. Ephesians. 2.15, 17. Mat. 22.4, 8, 9. and 9.12 13, Luke 7.37, 47. and 15.1, 2, 15
16, etc. 1 Cor. 6, 9, 10, 11.

3. God has showed himself merciful to us Gentiles and Heathens, in calling us
so wonderfully to the knowledge of his Son, and of his Grace in him, when as
formerly we were so gross and grievous sinners against all former dispensations
of his goodness and manifestations of himself in his works and providence. It
was his great mercy through the blood of his Son to make peace and atonement
for us, blotting out all former trespasses and admitting us to fellowship with
the Saints, and so with himself through Christ Jesus, as Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 11, 12,
17, 19, 20. as it is said, that the Gentiles might glorify God for his Mercy,
Romans 15 9. and who had not in times past obtained mercy, but now have obtained
mercy, 1 Pet. 2.10. whence, I beseech you by the Mercies of God, offer up your
body a living Sacrifice, etc. Romans 12.1. and the like he will show forth to the
Jews in calling them again, and receiving them to favor after all their
unbelief and stubbornesses against him, as it is said, He has shut them all up
in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon them all, Romans 11.32.

4. God has and does daily show himself merciful unto men, in passing by
iniquities, and extending helpfulness to them in their afflictions, which they
procure to themselves by their great follies and rebellions, as is also
frequently testified in the Scriptures, as in Psalm. 78.38. when Israel often and
much ^^oked him in the wilderness, so as he therefore (...) them sometimes with
his Judgments, yet (...) ^eing full of compassion forgave their iniquity (...)
^estroyed them not; yea, many a time he turned his anger away, and did not stir
up all his wrath, So in Neh. 9.16, 17, 18, 19.

5. So also in his patience toward sinners, not willing they should perish,
but rather come to repentance and be saved, 2 Pet. 3.9.15. Rom 2.4.5. 1 Timothy
2.5. and to say no more.

6. His readiness to hear the cries and prayers of the poor and afflicted, and
not to despise their prayers, but to hear and help them, as in Psalm. 22.24,
yea, to hear the cries of other Creatures, as the young Ravens, and provide
food for all flesh, Psalm. 136.25. and 147.9. much more does he fulfill the
desires of them that fear him; yea, he also hears their cries and saves them,
Psalm. 145.15, 17, 18.

2. So also Christ has abundantly showed forth his mercy toward us:

1. In that being in the form of God, not thinking it robbery to be equal with
God, yet for our sakes, at the will and appointment of the Father, he abased
himself, laid aside his Glory, humbled himself to the Death, the Death of the
Cross, and therein bare our sins in his own body on the tree, and was made a
curse for us to redeem us from sin and curse, that so he might in the virtues
of his sufferings and Sacrifice bring us back again to God. Ye know (says the
Apostle 2 Cor. 8.9.) the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ that he being rich
became poor, that we through his poverty might be made rich. He is merciful,
full of compassion, and gracious, Psalm. 145.8.

2. In pitying poor miserable men in his personal converse with them and
ministration to them, while on the earth; Going about and doing good, and
healing all that were oppressed of the Devil, curing their sicknesses and
Diseases, instructing their Souls in pity to them where ignorant and out of the
way, Mark. 8.2. Act. 10.38. As also,

3. In preaching peace by his Spirit in the Apostles, and by their ministration
both to the Jews that were near, notwithstanding their rebellious and great
despites against him; and to the Gentiles, though so great sinners when far
off, after his ascension, having made peace by the blood of his Cross for them,
Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16, 17. Heb. 5.1, 2 3. forgiving great sinners, as Paul, etc.
And indeed the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to be waited for by believers, is
not simply an affection of mercy in him toward us, but his evidencing and
demonstrating that his affection of mercy in the acts and exercises of it, but
not in giving himself a ransom for us, and dying for us for that is past, and
to be believed by us, as a thing done and accomplished already and as the
bottom, ground and foundation of all expectation of further mercy, nor will he
die any more; but it is for some acts or exercises of mercy for the future in
the exercises of those glorious Offices which his Father has designed him to
at and from his right hand: as to say,

1. His passing by and pardoning our sins for his Names sake, hiding, covering,
and keeping them, as it were from the eye of God; so as that he mark them not
against us, to judge and punish us according to them; as it is said, If thou,
Lord, should mark iniquity who should stand, but there is forgiveness with
thee, etc. Psalm. 130.4. which ver. 6.7. is called Mercy. And who is a God like
unto thee, that pardons iniquity and passes by the transgressions of the
remnant of his heritage; he retains not his anger for ever, because he
delights in mercy, Mic. 7.18. And sure this is one main thing, in which he is
evidenced to be a merciful High Priest, in that he makes reconciliation for
the sins of the people, and is the standing propitiation for our sins, that we
might receive forgiveness of them, Heb. 2.17. with 1 John 2.2. So Paul obtained
mercy, that is, the forgiveness of his sins, 1 Timothy 1.13, 16. that is mercy.

2. His sympathizing with us, and succouring us in temptations, afflictions,
and sufferings, as is also asserted, Heb. 2.18. and 4.15, 16. In that he
suffered being tempted, he is able (fit and meet) to succor those also that
are tempted. For we have not such an High Priest as cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted even as we, yet
without sin. Let us therefore go boldly to the Throne of Grace that we may
obtain (or take as it were at his hands) mercy, and find Grace to help us in a
time of need. Whereas it is evident that mercy signifies something transient,
(or passing) from Christ to men, and not only a thing abiding in the heart of
Christ, so what should that be there but the fruits of his sympathizing with us
in our infirmities and temptations obtained for us by his intercession for us,
as our High Priest; namely, succor in our needs, support in our sorrows and
sufferings, and seasonable issues out of them? even as the relieving the poor
and afflicted in their poverty and straits, is called the showing mercy to the
poor, Psalm. 109.12, 16. Prove. 14 21, 31. and Gods sparing Lots life and
helping or hasting him out of Sodom, Genesis 19.16. to that purpose was an
evidence of his being merciful to him.

3. His bestowing any benefit, favor, or blessing upon us, may be called his
showing us mercy, and the said benefit or blessing bestowed may be called his
mercy; as all the good God did to and bestowed on David is called his showing
him great mercy or kindness, 1 King. 3.6. and in that sense he is said, to
satisfy, as well as to save with his mercy, and to crown with loving kindness
and tender mercies, Psalm. 90.19. and 103.4. and the earth is said to be full of
the mercy of the Lord, Psalm. 119.64. and so the Lord Jesus himself and all the
benefits and blessings in him are called, the sure mercies of David, Isa. 55.3.
with Act. 13.34. and in that sense all the kindness, favor, and blessing
dispensed to us by Jesus Christ both for sanctifying and saving the Soul, and
for supplying the outward man may be called his Mercy, and may well be
understood to be comprised and signified in this expression, The Mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ, in as much as it is all the fruit and effect of his mercy
and pity toward us, and has in it an abundant relief of our miseries: Yea,
and,

4. His glorious coming again to raise the Believer out of the dust, and to put
an end to all the sorrows, sufferings, and abasement of his poor Church and
people, may well be called the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, because an act
of his mercy toward them, in pitying their miseries and sufferings, and fully
redeeming them out of them all into the enjoyment of the Glory prepared for
them. Which also may the rather be understood to be principally and ultimately
here meant, because the following words (unto eternal life) will best agree
with it as the immediate issue and consequent thereof: for that properly may be
called the mercy of our Lord Jesus unto eternal life, which is an act of his
mercy, freeing them from all that keeps them out of eternal life, and brings
them to the actual and perfect enjoyment of eternal life; though the exercise
of his Mercy in all the three former, as necessary to the fitting them for
eternal life, and keeping them, to it may also be very well included, as that
which the Believer is also to wait for, but principally his coming again, and
the mercy thereof, as the furthest and main of all; called therefore the
blessed hope, Tit. 2.13. Now,

2. This phrase of the Mercy of our Lord implies something both with reference,
1. To the Term, Mercy: And, 2 Its Authors Title, Our Lord Jesus Christ.


1. With reference to the word Mercy, therein is implied,

1. That the Believers, though upon the most holy faith, the best and
absolutely perfect foundation, and though thereon edifying themselves and
praying in the Holy Ghost, yet have need of Mercy to be showed them by Jesus
Christ, they are not yet so perfect and complete in themselves or in any of
their best and holiest actings, or fullest enjoyments here, but that they need
yet mercy to be exercised toward them: And that both.

1. In respect of their sinfulness, weaknesses, and defilements cleaving to
them and to all their actings and performances; for there is not a just man on
^arth (on this side the grave) that does good, and sins not (Eccles. 7.20.)
even in his good doings. If we (though Apostles) say we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us, says 1 John 1.8. Thence we need him as
the Propitiation for our sins, to cover and hide them from the face of God, and
by his Intercession to make acceptable to his Father, even our Spiritual
Sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2.5. and the mercy of Christ in both.

2. In respect of our defects, wants and shortness of seize to the full
possession of the blessing and glory of God, as mercy signifies kindness, or a
gift of good for our supplies as we have need; for the Believer, though
complete in Christ his head and root, yet is not complete and perfect in his
receipt of him, and the grace in him; has not yet attained, neither is yet
perfect, Phil. 3.13, 14. sees but in part, and knows but in part yet, 1 Cor.
13.11.12. has but the first fruits of mercy and blessing, not the full
harvest, Romans 8.23. He must wait for that (...) Christ's appearing, and
therefore needs that act of his mercy toward him.

3. In respect of afflictions, temptations and griefs in the mean time to be
endured: in and under which we have no strength, power or wisdom to uphold us,
much less to deliver us out of them; his Grace only in those cases also is
sufficient for us, as well as to the forgiveness of our sins, and the
perfecting what concerns us, Psalm. 138.8. thence that in Psalm. 60.11. Give us
help from trouble, for vain is the help of man, and all that he can give us.
Herein too we need his mercy and grace to help us, Heb. 4.16. and indeed thi^
is very obvious to sense; for we see the best of men, are men still subject to
like passions, infirmities, sicknesses and ailments as others. Job, though a
perfect man, yet sorely tried both in body and spirit with sad afflictions: the
Prophets and Apostles examples of patience, and suffering adversities of diverse
sorts and natures, under which they have not had ability of themselves to
stand, but as God by his mercy in Christ gave them strength and relief,
remembering his mercy, in the midst of his judgments. Nay, in the day of the
Lord, the righteous servants of God shall need his mercy, for the blotting out
perfectly all their transgressions, and deliverance of them from all wrath and
judgment, into the enjoyment of his everlasting Kingdom; as it was therefore
Paul's prayer for Onesiphorus and his house, in 2 Timothy 1.18. The Lord grant to
him that he may find mercy in that day: Though he had done very many good deeds
for the Apostle, especially in case of swe^vings or turnings aside in some
things from him, as may seem to have been his case, or the case of his
household, in that that prayer for his household and him follow immediately, upon
the mention of the turning away of all those in Asia from Paul, v. 15. Again,
it is here implied in the word, Mercy:

2. That the Believers, however diligent in s^rving God, and edifying
themselves on the faith of Christ, deserve not the love of God, or the
enjoyment of his presence and blessing with them unto everlasting life, nay,
nor any supply to their want^ or needs in any thing: It Is of mercy, not of
merit, that God does own them, and that Christ takes care of them, and helps
and blesses them: They cannot challenge it as matter of due debt, but need to
beg (even their daily bread too) as matter of mercy; or as the effect and fruit
of the mercy of Jesus Christ toward them, in his Sufferings and Sacrifice
offered up for them And this indeed springs from the former, their weakness to
do any thing for God, becoming him or his engagements upon us; and their
sinfulness, defiling all their best doings. They have neither power nor purity
enough in themselves, to do such service for him as may bind him by way of
desert to them: If he should mark the iniquities of their holy things, they
could none of them stand, Psalm. 130.3, 4. Therefore good Nehemiah, when he had
made mention of many good deeds well done by him, adds, Remember me O my God,
concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds that I have done for the house
of my God, and for the offices thereof, Neh. 13.14. and after further mention
of his zeal for the Sabbath, he adds again, ver. 22. Remember me, O my God,
concerning this also, and spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy: as
implying, that his good deeds, though very exemplary, were so far from meriting
reward from God, or the love and blessing of God, that it was his mercy to
spare him from his judgment, and not to blot out all he had done out of his
remembrance. Though God does give reward to him that wills that that is good,
and that runs the way of his Commandments, yet that rewarding of them is not
of him that wills, or of him that runs (as the due desert of his willing
and running, and what he may challenge as debt) but of him that shows mercy in
pardoning the defects of both willing and running, and accepting them and him
in whom they are, through Jesus Christ. So that no flesh has any thing to
glory of in the presence of God, for any thing found in, as of it, or done by
it: But there is cause of abasement and humility for the best; no cause or
ground for pride and high-mindedness in any. Christ brings up the top stone
with shouting, and crying, Grace, grace unto it, Zech. 4.6, 7. This is implied
too in the word Mercy, as to be waited for by the believer in all his building
up himself on his most holy Faith.

2. But then the consideration of him, whose mercy it is, that we are to wait
for, signified in this, that it is called the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ,
does afford great encouragement to expect and hope for it, as well as
engagement to wait for it. For,

1. In that he is the Lord that engages us to wait for it, it being meet to
wait on one so great; And if we consider how and upon what account he is the
Lord, in the nature of man, that will encourage to expect his mercy, and so to
wait in hope of it: For it was by his mercy already testified to us, toward us
sinners, while so, in that he then abased himself and became man for us, and as
man suffered to the death, the death of the cross for us: that he was in the
same nature of man exalted and glorified to be Lord of all, both things and
persons, as was above noted, Acts 2 36. Phil. 2 9, 10, 11. Romans 14.9. Because
he humbled himself to the death, the death of the cross, therefore God has
highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name, that at the name of
Jesus every knee should bow, etc. and that every tongue should confess that
Jesus is the Lord, to the glory of God, etc. Now if he had such mercy for us,
as to purchase to himself in the nature of man, a Lordship over us, by
ransoming us from death by his death for us, how shall we not think, that being
for that his love to us, and service for us, made Lord, he will exercise his
Lordship in a way of grace and mercy toward us, when brought to own him for out
Lord, and to subject our selves to his Government over us (as in believing on
him we do) and especially, if we therein exercise our selves to more knowledge
of him, and obedience to him, as in building up our selves on our most Holy
says? If justified by his Blood, much more will be save us from wrath in his
Mercy toward us, Romans 5.9.

2. And yet more in that he is our Lord; as the Lord of all generally in a more
common sense and relation so the believers Lord in a special sense and
relation, as exercising his Lordship peculiarly over and for them, as one owned
as their Lord, and depended on for the exercise of his power for their help,
yea, he is so the Lord of the Believers as the Husband is Lord of his wife, as
he is often styled in the Scripture language, as in Psalm. 45.10. Hearken O
Daughter, and consider, incline thine ear also and hear, forget also thine own
people and thy Fathers house, so shall the King greatly desire thy beauty, for
he is thy Lord, and worship thou him. And surely he that is, specially the
Lord, owner, Head, Husband, and disposer of his people, is both worthy to be
waited on by them and will be more especially merciful to them. He that is
good, and a merciful, bountiful Lord over all, and to all his Creatures, so as
to open his hand and liberally to satisfy the desire of every living thing,
will especially be rich in mercy to all that call upon him, that call upon him
in truth, that pray in the Holy Ghost. He will fulfill the desire of them that
fear him. He also will hear their cry, and he will save them, Psalm. 145.18, 19.

3. (...) that he is our Lord Jesus, that is so our Lord, as also our Savior,
our Lord and Savior, the Savior of all men, but especially of them that
believe, 1 Timothy 4.10 his name was therefore called Jesus, because he was born
into the wo^ld and manifested to save his people from their sin^, Matthew. 1.21.
and Believers in him, who are brought to and built upon him are his people in a
special sense, his sheep, his flock, his Disciples, yea, his Body, whereof he
is both the Head and Savior, Ephesians. 5.23. and therefore he is both worthy
their waiting on him for his mercy, and they have good ground of encouragement
to expect his Mercy in the pardon of their sins and saving and helping in, and
out of all their sorrows, afflictions and sufferings, and supplying of their
wants in their waiting for it from him: especially seeing also,

4. He is our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, our Lord, that is anointed of God to
be our Savior: He is both appointed of God his Father thereto, and furnished
with the Holy Ghost and power to fit him thereto. It is the will of the Father,
his designa^^^n, choice and ordination of him, that every one that sees the
Son and believes on him should have everlasting life, and that he should raise
him up at the last day, namely, to the enjoyment of that everlasting life. And
therefore he being faithful in all things to him that appointed him, as well as
merciful and loving to us that believe in him; they that flee to him for
shelter and refuge may comfortably expect and wait for his Mercy, even unto
eternal life; put all these together. As he is Lord, it impl^s him to have
power and authority to show us Mercy, as our Lord, relation, and engagement to
exercise his power and authority for our good; as our Savior mercy toward us
in his heart, and as Christ or anointed, to save us, an Office and designation
of God his Father to show us mercy according to his great power and goodness,
all speak engagement upon us, and encouragement to us to wait for his mercy,
for his mercy in all our present case, yea, mercy unto everlasting life, which
is the next thing considerable.

Unto eternal life. Which denotes either the tendencie and issue of his mercy,
or the term of our waiting for his Mercy.

1. The Mercy to be waited for, desired, and to be sought after by us, is not
only Mercy in this life, or the Mercies or benefits of this life, though they
are also in his hand and dispose, and he is ready to impart them to us as he
sees good for us; but such Mercy as conduces to and ends in eternal life, such
as be the forgiveness of our sins, the giving of his Spirit and Grace to us,
his supporting us in all trials and afflictions, his sanctifying us and
conforming us to himself in all holiness and goodness, his receiving our
Spirits in Death, and raising us up from the dead to eternal life and glory,
and the possessing us of it at the day of his appearance, all which are the
fruits and effects of his Mercy, and his Mercy stands, appears, and is acted
sorth in the gift of them to us; they being not the procurements of our
goodness, services, or sufferings, or to be looked upon as our merits, things
any way deserved by us, but the procurement of his Mercy in his Death and
sufferings for us and his Mercy and compassion, and riches of his Grace and
bounty toward us; yea, eternal life it self is the gift of God through Jesus
our Lord, as the effect and fruit of his Mercy to us, and therefore,

2. We are to wait for his Mercy unto, or until we arrive at eternal life, till
we have and attain to the full of that which his Grace and Mercy has procured
for us, and he as our Lord and anointed Savior is designed to give unto us,
and confer upon us, which is included and contained in eternal life, 1 John
2.24 25. This is the promise which he has promised us, even everlasting life:
which although it be given us, even mankind in Jesus Christ, inasmuch as he is
given of God to us, that he might be received by us, whether we receive him or
not; and he is that eternal life that was with God in the beginning, and in
these last days was manifested to us, 1 John 5.11. and 1.1, 2. and he has in
him all that will produce in us being received by us eternal life, or an
everlasting happy state and condition; as remission of sins, the Holy Spirit of
life and power, the presence, favor, and fullness of God and of all Grace and
blessing: yea, and though the Believer is said now to have everlasting life,
inasmuch as he has Christ in whom it is, and so has it by way of right,
title, and interest, and some beginnings and first fruits of it, in that he
has the forgiveness of his sins, the Holy Spirit, the favor of God and his
blessing in which is life, Psalm. 30 5. and 133.4. Prove. 8.34. yet that which is
most properly eternal life, is that full, perfect and everlasting freedom from
all sin, sorrow, and evil; and that full, perfect, and perpetual enjoyment of
the glorious presence and blessing of God and Christ and of his unspeakable
glory and glorious joys and satisfactions that shall be enjoyed by all that are
counted worthy thereof in the world to come, according to that distinction or
distribution of rewards promised by Christ to those that forsake all to follow
him, Mark. 10.30. he shall receive an hundred fold in this time, houses, and
Brethren, and Sisters, and Mothers, and Children, and fields with persecution,
and in the world to come everlasting life, that is the full and perfect
enjoyment of God and Christ and all happiness without persecution for ever,
till when they are to wait for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ therein.

This is the great hope of the Believers, as in Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal
life, which God, who cannot lie, has promised: and Chap. 3.7. That being
justified by his Grace we might be made heirs according to the hope of eternal
life, and therefore the great things hoped for are included therein, because
therein is contained all the fullness of the enjoyment of God and Christ, and
their favor and blessing, and so all happiness; yea, it is the great thing
promised in Christ, as 1 John 2.25 and therefore it is to be waited for by the
Believer all his time till he attain the enjoyment of it; yea, even the Souls
of those that have suffered death for the testimony of Christ, and that be
under the Altar, though they rest quiet from all further sufferings and
persecutions from men, or temptations and oppressions from Satan, or whatever
here annoyed the^, yet they also still wait for the full accomplishment of that
great promise, the full enjoyment of life everlasting; yea, and the mercy of
the Lord Jesus Christ is that that is exercised toward and over them, even his
free Grace, goodness, and compassion, until that be attained by them, Rev. 6.11.

3. And as all his Mercy tends unto the Believer, so this also being waited
for, shall be the certain and sure issue of his Mercy, they shall not fail of
it, but shall have and enjoy eternal life when fully built up and fi^ted for
it. As they have his love and favor toward them here, in which is life; so
their patien^ expectation of the utmost Salvation, and full recompense of
reward shall in it is time also (namely, in the World to come) without fail be
given them: for,

1. It was the end and design of God in giving his only begotten Son into the
World, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting
life; as also it was of his exalting and lifting him up, both to the Cross in
his Death, and out of the Grave being dead for us, unto his own right hand, and
in the Doctrine of the Gospel by his Holy Spirit commending and glorifying him
unto the hearts and consciences of men; that so he might be and be represented
as a fit and complete Object of faith, and hope for them, and that so many as
should believe and hope in him might live for ever, John 3.14, 15, 16. As Moses
lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up;
that so whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that
the World through him might be saved, etc.

2. It is the will and pleasure of God that Jesus Christ came down from Heaven
to do, and is gone up to Heaven again to prosecute: the thing to which he has
anointed and appointed him; the work or pleasure of the Lord that lies upon his
hand to see done, that whosoever sees and believes on him should not perish but
have everlasting life, John 6 40. And he is both alsufficient for accomplishing
it, having offered up himself a perfect and infinitely virtuous and precious
Sacrifice; and being filled with all the fullness of God, and so able to do all
things, and to subdue all things to himself: and he is also faithful in all
things to God who appointed him, and therefore will not fail nor be discouraged
till he bring forth judgment into victory, and accomplish what he is engaged
in, and has undertaken to do and accomplish, Col. 2.9, 10. Heb. 7.25. and
9.15. and 10.14. and 3.1, 2. Isa. 42.3, 4.

3. It is the promise of God and his Covevenant made and ratified with mankind
in Jesus Christ, that he will give eternal life to as many as do believe in and
are subject to him, 1 John 2.24 25 Tit. 1.2. and God that has promised, is
true and faithful and cannot lie or break Covenant yea, he has also confirmed
his promise and Covenant by an Oath, that by two immutable things in which it
is impossible for God to lie, they might have strong consolation who flee for
refuge to Christ the hope set before them, Heb. 6.18, 19.

4. Yea, whereas we are too prone to sin, and break ou^ Covenant with God, or
fail in what he requires of us to the enjoyment of eternal life, Christ has
undertaken, as the surety and Mediator of it, to see it performed to us; and to
that purpose to fit us for the performance of it to us; taking away our sins,
imperfections, and forfeitures, by the virtue of his blood and Sacrifice
pleaded with his Father for us; so as with reference thereto God keeps Covenant
and mercy with them that fear him, and Christ effects in us by his Grace and
Spirit what is required of us, and necessary for us, Writing the Law in our
heart, and putting his fear in our inward parts, Heb. 2.17, 18. and 7.22, 25,
and 8.2, 3, 9, 10, 11. and 9.15. and 10.15, 16, 17, 18.

5. Yea, Christ as the great King of Saints and Nations, Shepherd, and Bishop
of the soul, has undertaken it, to lead, guide, protect, and keep his sheep,
or his Disciples that hear his voice and follow him to the enjoyment of
everlasting life; and he has the Presence and Oneness of the Father with him
therein, and so power, wisdom, and love to guide and keep them, so as none can
pluck them away from him, as he says, John 10.27.28, 29, 30. My sheep hear my
voice, and I know (or own) them, and they follow me, and I give unto them
eternal life, and they shall never perish; neither shall any man pluck them out
of my hand. My Father that gave me them is greater than all, and none can pull
them ou^ of my Fathers hand. I and my Father are one. So that the Believer has
the greatest certainty of eternal life that may be, in believing, and cleaving
unto Christ, and so in building up himself, and being built up on that most
holy faith and foundation, and praying in the Holy Ghost, and so keeping
himself in the love of God, and waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ,
having God and Christ so engaged for his having it given to him, and conferred
upon him^ to which we may also yet add,

6. The earnest, helpfulness, and guidance of the Holy Spirit given as a pledge
or earnest of the full enjoyment of the eternal inheritance, and as the Guide,
Governor, Leader, Conductor, and Keeper of his Servants that listen to him,
and harden not their hearts obstinately against him, to the possession of it.
So Ephesians. 1.13, 14. and 4.30. Believing in Christ (says the Apostle to those
Believers) ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest
of our inheritance to the redemption of the purchased possession, to the praise
of his Glory: and the like in 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. He that establishes us with you
in Christ, and anointeth us, ^^ God; who also has sealed us, and given us the
earnest of the Spirit in our hearts, etc. And he is a good, holy, powerful
Spirit, and will guide the Believer into all truth as he sees it good for him,
and will lead him into the land of uprightness, John 16.13. Psalm. 143.10 So
that as the Believer in Christ has great encouragement to wait for the Mercy
of the Lord Jesus his Lord and Savior, as is fore-noted; so also has he good
ground to expect and shall assuredly in waiting receive his mercy to
everlasting life, so as to the possession and actual enjoyments thereof.

Unto which it is necessary (and that also is here implied) that he be raised
up again from Death and all the consequents of it, seeing those things also are
allotted to believers and they die as certainly (and often more grievously in
respect of their outward sufferings) than other men, and this Resurection of
them, Christ often asserts, saying, I will ^ise him up again at the last day,
John 6.40, 44, etc. yea, they shall be raised first, and unto life, 1 These
4.15, 16. John 5.29. even unto life eternal, Matthew. 25.46. In which they shall
enjoy,

1. A total, full and everlasting release of, and discharge from all their
sins, both as to the guilt of them, they shall be fully and for ever then
blotted out of Gods remembrance, Acts 3.19. so as they shall be remembered no
more, Hebr. 8.12. and 10.17. and therefore also as to all punishments,
chastisements or sufferings for them, The inhabitant of Zion shall not then
say, I am sick for their sins shall be forgiven them, Isa 33.24.

2. A full and perfect deliverance from the inherency and defilement of sin, in
a full, perfect and everlasting conformity unto Christ: When we see him; we
shall be like him (says 1 John 3.2.) for we shall see him as he is: Then shall
it be given to the Bride, the Lambs wife, to be clothed in fine linen, white
and clean, Rev. 19.8. and to be presented by Christ to himself, altogether
glorious and holy, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5.26,
27.

3. A full, perfect and everlasting peace and freedom from all trouble, sorrow,
crying, pain, temptations, death, either natural or violent: For the bodies of
the just being raised, shall be raised incorruptible and immortal, made like
unto the glorious body of the Lord Jesus, Death and Grave, and all things
pertaining or tending thereto, being swallowed up into an everlasting victory,
1 Cor. 15, 53, 54 55, 56. Phil. 3.20. and all Enemies and Oppressors, whether
men or Devils, being wholly subdued and thrust out, so as they never more have
power to molest or trouble: There shall be no more any Canaanite in the house
of the Lord of Hosts, nor any wicked ones to pass through their land, nor any
to waste or destroy in all Gods mountain, Zech. 14.21. Nah. 1.13. Isa. 11.9.
and 65.25. The Devil shall be shut up for ever in the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone, and all his Angels and followers, the Instruments of his malice
and mischief with him, and shall be there in everlasting torments, utterly and
everlastingly deprived of all power to hurt or injury any of those that here
have followed the Lamb. So that all inward causes, as sin, mortality and
diseases; and all outward causes of trouble, as Satan, and his Angels, and all
evil men, and all curse and wrath from God being for ever removed, there must
of necessity be a perfect freedom therefrom. No more death, nor sorrow, nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things shall be
then wholly passed away, Rev. 21.4.5. and 22.3.

4. A full, perfect and everlasting enjoyment of Christ, and God in Christ
evermore present with them, as 1 Thessalonians. 4, 16. We shall be all caught up
together to meet the Lord in the air, and then we shall be ever with the Lord,
Rev. 21.3. then shall the Tabernacle of God be with men, and he will dwell with
them; and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, their
God: yea, the throne of God, and the Lamb shall be amongst them, and his
servants shall serve him, and they shall see his face, and his name shall be in
their foreheads, openly and manifestly upon them, and held forth by them, Rev.
22 3, 4.

5. Full, perfect and everlasting sight and knowledge of God, and of the whole
mystery of God, They shall see as they are seen, and know as they are known, 1
Cor. 13.12. no night of ignorance and alienation from God; no candle light, no
dim, imperfect, fading knowledge there; no, nor any mediate light or knowledge,
but an immediate, clear and constant light and knowledge shall they have of and
from God, Rev. 22.5.

6. Full, perfect and everlasting joy and gladness in the presence, knowledge
and enjoyment of God and Christ, for in his presence is fullness of joy and
pleasures at his right hand for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. then they shall enter
into their Lords or Masters joy, and that shall be perfectly fulfilled spoken
of in Isa. 35.10 and 51 11. They shall have everlasting joy upon their heads,
they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away; for
they shall be then everlastingly and abundantly satisfied with the presence of
God and Christ: so as there shall be no want, defect or mixture in their joys
and rejoycings; nor any thing to be added to them, the want whereof should at
any time abate them for ever.

7. Full, perfect, and everlasting glory, being Kings and Priests unto God, and
filled full with the glory of Christ and of God, and reigning with him for ever
and ever, Rev. 22.5. their bodies all glorious, like the glorious body of
Christ; and their spirits all glorious, like the Soul or Spirit of Christ: for
they shall be like him, enjoying even that eternal glory to which they are now
called in and by the Gospel, glory unutterable, and beyond all conception, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14. 1 Pet. 5.10.

This is the portion and inheritance of those that are built up on the most
holy faith, and praying in the Holy Ghost, keep themselves in the love of God,
and wait for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ thereunto, a portion not
merited by them as a due reward of their deserts, but as the fruit of the mercy
of Jesus Christ in what he has done for them in his death, and in what he
further does to and for them in his life, pitying, pleading for, and succouring
them all along as the Captain of their salvation; a merciful and faithful
Priest, bearing them in his bosom, making reconciliation for their sins, and
sending them relief and comfort in their temptations, till having led them
through, and fed them in the wilderness (the state of exercise and living by
faith here) he bring them safely (in the taking them hence as to their spirits,
and in the Resurrection of the just as to their bodies reunited with their
spirits) to the enjoyment of this eternal life and happiness: which is so great
and so glorious a condition and enjoyment, as passes and exceeds all
expressions and conception. For no man knows, nor can enter into the heart to
conceive, the things that God has prepared for them that love him, only they
are in some measure made understandable by the Revelation of the Holy Spirit, 1
Cor. 2 9, 10, 11, 12.

Use. Now both the love of God, and the abiding in it; and this which is the
great issue and advantage of it, being all the fruit and profit of the most
holy faith built upon, and abidden in: It does exceedingly commend that most
holy faith to us, even the Son of God, that loved us, and gave himself for us,
as he is in the Gospel preached and declared to us: And therefore it may serve
to move and provoke all persons to love, and embrace, and close with it;
repenting of their neglects and slightings of it, and of their running in their
hearts and ways after vain and empty words and things, to believe and take heed
unto the Gospel and Christ crucified, as therein displayed, that so they may
therein discern and be found in the love of God, and be made heirs and enjoyers
of this unfathomable, endless happiness, eternal life: Ho every one that
thirsts, come to these waters (of the knowledge and doctrine of Christ) and
he that has no money, let him come and buy wine and milk without money, and
without price: Why do you lay out your money for that that is not bread, and
labor for that that will not satisfy you, when in enclining the ear, and
coming hither to the most holy faith, and so to Jesus Christ, you may eat that
which is good, and let your souls delight themselves in fatness, Isa. 55.1, 2.
The Spirit and the Bride say, Come: and let every one that hears say, Come:
and let him that is a thirst, Come: and whosoever will, let him take of the
waters of life freely, Rev. 22.17. even of the words of Christ, whose words are
the words of eternal life, John 6.68.

2. It shows the mavelous faultiness, and wretched wickedness, as of those
that neglect so great a salvation, such a most holy faith, such a precious
jewel and pearl of great price as the Gospel is, such a feast as therein is
declared and set before us, to run after their Farms and Merchandise: So much
more of those that having embraced the Gospel and Christ, as therein declared,
and having come to him and tasted of him, and of his sweetness and
graciousness, do afterward turn away and fall off from him to some other way or
doctrine; or to some other object for delight, stay or satisfaction, crucifying
him to themselves, and making him and the grace in him of none effect: They do
most foolishly and madly for themselves, putting away from them both the love
and favor of God, and that which is the product of it, everlasting life, and
all that mercy and pity of Christ that leads thereunto, and is necessary, and
was ready to be extended to them for their attainment thereof Oh foolish
people, and unwise, that do not only so badly requite God for all his love and
mercy in Christ, and grace extended to them by him; but also reward evil to
their own souls, losing them for very vanities and trifles, depriving them of
such infinite mercy and happiness, and plunging them into everlasting woe and
miseries: Who can express their folly and wretchedness, to sell everlasting
life, and that after some good progress toward it, for a mess of pottage. It
was a great folly in Esau so to ^ell his birthright, and in the Israelites,
when they were well on their way toward Canaan, and in a great likelihood, nay,
certainty of enjoying it, in following Gods conduct yet then for a little meat
to satisfy their lusts, for leeks and cucumers, etc. for a little pleasure
with the Moabitish daughters, when arrived at the borders of it, to forfeit
their inheritance in, and perish in the wilderness But no folly and madness
like this of withdrawing from God and Christ to perdition, after the tastes of
his goodness, and experience in some measure, of the the powers of the world to
come; as Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. O therefore, that we may receive admonition, while it
is yet called to day, and avoid or break off from such practices as tend to
such a loss, and utter undoing; for He that transgresses, and abides not in the
doctrine of Christ (the most holy faith) has not God, and he that has not the
Son, has not life, 2 Jo. 9 11. Jo 5.12.

3. It shows the infinite happiness of those that be and abide in Christ, in
the faith and obedience of Christ, edifying themselves and one another on him,
praying in the Holy Ghost, and so do keep themselves in the love of God, and
wait for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life, they have the
love and favor of God, now as a Sun and Shield unto them, and they shall have
in the world to come everlasting life: they are in a happy and blessed state
and condition, whatever trials and afflictions do or may befall them. Blessed
are the people that are in such a case; yea, blessed and happy is he whose God
is the Lord, Psalm. 33.12. and 144. last. And therefore also,

4. It may encourage and provoke all that do believe in Christ and are upon
that precious and most excellent foundation to abide in him, and beware of all
those things that may endanger their falling and departure therefrom. Looking
diligently least they, or any of them fail of the Grace of God, and least any
root of bitterness spring up and thereby many be defiled, least there be any
fornicator or profane person, as Esau, Heb. 12.15, 16, 17. least there be
found an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God, least any
false Prophet or Antichrist deceive any of us, or the love of this world, or of
the things of it stealing in upon us withdraw us from Christ, and from the love
of the Father which cannot consist with it, and so we be choked and all the
Grace of God bestowed upon us prove ineffectual to us. But on the contrary,
Exhort we one another while it is called to day, least any be hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin. Considering one another to provoke to love and to
good works, so running that we may obtain. Laying hold on eternal life, and
suffering no man, or corruption, or evil spirit to deceive us, and deprive us
thereof, But let that which we heard from the (...) in us, and then we shall
(...) ^^ the Father and in the Son, and not fail of the promise of eternal
life; seeing he is faithful that has promised, and will perform it, and
perfect what concerns us. Let us not be slothful then, but followers of them,
that through faith and patience have inherited the promises. Let us hold fast
the profession of our faith without wavering, and not cast away our confidence
in God by Jesus Christ, which has so great a recompense of reward* only
remember we have need of patience that we may bear and suffer injuries and
temptations and not faint; but yet hope in the Lord and quietly wait for his
Salvation, waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life,
that so when we have done the will of God, we may receive the promise, which
yet for a little while is deferred, but will not fail to be performed to those
that keep Gods wa^* and therein wait for it. He that shall come w^ll come and
will not tarry.

Now the good Lord, the God of peace, who brought again from the dead our Lord
Jesus that Great Shepherd of the Sheep through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make us perfect with him, and in every good work to do his will,
working in ^s that which is well-pleasing in his sight, (...) Jesus Christ. To
whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen. Amen.

March 26. 1664.
FINIS.

