praying figure Printed for Jonathan Edwin in Ludgate Street.


DAILY DEVOTIONS, Consisting of Thanksgivings, Confessions, and Prayers.

In Two Parts.

For the Benefit of the more Devout, and the assistance of weaker Christians.

By an Humble Penitent.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, for Jonathan Edwin, at the Three Roses in
Ludgate Street, 1673.

The Preface to the READER.
THe following Meditations, Praises, Prayers, and Confessions, were the
Devotions of a learned and pious Christian, humbly offered up, in due order, to
the Divine Majesty, as their nature, and the time to which they were fitted,
required, being very Rational, Comprehensive and Emphatical, are offered now to
the most sacred Consideration and practice of all those holy and humble
Votaries that may in any sort be assisted by, or delighted in the same. In the
Meditations, suggested to the Readers use, as he is going to Church sitting
there, and coming thence, the best and most opposite Reflections and
Resentments of holy David, that Royal Pattern, which God himself has set
before our Eyes, are so collected and digested, that they may easily pass into
the apprehensions and affections of the Peruser. The Praises contain the great
and manifold effects of Gods goodness, the Demonstrations of his Love, the
causes of our Joy, and the Incentives that feed and inflame our Love and
Gratitude. The Prayers for the third, sixth, and ninth hour, are every day to be
used, in memory of our Saviors Passion, for the more effectual application of
the merits of his bitter Death, and the more lively exercise of our Faith
therein, as well as for our daily Communion with him, in the sight and sense of
all his love and sufferings on the Cross for us, after the manner of the
ancient Christians, in the best, most pure, Primitive Times. The residue are
Devotions adapted, some to the use of Sinners, for the bewailing of their sins
at all times; others for the use of Christians in our most eminent Fasts and
Festivals; and some by way of Preparation for Death; that meditating upon it,
and wisely fitting our selves for it here, it may be a blessed change unto us,
(...) bring us to the life of ^nal Glory hereafter. I shall not speak more in
praise of the Devotions, (which several learned and holy men have seen, and
approved) but leave them to the experience of all the intelligent and pious
that shall use them, praying for a Blessing upon their Exercises in the same.

The Contents.
1. DEvotions and Meditations to be used as we go to Church. 2. Devotions in
the Church. 3. After Church. 4. Devotion comprising all our Duties. 5. A
Paraphrase upon the Objective Hymn of Praise. 6. Thanksgivings for all persons
and times. 7. An Hymn to Jesus wherein the Soul may expatiate it self with
delight in him. 8. A Prayer to the Holy Ghost out of St. Augustine. 9. A Prayer
for the Sixth hour. 10. A Prayer for the Ninth hour. 11. Additional Devotions
for the Evening. 12. A Prayer for Lent. 13. Daily Thanksgiving. 14. A Prayer
for Christmas Day. 15. A Prayer for Easter Day. 16. A confession of sin out of
Bishop Andrews. 17. Deprecations of Bishop Andrews. 18. Intercessions for all
Mankind. 19. A Christian Dedication (of himself) unto God. 20. A Prayer for
acceptance of Acts of Humiliation or abstinence on fasting-days. 21. Evening
thoughts and exercises to Bed-ward. The Advice. 22. A Prayer against
Afflictions. 23. An Exercise preparative to a good death, consisting of several
Acts of Piety. 1. A brief Soliloquy by way of Admonition. 2. Submition to the
sentence of death. 3. Thanksgiving for all benefits of your life past. 4.
Confession of our sins. 5. A Prayer to die to sin. 6. A petition for the
virtues of the dying Jesus.

Devotions and Meditations to be used as we go to Church.
I Was glad when they said unto me, let us go to the House of the Lord.

Our feet stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.

Jerusalem is built as a City that is compact together.

Whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord unto the Testimony of Israel,
to give thanks unto the name of the Lord.

For there are set Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the House of David.

O pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee.

Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces.

For my Brethren and Companions sake, I will now say peace be within thee.

Because of the House of the Lord our God I will seek thy good.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

O how amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts!

My soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord: my heart and my
flesh cries out for the living God.

Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, they will be still praising thee.

They go from strength to strength, every one of them in Zion appears before
God.

O Lord of Hosts hear my prayer, give ear O God of Jacob.

For a day in thy Courts is better than a thousand: I had rather be a
doorkeeper in the House of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.

For the Lord God is a Sun and Shield, the Lord will give Grace and Glory, and
no good thing will he withold from him that walks uprightly.

O Lord God of Hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Praise waits for thee in Zion, and to thee shall the vow be performed in
Jerusalem.

O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.

Blessed is the man whom thou chusest and causest to approach unto thee, that
he may dwell in thy Courts: We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy
House, even of thy holy Temple.

The Lord loves the Gates of Zion, more than all the dwellings of Jacob.

Therefore I will come into thy House in the multitude of thy mercies, and in
thy fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple.

Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness, make thy way strait before my face.

One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell
in the House of the Lord all the days of my life; to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.

I will wash mine hands in innocence, so will I compass thine Altar about.

Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy House, and the place where thine
honor dwells.

Thou art my my hiding place, thou shall preserve me from trouble, thou shall
compass me about with songs of deliverance.

O Lord instruct me in the way that I should go, guide me with thine eye.

I will wait for thy loving kindness in the midst of thine holy Temple.

O send out thy Light and thy Truth; let them lead me, and bring me to thy holy
Hill, and to thy Tabernacles.

Then will I go unto the Altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy: I will praise
thee O God, my God.

As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee O
God.

My soul thirsts for God, yea even for the living God.

When shall I come and appear before God?

My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise.

Truly my soul waits upon God, from him comes my Salvation.

He only is my Rock and Salvation, my soul wait thou only upon God.

For my expectation is from him, he only is my Rock and my Salvation.

He is my defense, I shall not be moved.

In God is my Salvation and my Glory, the Rock of my strength and my refuge is
in God.

Trust in him at all times: pour out your heart before him: He is our refuge.

O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for thee, my
flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty Land where no water is.

To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary.

Because thy loving kindness is better than life, my lips shall praise thee.

Thus will I bless thee while I live, I will lift up my hands in thy name.

My Soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness; and my mouth shall
praise thee with joyful lips.

I will praise God in the great Congregations, I will enter into thy gates with
thanksgiving, and into thy Courts with praise.

Open to me the gates of Righteousness, I will go into them, and I will praise
the Lord.

This is the day that the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it.

Give Israel thine Oracles, and fill Zion with thine unspeakable Glory.

O magnify the Lord our God, and fall down before his footstool: for he is
holy.

O worship the Lord in the beauty of Holiness, O come let us fall down and
kneel before the Lord our Maker.

In thy fear do I worship thee in [this] thy holy Temple: desiring to praise
thee in the great Congregation, before much people.

Here, O Lord, in the beauty of Holiness I approach, to worship thee among thy
Saints in the great Assembly.

I adore thine infinite Bounty, that notwithstanding all my sins, thou
permittest me to tread thy Courts, to attend thy Majesty in thy holy Temple.

For I have profaned thy Sabbaths.

Defiled thy Sanctuary.

Polluted thine holy Ordinances.

Dishonored my Profession.

Been cold in my Prayers.

Dull in my Praises.

Careless and censorious in my Hearing.

Extremely negligent in my Meditation.

Miserably distracted in all.

So that I have deserved a curse rather than a blessing from thee.

But O merciful Father.

Tender and compassionate Lord.

Jesus my Savior.

Most blessed and holy Spirit.

By thy Grace I return unto my heart, and with all my heart I return unto thee.

Hear O Lord, and have mercy upon me.

Pardon all my sins, and let them not hinder the ascending of my prayers and
praises unto thee: nor the descending of thy mercies and graces (now) upon me.

My Soul breaks for the longing it has to thy Judgments.

The Law of thy mouth is dearer unto me than thousands of Gold and Silver.

Thy Testimonies are my delight, and my counselors.

O now in the accepted time make them so to thy servant.

Open thou mine eyes, that I may see the wonderful things of thy law.

Make me to understand the way of thy precepts.

Order my steps in thy Word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.

Teach me thy way, O God, and I will walk in thy paths.

O knit my heart fast unto thee, that I may fear thy name.

It is my joy to see these Temples erected in the Land.

To see all Nations adoring, and offering prayers and praises unto thee.

O that thou would fill my heart, with all the love of all the Souls, that
ever were, are, or shall be; that I might offer it up now unto thee; with all
the love of Angels and glorified Saints; for thou have showed more mercy to me
than to them.

For I have offended thee more than all.

Give me therefore the love and obedience of them all, to offer it up now unto
thee. Amen.

Devotions in the Church.
O Most holy God, who art glorious in Holiness, fearful in praises, doing
wonders, give me great and dreadful apprehensions of thee, that all the words
of my mouth, and thoughts of my heart, may now and ever be acceptable in thy
sight, O Lord my strength, and my Redeemer.

Bless all thine holy Ordinances at this time, and at all times unto me.

Give me understanding in thy Word, both read and preached.

Grant that it may be so mixed with faith and obedience, that it may be the
savor of life unto life to me, and to every one here before thee, and not the
savor of death unto death.

Direct, I beseech thee, and assist thy Minister, that he may rightly divide,
and utter thy Word, that what in his Studies he has conceived, and composed of
thy holy Oracles, he may now powerfully preach to thy Glory.

Fill him with the Holy Ghost, that he by thy Spirit may minister grace to the
Hearers.

Make him to speak Knowledge and Instruction to the ignorant.

Comfort to the afflicted.

Terror to the profane.

That he may melt the hard hearted, and make the proud to tremble at thy Word.

Lord, enable him to correct all my errors, to search out, and eradicat all all
my sins.

And then, and not till then, let him speak peace to my Conscience.

So guide the sword of the Spirit in his hand, that it may meet with, and smite
all our corruptions, and bosom sins, who are now before thee, known or unknown
to us, (but all known to thee) discover them all by this thy holy Minister,
that we may be purged, purified and cleansed before thee.

Endue me, and all that are here, with wisdom to understand thy Word.

With serious attention to it.

With holy veneration of it.

With love and delight in it.

With all obedience to it.

And give us the grace of perfect amendment by it.

O let thy word drop as heavenly dew upon me, and make my barren heart fruitful
in the fruits of the same.

What I beg for my self, I beg for all thy people, for all my friends in
special, for all mankind in general, and for all thine all the world over;
humbly beseeching thee to make thine holy Ordinances profitable unto all. Amen.

After Church.
I Praise and magnify thy great and Glorious Name, that notwithstanding all my
sins, and great unworthinesses, thou have again admitted me into thy Holy
Temple, to make my prayers and supplications unto thee, and to offer up my
Praises in the Songs of Zion to thy great and Glorious Name.

I humbly thank thee for thy most holy Word read and Preached,

That Treasury of thy Graces,

That dispensation of thy Mercies,

That word of Life and Comfort,

That Helmet and Shield of Salvation;

Make it to have mighty operation upon me,

Let it make a deep impression in me,

Write it in my heart,

Record it in my Memory,

Make it familiar, pleasant, and present to my understanding,

The only subject of my Study,

And the sole object of my Love,

Let it amend my Life,

Carry me through all Difficulties,

And assure unto me, by a lively faith and obedience, an interest in all thy
mercies.

I praise thee for the comforts of this day in this visible Solemnity,

For the service of thy Ministers,

For thy gracious provisions both of learning and maintenance for them,

For the honor they do unto thee, and the service they do unto us.

For the excellencies of thy Laws, and the explications of them by their
Ministry;

And for all the promises of thy holy Gospel.

O blessed Jesus I praise and magnify thy name, for being the Author of my
Joys,

The Captain of our Salvation,

The Author and Finisher of our faith,

Go on I beseech thee to bless and prosper these good works begun in me.

That I may grow from Grace to Grace, and from strength to strength, till I
appear before God in Glory.

Lord pardon the iniquity that I have been guilty of, even in these holy things.

Let thy good Spirit bring to my remembrance the good things I have heard, and
enable me to reduce them all to practice.

Continue this glorious light of the Gospel to us.

Give a blessing to the labors of all holy, learned, painful Ministers:
Provide graciously for them. Give great success and comfort to them, and make
us all thankful for the graces communicated by them.

Obedient unto thee, true, faithful, sincere servants unto thee.

Let us not be Christians in word, but in deed,

Let our zeal to thee be constant,

Our love infinite,

And our service indefatigable.

Let our love to thee be known by our love to one another.

O let this love be without dissimulation,

Let all the good things we have learnt this day be expressed in our lives and
conversations. Amen.

Look upon Sion the City of our Solemnity; thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a
quiet Habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not one of the
stakes thereof shall be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be
broken.

But there the Glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad Rivers, and
Screams; wherein shall go no Galleys with Oars, etc.

For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King. He
will save us.

The ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Sion with songs, and
everlasting Joy upon their heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sighing and sorrow shall flee away.

DEVOTIONS comprising all our Duties.
O Lord hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee.

I praise thee, O Lord, for all thy righteous Laws and Commandments.

I beseech thee give me sincere obedience to them, and accept thy Sons
obedience for all my transgressions of them.

I praise thee for thy Creed, and for thy holy Gospel.

I beseech thee give me an understanding and practical faith therein.

I praise thee for the excellency and fullness of the Lords-Prayer.

As thou have given me a rule to pray, give me the spirit of prayer, to pray by
that rule; that I may praise thee abundantly for the Lords prayer.

I praise thee for causing me to be born in a Reformed Church.

As thou have graciously placed me in a true Christian Reformed Church, give me
grace to live according to the Holy Doctrines taught me therein;

To be a true Reformed Christian, in thy true reformed Church.

And as thou have commanded me to hear and obey thy Church, give me true
obedience to her in thee, and for thee.

I praise thee for all the Festivals and Sabbaths of thy Church.

Give me grace to keep the Holydays and Festivals appointed, with a clear
understanding of the Mysteries commemorated in them.

Give me a sensible feeling of thy mercies in them,

Unfeigned thankfulness for them,

Serious meditation and application of them,

In Union and Communion with thy Saints,

In imitation of all my Saviors virtues; treading in the steps of all thy
servants that are gone before us.

Give me grace also to keep all the Fasting-days appointed, with abstinence and
penitence, with great devotion, due Contrition, Liberality to the Poor, pardon
of my Enemies, love to all men; careful examination of my Conscience, and
conscionable care to amend my life; that for these also I may magnify thy holy
Name.

I praise thee for all the Order and Decency wherewith thou make the place
of thy feet Glorious.

Make me to observe all the Ecclesiastical Ceremonies and Customs established,
with understanding and benefit, obedience and unity, love and conformity;
without frowardness or contradiction.

Give me grace to repair to thy Temple as often as I can to delight in thy
Worship, and to worship thee in the Beauty of Holiness.

Make me the better for every opportunity thou give me there.

Suffer me never to be absent, upon any sinful, or vain, idle or lazy account.

In all my addresses enable me to serve thee acceptably,

Pray unto thee servently,

Praise thee heartily,

Hear thy Word diligently,

Practice it conscionably.

O my God I especially praise thee for the benefit of thy holy Sacraments.

Make me I beseech thee thankfully and reverently, frequently and desirously,
to come to thy Holy Table.

In memory of thy Passion,

In thankfulness for thy Mercies,

For the increase of Virtues and Graces,

For the extinguishing of all my Vices,

For the averting of thy Judgments;

For the obtaining of thy Relief in all my Necessities.

That I may live more and more in Union and Communion with thee.

Give thy Gospel and Sacraments free passage among us, and let not our sins
provoke thee to remove that glorious Light, and these saving means of Grace
from us.

Make us mindful of our Vows in Baptism, and of our renewed Vows in the
Eucharist.

Give us grace to perform them all.

Give me grace to serve thee with a true and strong faith, a firm hope, and
perfect love;

In Fasting, Prayers and Almsdeeds;

For since I have offended thee, in Body, Soul and Estate; I desire to
sacrifice all unto thee; my Body in Fasting, my Soul in Prayer, my Estate in
Alms.

Give me grace, I beseech thee,

To instruct the Ignorant with plainness,

To correct Offenders with mildness,

To counsel the Doubtful with prudence,

To comfort the Afflicted with tenderness,

To suffer Injuries with patience,

To forgive Offenses heartily,

To pray for others zealously.

To my power give me grace to feed the Hungry, to refresh the thirsty, to cloth
the Naked, to harbor the Needy, to visit and help the Sick, to minister to
Prisoners; and if need be, to bury the dead.

Give me the graces and the blessings of the eight Beatitudes:

To be poor in Spirit, that I may inherit the Kingdom of Heaven;

To Mourn, that I may be comforted;

To be Meek, that I may inherit the Earth;

So to hunger and thirst after Righteousness, that I may be filled;

To be merciful, that I may obtain mercy;

To be pure in Heart, that I may see God;

To be a Peacemaker, that I may be the child of God;

So to suffer Persecution for Righteousness sake, that my reward may be great
in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Deliver me from the Seven deadly sins, Pride, Covetousness, Luxury, Envy,
Gluttony, Anger, Sloth.

Grant me the Seven contrary Virtues; Humility, Liberality, Chastity,
Gentleness, Temperance, Patience, and Devotion, for thy mercy sake. Amen.

A PARAPHRASE upon the Objective Hymn of Praise.
O My God, do all thy works praise thee, and shall not I! shall not I who am
the work of thy hands, praise thee, whose care over me has been such, as if
thou had nothing else to care for. Yet thy providence is so great over all,
that it becomes our wonder and joy to see thee so particularly careful over
every one, and so amiable in thy goodness unto all, that the more thou take
care for all, thy care is so much the greater over every one. All the benefit
of thy wisdom, goodness and providence being guided to the benefit of every
person.

I praise thee therefore, O Lord,

For the Glory of Angels.

For the Faith of the Patriarchs,

For the Inspiration of the Prophets,

For the labors of the Apostles,

For the truth of the Evangelists,

For the Zeal of Confessors,

For the Blood of Martyrs,

For the Learning of the Fathers,

For the Study of Doctors,

For the Industry of all pious Ministers,

For the Hope, Virtue, Faith and Zeal of all thy Saints and Servants;

For all whom I praise and magnify thy Name, O Lord.

I also praise thee for the Heavens and all the Glory of them,

For the glory of the Sun, which comes forth as a Bridegroom, out of his
Chamber, rejoicing as a Giant to run his course.

I praise thee for its Beams, whose light and splendour revives mine eye,
beautifies and quickens all the Earth, digesteth Minerals, animates the Air,
enlivens Trees, perfects Flowers, excites the influences of the Heavens,
raises exhalations, dissolveth Ice, causes the Rivers to flow, begetting,
propagating and cherishing all the Creatures, which are the life and beauty of
this habitable World.

By it I am warmed, and refreshed,

By it I see all thy works in this glorious World,

By it I am exhilerated, and excited to praise thee, O thou eternal Sun of
Righteousness, who did rise upon us with healing in thy Wings; purchasing
this glorious light, and restoring it to me, when by my sins I had forfeited
the same.

O let not this Sun ever behold me doing any work of darkness.

O thou Eternal Sun, who art the Light of this, make me to remember that thine
Eye which is ten thousand times brighter than the Sun, is ever upon me, that I
may always walk as a child of the light before thee.

I praise thee, O most blessed Lord, for the shady glittering, and Majestic
Light of the Moon;

For its weaker, and milder Beams;

For all its Revolutions and wonderful effects.

By which our Days are refreshed, and our Nights enlightened.

By which we know Times and Seasons,

By which our Air is tempered, our Droughts are moistened, and all Productions
hastened.

O blessed be thy Name for the precious things put forth by the Sun, and for
the precious things put forth by the Moon;

For the blessed Interchanges of our Days to travel, and our Nights to rest in;
for the comfort of our lives, continued by their constant Motions and Returns.

I praise thee for the illustrious Stars in all their order; which govern
things below by thine appointment, while thou governest them in all their ways.

I praise thee for their powerful and precious influences.

I praise thee for the Waters above the Firmament, and for thy Clouds that drop
down fatness: For the Celestial Waters of Repentance, which I beseech thee
evermore to drop down upon me.

I praise thee for the winds thou sendest out of thy Treasuries; to purify the
Air, qualify the heat, and refresh our Spirits; by which all living Creatures
breathe and live.

I praise thee for the comfort, light and warmth, with all other benefits we
receive from fire.

For the blessings of Winter, in its healthful Airs, wholesome Winds, candid
Frosts, warmer Snows, curling Floods, and abounding Waters.

For the verdure, life and beauty of the Spring; for all the lovely Blossoms,
knitting Fruits, Grain and Grass, sweetly growing and springing in the same.

For the might and beauty of the Summers glory; in the fuller growth and
increase of all.

For the blessing of time, and happy length of days, to contemplate thy Glory,
and enjoy thy rich blessing in these; in all our pleasant Fruits, joyful
harvests, and various delicates of soft Wool, Milk, Butter, Honey, Balm, and
Spices; and for all the Refreshments thou give us in these thy good Creatures.

I revere thy Majesty which with such terror thou do manifest to us in the
Lightenings.

I adore thy greatness, appearing in the Thunderings,

Thine Omnipotency in all,

Thy wonderful Providence over all,

Thy Goodness to all.

I praise thee for our Temperate Seasons, Autumnal fruits, rich and wholesome
Wines, Oils and Siders.

For all the precious things of the Earth,

For the chief things of the ancient Mountains, for the precious things of the
lasting Hills.

For our Stately Woods, and lovely Trees, which afford us Wine, Oil and Spices;
fruits both for profit and pleasure, yielding Timber, also fuel, shade and
medicine.

I praise thee for the beauty, fragrancy, benefit, variety and delight of all
the curious Flowers, the least of them showing us a God, Creator and Preserver.

For our fruitful Valleys, wherein our Corn stands so thick, that they laugh
and sing thy Praises.

For the excellent Bread and daily food thou give us therewith.

For thy blessings on all our several labors, in raising and preparing it.

For thy continual blessing upon us in our daily use thereof.

For all the wonders of thy goodness and wisdom comprised in it.

For all our rich and beautiful Gardens, stately Walks, fruitful Fields,
pleasant Pastures, rich Meadows, Roots and Plants, all sorts of Grain for Food,
Health, Pleasure, and Medicine.

I praise thee for all our Mines of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, Tin, Copper,
Lead and Coal.

For all the Riches, Luster, Virtue, Use and Benefit of precious Stones.

For all our sovereign and wholesome Wells, Springs and Fountains, mavelous
and healing Waters, deep Seas, and Treasures that lie in the Deep.

For bounding the Sea by thy Laws, which though written in sand, stand fast for
ever.

For the magnitude of the Whale, and all the wonderful Fishes of the Deep.

For subduing all things to the service of Man,

I magnify thy name for ever.

For all the Fowls of the Air, in all their warbling Melody, delightful food,
pleasure, variety and beauty.

For all the Insects and creeping things, that are subject to thy care and
providence; the provident Ant, the industrious and curious Be, in its
mavelous working, and delicious Honey.

For all the Beasts and Cattle upon a thousand Hills, in all their strength,
use, service, food and pleasure,

But most of all do I praise thee, for the Children of Men, for the Israel of
God, for the Priests that serve at thine Altar, for all the Spirits and Souls
of the Righteous; for all holy and humble men of heart:

Those Incarnate Cherubims,

Inflamed Seraphims,

Strong Powers against Devils,

Principalities in the midst of contumelies,

Dominions reigning over all enticements,

Those Virtues in a miraculous life,

Those Angels of the Churches, and Archangels, who by close Communion with
thee, illuminate and encourage us to serve thee.

For Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, their courage and miraculous deliverance,

I praise, bless, and magnify thy Name for ever. Saying, Glory be to the
Father, etc.

Thanksgivings for all Persons and Times.
BLessed art thou, O Lord God, who sustainest all things by the word of thy
Power.

For by thine Ordinance all things are and do continue.

Thou give us Rain and fruitful Seasons, and fillest our Hearts with food and
gladness.

With admirable Wisdom did thou create, and do still govern all things.

But above all I admire thy Wisdom, Power and Goodness showed unto Man.

Thou made him of the mould of the Earth, and did breath into his Nostrils
the breath of Life.

Thou did honor him, and create him after thine own Image, giving him a
capacious Soul, sound Judgment, clear Understanding, ready Apprehension, useful
Memory, clear Reason, a ready and obedient Will; so that with these faculties
we can, by thy Divine aid, walk at large in the liberty of our thoughts into
all the Regions of Heaven and Earth, see thee in all times, and before all
time, in that Eternity wherein thou did live, before Time began to be; and in
that Eternity also which shall be when Time shall be no more.

By these powers and faculties of our immortal Souls, we can see thee also by
thy divine Illumination,

In all thy works of Grace,

In thy Government of all Ages,

And in that most stupendous work of Redemption, promised in the beginning,
and performed in the fullness of time, for our Salvation. O Lord our God, how
excellent is thy name in all the World!

It is thou who give us well ordered Passions, sound Senses, Health of Body,
strength of Limbs, and useful Members.

Thou give us peace of Mind, and tranquillity of Spirit, by which only we can
happily enjoy thee, and all things in thee.

It is thou alone, who give thine Angels charge over us, to keep us from
falls, fractures of Bones, Dislocations, Epidemical and noisome Diseases, from
the hands of the violent and wicked man.

Having placed Man in Paradise, when he fell from thee, even then thou did
not despise him; but did open the gate of Life in the promised seed unto him.

Thou did write thy Laws in his Heart, and instruct him in the service of
Sacrifices,

Strengthen our faith by the Oracles of the Prophets;

Enliven our Hearts with the Melody of the Psalms,

Teach us by the Wisdom of the Proverbs;

Evidently point out the coming of thy Son, by Types and Figures,

And at last recompense all their long waitings and expectations, by sending
him unto us,

Who took our nature upon him, and sanctified it in his Incarnation, Birth and
Life;

Redeemed us by his Death and Passion;

Quickened us by his Resurrection;

Exalted us by his Ascension;

Intercedeth for us in his Session at the right hand of the Father.

Sent down his holy Spirit for our Illumination, Sanctification and hope of
Glory.

O blessed be thy Name for giving this Lord of Life, and this Son of thy Love
unto us.

For thy glorious Gospel Evangelizing him;

For the prospect and benefit of his Life and Death.

It is thou most holy Father, who with thine only Son freely give us all
things.

By thee Kings reign and Princes decree Justice.

Thou instructest all our Rulers, and teach our Senators wisdom.

Thou give us Pastors after thine own heart, to fill us with the knowledge of
thee, and feed us with true faith and obedience unto thee.

Thou bring down our hearts for sin, so that we sometimes fall before our
enemies, and there is none to help us.

Again, upon our Repentance thou raisest us up, and breakest our bonds in
sunder.

For it is thou who castest our cords from us.

Thou do not leave us in the hardness of our hearts, but give us preventing
grace, with which if we cooperate, O how sweet and heavenly are the glorious
effects thereof.

Then we feel compunction for our sins, shame of them, hearty indignation
against them, and our selves for them; then the sense of thy Love of thy
Mercies, and of our most base and vile ungrateful abuse of thy mercies, throws
down all the strong holds of sin in us, and fortifies us against them.

Nay sometimes thou do send thy grace so forcibly upon us, that thou do
even compel us to come in unto thee.

Though thou delightest (O thou lover of men) to see thy Voluntary goodness
shine in our Souls!

O would we draw nigh unto thee, with what infinite joy do thou draw nigh
unto us! But thou will not always force us, because thou desire a free
obedience, and love to save us in the best of all possible manners.

The glory of a sinner voluntarily returning, being greater than that of Adams
Innocence, and causing greater joy in Heaven, then there is over ninety and
nine just persons, that need no repentance.

Blessed, magnified, highly exalted and honored be thy Name, for putting such
a power into our hands, of turning unto thee, such desires into our Hearts,
such powerful workings in our Souls; that every true penitent is always turning
more and more unto thee, ever moving to thee, and aspiring after thee; till by
thy grace he be wholly, thoroughly and effectually turned unto thee.

Finding no true satisfaction but in thee, no rest, no comfort, no peace but in
thee.

Thus by degrees do thou wean us from the world, and wed us unto thee. Till
at last we are fully accepted, pardoned, and in Jesus Christ justified, and by
thy Spirit wholly united unto thee:

So thirsting for, and drinking in thy grace, that at last thou give us full
satisfaction in all thy Glories.

Dearest Lord, it is thine own self that workest all our works in us.

And therefore well may thou require all good works from us.

Thou make that good ours, which first was thine,

That so in us thy whole goodness might shine,

For thou alone enablest us to do good, and to resist evil.

Thou teach us how to abound without abusing thy mercy, and how to want
without repining at thy justice.

Thou do help us to overcome, yet crownest us for overcoming.

O wonder of Mercy, miracle of Grace!

It is thou only do comfort us in our sorrows, support us in our trials, and
take care of our welfare in all estates.

Thou give us Songs in the night of affliction, and victory in the day of
temptation.

It is only thou can qualify our turbulent tempestuous spirits, and give us
calmness and serenity therein.

Who could make our impatient natures contented in the midst of all the storms
and tempests of a raging world, but only thou?

It is thou alone do establish our fickle hearts, and fix them fast on thee.

Who give us joy in our reproaches, and in all our labors of serving thee,
peace of Conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost, entire love of our enemies, and
zeal of Souls, -- yet alienated from thee.

O thou that have given us such a sense of them, hear our prayers for them,
that they also may see the felicity of thy chosen, and rejoice in thy Salvation.

That all the Sons of God may shout for joy in the Gates of Jerusalem.

O thou who have showed a miracle of Mercy in converting us who do call upon
thee, show the same upon them who do not yet call (effectually) upon thee.

O Lord God of Mercy convert all Infidels, all dead insensible Souls, into a
true sense of thee; make them and us to yield all obedience to thee. And to thy
Name be rendered all Honor, Praise and Glory for all these and for all other
thy abundant mercies showed unto us, from everlasting until now, and from this
time forth for evermore. Amen.

An Hymn to Jesus, wherein the the Soul may expatiate it self with delight in
Him.
JEsus, the only thought of thee
Fills with delight my memory.
But when thou do thy presence show,
Heaven into my breast does flow!
No Theme for voice so sweet can be,
Nor to the ear such Melody:
No Heart can Thought so charming frame,
As Jesus his most precious Name.
Our hope when we for sins do grieve,
Thy mercies all our wants relieve,
If good to those that seek thy Grace,
What art thou when they see thy face?
Jesus! in whom we comfort find,
Life of our Souls, light of our Mind,
Thou do our Hearts with true joys feed,
Thy gifts our utmost wish exceed.
No eloquence of tongue can teach,
Nor art of Pen this secret reach:
Only the experienced Soul does prove,
What sweets they taste, who Jesus love,
Him then I Will seek retired apart,
Shutting the world out of my heart;
Amidst my business him I Will strive
With fresh pursuits still to retrive.
Early with Magdalen I Will come,
A Pilgrim to my Saviors Tomb,
Wailing my sins with mournful cries,
I Will seek him with my Mind, not Eyes.
My Tears shall on his Grave distill,
My faithful Sighs the Garden fill;
Prostrate before him on my face,
His sacred feet, I Will fast embrace;
Striving to follow where they lead,
Jesus, in thy blessed steps I Will tread.
Nor shall my Soul give over to mourn,
Till to thy favor it return.
O Jesus, most admired King,
Who did triumph ore deaths sharp sting
Thy Mystic sweetness first excites,
Then satisfies all appetites.
Thy quickening visits life bestow,
Thy light true good does clearly show;
That they who once have relisht thee,
Know all the world's mere vanity.
Come then dear Lord possess our Hearts,
Inflame our Love with thy chaste darts,
All clouds of error drive away,
And change our night to thy bright day.
To thee our Hearts and Voices sing,
To thee our Vows, and Prayers we bring,
That when we end this life's short race,
In Heaven with thee we may have place.
A Prayer upon the third Hour.
O Blessed Jesus, being the third hour was devoted to thee by the ancient
Christians, in memory of thy Prayer in the Garden, thine Agony there, suffered
before thy Passion, and of thy sending the Holy Ghost to thy Disciples; accept
of me in Communion with them, doing honor to thy Name therein.

Enable me now seriously to consider, that in that Garden of sorrow to thee,
thou did repair our sin first committed in a Garden. Thine Agony there was so
great, thy Conflict so strong, thy Love so forcible, thy Fathers wrath so
weighty, our Sins so hearty, that thou did sweat drops of blood, pressed out by
thine intolerable anguish for our sins.

I humbly beseech thee to make me, in utter abhorrence of all sin, to forsake
iniquity. Give me a deep sense and sorrow for my sins, and a thorough
conversion to thee from them all.

Let this suffering of thine make me contented with all sufferings for thy
sake. And let thine infinite love therein melt my heart into love of thee, and
fill me with love to all Mankind for thee.

Great, O Lord, was this anguish of thine, when it urged thee to pray that this
Cup might pass from thee.

But greater was thy Love, which did drink it up for me.

Great was thy dolor in thy prayer, but greater was thy obedience.

Great was thy human suffering, but greater was thy divine perfection, that
therein could make so perfect a Resignation.

Great was thy love to our Souls, that suffered such inexplicable torments in
thine own.

Most deeply fervent were thy prayers, when thou did shed thy very blood for
tears.

O let me never refuse to bleed for thee,
Who shedst this strange prodigious blood for me.
O thou who did pray prostrate on the earth, and did repeat the same prayer
thrice: Grant I beseech thee, that by the outward gesture of our bodies, we may
increase the inward devotion of our minds; and in often repeating the same
prayer, may still advance to new degrees of pious affections; make me in all
things resigned unto thee.

O thou who were falsely apprehended and betrayed, deliver me from the false
apprehension and treacheries of Men; and grant, that neither for reward nor
danger, I ever withdraw my fidelity from the; but learn by thy example to do
good with cheerfulness, and to suffer evil with patience.

O blessed Lord, thou did deliver thy self to the violence of thine enemies,
suffering them to bind, scourge, deride and abuse thee in most barbarous
manner. Grant I beseech thee, that the sins of our hands may be loosed, by the
binding of thine; that the scourges due for our sins may be acquitted by thine;
let all our vain affections be confounded by the indecencies cast upon thee;
Grant that when ever thou call us thereunto, we may not only be bound, but
be ready to die for the Lord Jesus.

O by these bindings of thine, deliver us from the chains of eternal darkness,
and bind our Souls and Hearts unto thee, in the Chains of a strong obedience,
and everlasting love; and dissolve (now) all the bonds of my sins.

O blessed Jesus, being bound thus by Annas, thou wast sent to Caiphas, the
high Priest, where thou were yet worse abused, buffeted, and blindfolded.

Have mercy upon me, and make me to remember, that no darkness can hide me from
thy sight, that so I may ever behave my self as in thy presence, and be able to
suffer all things, rather than offend thee willingly any more.

Grant also that for thy sake, who were stripped, mocked, spit upon, wounded and
derided for me; I may patiently bear the devesture of all things, and the
derision of all men for thee; hoping that if I be afflicted for thee here, I
shall by thy mercy and merit be glorified with thee hereafter.

I furthermore approach thee, to commemorate the sending of thine holy Spirit
upon thine Apostles; humbly beseeching thee not to take it from me, but to
renew me daily by it.

Grant me by the same spirit, therefore to have a right Judgment in all things,
that I may both perceive and know what I have to do, and have grace and power
to fulfill the same.

Give me I beseech thee all the gifts and graces of thy holy Spirit.

Give me the spirit of wisdom to be sober, wise, and considerate in all things.

Give me the spirit of understanding to be quick, clear, and distinctive in my
Apprehensions; to distinguish between truth and falsehood, good and evil.

Give me the spirit of counsel, to consult thy holy will and pleasure before I
act any thing. Make me meekly to receive all good counsel, and prudently to
give it.

Give me the spirit of ghostly strength, that I may be modestly confident and
impregnably courageous in thy service.

Give me the spirit of knowledge to know all thy revealed will to me, and all my
bounden duty to thee; that so neither thy Law nor my duty, thy mercy nor my sin
may ever lie undiscerned in my Soul.

Give me I beseech thee, the spirit of piety, that I may ever be devoted unto
thee.

And O my Savior, give me above all things, thy holy filial fear, that I may
never more dare to offend thee.

Deliver me therefore, I humbly beseech thee, from all rashness, inadvertency
and inconsideration.

From a perverse, confused, unstable Understanding;

From refusing Counsel, or neglecting to give it;

From ignorance of thy Will, and my duty;

From all confidence of my self, or diffidence in thee;

From all impiety and profaneness;

From casting off thy holy fear; thereby growing bold or careless in offending.

And now dearest Lord, having implored the gifts of thy holy Spirit, and
deprecated those evils that oppose it.

I humbly beg of thy divine Majesty, the fruits of thy holy Spirit also; that
by finding those within me, I may know thy holy Spirit rules and governs me.

Give me, dear Lord, I beseech thee, an universal love, make me to love thee
for thy self, my friend in thee, and mine enemy for thee.

Give me joy in thee, in thy works, in thy ways, in thy Laws, in thy Saints and
Servants, in all the friends and blessings which I enjoy.

Give me, O Prince of peace, peace with thee, my self, my friends and enemies.

Give me patience in all my sufferings, mercy to all who offend me, or need my
mercy.

Give me meekness in my heart, words and behavior, in all, to all.

Give me a true and irreprovable faith.

Give me modesty in all disputations, shamefacedness amidst all commendations,
sobriety in the midst of plenty, that I never abuse thy bounty.

And with these give me I beseech thee the four Cardinal Virtues.

Prudence to govern me,

Justice to direct me,

Fortitude to discharge my duty,

Temperance to be moderate in all things.

Make me ever mindful

Of Death, to be prepared for it;

Of Heaven, to desire it;

Of Judgment, to dread it;

Of Hell to be delivered from it.

O keep me in with bit and bridle, when I stick not close unto thee.

Make me to delight in the Assembly of the faithful, to be among them, that the
holy Spirit, which thou did send upon thine Apostles, may descend upon me,
even me also.

O my Lord compel I beseech thee my dearest N.N. to come in unto thee: Make
him to see the felicity of thy chosen.

Give him a taste and relish of all these Gifts and Graces of thy holy Spirit;
that he also may be filled with those unspeakable joys, which they feel and
find, who spend their days and hours, spirits, souls, and forces, in knowing,
loving, and obeying thee.

Give me the whole armor of God, that I may resist all evil, and persist in
doing all good.

O give me the spirit of Grace and Supplication, that these and all my other
prayers may be acceptable to thee; blessed to me, and graciously answered for
thy mercy sake. Amen.

A Prayer to the Holy Ghost, out of St. Augustine.
O Love of the Divine Power, the holy Communication of the Omnipotent Lord and
Father, and of the most blessed Son, come down even now I beseech thee by thy
powerful Virtue into my Soul, and get into all the corners of my heart, and by
thy splendour clearly illuminate all the darkness thereof.

Let thy gracious Visitation and abundant dew make my Soul fruitful in all good
works, pierce the most retired parts of mine inward man, with the keen piercing
darts of thy love, inflame me with thy holy fires, feed me with delicious
Viands, replenish me with thy Celestial Graces. Give me so to drink of the
torrents of thy delights, that I may have no taste of vain or sinful pleasures.

Come, O thou comforter of all sorrowful Souls; come thou comforter of the weak
and strength of the strong; come thou supporter of the falling, and thou lifter
up of the fallen; come thou cleanser of our sins, and curer of our wounds; Come
thou teacher of the Meek, and destroyer of the Proud; Come, O thou hope of the
Poor, and reviver of those that faint; Come propitious Star of such as sail,
and haven against Shipwreck; Come thou stay and comfort of those that live, and
thou only hope of all those that die. Have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me,
and make me fit for thy self, and abide in me for ever.

And that thou may abide with me, I do again beg of thee, the fear of the
Lord; because this fear is,

Beautified by Wisdom,

Informed by Understanding,

Directed by Counsel,

Strengthened by courage,

Filled with Knowledge,

And crowned with Piety.

As this fear advances our knowledge, so our knowledge brings us to this fear.

Therefore O thou only spirit of Wisdom, give me this knowledge, that I may
always have this fear.

Such a fear as may make me wise unto Salvation.

Give me wisdom to understand thy Word.

Open mine eyes to see the wondrous things of thy Law.

Enlighten my Understanding, to find out the hidden and glorious treasures
thereof.

Fill me with the love of it,

With all delight in it,

Inspire me to meditate humbly of it.

Make me in every reading or hearing of it, to profit by it; and in all things
to be obedient to it. Amen.

Dearest Lord and most blessed Savior, give me I beseech thee such grace in
meditating, such divine light in understanding thy sacred sufferings in thy
passion for me,

That by faith I may believe in thee, and depend upon thy Merits therein,

By love feel thy sufferings, be crucified to the world, and be transformed
into thee.

Make me willing to suffer any thing for thee.

Enable me to imitate thee, in all thy imitable perfections, and virtues, which
thou have exemplified to me in this thy sacred Passion.

Give me the vast extensive love which thou did show to Almighty God in thy
obedience to his Will, and satisfaction of his Justice.

Give me that great Zeal of Souls which thou had, even to die for their good,
especially their Coversion, as thou did for their Salvation.

Give me, O Lord, I beseech thee, thy Obedience, thy Humility, thy Meekness,
thy Purity and Intention, thy Patience, thy Wisdom, thy Silence, thy
Contentedness, thy Sweetness, thy Mildness, thy Mercy, thy Pity, thy Fortitude
and Courage, thy Constancy and Perseverance, thy Righteousness to cover me, and
all thy Merits to save me.

Glory be to thee, O Lord most High. Amen.

A Prayer for the Sixth Hour.
O Blessed Jesus I now commemorate thy holy Sufferings for me, both in
thankfulness to thee for them, and for the application of them to my poor Soul,
as also to offer them up to thy holy Father, for the full satisfaction of all
my sins.

O dearest Savior, how were thou led for me as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as
a Sheep before the shearer is dumb, so thou openedst not thy mouth.

Thou did turn thy back to the smiters, and thy cheek to the nippers. Thou
were mocked and whipped, and rent and torn, defiled with spittle, wounded and
scourged, harshly and terribly nailed, and crucified for me: Yet in all thy
sufferings thou did nothing but good to thine enemies, and did pray with
loud cries for thy persecutors.

Have mercy upon me, plant in my heart, I beseech thee, gentleness and
patience, a meek and long suffering spirit, quietness of mind, and stability of
Soul; that I may never more be transported with violent anger; or be disordered
and discomposed by an offensive peevishness, much less ever think of revenge.

Give me grace, dear Lord, mildly and rationally, lovingly and discreetly, to
reprehend my Inferiors, sweetly and tenderly my Equals, and freely to forgive
all.

Give me patience in all injuries and contentedness in all conditions and cross
accidents. Make me with charity return good for evil. Deliver me from an evil
tongue and a turbulent mind, from an angry spirit, and a cross contentious
humor: Let thy example convert me, thy sweetness mollify me, thy gentleness
soften me, thy sufferings heal me, thy blood cleanse me, thy death satisfy thy
Fathers wrath, and save me. Fill me with thy Graces that I may imitate thy
Virtues, and by thy Merits be replenished with thy mercies here, and with thy
Glories hereafter. Amen.

Blessed Lord, thou were charged with the heavy burden of thy cross; O for thy
mercy sake, discharge me of the heavy burden of my Sins.

Thou were led up to Mount Calvary; lift me up I beseech thee to the Mount of
Heavenly felicity.

Thou were nailed betwixt two Thieves, be pleased to place me between thy
Saints and Angels.

Thou did charge Simon of Cyrene with thy Cross, make me with him contentedly
to take it up, and follow thee.

Let me not by folly make it, but with all obedience and cheerfulness take it,
when thou shall impose it upon me.

Dearest Lord, I see by the light of Faith thy sacred Arms stretched and
extended upon the Cross for me; O by that infinite love of thine, that made
thee endure all this for me, have mercy upon me, and save me. Receive me now
into those arms of mercy, and secure my Soul for ever unto thee.

O thou who at the Sixth hour and only the sixth day, did fasten the Sins of
the whole world with thy self upon the Cross; cancel I beseech thee the
handwriting of our Sins which is against us, and take it quite away from us.
Let all these sufferings of thine satisfy for what I deserve to suffer, and
deal not with me after my Sins, neither reward me after mine iniquities.

Let the nails of thy Feet nail my Affections, which are the feet of my Soul
unto thee.

Let the nails of thy Hands nail all good works unto mine.

Let the Meditation of the Thorns wherewith thou wast crowned for me, pierce
mine Eyes unto Tears, and my Heart with sorrow, for thy Sufferings and my Sins.

O let the most precious Blood which issued out of all thy Wounds, wash me
clean before thee, and keep me clean. Let me not after such a Bathing ever be
polluted more.

O dearest Savior, who did hang naked, wounded, wrackt, ten^'d, tortured,
and bleeding even to death upon the Cross for me, to offer up the only
propitiatory Sacrifice, by which thy Fathers wrath can be appeased, have mercy
upon me.

For in this thy alsufficient satisfaction I place my only hope of Salvation.

O let me never confounded be,
Since all my Hope is placed in thee.
I come, dear Lord, I come unto thee, O take me into the Comprehensions of
thine unalterable and everlasting love; for thou have opened thy Heart, as well
as thine Arms, to receive me.

As thine Arms of Mercy are stretched out for me, behold my Heart is by the
hand of Faith reached up unto thee.

O let us be joined together, and never divided more.

By thy Sufferings grant me deliverance.

By thy Stripes let me be healed.

By thy Wounds let me be cured.

By thy Blood let me be saved.

As thou have the pain, O give me the ease of all thy Sufferings. Ease me O
Jesus of the burden of my Sins.

By thy Crown of Thorns, pricking and wounding thee, adorn my Head with a clear
Understanding here, and the Crown of Glory hereafter.

For thou have paid the price of my Redemption, that I may get the purchase of
thy Kingdom; therefore I adore thine unspeakable goodness, I delight, I rejoice
and glory in thine infinite Mercies.

I desire to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

O let the powers of the Cross prevail against all the powers of darkness.

Let thy patience and love on the Cross reconcile me to all persons and
sufferings.

Let the peace of the Cross reconcile me to thy Eternal Father, and bring me
peace of Conscience.

Let thy pains on the Cross mortify all my evil and corrupt affections.

Let thy Victory on the Cross give me victory over all my spiritual enemies.

Let thy Patience satisfy for my Impatience.

Thy Obedience satisfy for my disobedience,

Thy Humility for my pride,

Thy Love for all my uncharitableness.

Give me such Patience, Obedience, Humility and Love, as may make me live
conformable to thee, and make thy Merits effectual to me.

By thy Prayer for thine Enemies, do thou mediate and intercede for me.

By thy care of thy Holy Mother and Saint John, take care of thy Church and me.

By thy Mercy showed on the Thief, have mercy on me, powerfully convert me and
all sinners unto thee.

By thy strong loud cries unto thy Father, hear my prayers, and let my cry come
unto thee.

By thy thirst after my Salvation, give me the benefit of this thy Passion.

By the Vinegar and Gall given unto thee, make bitter every sin unto me.

By thy finishing all things foretold of thee, finish my course of sining
against thee.

By thy Recommendation of thy self into thy Fathers hands, receive my Soul into
thy Almighty protection here, and to thy everlasting Glory hereafter.

By all thine unknown Sufferings felt by thee, but not understood by me, have
mercy upon me.

By all thy dolors during the three long hours thou did hang bleeding on the
Cross for me, have mercy upon me.

By all thine anguish thou did feel in the suspension of the divine aid, have
mercy upon me.

By the immensity of thy love in this thy most copious Redemption, have mercy
upon me, and fill my Soul with the love of thee.

By all the barbarous outrages which thou did endure for me; deliver me from
all mine Enemies visible and invisible.

My dearest Lord be thou the only supreme love of my heart, and the life of my
Soul.

Let thy Virtues be in all my Actions, and be thy honor the sole end of all my
intentions.

Let me live in thy Wounds, and for ever remain in thy love.

O my dear Lord Jesus, thou heavenly Physician of all humane nature, thou great
and glorious, and eternal King, remember I beseech thee, all the bitter pains
thou did endure in all thy sacred members, when thou were hoised up on the
Cross for me: And let not my Soul be lost which cost thee all those
inexplicable pains. Make me feelingly and thankfully to remember how all thy
precious body was rent and torn, thy sacred limbs tortured and rackt, thy head
pierced, thy bones disjoynted, and all thy body broken for me. Let me never
forget this love of thine or ever offend thee more. From the crown of the head
to the soal of the foot, thou had no part left whole in thee.

Never suffering like thine.

Never dolor like thine.

Never love like thy love.

Yet were thou unmindful of all thine own Sufferings, and did pray to thy
Father for thy cruel enemies.

O by this mercy of thine, give me love and mercy to all that offend me; and do
thou now have mercy upon me.

Grant that I may always have such a devout memory and feeling of thy Passion,
that it may be a most powerful protection of my Soul against all temptation.

O thou who hanging on the Tree, did there make satisfaction for the sins of
the world, have mercy upon all Men.

Convert the Obdurate,

Convince Heretics,

Reduce Schismatics,

Call in the Jews,

Bring in the fullness of the Gentiles,

Make all the Profane to tremble at thy Word.

Inflame all lukewarm Christians with an holy zeal unto thee.

Take pity on those who do not pity themselves.

Bring us all into obedience unto thee.

O holy Father accept of this propitiatory Sacrifice of thine only eternal Son
for the full pacification of thy wrath, and for the satisfaction and salvation
of all returning sinful penitent and believing Souls.

Bring all that are ignorant of this thy Sons redeeming love, to the knowledge
of it and thee.

Since it is life eternal to know thee O holy Father, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent.

Make all those who are ignorant of the terms of the Gospel, to know and
embrace the same

Bring in all who are out of the Covenant of Grace, by sincere faith and
unfeigned Repentance, into Covenant with thee.

Convert those in particular, whom I am obliged to pray for effectually.

Keep my Soul for ever from offending thee;

Let this sweet peace my Savior has purchased with his own blood, never more
be broken, between me and thee.

Let none of my rebellions break it, keep me from sin, that it never be
disturbed.

O blessed Jesus, as there was darkness at the hour of thy Passion over all the
Earth until the Ninth hour; deliver me from all the works, and from the place
of everlasting darkness, by thy holy sufferings in this hour. Amen.

O sovereign Lord and blessed Savior, Jesus our only Redeemer, Savior of the
World, who by the sole motive of thy mercy, did humble thy Soul to the death
for our Redemption, and ascend to thy Father for the full accomplishment of our
peace; graciously apply to our Souls the infinite Merits of thy sacred Passion;
and with thy precious blood cleanse us from all our sins; nail them to thy
Cross, hide them in thy Wounds, bury them in thy Grave, that they may die in
us, and we live in thee, the life of Grace here, and the life of Glory
hereafter, wherewith the Father and the Holy Ghost, thou live and reignest in
the Unity of the Glorious Trinity, ever blessed World without end. Amen.

Prayers for the Ninth Hour.
O Blessed Jesus, I come now to commemorate thy holy Death, which after all thy
pains, hanging so tedious a time on the Cross, thou did suffer at the Ninth
Hour, in full satisfaction for all our sins.

O by this death of thine, have mercy upon me, let it kill, crucify, and
destroy all sin in me, let me die unto the World, and live henceforth only unto
thee.

At the Ninth Hour was thy Heart pierced with a Spear; O transfix my Heart unto
thee.

By that precious Water and Blood shed for me, have mercy upon me; wash,
cleanse, purify, heal my wounded and defiled Soul! Then blessed Jesus did the
virtue of the Holy Sacraments flow from thy sacred side; the Water by which we
are regenerated, the Blood by which we are redeemed, give me evermore the
virtue and benefit thereof.

Then was thy sacred Soul separated from thy Holy Body; O separate me from this
evil World, and unite me wholly unto thee.

Then did thou admit the Thief into Paradise; O admit me into thy Heavenly
Kingdom.

For all these stupendous Mercies, I praise and magnify thy Name for ever,

I beseech thee that the power and effect of all thou have done for me, may be
saving to me.

Make me now to feel the horror of Sin, and the sorrow due unto it, that has
cost thee thy life, and the very last drop of Blood, to make atonement for it.

O that I could comprehend the immense love of my dying Savior, that I might
make some grateful return of love unto thee.

Why should not the sense of thy Weeping make mine eyes to overflow with tears
for offending?

Why should not the Blood which thou did shed for me, make me desirous to
shed mine for the love of thee?

O my dear Lord, let thy thirsting breast, make mine to thirst and languish
after thee; inebriate me with the delicious viands of thy grace and love, since
my Soul can take no satisfaction in any thing but thee.

O fountain of living Waters, to thee I come, let me by faith drink up the
Water and Blood which flowed from thee.

As thy Heart was broken for me, break mine with sorrow for offending thee,
proceeding purely from the love I owe unto thee.

Hide me in thy wounded side, till thy Fathers indignation be over past.

By thy precious Blood save me.

By thy holy Water cleanse me.

By thy prevailing death give me life, and

By thy Resurrection, Glory.

O blessed Jesus, what a bill of payment have thou here discharged? what an
acquittance have thou made for me?

The Rocks did rent, the Graves open, the Heavens mourn, the Earth did shake at
thy Passion; and shall I evermore make leight of any transgression more?

O strike the Rock of my hard Heart, that it may kindly flow forth in tears for
thee, as thou did overflow in tears of blood to ransom me.

Open the grave of my dull and earthly Soul with thy Almighty power, and
enliven the dead therein, even all my powers and affections, that abundance of
holy thoughts may rise out of it in thankfulness for thy Passion; with
multitudes of praises for my Redemption.

Shake the earth of my Heart with terror at the approach of every sin; that I
may die rather than commit one known wilful sin against thee more.

Blessed Lord enclose my Soul now in that Heart of thine, which was opened with
the Spear for me.

There I delight to dwell, for I have desired it.

There will I live, and suck life, and draw Salvation from thee.

Thy wounded Heart is my Sanctuary, my comfort in sorrow, my refuge in trouble;
here let me live and die, and be secure for ever.

I desire nothing but thee, I languish after none but thee, all satisfaction
lies in thee.

I desire to creep into this hole of the Rock, and there to lie close with
intimate, individual adhaesion to thee, with fullness of love and obedience.

O nourish me in it, fill me with that love which made it, and I will return it
all in thanksgiving and love unto thee.

Additional Devotions for the Evening.
O Blessed Jesus, by the eye of faith I now behold thee dead upon the Cross for
me; and see good Joseph of Arimathea, thy holy Mother and Saint John coming to
take thee down from the same. Among whom I also by faith desire to come, upon
the Ladder of holy Thoughts, with the shroud of my Heart to receive thee.

O give me the myrrh of Mortification,

The bitter Aloes of sorrow for my sin,

And the odor of divine Virtues, to present and embalm thee with.

O that I had tears to wash thy sacred body, all begored with blood and spittle
for me.

O that I were but gratefully sensible of thine unspeakable love in all thy
sufferings!

As these good men did draw out the Nails all begored with blood, be pleased to
draw out all the nails of Sin, which lie in my body, corrupting my poor Soul.

Fetch out all my corruptions, though thou rent and tear me in the cure.

Thy wounded shoulders and rented hands were ripped from the Cross; so fast did
the bloody nails, and thy love above all, fix thee thereunto.

O dear Lord, loosen me quite from the World, and from every vain affection
that would withdraw my Heart from thee.

O fix the memory of thy Sufferings in my Heart, and my Heart fast unto thee.

As thy Servants took thee down in their Arms, vouchsafe to receive me into
thine.

Methinks I see thee laid in thy Mothers lap while they shroud thee;

Dear Lord, I lay down all my affairs in the lap of thy divine Providence,
desiring to rest sweetly, thankfully, and most contentedly in all thy
dispensations toward me. I resign my self, my Soul, my Estate, my Friends, and
all that I am or have unto thee. Thou have bought and redeemed me to be thine,
and thine only will I be for ever.

Make me to spend hours and days in contemplating thee, and thy miraculous
sweetness; to vapor away in acts of Love, Adoration and Thankfulness to thee,
for this thy redeeming love unto me.

And now, dear Lord, I see thee taken away to thy burial also, and laid in a
new Sepulcher.

O make me a new Heart, and take thy repose in the same.

I see thee buried for me;

O bury all my sins in the Grave with thee.

And thou who were in that night of sorrow before thy death in thine Agony, at
Prayer for me in the morning, condemned the Third hour, crucified the Sixth,
dead and pierced the Ninth hour, and taken down from the Cross at Even-song;
who wast now buried for me, have mercy upon me, give me grace daily and duly to
apply the same unto my Soul, as being my only Help, Health, and Remedy, for in
thy Merits, Death and Passion, is my only hope of Salvation.

Therefore let my life be hid with Christ in God.

Let me count all things but dung to gain thee.

For whom have I in Heaven but thee, O Lord, and there is none upon Earth that
I desire in comparison of thee.

Compline.
HAving now, dearest Lord, passed this day in health and safety by thy divine
Providence, I give thanks unto thee.

Blessed by thy holy Name for any good I have done, or for any evil I have left
undone; since it was by thy Grace only that I performed any good, or did
forbear any evil.

Blessed be thy Name for thy Mercies received, for thy Judgments escaped, and
thy goodness enjoyed this day.

O let not my days consume in vanity, nor my years in trouble, but let every
day add some knowledge, some practice and some virtue to yesterday.

Holy Father, I beseech thee by the Merits of thine only Son, to pardon me the
sins of this day; and take me now and ever into thine Almighty protection.

O that thou would visit me with the visitation of thy Saints; O that thou
would show me the felicity of thy chosen! O that thou would open mine eyes
in the Visitations of the night. O that thou would give me Songs in the
night, that I might never cease day nor night from praising thee.

O that while mine Eyes sleep, my Heart might always wake unto thee.

O fill me with love, fill me, O Lord, with the most enflamed love, that ever
any of thine had unto thee.

O that I had all the love of all thy Saints and Angels comprised in my Soul,
to pour it out unto thee.

Lord, thou have not denied thy blood to redeem my Soul; do not, O do not deny
me thy love to replenish it.

I desire to empty it of every thing else, fill it with thy self for ever. That
as of thy fullness we have all received; of the fullness of my love thou may
receive such a full obedience and duty, that I may be thine, and only thine for
ever.

O make me to think upon thee in my Bed, and to remember thee when I am waking.

Let my first and last thoughts, yea, let all my thoughts be of thee, and let
thy blessing most blessed God be now and evermore upon me.

O make me to be early up at my Prayers and Praises unto thee. Amen.

A Prayer for Lent.
MOst Holy, and ever Blessed Lord Jesus, who did fast forty days, and
fortynights for me and all thine, to teach us that Prayer and Fasting were
necessary fortifications against the assaults of the Devil, and all his
Temptations, as also to satisfy for all our excesses by Intemperance, and for
all deficiencies in our Retirements and Prayers; I adore thy goodness, and
humbly implore thy grace and acceptance of my Humiliation before thee these
forty days, which I now enter into, and continue in, in memory of, and
conformity to thee.

I offer up this holy time, in honor and love of thee, in imitation of thy
Saints, in obedience to thy Church, in sorrow for my sins; as an act of
indignation against my self in hearty confession, that I am not worthy of the
least of thy mercies; to deplore my weakness, to implore thy assistance, to lay
before thee all my wants, to beg thy supplies, to meditate upon thy life, death
and passion, and to be thankful for the admirable work of our Redemption; to
show thee my wounds, and to creep into thine for cure; to judge, condemn and
deny my self, that I may not be judged, condemned and denied by thee. I correct
my self, that thou may spare me; I abhor my self that thou may pity me;
and I desire to die to the world, to live with thee. I desire not only to fast
for sin, but above all from sin; so to meditate upon thy Life, Death and
Passion, as to make most grateful returns of love and obedience. In serious
care to imitate all thy Virtues, truly conforming my self to all thy imitable
perfections. Since if our Humiliations produce not these effects, it may well
be suspected they have more of formality, humor or hypocrisy, than true
sorrow and integrity.

Therefore I earnestly crave thine Almighty aid, and grace for my sincere
performance.

Help me, dear Lord, to search and try my heart; to discover, discern and
eradicate all my sins; to empty my self of all vanity; and do thou plant in me
true sanctifying grace and constant piety.

Help me to overcome all my Infirmities, and especially those which by my
corrupt nature, careless and evil customs, inadvertency, or condition of life,
I am most subject unto.

Help me also, dear Lord, to make worthy preparations for the holy Sacrament,
that having chastised my self in this time of willing and obediential
Humiliation, I may come out so cleansed, healed and restored by thy Death and
Passion, that I may partake of all the joys of thy glorious Resurrection.

Give me therefore I beseech thee, blessed and happy opportunities of
Retirement and Introversion, with the grace of profitable Meditation, and a
lively faith for effectual Application. Give me the blessing of health and
strength to perform the same; make me so earnestly to implore all thy Graces as
to attain them; so to deprecate thy Judgments, that thou may ever withhold
them, deliver me from all vain and sinful company, from great disturbances, and
from all destraction that may impede my duty to thee.

Give me a discerning Spirit that I may know the duties of my calling, that I
may neither be negligent of it, nor too solicitous in it. Give me opportunities
of doing good to all, but especially to those of the Household of Faith, for
both the Will and power comes from thee.

Make me a comfort to the afflicted, a help to the poor and needy, an
encourager and example of virtue, a discountenancer of Vice, a meet help for my
individual Relation in all things, but especially in the best.

Help me to bear injuries patiently, to take contradictions easily, to forgive
all freely. Make me a true, a prudent and a faithful friend, a kind neighbor,
a good Master (or Mistress) in my Family, liberal to the poor, and truly loving
to my Relations.

Tender and compassionate, meek, humble and courteous to all. Make me as much
to honor thee, as ever I have dishonored thee; as much to please thee as ever
I have displeased thee.

O that thou would make me a great instrument of thy glory; and though
without thy grace I can do nothing, enable me so, that I may experimentally
say, and evidence to all the world, that through thy grace I can do all things.
That thy strength may be seen in my weakness, and that from the greatness of my
sin and misery, the greater glory may arise to thine infinite goodness and
mercy.

Lord, do thy work of Grace speedily and mightily upon me, and make thy servant
unalterably constant in thy faith and service; to which end bless all the means
of grace unto me. Let my private devotions so fit and prepare me for thy
public Worship that all thine Ordinances may be profitable to me, that so by
thy Grace derived from them, my whole life may be acceptable in and through my
blessed Lord and Savior.

A Daily Thanksgiving.
I Praise thee for electing me before all time,

For creating me in time,

For redeeming me in the fullness of time;

For all the parts and mysteries in my Redemption.

For thy patient forbearance of me so long a time;

For giving me a time to repent, and repentance in that time;

For justifying me in thy good time,

For my Sanctification at all times,

And for my hope of Glorification when time shall be no more.

I praise thee for thy wonderful mercy in preserving me from a thousandfold
dangers, miseries, diseases, falls and troubles, which without thy mercy had
befaln me.

For delivering me from those calamities I have so particularly feared, and so
much deserved.

For delivering me out of all the mire of iniquity, and those sinks of sin in
this evil world, which without thy grace and mercy I had fallen into, and perished
in; if thou had not snatched me as a firebrand plucked out of the fire.

For all the blessings of thy bounty which we daily receive from thy mercy.

For thy supply to me in all my wants.

Thy relief in all my necessities,

My comforts in all my sadness.

For the kindness, affection, ability, support and comfort of my dear H.

For preserving him in health and safety.

For thy miraculous preservation of us from the late Plague, in time of eminent
danger.

For keeping us from drowning, and from all hurt and loss by fire.

For preserving us from Falls, Fractures of Bones, Dislocations, Hurt, or loss
of any of our members, or senses.

Above all I praise thee for making me a member of thy Holy Catholic Church,
and the satisfaction I enjoy therein.

For the miraculous preservation of the King, and thy wonderful Restoration of
thy Church

To some degree of its wonted glory,

To a full degree of thy saving Truth.

And to a peaceable possession of our ancient Privileges.

For the joy of thy Courts in the beauty of Holiness,

For the comforts of all our solemn Assemblies,

For an able, pious, and learned Clergy,

For a willing, obedient, and conformable Laity,

For the glory of our Festivals, and all the glorious mysteries contained,
commemorated, and reduced to practice in them.

For our Weekly, Monthly, Quarterly and yearly Fasts; in our Fridays, Eves,
Embers, and Lent;

For the excellent uses designed in them,

For the unspeakable benefits derived from them,

By giving us (in holy abstinence,)

Life to our Prayers,

Light to our Understandings,

Vigor to our Affections,

Wings to our Devotions,

Examination of our Consciences,

Sorrow for our Sins,

Acts of penitence for them, and charity against them.

I praise thee for our excellent Liturgy, containing penitential Confessions,

Effectual Absolutions,

Charitable Intercessions for all,

Invocating thy Mercies,

Deprecating thy Judgments,

I praise thee for the Tears, sighs and groans of our Hearts, Souls and Spirits
at our Prayers, to the delight of God, and the joy of Angels.

For the Music of our Songs and Praises,

For the Harmony and unity of our Versicles and Responsals.

For our strong, loud, powerful Cries, to importune thy mercy.

For our soft, silent dropping Tears to move thy pity.

For our Regeneration in Baptism,

Our Renovation in the Eucharist,

Our daily growth and comfort in the means of Grace.

For our comforts and increase of grace in the Seals of Salvation.

For the Infallibility of thy Holy Word.

For thy Judgments denounced therein to keep us from sinning.

For thy saving promises to keep us from despairing.

For thy Righteous Laws, Glorious Attributes, wonderful works, and all the ways
of thy divine Providence, making our faith and dependence strong in thee.

I praise thee for the great delight of the Mosaical part of thy Word, showing
us thy Wonders, Laws and Ordinances, enriched with thy second Covenant, which
was believed and depended on by all the Holy Patriarchs.

I praise thee for the Historical part of thy Word, declaring to us thy Wisdom,
Power and Providence, in the Ecumenical Government of thy Church and People,
both under Judges and Kings; making Monarchy to succeed Aristocracy, because
far exceeding it.

I praise thee for the History and Patience of Job;

For the Poetical part of thy Word,

In the Melody of the Psalms,

The Instructions of the Proverbs,

The mirror of Vanity,

The transporting Raptures of the Canticles,

The melting Lamentations for our Sins, and thy Judgments.

I praise thee for the stupendous Prophetical part of thy Word, whereby we are
filled with wonder at the mysteriousness of thy Prophecies, and raised to
exultation in seeing their Accomplishments.

And for all those heights and depths, not yet revealed, but still obscure, is
thy Wisdom, Power, and Majesty to be reverenced.

By which springs of Glory thou have made all our fresh springs to arise in
thee.

But if in thy Law and Prophets thy Gospel lay concealed, how glorious in thy
Gospel, that brings us a Savior, by whom thy Law is fulfilled, and thy
Prophecies revealed?

I praise thee therefore with intense and fervent praises for thy glorious
Gospel above all, which brings us the tidings of a Savior, sent from Heaven to
redeem and restore lost undone and fallen man.

I praise thee exaltedly most holy Father for my dear and blessed Savior.

For his Miraculous Incarnation,

Joyful Birth, sharp Circumcision,

Glorious Epiphany, painful and concealed life till his Baptism.

I praise thee for his Prophetical Office then taken and executed, in his
Sermons of Salvation, excellent precepts, gracious Promises, Miracles,
Prophesies and works of mercy.

For all his hard Labors, Travels, on foot, Watchings, Tears, Fastings,
Prayers, and humble life of pain and poverty for our example and encouragement
therein.

For his Priestly Office in his Life-giving and all-saving death; wherein he
sacrificed himself for the Sins of the whole World, and even for me, as if
there had been no other.

I praise thee for his Kingly Office, manifested in his Almighty Resurrection,
Triumphant Ascension, Regal Session at the right hand of God, and his
Intercession for us.

For the glorious descent of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost.

For the blessed presence, residence and assistance of the same spirit upon thy
holy Church throughout all Ages.

For the knowledge of an Incomprehensible Trinity in an undivided Unity; thy
Name be blessed and praised for evermore.

I praise thee also for the Glorious Acts of the Holy Apostles.

For the propagation of thy Church by them.

For the riches of Wisdom, and the sacred Mysteries that lie hid in their
Epistles.

The Humility of their Lives,

Their courage and patience in suffering,

Their Charity in forgiving,

Their powerful declamation against Vice,

Their practice of Virtue,

Thy spirit of truth in all.

And for that Map of the Celestial Canaan in the all-bright and glorious
Revelation, thy name be blessed and praised both now and for evermore. Amen.

I praise thee also for the successful Ministry of thy Word in all Ages since.

For the Learning of the Fathers,

The Holiness of their Lives,

Their zealous Devotions,

For the Tears, Watchings and Prayers of all Christians,

For their patience in suffering, and courage manifested in the Primitive Times.

For thy saving truth shining more or less in all times.

For the excellent Preaching of thy Word in our times,

For the cooperation of thy Spirit with it,

To the awakening of our seared Consciences,

The melting of our hard Hearts,

To the dividing between the Soul and Spirit, the Heart and Reins.

For the discovery of our Sins,

The quickening of our Spirits,

The fear of thy Judgments,

The hope of thy Mercies,

For the Reformation of our Lives.

I praise thee also for all those who have benefited me by their Writings,
Sermons, Discourses, Prayers, Books, Rebukes and Advices, and for all other
helps unto Heaven.

I praise thee for all thy sanctified afflictions, to chastise my rebellions,

For all the unkindness of Friends, ingratitude and contempt of enemies,

Thereby to wean me from the World,

Scowre me from my rust,

Refine me from my dregs,

And unite me closer unto thee.

For raising me up many comforts and Friends,

I neither deserved nor thought upon.

For giving me the grace of Penitence;

The super-exalted love of a Redeemed, and the care and piety of a regenerated
person.

For upholding me from falling,

For lifting me up when I was down,

For strengthening me in my weakness,

For confirming me in goodness,

For the Conversion of all Sinners,

For thy patience in waiting for their Conversion,

For thy pardon of the Penitent,

For thy Justice on the Obstinate,

For thy preventing and initiating Grace,

Thy illuminating and cooperating Grace,

Thy restraining and restoring Grace,

Thy renewing, assisting and quickening Grace,

For thy many great, strong, loud calls by thy Judgments,

For thy soft melting whispering calls in our Consciences, to turn unto thee.

For alluring us by thy Word, read and preached,

Thy Mercies and thy Judgments,

Thy Divine Inspirations,

The stings of our Consciences in sinning,

The humility and fear of a pardoned person,

For making Sin bitter unto us,

The burden intolerable,

I praise thee for giving us any hunger or thirst after Righteousness.

For any power thou give us to do good works, and for thy blessing upon those
we do.

For a good and right understanding,

A ready unloosed Tongue,

A clear apprehension, and a little comprehension of divine things.

A serviceable Memory,

An obedient will at any times to thy calls.

For giving me a great love to thee, my friend in thee, mine enemy for thee.

For the comfort and delight thou give me in my Prayers and Praises.

For the fidelity of my Friends,

The love of my Neighbors,

The good acceptance thou give me with all kind of persons,

For the interest thou give me in the souls of men.

For any love, care or Conscience that is in my servants.

For giving me a Heart to pardon mine enemies.

For the gratitude thou do enable me to pay to my Friends,

For my compassion of others, and theirs on me.

For giving me grace to leave the World a little, before I was by thy Judgments
forced to leave it altogether.

I praise thee for all the Ministry of Angels:

For my Guardian Angel,

For all the faithful departed,

For thy great Graces given to them,

Their good example given to me,

For the Suffrages and Prayers of all Saints.

For my Communion with them, and with all those who are at Prayers with me now
in this holy hour.

For the large capacity and extent of my Soul, that can be in union with all
Ages past, present, and to come, worshipping, praising and adoring thee.

For enabling me so to rejoice in thy Glories, to dilate upon thy Excellencies,
to delight in thy Service, so as if all our affections were united in one holy
individual oblation of our Souls and Bodies unto thee. As if all Souls were in
one, and one so in all, that we could never more be divided from thee; nor
cease from the love and service we bear unto thee, nor be separated from each
other in thee.

I praise thee for preserving me from all perils and dangers, either by day or
night.

For that portion of Health I now enjoy.

For the contentedness and thankfulness thou give me in all estates.

For all the necessaries of this life.

Healthful dwelling, quiet, safety, plenty of food and raiment.

For all the retirements and happy opportunities thou give me, of Reading,
Praying and enjoying thee.

For assisting me to overcome (in any measure) any of those great Infirmities I
am subject to by nature.

For all thy gifts of Grace and nature, infused or acquired, attained by study
or experience in the world.

For any good use I make of them.

For all thy wonderful Mercies to me and mine, blessing us in all good things.

For thy great preservation of us in many dangerous Journeys, and deliverances
out of very many great troubles, which my Soul recounteth unto thee.

For all these and for all other thy Mercies, known or not known, manifest or
secret, willingly or unwillingly received, I praise thee, I bless thee, I give
thee thanks, and I desire to praise, bless and give thee thanks all the days of
my life.

What am I that thou should look upon such a dead dog as I am.

What reward shall I give unto the Lord, for all his benefits toward me,
especially in that he has spared and forborne me until now?

Holy, holy, holy, thou art worthy to receive Honor, Worship and Praise, now
and for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer for Christmas Day.
HOly Jesus, who being infinitely higher than the Heavens, did condescend to
look on the Earth, to come down, and visit us, with the saving Presence of
thine Eternal Godhead, clothed with our Manhood in the Virgins Womb; let this
miraculous grace of thine effect another miracle in me: Let it raise me by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and change me by a new Birth, and exalt me to a
Divine and Heavenly life, that I may forsake the world, and live unto thee. O
thou who did assume thy Body and Soul for me, that we might be members of thy
Body, and of thy flesh, and of thy bones; unite me unto thee, make me sensible
of thee my head, fill me with the joy of thy Nativity, and give thy self unto
me, who wast born for me; that I may be thine, and my beloved mine, for
evermore.

O Eternal Glory of the Father, veiled over with mortal flesh, remove the vail
from off my heart, clarify my understanding, and draw me near unto thee; that
I may know the mystery which was hid from Ages and Generations, but is now
revealed for our Glory. Receive me to thy self, make me one with thee, and be
thou more dear unto me than all the world?

O thou who did vouchsafe to dwell in the dark Cloisters of a Virgins womb,
thou who did vouchsafe to close thine infinity within the confines of Humane
shape, and advance our Humanity to the Throne of God. Prepare the Temple of my
Soul, make it bright with knowledge and wisdom, come and dwell in my
understanding, take possession of my will, reign within my heart, let thy
Scepter of Righteousness be exalted over me, and become the rule of my thoughts
and actions.

O reign over all the World, and let the Righteousness and true Holiness
wherein thou delightest, prevail and prosper in the Earth, let the Souls be
saved which thou have redeemed. Amen. Amen.

A Prayer for Easter Day.
ETernal Son of the eternal Father, who wast a man of sorrows, and art now the
Lord of Joys, look down from Heaven thy dwelling place upon me thy Servant, who
rejoice in thy glorious and blessed Resurrection. Thou have broken the Bars of
Death and Hell, for it was impossible that he that was innocent should be
holden of them: Thou have broken down the gates of the prison of the Grave,
because thou have satisfied thy Fathers Justice, He knew thy ability and
therefore he trusted thee with so great a debt. He knew thy Power, and
therefore did commit so weighty an employment to thy sacred Hands. O cause me
to know thee my Savior to be the Son of God by this glorious Resurrection. Let
it quicken me, and raise me up, who am dead in sins and trespasses.

Our Surety has paid the debt, and is come abroad, let all the Earth rejoice,
and be glad in him. Sing O Mountains, and break forth into singing all the
valleys in the World; for our Redeemer and our Savior has conquered Death,
Hell, and the Grave. Let the light of his Resurrection transform the World into
Heaven, and turn the Wilderness into Eden, let it restore a better Paradise
than the old one unto us. Let the power of his Resurrection quicken all the
dead in sins, and convert all the Kingdoms upon Earth, and make them the
Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, wherein Truth, and Peace, and
Righteousness may reign for evermore.

O my Soul, thy lover and thy friend, that was killed, dead and buried, is
alive; and he is able to save unto the utmost all them that come to God through
him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for us. He by, and for whom the
Worlds were made, loved thee to the death. O let his Love inflame thee, and
turn thee all into Love; and let the love of God which passes all
understanding possess thy Soul and Body for ever. Let the Love of Christ
constrain thee to forsake iniquity; and to esteem nothing easy, honorable or
delightful, but that which is so to him. Love all that he loves, hate all that
he hates.

O Jesus, the love and life of my Soul, be thou my sovereign Lord and Friend,
my only treasure and possession; be thou my Wisdom and my Glory, my Kingdom and
my Crown, my Life and Blessedness; be thou all in all to me. Let thy will be my
will, and thy pleasure mine. As thou came to do the Will of thy Father, let
it be my meat and drink to do thy Will, to glorify thy Name, and finish the
work which thou have given me to do. O give me the Image of thy Soul, and let
the same mind be in me that was in Christ Jesus, both toward thine Eternal
Father, and toward all thy Creatures. Let me despise all the vanities which
thou did contemn, that I may enter into thy Joys, and live in Communion with
thee for ever. Amen.

A Prayer upon the Day of Pentecost.
O Lord my Light, my Life and Confidence, my Love, and my only Happiness; I
place my whole hope and trust in thee. I now expect from thine infinite Bounty
thy Holy Spirit, which thou have promised in thy mercy. O send out thy Light
and thy Truth unto me. Thy Word is Truth, thy Spirit is Truth, thou O God art
the God of Truth. Inspire me with thy Truth, and make me to know the Truth;
embrace, love, live in the Truth, believe and speak the Truth; serve, obey and
praise thee in Truth now and for evermore.

O blessed Jesus, all the Treasures and Joys thou gave us in thy Birth, all
the Mercies and mysteries of thy Life, all the Benefits of thy Death and
Passion, all the Victories and Joys of thy Resurrection, all the Triumphs and
places thou give us in thy Ascension, all the advantages of thy Session and
Intercession are locked up and sealed in this promise of sending the Holy Ghost.
Till he unlock and open these Treasuries to us, till he illuminate us in, and
fit us for them, till he reveal and apply them to us we cannot enjoy them. O
send thy Spirit then into us, and seal all thy Mercies by him upon us now and
evermore Amen.

Confession of Sin, out of Bishop Andrews.
I Confess, O Lord, that I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my Mother
conceived me;

That I was brought forth in uncleanness,

That I am a root of bitterness,

A wild Vine of Sodom,

A branch of the wild Olive,

A child of wrath, a vessel of dishonor.

My heart is rebellious like a starting bow,

My throat an open sepulcher, venting folly,

My lips so polluted, that my tongue talks nothing but vanity.

Mine eyes and my tongue uncircumcised.

I have a forehead of brass, and a neck of iron.

My hand slow to do good, and my feet swift to do evil.

I have sinned against thee, O Lord, and trespassed in thy sight, not fearing
thy Majesty.

My sins are in quantity large, of long continuance, from my Mothers womb,
deep, heavy, like a burden, like lead, reaching to Heaven with their cry.

Many in number like the Stars.

More than the hairs of my head, or the sands of the Sea, oftentimes
reiterated, as a fountain casting out waters, till they become as a habit, as
red as scarlet and crimson.

For I am sold under sin, I sin till they become natural to me, like the
Aethiopian's skin and the Leopards spots.

In quality sins as strong as cords and cart-ropes, gaining nothing thereby,

For a handful of Barley and a little Bread,

Committing sin with greediness, sin upon sin, with impudence, not being
ashamed, knowing it to be sin.

Giving offense thereby, unthankfully like the dog to the vomit.

Like the Sow to the mire.

Therefore, O Lord, because thou art just, and thy Judgments true.

I do (or may) reap the fruit of my foolishness;

For what fruit have I in those things whereof I am now ashamed.

My days are consumed in vanity, and my years in the bitterness of my Soul, and
now there is no health in me, because of thy displeasure, nor any rest by
reason of my sin.

My Heart trembles also for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments.

I feel bitterness beyond the bitterness of death, for ever forsaking thee, or
being forsaken by thee.

Woe unto me rebellious wretch for so doing, by which I become so vile, I loath
and abhor my self.

I have roared for the very disquietness of my heart.

And what shall I now say, or how shall I open my mouth?

What shall I answer, seeing I have done these things?

Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

When I have not what I can farther say or do, this only remains, this is my
last refuge, that I direct mine eyes unto thee.

Out of the deep have I cried unto thee, O Lord, Lord hear my v^ice.

If thou Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who may abide it.

Enter not into Judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living
be justified.

Wherefore, O Lord, I appeal from thee unto thee,

From thee a just Judge, to thee a merciful Father.

From the Throne of thy Justice to the seat of thy Mercy.

O Lord be pleased to admit of this appeal, if thou do not, I perish, and
carest thou not that I perish, who would have all to be saved, and none to
perish?

I am thine, O save me.

Despise not the works of thine own hands, who hate nothing that thou have
made.

I am thy servant, the Son of thine handmaid.

I am called by thy name, I am the price of thy Blood.

O spare thy workmanship, spare thy child.

Thy name, the price of thy Son's Blood;

But I am a sinner, and God bears with sinners, be pleased to bear with me
and remember of what I am made.

Remember that I am but dust,

Frail flesh, light wind, loose dust, and wilt not thou, O Lord, break a leaf
driven to and fro by the wind, will thou pursue dry stubble.

Behold, O Lord, though I have sinned, I humble my self before thee.

Spare the humble and contrite,

David spared Shimei that railed on him, and David was a man after thine own
heart, therefore do thou spare me.

Ahab forgave the King of Assyria his offenses upon his humiliation.

Was there ever King of Israel so merciful as thou art?

Thou therefore, whose very nature is to have mercy, have mercy upon me, spare
me and be not angry with thy servant for ever, but for the sake of Jesus
Christ, turn away thy wrath from me, and be reconciled to me.

Accept the sacrifice of a contrite heart, and grieved Soul, a wounded spirit,
a troubled conscience, pity me and spare me, though I have so grievously sinned
against thee.

It has ever been thy practice to be merciful,

They trusted and were not confounded.

Thy Mercies have been ever of old,

When I look at the Generations of old, I see never any trusted in thee and was
confounded, and thou never did despise those that called upon thee.

Remember thy word unto thy servant in which thou have caused me to hope.

Thou have blessed the man that trusts in thee, my whole trust is in thee,
let me never be confounded.

Thy Mercies, O Lord, are comfortable better than life, many, plentiful, and
tender, superabundant, wonderful and infinite, preventing us, following us,
compassing us, pardoning iniquity, transgression and ^n.

Thou art the Father of Mercies.

Thou sparest when we deserve punishment, and in thy wrath think^ upon mercy,

Gently correcting in the midst of wrath, remembering mercy.

It being of thy mercy, that we are not consumed.

O how do thou wait, to have mercy upon us! with thee is plenteous Redemption.

And thy mercy and thy pardon extends not only to small sins and sinners, but
those that are great;

Such as Peter who forswore thee;

Such as Paul who blasphemed thee;

To the Thief on the Cross;

To the Adulteress Mary Magdalen;

To David and to Manasses.

Thou biddest those that have played the Harlot with many Lovers, return unto
thee.

And all those are recapitulated and summed up by thy holy Spirit, for comfort
and assurance of thy mercy to us also in Jesus Christ.

In whom thou have given us great and precious promises, and in whom all the
promises of God are Yea and Amen.

Therefore Jesus thou Son of David have mercy upon me.

And by thy name Jesus be a Savior to me.

Lord, do not so remember my sins, as to forget thine own Name,

But hear me, forgive me, intercede for me.

O reconcile thy Father to me; say unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation.

Where sin has abounded, let Grace superabound.

God has concluded all under sin, that he might have mercy upon all.

O blessed Lord, thy Son my Savior Christ once suffered for sin, the just for
the unjust; he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

He bids all that labor and are heavy laden, come unto him, and therefore,
most holy God, blessed Jesus receive me, have mercy on me,

Justify me freely,

Sanctify me effectually,

Cleanse me thoroughly,

Receive me graciously into the arms of thy protection and unspeakable mercy,
and secure me from all mine Enemies, visible and invisible.

Deprecations out of Bishop Andrews.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath.

Cast me not off for ever.

Cast me not away from thy presence.

Hide not thy face from me.

Forsake me not, put me not to shame, O turn away reproach.

Let not mine enemies triumph over me.

Deliver me not over to their will, preserve my life from them.

Deliver me, O Lord, from hardness of heart, from impenitence.

From grossness, dullness and deadness of spirit.

From all impudence, or over bold confidence.

From a seared conscience, and a dull reprobate mind.

Form the sin unto death, the sin against the Holy Ghost.

From all superfluity of naughtiness.

The weight of sin, the lusts of the eyes, and pride of life.

From all wicked and vain desires, hurtful,

Vain, unprofitable, foolish and sinful thoughts.

From desire of vain glory, or enduring it.

From lying lips and a deceitful heart or tongue.

From hands stretched out to covetousness.

From feet swift to do evil, from eyes or ears,

Open to vanity or destruction.

From errors or blindness of judgment, inconstancy of mind, sinful words and
actions, envy, hatred, rancour, malice, and revenge,

Good Lord, deliver and preserve me for ever.

Root out of me all profaneness and superstition, pride and indecency,

Anger and contention, swearing, cursing,

Violent passion, inordinate affection,

And cleanse me from all my corruption, deceit, fraud, lying, slandering, envy
and malice.

Take from me all gluttony and intemperance.

Give to me the virtue of Abstinence and Temperance.

Take from me the spirit of uncleanness,

Give to me the love of chastity,

Take from me all love and desire to this vain world,

Give to me the love and desire of Heaven,

Take from me all perturbation of mind,

Give to me a contented mind,

Take from me the heat and violence of anger,

Give to me the spirit of meekness and true humility,

Take from me all immoderate care of this life,

Give to me the constant care of eternal life,

Give to me all spiritual joy,

Take from me all sinful joy,

Take from me all haughtiness of mind,

Give to me compunction of heart humility.

Good Lord deliver me.

In all my prayers hear me,

In all my thinkings, speaking, and writings,

Inspire, instruct, and direct me,

In all my infirmities, pity and help me,

Out of all temptations deliver me,

From all falls, fractures of bones,

Dislocations, noisome and grievous diseases,

Good Lord deliver me.

From all dangers of Fire and Water.

From thy wrath and everlasting damnation,

Good Lord deliver us.

And let thy grace, mercy and blessing be now and evermore upon us.

Intercessions for all Mankind.
I Beseech thee, O Lord, for the Conversion of Turks, Jews, and Heathens to the
Truth.

For all Christians,

That they may be strengthened that stand,

That they may be converted that are in error;

For the Churches throughout the world;

That they may be united in Religion;

For our Church, that whatsoever is amiss in it may be amended.

For the Kings Majesty and his prosperity;

For all Christian Kingdoms;

For ours and each part of it;

That it may flourish in peace;

For the Clergy, that they may teach and live well.

For wisdom in the Council,

Integrity in the Judges,

Strength in our Armies,

Discretion in the Magistrates,

Obedience in the People.

The prosperity and good success of Merchants, Husbandmen, Artificers and
Tradesmen, that they may live carefully and honestly in their Vocations.

For the prosperous education of Youth in our Universities and Schools, and
other parts of the Kingdom.

For our Parents, Kindred, Friends, Benefactors and Neighbors.

For those of whom we have the charge committed to us, either in Church, Common
wealth or Families.

For our enemies, especially those that hate us without cause; that God would
convert them.

For those that commend themselves to our prayers; and those whose affairs and
troubles will not suffer them to pray as they ought.

For those who are in affliction of body or mind;

In danger or want; in prison or condemned to death.

For those that excel in qualities of mind, in strength of body, in abundance
of wealth,

That they exalt not themselves above their Brethren, but do good with their
gifts and advantages.

For those which undertake any notable action, which may redound

To the Glory of God,

The Peace of the Church,

The Honor of the Kingdom.

A Christians Dedication of himself unto God.
I That am a wretched sinner, here personally appearing, and prostrate before
the presence of the everlasting God, having in remembrance the exceeding mercy
of his great goodness toward me, whom he has created of nothing, preserved,
sustained and loved when I was most unworthy of any thing, whom he has of his
incomprehensible clemency so often invited to repent; and whose conversion and
amendment he has so patiently expected; as also having in memory, that at the
day of my Baptism, Christning, I was so happily and holily vowed and dedicated
unto my God to be his child, and to live in his continual service, grieve that
contrary to the profession then made in my name, I have often displeased his
Glorious Majesty.

I have so many and sundry ways so execrably and detestably violated my Vows,
profaned my sacred promises, and employed my soul to the service of the world,
the flesh and the devil, that I have thereby despised the graces, and contemned
the goodness of Gods Divine Majesty, and deserved everlasting perdition; but
now at length recalling my self, and in all lowly devotion and devout
obedience, here casting my Soul and Body prostrate before the dreadful Throne
of his Justice, I acknowledge and confess, and I yield my self a most miserable
wretched sinner, guilty of that Death and Passion which Christ once suffered
for me upon the tormenting Cross. But turning my self to the Throne of his
infinite Mercy, and with all my might from the very bowels of my heart,
detesting the iniquities of my fore-passed life; I most humbly beg and crave
pardon for the same with an entire absolution from all my sins, even for the
precious Death and Passions sake of my Lord and Savior; upon whom as upon the
only foundation of my hope I repose all my confidence, and unto whom I promise
and confirm again, I vow and solemnly renew the sacred profession of loyal
service and fidelity which was made in my name, and in my behalf unto him in my
holy Baptism, renouncing unfeignedly the vanities of this wicked world, the
lusts of my sinful flesh, and the suggestions of the Devil; and converting my
self to my most gracious and most merciful God, I desire, deliberate, purpose
and fully resolve to honor him, serve him, love him, and obey him, now and for
ever hereafter, giving and dedicating to him for this end, the powers of my
Soul, the affections of my Heart, and the faculties of my Body, to be his
faithful, loyal and obedient servant for ever, without unsaving, revoking or
repenting me of this my holy and sacred promise or any part thereof. And I most
humbly beseech Almighty God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, to confirm me in
this constant resolution and to accept of this my broken and contrite Heart,
which he has promised not to despise, entirely desiring his fatherly goodness
that as he has given me a will to purpose, so he would give me strength and
grace to perform all holy actions, through Jesus Christ.

A Prayer for acceptance of acts of Humiliation or Abstinence on Fasting-Days.
LOrd Jesus, who both by thy Word, and thine own example, have taught us to
deny our selves, and by thy Apostle have counseled us to judge our selves, that
we be not judged of the Lord. I offer unto thee this act of Abstinence, not out
of a proud conceit of satisfying thy justice by it for the least sin, or
meriting any the least favor at thy hand; but in a pure acknowledgment that
through my manifold sins, I am unworthy of so liberal an use of thy good
Creatures, and even of the necessary sustenance of life; in an holy revenge
upon my self for former excesses, through heedlesness, or wanton appetites; in
an humble desire of bringing forth some fruits worthy of repentance; as also in
honor of and conformity to thy hunger and thirst, abstinence and austerity,
voluntarily undergone by thee, to expiate the errors of our excesses.
Beseeching thee graciously to accept of me and mine, as thou usest to do to
those that love thy name, and fear thy wrath, and are displeased at themselves,
for having displeased thee, and that judge themselves to prevent being judged of
thee. Purge and purify our humiliations and abstinencies, from all hypocrisy,
vainglory, and self-pleasing, and offer it to thy holy Father in the Union, and
through the merits of thy holy Abstinences, for the averting of thy Judgments,
and for procuring of thy grace and favor (for my self and others) to the
beating down of the body, and the bringing of it into subjection, to the
crucifying of the flesh with the affections and lusts, for the disposing of my
Soul to the more free influences of thy Divine Grace, to fit me for Prayer,
Meditation, and all other Blessings wherewith thou usest to crown the worthless
service of thy poor Creatures, infinitely beyond their deserts, in such sort as
shall seem good to thee, and be expedient for us, to thy Glory, and to the
Glory of the Father, and the Holy Ghost, Three persons and one God, world
without end.

Evening Thoughts and Exercises to Bedward.
The ADVICE.
DO not dare to go to Bed in such a state, with such a conscience, in which you
do not dare to die. For who can tell whether this night your Soul may not be
required of you. Having retired therefore, and set God before you, and your
self before God, stir up your self to an act of self-examination thus, or to
this purpose.

The MEDITATION.
SEE O my Soul, the day is past, the time of working is over, the night is come
and invites us to rest, our life is one day shorter than it was in the Morning,
and what if it be our last?

Our gracious Lord has given us this day to serve him, and what service have we
done him, to work out our Salvation in, and what have we done toward it? How
have we spent this day, how has it past, from our down-lying to our uprising,
to the first hour, the third, the sixth, the ninth, to the Evening, to this
hour, where was each hour spent, and with whom, and in what employment?

2. What were the considerable passages of each hour, what was done by us, what
devotions, businesses, recreations?

Have we ordered our Conversations aright to Godward in the exercises of
Religion, Prayer, spiritual reading of this Book, or other good Books of
Devotion, looking up to his hand in all things that befell us, both the good
and the evil; directing all our doings to his Glory?

To our selves in the exercises of prudence, ordering all our affairs wisely;
of Temperance, moderating our selves, Actions, Appetites, Affections; of
Courage, both doing the good we had the power and opportunity to do,
notwithstanding the difficulty or danger; and suffering the evil that befell
us, bearing afflictions, pains, losses, injuries with patience, and (as much as
may be) with cheerfulness.

To others in the common exercises of Respects, Justice, Charity, in our proper
duties according to the special obligations of our Relations, Callings,
Offices, etc.

How have our thoughts been busied about wholesome good things, or vain,
impertinent, sinful, dwelling upon such with delight? Our Affections, have they
been set on things above, or altogether on things of the Earth? Our Senses, how
have they been disciplined, or have they been loose or wanton, wandering,
especially our Eyes? Our Words, have they been few, discreet, gracious; or have
they been light, vain, offensive, boasting, censuring? And our doings, of what
worth in themselves, or benefit to others; or have they been of little worth in
themselves, or small benefit to others? Our carriage, how grave, harmless,
affable, obliging, patient, or otherwise?

How have we kept our Rule, our Hours, our Measures; have we done all we were
to do to day; our daily tasks, our accustomed devotions, our proper businesses,
have we not exceeded (for there is the danger) in our Refections and
Recreations; have we done every thing as we ought? Have willing distractions,
and careless indevotions stolen in upon us? Our business was it begun with that
purity of intention, carried on with that diligence and industry, and with that
constancy and unweariedness that was fitting, till brought to an end? our
Refections and Recreations, were they used with that sobriety as was meet, and
broken off with cheerfulness, to go fresh to our Masters service again?

3. Were all things done in their due and set time; or did we fail, (otherwise
than for necessity or charity) out of inconstancy in good things, or
tediousness of our proper business.

4. Lastly, have we done what we might have done, by the means afforded us, by
the opportunities offered us, such hints given, such impulsions moving, such
occasions inviting? Or have we done contrary, have we failed in any one kind,
or more, in our duty or manner of doing it, by omission not doing what we
ought? And how often and how deeply, and why did we so?

Then sum up readily what comes to mind in every kind with ordinary intention
of mind, and without study; such has been our Lords blessings, such his
provisions for us; such his scourges (if any) such temptations to prove our
faithfulness, and for return of service, thus and thus have we done, no better,
in answer to all his love and care for us:

All his talents, helps, means, opportunities, impulsions, restraints upon us,
and these our rebellions (if any gross sin) these failings, (that we know of)
and for our secret sins, who can tell how often he offends, and worse than thus
we had done, had not he upholden us with his hands, prevented, supported,
restrained us by his grace. Lord, I know I have done amiss, I have done evil in
thy sight, thou alone know how much, how evil.

Thou see my Soul wherein thy discharge lies, in a peace offering of Praise,
a sin-offering of sorrow and contrition for offenses committed, with a promise
of better obedience: These make up the Evening Sacrifice, and with these
prepare to meet thy God.

A Prayer against Afflictions.
HEavenly Father, seeing thou art willing so to have it, let the cup of thy
wrath and displeasure pass from us, and let the cup of thy blessing be ever
amongst us, expose us not good Father to those bloody and grievous conflicts
with the powers of Hell and darkness, which thy Son sustained for us; Oh lay no
more upon us than thou shall give us strength and patience through him and for
him, to undergo and vanquish, Make us to triumph as conquerors in this victory
over Hell and Satan, over all the power of the enemy. Amen.

A Brief Soliloquy by way of Admonition.
FOrasmuch as the violence of sickness which ordinarily goes before death,
hinders us often from applying our selves in due manner to God in our last
duties, suitable to that estate; to prevent such hindrances it will be to very
good purpose, O my Soul, to make choice of some solemn time of Retirement,
every year, if not every week, or day to do such duties in, beforehand, which
then we should, but cannot so well perform.

An Exercise Preparative to a good Death, consisting of several Acts of Piety.
VIZ.
I. Submission to the sentence of Death. II. Thanksgiving for all benefits of
the life past. III. Confession of our Sins. IV. A Prayer to die to Sin. V. A
Petition for the Virtues of the dying Jesus, with special recommendation of
those of our charge to Gods grace and blessing, and of our own spirits into the
hand of God.
I. A Submission to the Sentence of Death.
O Lord my God in most profound humility of Soul and Body, I cast my self at
the feet of thy Divine Majesty, adoring thee as my Sovereign Judge, who have
pronounced against me and all sinners (in the first man that sinned) the
sentence of death, saying, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return. In
homage of thy Divine Justice, I submit from my Soul to the sentence then
pronounced against me, acknowledging it most just and due to me both for that,
and infinite other sins of mine, that I have since committed against thee.

As also in homage of the bloody and shameful death of thy Son Jesus Christ,
who after that he had suffered unspeakable sorrows of his soul in his Agony and
bloody sweat offered up himself a Sacrifice for mine, and the sins of the whole
World. I resign my self wholly to thy Will touching my death, at least I desire
so to do, for the time and place, and manner, and all circumstances, that all
be according to the high pleasure of thy holy Will. If thou have ordained that
I die a painful death and even a shameful death; or that I should be forsaken,
and cast off by all humane succors, so my God be ever with me, I submit. If I
should be void of reason or sense by the extremity of my disease, so as to fall
into any idle, or even evil words, any thing against the Catholic Faith, thy
house, or the purity of the Christian profession, I yield my self a living
sacrifice to thee, to do and to be done with as it shall please thee.

Only I make this protestation, that I abhor from my soul, and renounce, and
hereby revoke all or any such words as may be offensive to Christian ears as
none of mine, humbly begging this my protestation may be entered in thy Book,
resolved and ready by thy grace (if thou should call me) to die for the
honor of thy name, of the Christian Catholic faith and religion, to thy glory
and the eternal salvation of my poor soul, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

II. Having accepted the sentence of Death, the first thing we are to do is to
prepare for an holy Death, to be thankful to God for all the benefits of this
life.
GRacious God, the fountain of all goodness and all Graces, out of the
storehouse of whose all sufficiency, Angels and Men, and all Creatures have
received all the good that is in them, that they have, and that they can do. I
bless and adore thy sacred Majesty for all thy goodness to all, and especially
to me and mine, for all thy blessings of my being and well-being, from the
first hour of my conception to this day; from the womb and from the breasts, to
my riper years, to my age of full strength (to my gray hairs) for all thy
blessings in the Ordinances of Nature and Grace, and for the hopes of glory;
for all the Blessings of my Creation, Redemption, Preservation, for all the
good things thou have bestowed upon me, and all the evil thou have saved me
from, or kept from me, bodily or ghostly, for the abundant supply of all my
necessities of body and soul; for all my worldly comforts and ghostly comforts,
for all thy mercies in forgiving my infinite transgressions; for all thy
patience in bearing with my follies, and for thy long-suffering in my errors
and strayings, expecting my return, and for all thy goodness in receiving thy
child, thy prodigal Child so graciously; for all the gifts of grace, for thy
holy Spirit, and for all the means of Grace, and for the good use of it and
them.

For all the good thou have done me by thy self or others, Angels and Men, the
Ministers of thy providence to me, for the good of my soul and body; and for
all the good thou have wrought in me, and for giving me grace and strength in
the discharge of my duty to thee and my neighbor; for all and every of thy
blessings in every kind which are infinite for number, and for worth
invaluable, and every way unspeakable, whatsoever from thy bounteous hand I
have received, I thankfully return my heart and soul in a most grateful
acknowledgment of thy infinite Bounty, and my unworthiness, with the tribute of
all possible love, honor and praise; beseeching thee to the vast heap of all
thy unspeakable blessings to add this one more of a thankful heart, that with
joyful lips, and a glad heart, I may praise and bless thee, all the days of my
life, whilst I have any being here, and in the land of the living, in Heaven
hereafter, everlastingly. Amen.

III. After Thanksgiving for all Benefits it will do well to make a confession,
and beg pardon for all our sins, and to do it, as if it were to be our last.
LOrd God who did make me for nothing else but to serve thee, and love thee,
who art most worthy of all love and service, and to whom I have infinite
obligations so to do. With shame and blushing I confess I have not loved nor
served thee as I ought; nay I have dishonored thee, and offended thee as I
ought not; doing what thou have forbidden, and not doing what thou have
commanded. In my thoughts, in my words, in my actions, by all the senses of my
body, and all the powers of my soul, and all the Creatures which thou have
given to serve me in thy service, transgressing thy Commandments infinite ways
by numberless Transgressions. O my sins, my many sins, my grievous sins, my
ingratitudes, my unfaithfulness! O that my soul were all sorrow, my heart full
of Contrition, my eyes of Tears, (and if it might be tears of blood) to blot
out my offenses against a God so glorious, so gracious; whom having all the
reason in the world to love, honor and to please, I have so little loved, so
much dishonored and offended; if all the torments and martyrdoms in the world,
all the violent and voluntary sufferings, that such a wretch could endure, were
sufficient to expiate my faults, sure I would (at least I should) undergo them,
to make amends for my Injuries against my God, my dear God. But alas they
cannot repair the least injury, nor satisfy for the least of my offenses. But
this is my comfort, thy Son my Savior has done it for me; he has honored
and pleased thee in all holy obedience, in all his thoughts, words and actions,
by all his senses, the powers of his soul, and members of his body, and by all
the Creatures of the world he made use of, yielding exact obedience to thy holy
will for me, and by the sorrows and sufferings of his soul and body made full
satisfaction for all my sins.

Him therefore I offer up to thee, and all that he has done and suffered for
me, that as thou have promised, I may be accepted to pardon, grace, and favor,
through him in whom thou can not but be well pleased. Holy Father, look upon
thy Son, thy beloved Son, and pardon thy ungracious servant.

Lord, set thy sorrows and sufferings between my Sins and thy Fathers wrath,
that his justice being satisfied I may be received to mercy; and as to God, so
to all Men and Angels, and all Creatures whom I have injured; do thou satisfy
all my injuries and offenses, that none of them come in against me to accuse me
at that day, but that I may have a clear and full acquittance through thy
blood, O my dear Redeemer, whereby thou have fully purchased me, that I may be
wholly thine. Amen.

IV. A Prayer to die to Sin.
LOrd Jesus Christ, who did die for me, to the end I should no longer live to
my self, but unto thee who diedst for me, and that so I might reckon my self
dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God in righteousness and true holiness;
mortify in me wholly the life of sin, and of the old Adam, that all my sins,
and even the affections and lusts thereof may die before me; that I may be
perfectly dead to the world, and to my self, and to all things else, but thee.
Mortify in such a manner, my eyes, mine ears, my tongue, my hands, my feet, my
heart, and every member of my body, and all the powers of my Soul, that I may
no more see, hear, or speak, or do, or walk, or think, or wish, or make any use
of any Member of my body, or faculty of my Soul,to the service of (...) service
of (...) may retain (...) ^ctions (...) such (...) and (...) course (...) thy
servant in this world to (...), when death comes it find me not unprepared, but
that I may receive and welcome it as my summons to a better life, where there
is no sin, nor temptation, nor misery, nor want, nor pains, nor death, but
bliss and happiness, and joy and fullness of pleasure, and life for evermore.
Amen.

V. A Petition for the Virtues of the Dying Jesus.
LOrd Jesus, teach me when the time of my dissolution shall come, to depart
this life as thou did, with the like holy affections and dispositions of soul
that thou had; that I may loose hold not only of my sins, and all that is
sinful, but even of all that is in the world, the chiefest of the allowed
comforts of it (my dearest Friends) and even my self to be ready at thy call as
thou wast at thy Fathers. Teach me as thou did earnestly to commend to thy
Father the care of the Catholic Church, and especially of this of England my
dear Mother, to keep her in unity and purity to the end. Teach me then (and
even now and till then) to give good spiritual counsels and instructions to
those about me, as thou did to thy followers. Teach me from my heart to
pardon all mine enemies, as thou did thine; and to pity and pray for them;
with all other high and holy lessons of the Cross; of submission to the hand of
God, his heavy hand; of patience in pains of body, and sorrows and heaviness in
soul; contempt of the world, obedience to the death, and all other those
virtues which in the last act of thy life thou did in a most eminent manner
practice in thy self, leaving the pattern for an example to all, and to me in
particular, that I might practice them in my last Act, and leave them as a
Legacy to all mine. Particularly teach me the art of true love to, and of a
right care for, all mine, that I leave behind me; that as thou did commend
thy blessed Mother to the care of thy beloved Disciple, so may I all my nearest
Relations, my -- my Friends; to such as St. John was (if such be to be had)
beloved of God and faithful in their trust; that they may be so carefully
instructed and bred up in piety and virtue, as to live in holiness and
righteousness all their days, that when they come to depart this world (as I am
now a doing) we may meet and enjoy one another in thee, in bliss everlasting.
But if no such there be, to whose hands I may leave them (or if there be, there
is none to thee I consign them over unto thee, the only friend of the
friendless, that thou conducting them, either by thy self, or by the Ministry
of such faithful friends of their Souls as thou shall raise them, they may so
pass with innocence through the things temporal, that finally they lose not the
things eternal. And that I may not be ungrateful to all other my Benefactors
whom thou have used, as thy instruments to convey thy Blessings Spiritual and
Temporal to me, for what I can make no return to them of, I earnestly recommend
them to thee, to the riches of thy bounty and mercy to reward them sevenfold
into their bosom, humbly beseeching, that they may find mercy in that day, and
abundant recompense in the day of recompense, for all the good they have done
to me in thy name and for thy sake. Amen.

And now my God, and my all, as having nothing in the world left me but my
self, (my sins I have renounced, and all my affections to them as none of mine)
and the dearest pledges of my love, which I have past over to thee, as no
longer mine but thine), I cast off from me all the care of my self, and cast
all the care of me upon thee; put off this earthly tabernacle of flesh, when,
and as it pleases thee, and return it to its ancient dust, and commend my
Spirit (delivered from this burden of flesh) by the Ministry of thy holy Angels
to be presented to thy Father (as pure and spotless as thy Divine Blood can
make it) that among those he has given thee (according as thou have prayed and
thy Father granted) it may ever be where thou art. And now what have I to do,
having taken leave of earth, and sent my thoughts and desires, and hopes, (and
in them my soul) to Heaven, but to languish, and call, and cry, and not to
cease, till I breath out my soul into thy hands. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.
Amen and Amen.

DEus vitae meae quam vane consumpta sunt, quam infructuose elapsa sunt tempora
mea, quae dedisti mihi, ut facerem voluntatem tuam in eis, and non feci! quanti
Anni, quot Dies, quot Horae perierunt apud me, in quibus sine fructu vixi coram
te! Quomodo subsistam, quomodo levare potero oculos meos in faciem tuam, in
illo magno examine tuo, si omnia peccata mea, vel tempora mea and fructus
requisiveris singulorum? Patientissime pater, non fiat hoc, sed sint in
oblivione coram te. Et quae perdidi tempora (heu multa sunt nimis) and si quae
te juvante utiliter servavi, quorum O domine numerus brevis est, in memoria
aeterna fac permanere. Fiat amande Pater saltem hoc residuum temporis mei
fructuosum, and sanctificatum in Gratia tua, ut in diebus Aeternitatis inveniat
locum and computabile sit ante te. Amen.

FINIS.

