A SERMON Preached at St. Martins in the Fields, To the NATIVES of that Parish:
Upon the 29th. of May, 1676.

BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF His Majesty's Birth and happy Return to His Kingdoms.

AS ALSO The Day appointed for their Yearly Meeting and Feasting together.

By JOHN HORDEN, Rector of St. Michael Queen-hithe, London.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1676.

Imprimatur,

G. Jane, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris domesticis.
Jun. 6. 1676.
TO Mr. John Clayton, Mr. Charles Palmer, Mr. Charles Titford, Mr. John Heames,
Mr. Thomas Nicholas, Mr. John Steel,
Stewards for the Day.
Gentlemen,
WHAT it was that should make you so earnest for the Printing of a Discourse,
which was only designed for that particular Audience unto which it was
preached, I cannot possibly imagine, unless it were thereby to make your
Meeting more publicly known, in hopes that your good Example might prevail
upon others, and stir up a forgetful People, to celebrate the Day with that
Solemnity which is due unto it: If so, I must confess your Design is necessary
and good; and I am content thus at the expense of my own Reputation to become
serviceable unto it: though I could wish you had made choice of some better Pen
for that purpose, and laid your commands on such a person, as was able to have
spread abroad your Fame, without the imminution of his own. However you see I
have obeyed and (which is all I do pretend to) showed in that, how much you
have at your command,

Gentlemen, Your most affectionate Countryman, and very faithful Servant, John
Horden.

II. SAM. xix. 14, 15. And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as
the heart of one man, so that they sent this word unto the King, Return thou
and all thy servants.

So the King returned and came to Jordan, and Judah came to Gilgal, to go to
meet the King, to conduct the King over Jordan.


THAT on those days, which as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. cxviii. 24. the Lord
has made, we may rejoice and be glad; that at such times, as God has made
more especially remarkable, by the then vouchsafement of great and signal
favors, we ought to manifest our joyous acceptance, to evidence our grateful
resentments of them, by the most full and demonstrative expressions; there are
none I think, who will deny, but such as are professed enemies to Gratitude,
avowedly against all returns unto the mercies of their God, and do, for being
so, deserve to have their choice become their punishment; as they delighted not
in joy, so to have it far from them; as they have sullenly chosen a sinful and
unseasonable melancholy here, so to have their future portion, where there is
weeping and wailing for evermore. If then the present day be such, if it appear
that the Lord has been pleased to signalize it, by Kindnesses of such note,
Mercies of such a rank and quality, as the revolution of many years has seldom
been crowned with, the solemnity of this present Meeting is sufficiently
justified, and Reason will warrant so righteous an indulgence of our Joy. And
though to entitle any day unto so great an honor, as is that, of being the day
which the Lord has more particularly made, it be enough, that on it, we have
received any single instance of his extraordinary Goodness; yet here to
ascertain the claim of this, beyond the questioning of the most scrupulous and
doubtful, for greater sureness the thing is doubled, and a succession of
Mercies has confirmed this Glory to the Day.

For first, It is the Birthday of our King, a Name which methinks it self
affects, and cannot be mentioned without emotion; The morn which did first give
light to him, who is the breath of our nostrils, and the light of our eyes; the
day which brought forth an universal blessing to the Land, but did confer
particular honors on this place, such as should reach unto its after
offspring, such as does give to us the Natives of this Parish, such a more
especial relation to our King, as does I Am sure ennoble us, and will I hope for
ever endear him, make him precious as our eyes, and more desirable than life
unto us. And certainly, if we think fit to observe the time of our own
Nativities, and gladly keep the day, on which we wept out the first beginnings
of life, as an omen of those future miseries unto which then we were born; with
much greater reason we ought to celebrate the Birthday of our King; to the
prudence of whose Government, under God, we owe the correction of our evil
fate; to whose care we are indebted, that under it we may live peaceable and
quiet lives; to whose Authority it must thankfully be referred, that we are
restrained from that violence and evil, whereby we are naturally prone to
ruinate our own and our Neighbors felicity, to make our selves and others
miserable. And upon this very account have all good Subjects in all ages,
solemnized the Birthday of their King, with far greater Religion than they
have done their own, thought themselves more obliged then to enlarge their
Praises and Thanksgivings unto God. Nor was it ever otherwise, till over this
latter Age Impiety and Rebellion together did prevail; when men began to lay
aside all Respect, both to the Lord and his Anointed, and thought it equally
superstition to celebrate the Nativity of their Savior, and Birth of their
King.

But secondly, As it is the day of his Birth, so is it also the day of his
Restoration; the day whereon he was Restored, a second time to breath that
Native Air, unto which he had been so long a stranger, and bless our eyes,
which too long had wanted their dear delight. And here we cannot make enquiry
into this other happiness of the day, without bringing our faults to mind; we
cannot reflect upon our present joy, without calling also to our remembrance a
foregoing sorrow; the darkness of that long and gloomy night, which clouded the
former Glories of this Day, and robbed us of all the Joy that his Nativity had
given us. He was indeed born with us, but like the greater prodigies of
goodness, which the Heavens for a show, do only drop on Earth, and soon again
resume unto themselves, he quickly disappeared; so much still the more for our
guilt and shame, that the hand which gave him took him not away, that the
Heavens which showed him to us, did not him withdraw; but when God who gave it,
was willing still to have continued the favor to us, we wilfully forsook our
own mercies, would be wicked that we might be unhappy, and did what we could to
evacuate the blessing of his Birth. That Royal Oak which with us Gods own right
hand had planted, we forcibly transplanted into a strange Land, suffered it
there to grow up in an unnatural Soil, and might for ever have wanted the
defense and comforts of its shade; but that it pleased Almighty God, this day
again to replant it in its proper place, where we hope through his blessing it
has taken such root, that no storms nor tempests shall ever again be able to
unfix it; but underneath its branches for many many years we may yet sit and
sing, how much soever the sons of discord are offended at the harmony.

And these indeed are the great and essential happinesses of this day, that
have imprinted Gods especial character upon it, that justly do denominate it
the day which the Lord has made, and consequently the day on which we may
rejoice: To which, it is not, nor let it seem to any so small and
inconsiderable a mercy, as to be thought unworthy to be added, that this day
does annually renew this solemn and great convention of persons so cordial and
unanimous, who marching all under the same colors, show that they are brethren
who dwell together in unity, who are of one mind, and have the same designs;
and making choice of these, do farther evidence that their designs are good,
that they do meet, and will meet, in honor of him, whose are the Colors which
they were; and that as cheerfully as now they do sit down to eat and drink, so
when his Service shall require, they will as heartily rise up to play: I do not
mean as did the brutish Israelites, Exodus vi. 32. but, as the young men did at
the request of Abner unto Joab, 2 Samuel ii. 14. even to catch them by the heads,
and thrust their Swords into the sides of all, that dare rebelliously lift up
their hands against our Lord the King. Only to see the first of these must unto
every eye be good and pleasant, as was Aaron's ointment, or the dew of
Hermon-hill: but to understand the latter, cannot but infinitely rejoice every
good and loyal heart. Nor is this blessing of the Day less glorious in its
Author or effects; it being the Lord who makes men to be of one mind, who
causes us to be at peace and unity among our selves, by making up our
breaches, and healing our divisions, by composing our differences, and quieting
our strifes; works great as it is to still the raging of the Sea, and turn the
storm into a calm: And as it is excellent in its author, so is it lovely in its
effects, it being to this love and friendship, this concord and unanimity, of
which this present meeting is an happy instrument and representation, that we
owe very great and many advantages; but to make us set that due value and price
upon it which we ought, I shall need to instance only in that one, which
deservedly has the greatest share in the gladness and solemnity of this day,
which the Text that I have now read unto you reckons up, as the immediate
consequent of Judah's unity and agreement; and that is the recalling and
restoration of their King, an effect so happy and desirable, that there needs
no other to recommend it to our love, and engage us in its preservation. And he
bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man; so that
they sent this word unto the King, Return thou and all thy servants. So the
King returned and came to Jordan, and Judah came to Gilgal, to go to meet the
King to conduct the King over Jordan. In which words you may be pleased to take
notice of these four things considerable.

First, The then state and condition of the men of Judah: And he bowed the
heart of the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man.

Secondly, What they did in this condition; They sent this word unto the King,
Return thou and all thy servants.

Thirdly, We have the Kings condescension to their embassy and request; The
King returned and came to Jordan.

And fourthly, We have those returns of gratitude and respect, which Judah made
unto this kind condescension of their King: Judah came to Gilgal, to go to meet
the King, and to conduct the King over Jordan.

I begin with the first, in which we have again more particularly observable,
the state it self, the persons in it, and the person who brought them to it.

First, The state it self, a state of amity and friendship, unity and
agreement; all the hearts of the men of Judah stood bent the same way, they had
all the same inclinations and desires, not any the least appearance of any
variance or repugnancy, but they all together moved the same way; the thoughts
of their hearts, as we may guess by the agreement of the tongues that spoke
from them, were in all the same, and there was in every one a like and equal
readiness to put them in execution: so that those many bodies seemed, as they
ought to be, but so many members of the same body, which one soul did animate,
and influence with ease. So we find the phrase often used in Holy Writ with the
import of an extraordinary agreement and unanimous consent. Thus when the
people so universally conspired to avenge the indignity offered by the men of
Gibeah to the Levites concubine; it is said, that all the people arose as one
man, Judges viii. 20. And again, when they so unanimously made their address to
Ezra, that he would bring forth, and read the Book of the Law, that all the
people gathered themselves together as one man. This is that which the policy
of Heathens did recommend, and the Religion of Christians has since more
powerfully enjoined. So St. Paul in 1 Cor. i. 10. Now I beseech you brethren,
by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and
that there be no division among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together
in the same mind and the same judgment. Nay the Devil himself, who by dividing,
chiefly does maintain his Empire upon earth, preserves and supports his
Kingdom by unity at home; whilst Devil with Devil is in league, and all are
ready as one Beelzebub their Prince, to go about seeking whom they may devour. I
could heartily wish that a greater plenty of Christian patterns did wholly
supersede the necessity of proposing Hell as an example unto imitation: but
alas, so is every Church rent by Schism, so is every State torn by Division,
that I know not where on earth to find a parallel union. The Text indeed gives
us the instance of a tribe so closely cemented and joined together, that all
the men of it are but as one; and here within these walls, I see a smaller
body, but I hope united by the firmest ties of true affection. O may it still
grow on, every year still add unto our numbers, and increase our love, till
Neighbors grow enamored of the fair Example: every Parish wish that she had
sons agreeing and affectionate as you, and the whole Nation study to become so.

So much for the first particular, the state or condition; they who were in it,
were the men of Judah, a Tribe of which, though there are many things I might
remark, yet I shall at present take notice of nothing more, than that in which
this Auditory may seem concerned; and that is this, that it was David's Tribe,
that the King was born among them, and with them did keep his Court and
habitation; by which they themselves did think, and the King himself does
allow, that they had contracted somewhat a nearer relation to him: for though
the men of Israel, jealous of his kindness, and envious of their honor, in the
heat of their expostulation, at the last verse of this Chapter, do tell them,
that they the men of Israel had ten parts in the King, and also had more right
in David; yet we find he himself is of another opinion, acknowledges at ver.
12. of this Chapter, that they are his brethren, his bones, and his flesh; very
indearing expressions, and such as could not but very effectually gain and win
upon them: which though they seem to import a much nearer affinity than that
which I have mentioned, yet ought they only to be understood of that remoter
relation; for otherwise the meanest of the tribe might have claimed kindred
with the King; and the basest among them have reckoned himself of the Royal
Blood, which would have been a great dishonor to the King, and too criminal a
presumption in them: And therefore what the men of Judah do allege in excuse
unto the men of Israel, at the 42. verse of this Chapter, that the King was
near of kin unto them, Vatablus, and I think rightly, makes to be spoken upon
no other grounds than this, that David did keep his Court amongst them, Hoc
dicunt quod David habitaret in tribu Judah. And so indeed the word in the
Original (...) does more properly signify the nearness of vicinity than that
of kin: And upon this account it was that David did justly expect more from
them, and themselves did rightly think that there lay greater obligations upon
them unto Loyalty, and that they ought to be, as anon we shall find they were,
more concerned for the service and restitution of their King.

But then thirdly, we must not without taking some notice of him, here pass by
the happy instrument of this accord in Judah; well may he deserve some
remembrance, who did so seasonably unite, and in that set them forward to an
enterprise, that shall for ever be recorded to their immortal honor: But here
we are somewhat at a loss, the Text having made no farther discovery than by an
indefinite Pronoun, which is of dubious reference. And he bowed the heart;
which whether it were Amasa in the verse before, or one of the Priests upon
whom David had imposed the persuasion of Amasa and Judah both; or whether it be
meant of the King himself, that by the short and kindly admonition he had
suddenly and universally prevailed upon them, it is not so easy to determine.
It Is true, the message alone which David sent, though short, yet was very apt
to affect, and recall that sense of duty which they seemed to have lost, Ye are
my brethren, my bones, and my flesh; wherefore then are ye the last to bring
back the King? To encourage Amasa to enlarge upon it, and stir him up
effectually to press it home; a promise great enough was particularly made to
him; God do so to me, and more also, if thou be not captain of the host before
me continually in the room of Joab: and it is no way likely, that he would not
endeavor what he was courted to by so great and fair a recompense. The Priest
indeed only had received his Kings command, and that was (no doubt) enough for
him who knew full well his Duty, and never had declined its practice; though
here in the work it self, there was sufficient invitation, to compose and to
unite, to promote concord and agreement, to make all Gods people, as they are
thereunto called in one body, so to be of one heart, and of one mind, it is our
proper office; in doing which, I heartily wish that then only we may prosper,
when we confederate for God, and bow his peoples heart for his Vicegerents
honor. Where therefore thus we may mistake, it is not prudence too
peremptorily to decide; but whoever he did the honor to make his instrument,
we know who was the author and chief cause of the union, even the Lord in whose
hand are the hearts of all men, and he turns them as the rivers of water,
making them now together to run in one channel, that had a different current,
and were before divided streams. To him therefore let be the honor, and unto
him let us ascribe the glory of the thing, who works secretly, but
miraculously for his King, and did bow the heart of all the men of Judah as the
heart of one man. And so much for the first general: I proceed unto the second,
the consequent of their hearts being thus bowed. They sent this word unto the
King, Return thou and all thy servants.

Whilst there were as many minds as men, and every one had his particular aim
and ambition, which apart he carried on, by such means as seemed right in his
own eyes, it is no wonder if there be no King in Israel, or an Usurper only be
permitted to sit upon the Throne, who by toleration and compliance, unworthy
and mean concessions, must be as unlike as possible unto a King, wear the Title
indeed, but decline the Majesty and Power, pretending himself a servant unto
every interest, that each several subject would apart advance: But, Mente
omnibus una incolumis Rex. When they come to be of one mind, the King is
secure, and his Throne must be established. The very first expressions of their
unity are these, that the King would return, he and all his servants. I shall
not need to make any long repetition of stories that are so well known, to
relate the means whereby the ungrateful Absalom carried on his unnatural and
accursed rebellion, to represent unto you David fleeing, with that small handful
of those, who did prefer their duty to advantage, and durst be loyal, when it
was dangerous to be so. And though to recount the sorrows of his flight, and
the necessities of his exile, would not be so melancholic a performance, as at
first sight it seems; the greatest dangers making this amends for the
displeasures they have caused, that they are sweet in the after remembrances,
and when gone off, do leave delight behind them, equal to the terrors which
coming on they brought; yet I shall forbear: for in the message of return it
self, there was enough of pleasure, and it needs no inhancement, from the
memory of his passed flight. Their desires of his, did plainly speak their own
return to Duty; and that they were not forgetful of his faithful servants, but
did desire their return also, the same whom not improbably before, when a
pretext was wanting for Rebellion, they would have had as evil Counselors
removed, this did declare a through repentance of their crime, was a confession
of that virtue, which they had disgraced, showed that now they did approve it,
and gave good hopes of their future imitation: To make acknowledgment of, and
be sorry for, is the only amends that we can make for such commissions, whereby
we trespass against God; nor is it often in our power to make other reparations
for our offenses against his Representative, who is in this most truly like
him, that he is merciful as he is merciful, forgets our crimes upon the day,
that we remember them, and immediately grants our requests, without any
exprobration of those faults, which have rendered us unworthy for to make them.
David had no sooner received Judah's petition, but he condescends unto it; he
presently returns, but he comes no farther than to Jordan:

Where possibly he might expect the like effects of the other Tribes
repentance, and think that they also now they had lost all hopes of its
advantage, would grow ashamed of their sin, and now that Absalom (whom as the
people rightly speak, they, not God, had anointed over them) was dead in
battle, they would again return unto the Lords anointed, and make that a more
public address, which they had already privately discoursed of; that the King
who saved them out of the hand of their enemies, and did deliver them out of
the hand of the Philistines, might be brought back from that flight, which the
son whom he so loved, and the people whom he had thus delivered, had so
undutifully put him to. But Judah whom every day did still make more and more
sensible of those especial obligations which lay upon themselves, whom every
hour did more and more affect with the brisker thoughts of a King who was born,
had been bred up and lived amongst them, they prevent the tardy consultation of
their fellow Tribes, with as unanimous a consent, as before they did send, they
now did come to Gilgal, to go to meet the King, and to conduct the King over
Jordan.

In the first of which they had a respect to his honor, and in the latter they
had a regard to his safety; So we find it anciently was, and still it does
continue a testimony of respect to go out and meet such persons, for whom we do
desire to make as honorable a reception as we can: Thus the King of Sodom went
out to meet victorious Abram, as he returned in Triumph from the slaughter of
Chedorlaomer, and the redemption of his own subjects, Genesis xiv. 17. So Joseph
went up to Goshen to meet his Father Israel, Genesis xlvi. 29. And for the same
reason Judah in my Text went out to meet their King, and not to meet him only,
but to conduct him also, to be a wall unto him on the right hand and on the
left, that no Traitorous hand might privily approach to hurt him, nor any sons
of violence dare openly to stop his way. Thus should our past omissions make us
more vigorous and careful in all our after-performances of duty, and may the
sense of former failures still put us upon fresh endeavors, of making up what
heretofore we have been wanting in, by more eminent and extraordinary acts of
piety to God, and loyalty unto our King.

And thus I have with all imaginable brevity gone through the several parts of
the Text, the parallel unto which (in those things which have been transacted
among our selves, and may so exactly, and so easily be run) is that for which
we have met this day to rejoice in every way of laudable and holy gladness; in
singing praises first to God, and chearing then our selves. It is not so long
since our David too was forced for to fly, with a far less attendance than the
King of Israel, since he went away not with many servants, but himself as one
was glad for to escape, since the best advice which his most faithful
counselors could give, was that which Hushai sent to David, 2 Samuel xvii. 16.
to arise and pass quickly over the water, lest the wicked should spill his
blood, and so pour it out that it should never be gathered up again. But
blessed be God, who then defended him from evil, when the snares of death
compassed him, and he walked in the shadow of it, who preserved him in a
strange land, till he had healed the breaches which shook his own, till he had
composed those differences, which divided him from his people, and separated
them among themselves, till he had bowed all their hearts even as the heart of
one man; so that they also sent this word unto the King, Return thou and all
thy servants. And blessed be God, that his goodness has superseded the
necessity of this exhortation, that you, who, if I may speak as David does of
Judah, are his Brethren, his bones, and his flesh; or as the men of Judah speak
of David, have this honor, that the King is near of kin unto you, would not be
the last to bring back the King: among the forwardest I hope you have already
showed your selves, and there are many here, who have gone out to meet and to
conduct the King: all therefore that remains for me to press upon you more,
from this Text, is by way of application to address my self unto you, in a most
serious and importunate supplication.

First, That you would always remember, that you are as the Tribe of Judah,
that you stand in a like relation to your King, and as they to David are near
unto him, upon which as often as you do reflect, you cannot but still think
your selves to be more and more engaged in all the services of love and duty,
and we always shall, I hope, accordingly perform them, without murmuring or
disputing, not grudgingly as of necessity, but cheerfully and readily, as if
indeed we thought, that whilst we were zealous for his honor and welfare, we
were officious for our selves, and did promote our own. This very consideration
it was, which did so far influence the men of Shechem, that they preferred a
spurious issue, before the legitimate offspring; and passing by the threescore
and ten sons of Jerubbaal, any of which had a greater right and better title to
the Crown, they chose Abimelech to reign over them, that they might advance his
throne, Judges ix. 4. did not stick to spoil the Temple of their God; and all
this upon no other account or ground than this, that he was their brother, as
they speak, Judges ix. 3. or that he was their bone, and their flesh, as he
speaks of himself in the second verse: all which amounts to no more, than that
he was their Towns-man, born in the same place with them: for we cannot imagine
that he could be more nearly related unto all the men of Shechem. Far be it
from me to justify the traitorous conspiracy, nor would I have any man so far
mistake me, as to think that I believe this, or a much greater consideration,
is a sufficient motive to desert the lawful heir, and side with an unjust
pretender; but certainly what did so far prevail with them in an unrighteous
cause, ought much more in a good one to be of force, and make us more firmly
adhere to a Prince who is so nearly related to us, whom however, were he not
so, we could not without sin and treachery forsake. If therefore ever yet again
(which God fore-fend) any son of Bichri should arise, any Benjamite of Belial
should blow the trumpet of Sedition, disclaim his part in David, and endeavor
to persuade others, that they have no inheritance in the King, let not in Judah
there ever one be found who would go after him; let not any of us ever stir an
hand, or move a tongue against the King; let not us lift up any offensive
weapon, no not that little one, which though little, yet as David himself can
tell, Psalm. lii. 2. is sharp as any rasor, and makes wounds so deep, that they
go into the innermost parts of the belly. But remembering who we are, and what
he is to us, let us demean our selves suitably to our obligations, employ every
member in his service, assist him with our heads, pray for him with our tongues
and hearts, and after all, act mightily for him with our arms. And all this
that as it is fit for Judah, as it well becomes us, we may to purpose do;

Let us in the second place take care, that as Judah was so we continue, having
all our hearts bowed as the heart of one man: this it is that will best fit us
for, and incline us to the foregoing duties, preserve us firm in our allegiance
to the King, and enable us more effectually to do him service. Whilst men
separately and apart carry on their designs, though each of them be well
intended, and all of them peradventure may have the same end and aim, yet do
they seldom prosper; every man being ambitious that his own may succeed, and
they mutually hindering and crossing one another, whilst the less likely to
prevail, repines at the others probability of success, every one of them when
behind, still pulls him who appears foremost back; and each of them envying unto
another, the recompense and honor of the thing, the whole of all their
endeavors ends in an inglorious miscarriage, and a too fatal disappointment:
but when hand joins in hand, and hearts too are united, we cannot then but
mightily prevail: by this agreement, strength and counsel meet together, policy
and power do kiss each other: and what is there that we may not expect from
such an assocration? And to this unity and concord, this amity and love, that
very consideration, which from such distant places, has brought so many hither
in this place to solemnize this day, is a sufficient, and will I hope, prove a
very successful obligation, that we were all born in this Parish, and had our
first Education within the same precincts. To be of one and the same Nation,
how strongly does it bind? what firm, and yet what easy friendships in
Countries that are remote, does this alone create between such, as at home were
strangers, and upon no other account abroad have taken cognizance of one
another? And if to have been of the same Nation only does tie thus fast
together, to have had more neighboring Nativities, to have been born in the
same Shire or City, ought certainly to link more closely yet to one another:
but to have been Natives of the same Parish, must draw yet streighter much the
knot, and join us in so fast and near a friendship, as nothing should excel but
Brothers love, who yet have had their births within a shorter compass, and came
forth from one and the same womb. To these indeed we may yield, according to
the rule their affections must be proportionably more vigorous and strong, for
they are brethren, and between such no strife should be, none but for the
mastery in love, which of the two should be most kind, and show the greatest
tenderness to one another: But next to these are we, near was the resemblance
of our births, and as nearly as we can our lives should represent them; at
least we ought to live like brethren, and as them to love, that which I hope ye
all already do; and that ye never may do otherwise, but that the love sowell
begun on earth, may continue till it comes to be perfected in Heaven; where
when Hope shall terminate in enjoyment, and Faith be swallowed up in vision,
the exercise of this shall still remain. I should now come in the last place to
give you some directions for its maintenance and preservation; but you your
selves have taken such a course as justly supersedes the necessity of any such
advice: and having appointed this day for the holding of your annual Feast, you
have prevented me of what I should prescribe. This very meeting to rejoice and
feast together, to eat the fat, and drink the sweet, as Nehemiah phraseth it,
chapter viii. v. 10. is of it self apt to mollify and soften the harshness of our
nature, and to create good humor in us: this will prepare and fit us to
forgive offenses, insensibly disposes us for reconciliation, and will in one
day compose the differences of a year. This creates acquaintance where before
was none, renews it where it was decayed, and so improves it by an annual
increase, till at length it grow to perfect friendship, and become an union
like that of soul and body, which there is naught but death can break in
sunder. Let then the dissenting sons of discord, (as we know they often have
done) fast for strife and debate, and Drunkards tarry at their wine, till that
false fire which at their first meeting looked like love, break forth before
they part into a flame, and make them burn with anger, instead of being warm
with love. These are the two extremes which like those of virtue we equally
must fly; both of them will destroy the business of this day: the former is
contradiction on a Festival, and the latter ruins what thereby we pretend our
purpose to advance. Against the one I question not, but the care of good and
liberal Stewards most amply has provided; from the other I hope your own
Virtue and Temperance will secure your selves: so shall there need no future
sorrow to expiate any madness or sin in this days Joy, so may we hope to
continue this innocent Society, this Feast of Love on Earth, till being made
fellow-citizens with the Saints, we are called to the Supper of the Lamb in
Heaven, where all these ways and needs of feasting happily shall cease; and to
love God and do his will, that shall be our meat and drink for ever.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, three Persons, and
but one Eternal God, be all Honor and Glory, now and for ever. Amen.
FINIS.

