A TRACT CONCERNING SCHISM AND Schismatics: Wherein is briefly Discovered The
Original Causes of all Schism.

By the Ever-memorable Mr. JOHN HALES, Of Eaton College, etc.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCC.

A Tract concerning Schism.
Heresy and Schism, as they are commonly used, are two Theological Scarecrows,
with which they who use to uphold a Party in Religion, use to fright away such,
as making Inquiry into it, are ready to relinquish and oppose it, if it appear
either erroneous and suspicious; for, as Plutarch reports of a Painter, who
having unskilfully painted a Cock, chased away all Cocks and Hens, that so the
Imperfection of his Art might not appear by Comparison with Nature; so Men
willing for Ends to admit of no Fancy but their own, endeavor to hinder an
Inquiry into it by way of Comparison with somewhat with it, peradventure truer,
that so the Deformity of their own might not appear: But howsoever, in the
common Manage, Heresy and Schism are but ridiculous Terms, yet the Things in
themselves are of very considerable Moment; the one offending against Truth,
the other against Charity, and therefore both deadly, when they are not by
Imputation, but indeed.

It is then a Matter of no small Importance, truly to descry the Nature of
them, and they on the contrary strengthen themselves, who through the Iniquity
of Men and Times are injuriously charged with them.

Schism (for of Heresy we shall not now treat, except it be by Accident, and
that by occasion of a general Mistake, spread through all the Writings of the
Ancients, in which their Names are familiarly confounded:) Schism, I say, upon
the very Sound of the Word, imports Division; Division is not but where
Communion is or ought to be: Now Communion is the Strength and Ground of all
Society, whether Sacred or Civil; whosoever therefore they be that offend
against the common Society and Friendliness of Men, if it be in Civil
Occasions, are guilty of Sedition and Rebellion: If it be by reason of
Ecclesiastical Difference, they are guilty of Schism. So that Schism is an
Ecclesiastical Sedition, as Sedition is a Lay Schism: Yet the great Benefits of
Communion, notwithstanding in regard of diverse Distempers Men are subject to,
Dissension and Disunion, are often necessary: For when either false or
uncertain Conclusions are obtruded for Truth, and Acts either unlawful, or
ministering just Scruple, are required of us to be performed, in these Cases,
Consent were Conspiracy; and open Contestation is not Faction or Schism, but
due Christian Animosity.

For the opening therefore of the Nature of Schism, something may be added by
way of Difference to distinguish it from necessary Separation; and that is,
that the Cause upon which Division is attempted, proceed not from Passion or
from Distemper, or from Ambition or Avarice, or such other Ends, as Humane
Folly is apt to pursue, but from well weighed and necessary Reasons, and that
when all other Means having been tried, nothing will serve to save us from
guilt of Conscience, but open Separation; so that Schism, if we would define
it, is nothing else but an unnecessary Separation of Christians from that part
of the visible Church of which they were once Members. Now, As in Mutinies and
Civil Dissentions there are two Attendants in Ordinary belonging unto them; one
the Choice of one Elector or Guide, in place of the general or ordinary
Governor, to rule and guide; the other the appointing of some public Place or
Rendezvous, where public Meetings must be celebrated: So in Church-dissentions
and Quarrels, two Appurtenances there are, which serve to make Schism complete.
First, in the Choice of a Bishop, in opposition to the former, (a thing very
frequent amongst the Ancients, and which many times was the Cause and Effect of
Schism.)

Secondly, The erecting of a new Church and Oratory, for the dividing parts to
meet in publicly. For till this be done, the Schism is but yet in the Womb.

In that late famous Controversy in Holland, De Praedestinatione and auxiliis,
as long as the disagreeing Parties went no farther than Disputes and
Pen-combats, the Schism was all that while unhatch'd; but as soon as one Party
swept an old Cloister, and by a pretty Art suddenly made it a Church, by
putting a now Pulpit in it, for the separating Party there to meet; now what
before was a Controversy became a formal Schism. To know no more than this, if
you take it to be true, had been enough to direct you how you are to judge, and
what to think of Schism and Schismatics; yet, because of the Ancients, (by
whom many are more affrighted than hurt) much is said, and many fearful Dooms
pronounced in this Case. We will descend a little to consider of Schism, as it
were by way of Story, and that partly farther to open that which we have said
in General, by instancing in Particulars, and partly to disabuse those who
reverencing Antiquity more than needs, have suffered themselves to be scared
with Imputation of Schism above due measure; for, what the Ancients spoke by
way of Censure of Schism in General, is most true; for they saw (and it is no
great matter to see so much) that unadvised and open Fancy to break the Knot of
Union betwixt Man and Man, (especially amongst Christians, upon whom, above all
other kind of Men, the Tie of Love and Communion does most especially rest) was
a Crime hardly pardonable, and that nothing absolves Men from the Guilt of it,
but true and unpretended Conscience: Yet when they came to pronounce of Schism
in Particular, (whether it was because of their own Interest, or that they saw
not the Truth, or for what other cause God only does know) their Judgments many
times (to speak most gently) were justly to be suspected. Which that you may
see, we will range all Schism into two Ranks.

First is a Schism, in which only one Party is the Schismatic; for where Cause
of Schism is necessary, there not he that separates, but he that is the cause
of separation, is the Schismatic.

Secondly, There is a Schism in which both Parties are the Schismatics; for,
where the occasion of separation is unnecessary, neither side can be excused
from the Guilt of Schism.

But you will ask, Who shall be the Judge, what is necessary? Indeed, it is a
Question which has been often made, but I think scarcely ever truly answered,
not because it is a Point of great depth and difficulty truly to assoil it, but
because the true Solution of it carries sire in the tail of it (for it brings
with it a piece of Doctrine which is seldom pleasing to Superiors:) to you for
the present this shall suffice.

If so be you be anima defaecato, if you have cleared your self from Froath and
Growns, if neither Sloth, nor Fear, nor Ambition, nor any tempting Spirit of
that nature abuse you (for these and such as these are the true Impediments,
why both that, and other Questions of the like danger are not truly answered)
if all this be, and yet you know not how to frame your Resolution, and settle
your self for that doubt; I will say no more of you than was said of Papias,
St. John's own Scholar, Your Abilities are not so good as I presumed.

But to go on with what I intended, and from that that diverted me, that you
may the better judge of the nature of Schisms by their occasions, you shall
find that all Schisms have crept into the Church by one of these three ways,
either upon matter of Fact, or upon matter of Opinion, or point of Ambition;
for the first, I call that matter of Fact, when something is required to be
done by us, which either we know, or strongly suspect to be unlawful. So the
first notable Schism, of which we read in the Church, contained in it matter of
Fact; for, it being upon Error taken for necessary, that an Easter must be
kept, and upon worse than Error, (if I may so speak) for it was no less than a
Point of Judaism forced upon the Church; upon worse than Error, I say, thought
farther necessary that the Ground of the Time for keeping of that Feast must be
the Rule left by Moses to the Jews, there arose a stout Question, Whether we
were to celebrate with the Jews on the fourteenth Moon, or the Sunday
following? This matter though most unnecessary, most vain, yet caused as great a
Combustion as ever was in the Church; the West separating and refusing
Communion with the East, for many Years together. In this fantastical Hurry I
cannot see but all the World were Schismatics, neither can any thing excuse
them from that Imputation, excepting only this, that we charitably suppose that
all Parties did what they did out of Conscience, a thing which befell them
through the ignorance of their Guides, (for I will not say, through their
Malice) and that through the just Judgment of God, because through Sloth and
blind Obedience Men examined not the things which they were taught, but, like
Beasts of Burden, patiently couched down, and indifferently underwent
whatsoever their Superiors laid upon them. By the way, by this we may plainly
see the danger of our Appeal to Antiquity, for Resolution in controverted
Points of Faith, and how small Relief we are to expect from thence; for, if the
Discretion of the chiefest Guides and Directors of the Church did in a Point so
trivial, so inconsiderable, so mainly fail them, as not to see the Truth in a
Subject, wherein it is the greatest Marvel how they could avoid the Sight of
it, Can we, without the Imputation of great Grossness and Folly, think so
poor-spirited Peasons competent Judges of the Questions now on foot betwixt the
Churches. Pardon me, I know what Temptation drew that Note from me.

The next Schism which had in it matter of Fact, is that of the Donatists, who
were persuaded (at least pretended so) that it was unlawful to converse or
communicate in Holy Duties with Men stained in any notorious Sin; for howsoever
that Austin do specify only the Thurificati and Traditores and Libellatioi,
etc. as if he separated only from those whom he found to be such, yet by
necessary proportion he must referr to all notorious Sinners. Upon this he
taught, that in all Places, where Good and Bad were mixed together, there could
be no Church by reason of Pollution, cooperating away from Sinners, which
blasted righteous Persons, which conversed with them, and made all unclean. On
this Ground, separating himself from all that he list to suspect, he gave out,
that the Church was no where to be found but in him and his Associates, as
being the only Men among whom wicked Persons found no Shelter, and by
consequence the only clean and unpolluted Company, and therefore the only
Church. Against this, St. Augustine laid down this Conclusion, Vnitatem
Ecclesiae per totum mundum dispersae praeceptam non esse disserendam, which is
indeed the whole Sum of that Father's Disputation against the Donatists. Now
in one part of this Controversy one thing is very remarkable: The Truth was
there, where it was, by mere Chance, and might have been on either side, the
reason brought by either Party notwithstanding: For though it were de facto,
false, that pars Donati shut up in Africa, was the only Orthodox Party, yet it
might be true, notwithstanding any thing St. Augustine brings to confute it;
and on the contrary, though it were de facto, true, that the Part of Christians
dispersed over the whole Earth were Orthodox, yet it might have been false,
notwithstanding any thing St. Augustine brings to confirm it. For where, or
amongst whom, or how many the Church shall be, or is, is a thing indifferent;
it may be in any Number, more or less, it may be in any Place, Country or
Nation, it may be in all, and, for ought I know, it may be in none, without the
Prejudice to the Definition of a Church, or the Truth of the Gospel, North or
South; many or few; dispersed in many Places, or confined to one: None of these
do either prove or disprove a Church.

Now this Schism, and likewise that former, to a wise Man that well understands
the Matter in Controversy, may afford perchance Matter of Pity, to see Men so
strangely distracted upon Fancy, but of doubt or trouble what to do, it can
yield none; for though in this Schism the Donatist be the Schismatic, and in the
former both Parties be equally engaged in the Schism, yet you may safely upon
your Occasions communicate with either, if so be you flatter neither in their
Schism: For why might it not be lawful to go to Church with the Donatist, or to
celebrate Easter with the Quartodeciman, if occasion so require, since neither
Nature, nor Religion, nor Reason does suggest any thing of moment to the
contrary? For in all Public Meetings pretending Holiness, so there be nothing
done, but what true Devotion and Piety brook, why may I not be present in them,
and use communion with them? Nay, what if those, to whom the execution of the
public Service is committed, do something either unseemly or suspicious, or
peradventure unlawful? what if the Garments they wear be censured, nay indeed
be suspicious? what if the Gesture or Adoration to be used to the Altars, as
now we have learned to speak? what if the Homilist have preached or delivered
any Doctrine of the Truth, of which we are not well persuaded? a thing which
very often falls out; yet for all this we may not separate, except we be
constrained personally to bear part in them our selves. The Priests under Ely
had so ill demeaned themselves about the daily Sacrifices, that the Scripture
tells us, they made them to stink; yet the People refused not to come to the
Tabernacle, nor to bring their Sacrifice to the Priest: For in those Schisms
which concern Fact, nothing can be a just cause of refusing of Communion, but
only to require the execution of some unlawful or suspected Act; for not only
in Reason, but in Religion too, that Maxim admits of no Release, Cautissimi
cujusque Praeceptum quod dubit as ne feceris. Long it was e're the Church fell
upon Schism, upon this occasion, though of late it had very many; for until the
second Council of Nice, in which irreconcilable Superstition and Ignorance did
conspire, I say, until the Rout did set up Image Worship, there was not any
remarkable Schism upon just occasion of Fact; all the rest of Schisms of that
kind were but Wantons, this was truly serious; in this the Schismatical Party
was the Synod it self, and such as conspired with it, for, or concerning the
Use of Images in Sacrifices.

First, It is acknowledged by all that it is a thing unnecessary.

Secondly, It is by most suspected.

Thirdly, It is by many held utterly unlawful. Can then the enjoining of such a
thing be ought else but abuse? or can the refusal of Communion here be thought
any other thing than Duty? Here, or upon the like occasion to separate, may
peradventure bring personal trouble or danger; (against which it concerns any
honest Man to have pectus Praeparatum;) farther harm it cannot do, so that in
these Cases you cannot be to seek what to think, or what you have to do.

Come we then to consider a little of the second sort of Schism, arising upon
occasion of variety of Opinion: It has been the common Disease of Christians
from the beginning, not to content themselves with that measure of Faith which
God and Scriptures have expressly afforded us, but out of a vain Desire to know
more than is revealed, they have attempted to devise things, of which we have
no Light, neither from Reason nor Revelation; neither have they rested here,
but upon Pretense of Church Authority (which is none,) or Tradition (which for
the most part is but feigned,) they have peremptorily concluded, and
considently imposed upon others, a necessity of entertaining Conclusions of
that Nature, and, to strengthen themselves, have broken out into Divisions and
Factions, opposing Man to Man, Synod to Synod, till the Peace of the Church
vanished, without all possibility of Recall: Hence arose those ancient and many
Separations amongst Christians, occasioned by Arianism, Eutichianism,
Nestorianism, Photinianism, Sabellianism, and many more, both ancient, and in
our time; all which indeed are but Names of Schism: Howsoever, in the common
Language of the Fathers, they were called Heresies; for Heresy is an Act of
the Will, not of the Reason, and is indeed a Lie and not a Mistake, else how
could that of Austin go for true, Errare possum, Haereticus esse nolo: Indeed
Manichanism, Valentinianism, Macedonianism, Mahometism, are truly and properly
Heresies: For we know that the Authors of them received them not, but invented
them themselves, and so knew what they taught to be a Lie; but can any Man
avouch that Arius and Nestorius, and others that taught erroneously concerning
the Trinity, and the Person of our Savior, did maliciously invent what they
taught, and not rather fall upon it by error and mistake? Till that be done,
and upon good evidence, we will think no worse of all Parties than needs we
must, and take these Rents in the Church to be at the worst but Schisms, upon
matter of Opinion, In which case, what we are to do, is not a point of any
great depth of understanding to discover, if so be distemper and partiality do
not intervene: I do not see, that opinionum varietas and opiniantium unitas,
are (...), or that Men of different Opinions in Christian Religion may not hold
Communion in Sacris, and both go to one Church. Why may I not go, if Occasion
require, to an Arian Church, so there be no Arianism expressed in their
Liturgy? and were Liturgies and Public Forms of Service so framed, as that
they admitted not of particular and private Fancies, but contained only such
things, as in which all Christians do agree, Schisms on Opinion were utterly
vanished: For consider of all the Liturgies that are and ever have been, and
remove from them whatsoever is Scandalous to any Party, and leave nothing but
what all agree on, and the Evil shall be, that the Public Service and Honor
of God shall no ways suffer. Whereas to load our Public Forms with the Private
Fancies upon which we differ, is the most sovereign way to perpetuate Schism
unto the World's end; Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving, Reading of Scriptures,
Administration of Sacraments in the plainest and the simplest manner, were
Matter enough to furnish out a sufficient Liturgy, though nothing either of
Private Opinion, or of Church-Pomp, of Garments, or prescribed Gestures, of
Imagery, of Music, of Matter concerning the Dead, of many Superfluities which
creep into the Church, under the Name of Order and Decency, did interpose it
self.

To charge Churches and Liturgies with things unnecessary, was the first
Beginning of all Superstition, and when Scruple of Conscience began to be made
or pretended, there Schism began to break in; if the special Guides and Fathers
of the Church would be a little sparing of incumbring Churches with
Superfluities, or not over-rigid either in reviving obsolete Customs, or
imposing new, there would be far less Cause of Schism or Superstition, and all
the Inconvenience were likely to ensue would be but this, they should in so
doing yield a little to the Imbecility of their Inferiors, a thing which St.
Paul would never have refused to do; mean while, wheresoever false or suspected
Opinions are made a piece of Church-Liturgy, he that separates is not the
Schismatic, for it is alike unlawful to make profession of known or suspected
falsehood, as to put in practice unlawful or suspected actions.

The Third thing I named for Matter of Schism was Ambition, I mean Episcopal
Ambition, showing it self especially in two Heads, one concerning Pluralities
of Bishops in diverse Sees. Aristotle tells us, That Necessity causes but small
Faults, but Avarice and Ambition were the Mother of great Crimes: Episcopal
Ambition has made this true, for no Occasion has produced more frequent, more
continuous, more sanguinous Schisms than this has done. The Sees of
Alexandria, of Constantinople, of Antioch, and above all of Rome, do abundantly
show thus much, and all Ecclesiastical Stories witness no less, of which the
greatest that consists of factionating and tumultuating of great and potent
Bishops.

Socrates apologizing for himself, that professing to write an Ecclesiastical
Story, he did often times interlace the Actions of secular Princes and other
civil Business, tells us, that he did this to refresh his Reader, who otherwise
were in danger to be cloyed by reading so much of the Acts of unquiet and
unruly Bishops, (...), in which, as a Man may say, they made Butter and Cheese
one of another; for (...) (that I may show you a cast of my old Office, and
open you a Mystery in Grammar,) properly signifies to make Butter and Cheese,
and because these are not made without much agitation of the Milk, hence (...),
by a borrowed and transmuted signification, signifies to do things with much
agitation and tumult.

But that I may a little consider of the two Heads I but now specified, the
first I mentioned was the Prelacy of Bishops in one See. For the general
Practice of the Church, since the beginning at least since the original of
Episcopacy, as now it is, was never to admit at once more than one Bishop in
one See; and so far in this point have they been careful to preserve Unity,
that they would not have a Bishop in his See to have two Cathedral Churches;
which thing lately brought us a Book out of France, De Monomachia Episcoporum,
written by occasion of the Bishops of Langres, who, I know not upon what Fancy,
could not be content with one Cathedral Church in his Diocese, but would needs
have two, which to the Author of that Work seems to be a kind of Spiritual
Polygamy. It fell out amongst the Ancients very often; sometimes upon occasion
of difference in Opinions, sometimes because of those who were interessed in
the Choice of Bishops; that two and sometimes more were set up, and all Parties
striving to maintain their own Bishop, made themselves several Churches,
several Congregations, each refusing to participate with others, and many times
proceeding to mutual Excommunications. This is that which Cyprian calls Erigere
Altar contra Altar: To this does he impute the Original of all
Church-disorders; and if you read him, you would think he thought no other
Churchtumult to be Schism but this. This perchance may plead some Excuse; for,
though in regard of Religion it self, it matters not whether there be one or more
Bishops in one Diocese; for Epiphanius reckoning up the Bishops of Rome, makes
Peter and Paul the first; and St. Augustine acknowledges for a time he sat
Fellow-Bishop with his Predecessor, though he excused it, that he did so, being
ignorant that the contrary had been decreed by the Council of Nice; yet it
being a thing very convenient for the Peace of the Church to have it so,
neither does it any whit favor of their Misdemeanor, their Punishment sleeps
not, who unnecessarily and wantonly go about to infringe it.

But that other Head of Episcopal Ambition, concerning Supremacy of Bishops in
diverse Sees, one claiming Supremacy over another, as it has been from time to
time, a great Trespass against the Church's Peace, so it is now the final Ruin
of it. The East and West, through the Fury of the two prime Bishops, being
irremediably separated without all Hope of Reconcilement. And besides all this
Mischief, it is founded on a Vice contrary to all Christian Humility, without
which no Man shall see his Savior; for they do but abuse themselves and
others, that would persuade us, that Bishops by Christ's Institution have any
Superiority over other Men farther than of Reverence, or that any Bishop is
Superior to another farther than positive Order, agreed upon amongst
Christians, has prescribed; for we have believed him that has told us, that
in Jesus Christ there is neither High nor Low, and that in giving Honor every
Man should be ready to prefer another before himself; which Saying cuts off all
Claim certainly of Superiority, by Title of Christianity, except Men think that
these things were spoken only to poor and private Men. Nature and Religion
agree in this, that neither of them has an hand in this Heraldry of Secundum
sub and supra: All this comes from the Composition and Agreement of Men amongst
themselves; wherefore this Abuse of Christianity, to make it Lacquey to
Ambition, is a Vice for which I have no extraordinary Name of Ignomy, and an
ordinary I will not give it, lest you should take so transcendent a Vice to be
but trivial.

Now concerning Schism arising upon these Heads, you cannot be for Behavior
much to seek; for you may safely communicate with all Parties, as Occasion
shall call you, and the Schismatics here are all those who are Head of the
Faction, together with those who foment it; for private and indifferent Persons
they may be Spectators of these Contentious as securely in regard of any Peril
of Conscience, (for of Danger in Purse or Person I keep no account,) as at a
Cock-fight where Serpen^^ fight, who cares who has the better? The best Wish
is, That both may perish in the Fight.

And for Conventicles, of the Nature of which we desire to be informed, thus
much in general evidently appears, That all Meetings, upon an unnecessary
Separation are to be so styled; so that in sense a Conventicle is nothing else
but a Congregation of Schismatics, yet Time has taken leave sometimes to fix
this Name upon good and honest Meetings, and that perchance not altogether
without good Reason; for without Public Religious Meetings thus it fares:
First, It has been at all Times confessed necessary, that God requires not
only inward and private Devotion, when Men either in their Hearts and Closets,
or within their private Walls, pray, praise, confess and acknowledge; but he
farther requires all those things to be done in Public, by troops and shoales
of Men, and from hence have proceeded public Temples, Altars, Forms of
Service, Appointed Times, and the like, which are required for open Assemblies,
yet whilst Men were truly Pious, all Meetings of Men for mutual Help of Piety
and Devotion wheresoever and by whomsoever celebrated, were permitted, without
Exception.

But when it was espied that ill-affected Persons abused Private Meetings,
whether Religious or Civil, to evil Ends, Religiousness to gross Impiety, as
appears in the Ethnic, Elusinia, and Bacchanalia, and Christian Meetings under
the Pagan Princes, when for fear they durst not come together in open View,
were charged with foul Imputations, as by the Report of Christians themselves
plainly appears, and civil Meetings, many times under Pretense of friendly and
neighbourly Visits, sheltered treasonable Attempts against Princes and
Commonweals.

Hence both Church and State joined, and jointly gave Order for Forms, Times,
Places of Public Meetings, whether for Religious or Civil Ends. And all other
Meetings whatsoever, besides those of which both Time and Place are limited,
they censured for Routs and Riots; and unlawful Assemblies in the State, and in
the Church for Conventicles.

So that it is not lawful, no not for Prayer, for Hearing, for Conference, for
any other Religious Office whatsoever, for People to assemble otherwise than by
Public Order is allowed; neither may we complain of this in Times of
Corruption, for why should Men desire to do that suspiciously in Private which
warrantably may be performed in Public.

But in Times of manifest Corruptions and Persecutions, wherein Religious
Assembling is dangerous, Private Meetings howsoever, besides Public Order, are
not only Lawful, but they are of Necessity and Duty; else how should we excuse
Meetings of Christians for Public Service in Time of Danger and Persecutions,
and of our selves in Queen Mary's Days? And how will those of the Roman Church
amongst us put off the Imputation of Conventicling, who are known amongst us
privately to assemble for Religious Exercises, against all Established Order,
both in State and Church? For indeed all Pious Assemblies, in Times of
Persecution and Corruptions, howsoever practiced, are indeed or rather alone
the lawful Congregations, and Public Assemblies, though according to Form of
Law, are indeed nothing else but Riots and Conventicles, if they be stained
with Corruption and Superstition.

FINIS.

