THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND Free from the IMPUTATION OF POPERY.

LONDON, Printed for W. Abington next the Wonder Tavern in Ludgate Street, 1683.

THE Church of England Free from the Imputation OF POPERY.
THE Case between the Church of England and the Dissenters from it, The
Imputation.
requiring not much of Learning or Speculation; it might well seem to be no
difficult matter to see into the bottom of it, and clear the difference. And
indeed the Duty of Obedience in things indifferent, and the obligation of each
Christian to preserve the Unity of the Church are so convincing, and the
Expedience of some Ceremonies in general, and the Innocence of ours in
particular so plain; that the Reconciliation of our Brethren to us, upon the
view of our Reasons, and the Answers we have given to their Scruples, might be
easily expected; were there not some General Prejudice upon the minds of
otherwise welldisposed men, that like an interposing mist, either diverts the
light that would otherwise come in, or lets it not appear in its own color.

And this seems to be no other than the Opinion many men have been poffest
with, that our Worship is Popery; and that to return to our Communion is to
make a step toward Rome, to join company with those that are going thither.
For this conceit once entertained, a Minister of the Church of England is a
disguised Emissary of the Romish Church; and all the Arguments and Persuasions
he offers for Conformity, are received no better, than if he was endeavoring
to pervert to the Papal Superstition. If we speak to them of the Common Prayer,
they think of the Mass; and while we discourse to them of the fitness and
lawfulness of kneeling at the Communion, they imagine nothing else but the
Worship of the Host, and the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

By whose Malice and Artifice soever this Prejudice has been raised and
cherished; they, we must confess, have gained their point by it. They have
stopped the Ears, and blinded the Eyes of those that otherwise would know the
voice of their Brethren. The Aversion of the people deservedly raised against
Popery, they have had the skill to turn against the greatest and best Church of
the Reformation: And they have had the pleasure to put her under the most
sensible affliction of lying under an imputation she so much abhors, and
hearing her self reckoned amongst those she has so openly and so justly
condemned.

None can be ignorant how far this Prejudice has prevailed, and with what
success; tho's indeed it is a conceit so unlikely and inconsistent, that we
might well expect no rational person should have entertained it: And did not
Popery let us know what gross absurdities may find credit with the ignorant, it
would be very hard to imagine how any belief should be given to such an
impossibility. Transubstantiation it self being as conceivable a thing, as that
a Protestant, really of our Church, should be a Papist too; and any other
contradiction as easily reconciled as that.

Neither can they fairly object Ignorance and an Implicit Belief to the
Papists, who know so, little the constitution of the Protestant Religion, as
not to see it in our Church; and who resign themselves to their Teachers so
far, as with the same credulity to call our Chruch Popish, with which the
Papists are taught to call it Heretical.

So Causeless, I hope, and Groundless will this mischievous Calumny appear to
all those that shall consider; and all those who will be willing to consider,
that do not wilfully choose a mistake so scandalously unjust to a great Reformed
Church, and so destructive and ruinous to the whole Reformation. As therefore
they would not be found ignorant of the Religion they profess; as they would
not continue so highly uncharitable to their Brethren; nor be guilty of the
Ruin of what they would be thought so much to contend for; if there be in them
any love of Truth, any care of Justice, and tenderness of Conscience, any
concern for the public cause and our common Religion, let them think of these
things.

In the first place therefore, False.
to begin with the unreasonableness in general of this Jealousy wherewith some
men are prepossessed: Who would not stand amazed to hear that Church styled
Popish, the purity of whose Faith has been declared so expressly, so
illustriously attested and spoken of through all the World? Know they, or care
they what they say, that say this of a Church, that has solemnly and positively
disowned all the Usurped Authority, and condemned all the false Doctrines of
the Roman See, its Supremacy, Infallibibility, Transubstantiation, Idolatry of
the Angels and Saints, Purgatory, etc. that has not done this in a corner, or
in the ear, but proclaimed it on the House top; that like a City set upon a
Hill, has been as high and eminent on the one side, as Rome it self, with its
seven boasted Hills, has been on the other; and has as remarkably opposed the
Errors of that Church, as ever they had been advanced? What a new wonder must
this be to the World, to hear the Church constituted by Cranmer and Ridley,
accused of Popery; that Faith and Worship suspected to be un-reform'd, which
was delivered down to us by those great Martyrs? Is this the reward of a
Church, whose Sons have given so loud Testimony against the Roman, in their
Lives, and by their Deaths; who have still born the burden and heat of the day;
who have felt the fiercest rage of the Enemy, and have returned them the
dead-liest wounds; who have been foremost still in all encounters, all along in
the last age, and in our own, the famous and the Victorious Champions of the
Protestant Cause? If this Church, and these Men, after the declaration made in
our Articles, after repeated subscriptions and abrenuntiations, after all this
zealous opposition of Popery, must be yet suspected of Popery: as well on the
other side may the Decrees of the Council of Trent be said to comply with the
Reformation, and the Pope himself be thought a Protestant.

One would imagine from the suspicions of these men that traduce is, that there
was some small inconsiderable difference betwixt the Papists and us; something
that might easily be reconciled: not that we differ as much from them, and in
as substantial points, as those very persons that complain. For let all the
Harmony of Protestant Confessions be consulted, and see if we are not of the
Harmony, and our Articles do not conspire with theirs; if ours are not as
express, and as directly opposite to the Roman Church; if there can be any
hopes of reconciling us, sooner than of reconciling them.

For though there are of the Protestants that retain not some indifferent
Ceremonies which we have; (and that we might well do it you will see presently)
yet it is to be supposed they would not stand out against the Roman Church on
that account, if the rest were well agreed: If they could once allow their
Transubstantiation, Idolatry of Images, etc. if they could endure their
Superstitious Rites; they would not stick at what might remain of a little
Ancient Order and received Decency; and were that all, would as soon return to
Rome as we.

Nothing can make an honest man suspect our Church of Popery, but his Ignorance
what Popery is. He may take all that to be Popish which the Papists do and
believe; and presume those guilty of their Superstitions, who do not dissent to
their whole Creed, and are not Nonconformists to their whole Practice; and in
his opinion the purest Church of the Reformation must be that which is most
opposite to the Church of Rome. But he forgets then that the Church of Rome is
Christian, still, though abominably corrupted; that to run contrary to her in
all things, must be to deny our God and Savior; that by this Rule we must lay
aside their Scripture as well as their Traditions, and neither give alms, fast
nor pray, because it is the practice of that Church. He considers not that such
an Anti-Papist is in a much worse condition than the Papist himself; and that
if we take what the Pope proposes in gross and together, it is infinitely more
dangerous to reject all, than to admit it.

By Popery therefore can be meant nothing, but the Corruptions that Church has
suffered, and the Usurpations it has advanced. For the Faith of that Church was
once as far spoken of as now its Errors are; and had she continued in that
Purity, we ought to have been of her Communion: and now we are to depart from
her, no otherwise than she shall be found to have departed from herself, to
have varied from the Truth, and to have corrupted the Doctrine that was once
delivered from the Saints.

Now the Test whereby these Doctrines are to be examined whether they are
Popish (that is, Corrupt,) or no, is this; Whether or no they are Consonant to
the Holy Scriptures. This being the Common Principle and Touchstone with all
Protestants, That nothing is to be Believed or Practiced as Necessary to
Salvation, but what is contained in the Scripture; and that nothing is to be
Believed or Practiced in any manner whatsoever, that is contrariant to it. A
Principle this is delivered to us with the New Testament, by the first Ages
that Received and Transmitted it. By this Test their Additional Traditionary
Doctrines fall, their Infallibility proves the greatest Falsity, and their
Illimited Jurisdiction is cut off; the number of the Sacraments is retrenched;
their Worship of the Host, of Images; Prayers to Saints, for those in
Purgatory, or in an unknown Tongue, are taken away; whatever was imposed as
necessary to Salvation; and had no warrant from God's Word; or was otherwise
proposed, and yet repugnant to it. Such errors and corruptions you will find
marked out in our. Book of Articles, and there distinctly condemned.

But though nothing is to be enjoined as necessary to Salvation, but what God
himself, the Author of our Salvation, has declared; yet we are not to think
that no circumstance is to be used in his service, that he has not distinctly
commanded: This being no Protestant Doctrine, but the greatest Falsity. For
then no Action that is even of necessity to be performed could be performed,
had not God prescribed the Circumstance too. Whereas on the contrary there
cannot be a plainer Truth than this in the World, that he who orders an Action
to be performed, and orders no Circumstance, must be supposed therefore to
leave the choice of the Circumstance to Discretion. And it is as clear, that in
such Cases where in private we are left to our private choice, there in public
we are to be directed by the public Discretion, the Election of the
Superiors. Provided always that in both Cases no circumstance be used, that is
contrary to the Intention of the Action, and the Will of God.

It was therefore in the Power of our Spiritual Governors after they had
retrenched, what they were constrained to take away, all that was unlawfully
believed or practiced, Idolatrous, Superstitious, or Erroneous; to retain or
reject, as they should see cause, all indifferent circumstantial things: Which
as they were not commanded by God, so neither were they forbidden by him.
Innumerable Ceremonies therefore they cut off: Some inseparable Companions of
the falsities and superstitions they had abolished, some impertinent to the
main action, others choking or incumbring it. And some too they left; so few,
that they rather expected to be asked why no more; and those the freest from
offense, and the fittest to be retained. For they considered that an innocent
useful Ceremony, which had either been laudably used before Popery came in, or
was not proper to the superstition to which it had been annexed, when purged of
that superstition, was restored to its Innocence and Indifference, and might be
used as lawfully now as in its first state. And therefore though they took the
liberty to leave off several rites however in themselves innocent, and in use
before Popery began, because they were of little Edification, yet they kept up
others which appeared more necessary to the Church; and which at the same time
might show both their Temper and Moderation toward the Modern Roman, which
they were forced to leave, and their respect to the Primitive, which they
desired to imitate.

And with such a view as this, if you will look upon the particulars for which
we are accused, you will see how little of Popery (that is, Corruption or
Superstition) there is to be found.

The Particulars in which we chiefly differ, are these: Government by Bishops,
a Liturgy of some Ancient Prayers, Kneeling at the Communion, the Cross at
Baptism, the Surplice, and the Observation of some Christian Fasts and Feasts.

1. First then as to Government by Bishops, had it been a thing purely
indifferent, we might have lawfully retained it; and our Church might have
taken leave to have chosen a sort of Aristocracy, as others have been pleased
with a kind of Democracy. But take it as it is, intimated in the writings of
the Apostles, and manifestly of their Institution; we then had been obliged to
reduce it, if the Roman Government had been Presbyterian. When we found it
therefore there, what reason had we to abolish it? Shall we allow the Pope so
much Power as to make that unlawful by his Use, which the Apostles and their
Disciples have recommended to us by theirs?

2. For our Liturgy of some Ancient Prayers, is it Popish as a set form? or as
a form of those Prayers? A set form is so expedient and necessary to the
Church, if but for the sake of the People (that they may be sure to have no
other Petitions suggested than what are fit, that their Devotion may not suffer
by the weakness or indiscretion of the Minister, that they may know beforehand
how to prepare their thoughts what frame of Spirit is to be brought to Church)
that I may take leave to say, had a set form been used, not only in the
superstitions of Rome, but in the Charms of a Magician, it ought however to be
used in the service of God. If the Papists, if the Heathens used set forms,
because it was the most certain, orderly and best considered way, fittest for
the Worship of a God; must we therefore be forbid? because they did well, are
we therefore to do worse? And so for the Prayers themselves, they are most of
them elder than Popery, and no more Popish than the Lords Prayer. And if there
are any of their composure; yet if they are good, and according to the will of
God, why may they not be offered to him by us, as well as by them? Nay, may
they not be more acceptable to God, as they may be a testimony how willing we
would be to keep the Unity of his Church; and to join with all Christians, were
we permitted in all their Devotions? If our Accusers would show us any Popery
in our Prayers, they ought to show us where we pray to any but God, or for any
thing for which we want his Warrant; where we use any Intercession, but our
Saviors; or what part of our English Language, is an unknown Tongue.

3. The Surplice is nothing but an Innocent Habit made of Linen, which is
appointed to be the Dress of the Priest when he officiates. It cannot but be
acknowledged, that it is a fit point of Decency to assign all that are in
Orders some certain fashion of Garment in public, if but in the streets, and
when they appear abroad. And if this be a Gown, and the Papists wear one too,
is a Gown therefore Popish? In like manner as the Ministers of the Church are
directed to an Uniform Decency abroad; so particularly, and with the same
innocent intention they are ordered to wear a distinct Robe, when they perform
the Public Service in the Church: That as the Common Devotion is administered
by a Person set apart, in a Place, and at a Time set apart, so it may be done
too in a peculiar Garment. And if the Papists do so too, even so let them; they
do well. If they had invented the Garment, we need not have scrupled to follow
this one Italian Fashion. But they took it up from earlier Custom, and it is no
more Popery, then the Ministers, then the Citizens, the Lawyers, or the Judges
Garments. If they could say we placed any Sanctity in it, attributed any
Efficacy to it, it would be something: but as we use it, it may as well be a
piece of Popery, to be at Church with a Band, or with a Crevat.

4. Kneeling at the Communion is far too from being Popish; that is, either a
Corruption or Superstition. The Papists indeed kneel to the Host, as to their
God: but not so particularly then, when they Receive it, as when immediately
after Consecration, it is Elevated, and shown to them for that purpose by the
Priest. But we that Kneel when we Receive the Communion, Kneel not TO IT, but
AT IT. And what Posture can there be fitter for those, that in the deepest
sense of their own great Unworthiness, and of Gods unexpressible Mercy, are
going to take the Seal of their Pardon, and the Pledge of their Salvation; What
better Posture would they have for those, that at that time are to be in the
Highest Acts of Devotion; the most Relenting Contrition, and the greatest
Thanksgiving? If on that Occasion the Papists Kneel too, and with a Wrong
Intention; why should any Fault of theirs hinder me from expressing my Duty?
What they do on No Reason, why should not I do on the Best? especially when we
have so solemnly disclaimed them, and so expressly declared our own. As we are
not to disuse the Holy Sacrament, because the Papists have made it an Idol: So
may we continue our Reverence, though they have paid it Adoration.

5. The Cross in Baptism, or rather after Baptism, has in it as little of
Popery too. To Worship the Cross, to Ascribe any Virtue to the Sign, or to
promise ones Self any Defense from it, may be Popery: but to Use it as a Sign,
only to signify and declare, can never come under that Notion, nor be termed
Superstition; no more than it would be to pronounce the Word. Though the Cross
was Foolishness to the Greeks, a Stumbling Block to the Jew; and has been since
to the Papists too, a Stumbling Block and an Idol; yet are we still to Glory in
it, and to have the Memorial of it in a high and precious Esteem: neither
concerned onone hand at the Gentiles Mockery, nor on the other at the Roman
Superstition. The Primitive Christians, it is certain, Used this Sign in the
Earliest Times, very frequently: with that on all Occasions they put themselves
in mind of our Savior's Suffering for them; and with that they Armed
themselves against their own. So they Saluted their Brethren, and so they
Defied the Heathen. It was the common Token and Mark of those that belonged to
Christ; and was afterward the Imperial Banner of the Great Constantine, the
first Christian Emperor, and under that (by the Grace of God) were those
Victories obtained, that put an end to the Heathen Persecutions. Our first
Reformers therefore finding the Crols of Christ made the Subject of much
Superstition among the Romanists, its Image Worshipped, and I do not know what
Virtue imputed to the Signs; and yet remembering withal the Devout Practice of
the First and Best Ages; as they abhorred to Countenance the one, to they were
tender too of Condemning the other: and in that Intention, after the Sacrament
of Baptism is Administered, the Priest is Ordered, when he declares Audibly the
Admission of the Child into Christ's Flock; to declare Visibly too by that
known blessed Sign, what that Shame is the Christian ought to despise, how he
is openly always, and as it were on his Forehead to bear the Profession of his
Faith, what that Banner is, under which he is now Listed, and in what Warfare
he stands Engaged. Our Church applying that to its Members once at least in
their Lives, which the Primitive repeated so often; and doing that on so proper
an Occasion, which heretofore had been done on all. in hopes of being excused
on the part of the Ancient Christian, by its Care to avoid the Faulty Practice
of the Papists; and in hopes of being justified to its Members and Brethren, by
so Great, and so Reverend an Authority. And that it might be impossible for any
Stander by, how weak soever, to fall into any Superstition himself, or to
suspect it in the Minister; he never uses the Action Dumb, but Proclaims the
Edifying Signification, and speaks out in plain words the wholesome meaning. A
Sign This, Nobly and Generously taken up by the Elder Christians, in the midst
of their Blaspheming Heathen Neighbors; owned now with like Courage under the
insulting Mahumetan: A Lesson as necessary for that part of Christendom that
confines now upon the Turk; not to be looked upon as Unreasonable or Improper,
by those Nations that, by the Mercy of God, have yet a better Neighborhood:
always of great Edification to the Devout, but particularly to be remembered by
those whom Commerce carrys into remoter Countries: where tho, if Report mistake
not, it has by some been most scandalously forgot. So Clear and Free is the
Sign of the Cross, as Used by us, from the least shadow of Superstition.

6. Lastly the Fasts and Feasts of the Church come as unjustly under the same
groundless imputation. The time of assembling, is a Circumstance of our Worship
that cannot be left to particular choice, but must be determined in Common: and
what is to be done at that time, must be determined too in any Orderly
Assembly: so that it must be left to the Discretion of the Governors, when we
are to keep a Festival, and when a Fast. As to the Keeping of the Lord's Day,
our Church was not at Liberty: without she would have rashly departed from
Apostolic observation, and the Continued practice of all Ages and Places since
the beginning of Christianity. As for the Keeping of Easter, she was too under
the like Obligation: the Annual Feast of the Resurrection, the Creat Lords Day,
being known to have been the Chief, and the Cause of all the Weekly. And as to
the Fast of Good Friday, it was nigh as early as the Feast of the Resurrection.
They lamented their sins our Savior died for on the Friday before; as
constantly as they commemorated His Rising again for our Salvation the Sunday
after. And in Order to the keeping of those two great Days with more Devotion,
there was likewise in the Church some time beforehand set apart, for better
Recollection, and greater Preparation: The number of Days in some Places more,
in some less. That of Forty, no Superstitious Number, had obtained in the
Western Country; and therefore was still kept: and would to God it were as
Religiously observed, as it was Piously appointed. Whitsunday too, the Day on
which the Holy Ghost descended, was Observed Always, and Universally by the
Ancient Church. Only the Nativity of our Savior was of later remembrance, but
yet before Popery came in: First observed in the Western Church; and afterward
taken up by the Eastern, in St. Chrysostom's time, as it slands recommended by
him to the People of Antioch. Other times besides these have been Appointed too
for our Religious Assemblies; which besides the general Worship of God, the
Examples of his Saints and Martyrs are gratefully remembered, and piously
proposed, and those Days are called commonly by the Name of the Person then
particularly Commemorated: Not that the Worship is to the Saint, or that the
Day is employed in his Honor; only because on the Occasion of his Memory or
Martyrdom, we come together as to Pay our other Duties to our God, so to thank
him for the Graces of his Servant, and to be Edified and Instructed by the
Example. It is true the Church heretofore, when God had been bountiful to them
in the Number of his Saints, increased in some proportion those Days of his
Worship: and it is to be Confessed that Popery had both acknowledged Saints to
God, which he might not own, and gave the True Saints an Honor, which they
must disclaim. But with is the Number of those Days is not greater then that
the Affairs of the World may well comply; and as the Number of the Apostles is
not large, so their Sanctity sure is unquestionable: and then on those Days we
neither Beseech by their Merits, nor Recommend our Selves to their
Intercession. You see then how unreasonable the Objection of Popery is here
too: but see to what absurdity it goes on. First it is Supposed Popery to keep
a Day in the Memory of an Apostle, and then it is thought as Popish, to call
him a Saint. A Great Person at Geneva, it seems, presumed it somewhat Popish to
Observe Sunday it self: and considered about Changing the Day. Nay some are so
perversely Superstitious on the other hand; as that That Day, on which all the
Christian World remembers our Savior's Bitter Passion, has seemed to them the
fitter for a Feast; and the Time Universally now set Apart for the Joyful
Memory of his Blessed Nativity, the more proper for a Fast. This indeed is not
like the Papists: No, it is like a Jew, or a Healthen.

So I hope it has sufficiently appeared, how little guilty those Usages are of
the Popery of which they are accused: the chief designs of these papers. But
having not been able to discourse of their Innocence without some discovery of
their use, I shall crave the Readers patience for a short digression, wherein
he may see that the first Governors of our Reformed Church did not only use
their Liberty, and impose them as things Indifferent; but as things expedient,
and to which they were obliged in all Godly Prudence.

For although the Persons who now enforce this account may think so much of
themselves as that the weakest of their Possible Jealousy ought to have been
considered most; yet the First Reformers were not to engage themselves in a
task so endless, nor to content themselves with so narrow a view; several other
respects more weighty, and things more practicable did expect their care.

For in the Reformation there were more considerations to be had, then some are
pleased, or capable to understand. There was a Regard to Truth, to Increase of
Piety to Gravity, and Decency, to Antiquity; to All the Modern Churches, the
Roman it self, the Grecian, and the then Reformed: Regards then had, and ever
since to be continued. They were indeed to provide in the first place, that
their prescribed Rites should be such as might not in any manner reasonably
offend their own members, but be the most fit to raise and promote their
Devotion: They were too at the same time to take care, that no offense should
be givin to other Churches, no just scandal even to that they left.

For as to the Church of Rome, tho we were forced to part from Her, it was to
be withal Christian meekness and Charity; with a desire that she would return
to Herself and us; and would at last follow the Reformation, which she had been
often desired to begin. And therefore when we cut off Her Corruptions and
Superstitions, we retained some of her most Laudable and Ancient. Ways; not
leaving them though Godly and Venerable, because Practiced by Her, as the Spirit
of Opposition would have directed; but for that Cause the rather practicing
them our Selves, as it was fit for Christians and Brethren. All the Innocent
Ceremonies indeed we did not keep; because their Number was Excessively great,
and they of small or no Edefication. Though under that Burden we could have been
content to rest, had that been the Only Dispute, and were it to have been the
Condition of our Peace. But the Tyranny of their Corruptions, by which they
forced us out of their Communion, having restored us to our First Liberty, and
taken off that Humane Right or Usurpation by which their Bishops pretended
Authority oyer Ours (from a Prescription whose Date we know); we used then that
Liberty too in other matters: and both showed that we were not under Bondage,
and that we were in Charity; leaving that Church a Pattern for Her to imitate,
and Usiing toward her a Temper by which she was not needlessly provoked.

So did the first Reformers discharge their Duty toward the Roman Church: by
this Conduct giving to the Sober and Well-minded all reason to commend us, and
taking away from the Rest all occasion to Blaspheme: reducing themselves in all
Material Points, to the Standard of the Primitive Church; and in lesser matters
taking leave to vary, as several Countries then of the same Ages had used to
do: in hopes that other Nations would by the Grace of God be at last invited by
so fair an Example; we not proposing our selves so much, as the Ancient Church
to their Imitation.

The same Apology might too be Satisfactory to the Greek Church; from whom if
we differ in Doctrines or Worship, it was because we presumed our selves
constrained by the Truth so to do: but that we affected not wantonly an
unnecessary Contrariety, they might perceive by our choosing some such Custom
as had the general Approbation, and by conforming to Ancient Usage. A Church of
another Climat not being to expect that we of the North-West should Agree in
all; but that it might appear by Common Practice of some things, that it was
not out of Opposition that we had abstained from the rest.

Such Respect there was to be to the Roman and Greek Churches: there was too a
consideration of the Reformed, the Lutheran; a chief regard was to be had to
her, and the upper hand of Fellowship given as to the Elder Sister. She first
had Protested against the Romish Corruptions, stood the dangerous Shock of
Papal Tyranny, and boldly advanced a Reformation; which too she Planted wide,
and Settled in very Powerful Countries. This Noble Example our First Reformers
followed: from Them they learned to cast off all Modern Usurpation, and to
restore according to the Earlier Pattern: not taking our Copy indeed from
theirs, but from the same ancient Original, though with some difference, yet with
a near resemblance. Our Episcopacy by the Piety of our Princes was left more
Entire, than with Them in some Places. The Doctrine of Consubstantiation, which
determines the Mode of Christ's Real Presence at the Time of Participation, we
were not Satisfied in; but yet as they condemned the Idolatry and Superstitions
of the Popish Transubstantistion equally with us; so did we equally with them
Adore the Mystery of the Holy Sacrament, and were ready to Communicate on our
Knees. After their Example our Churches and Cathedrals were not Neglected, the
Places where Gods Honor dwells; nor His Altars, where His Mercy and Love show
themselves forth. The Worship of the Soul was Commanded to be expressed in the
Posture of the Body; The Bowing to the Holy Name of JESUS recommended; and a
decent Gravity every where kept up, though with fewer Ceremonies.

So Serviceable were these Orders of ours in respect of the rest of
Christendom, and so fit to be retained for their Edification in Love (the Fruit
of which we had the Satisfaction to reap, not only from the Approbation of
those our Brethren, not so well Satisfied elsewhere, but from the Confession
even of some Romanists themselves.) They were too as Proper for our own
Edification, and for the Advancement of Gods Worship here.

To that Purpose these Rules were as exactly fitted, as if it had been the only
Design. For what could have been better designed for the Honor of God, and
Increase of Religion amongst Men, then that the People should be Ordered (had
it not been their Custom before) Solemnly to meet to pay their Devotions on
certain Days of the Week; that there should be Annual Commemorations of the
Mysteries of our Redemption, and of the Zeal and Doctrines of the Blessed
Apostles. And how could our Devotions be more Certain and Sufficient, more
Grave and Regular, than under a well considered Form? If the Minister were then
in another Garment, did not the very Sight of him Admonish, before the
Exhortation began, that the People were to lay aside their ordinary Thoughts,
not to meet him there as Abroad, but to be a Holy Congregation? If they were
directed to be on their Knees at Prayers, and at the Communion; was it more
than became their Duty? or a Hinderance think we to their Devotion? Or was it
to be expected, that when a Congregation saw a Person admitted into the Number,
and the Doctrines of the Cross declared over him, as the Terms of his
Reception; they should be Offended that it was so evidently set forth, and
declared to the Eye as well as to the Ear; and should so far forget its
Benefits, as rather at that time to think impertinently of an old Superstition
that was gone, and of Popery that was abolished; than to join and recognize our
Saviors Death, and their former Vows, and zealously to resolve the Profession
of their Holy Faich in despite of all its Enemies? But on this Subject I
proceed no further to the other unquestionable parts of our Ritual; it being
plain, that even the lesser Appointments have their proper use.

When therefore the Reformation began; for such just Reasons, and several
Respects to others, and to our selves, was the present Form Established.

At that time the other Protestant Church of Calvin's Model (that the Reader
may not think it forgot above) was but just set up in the narrow Territory of
Geneva; and therefore, indeed, not much considered by our Reformers; only under
their general Rule, that as they begged leave in Indifferent things to use
their own Liberty, so they imposed not on other Churches. By our leave
therefore the Reformers of that place might have used fewer Ceremonies, and
those of their own Invention, so they would be pleased not to dictate their
Regulations as necessary Rules to us: Nay, even there, where otherwise we might
think they had gone too far, the necessity of their Circumstances might have
pleaded for them; provided they prescribed not their Orders and Discipline to
foreign Countries. Though therefore they had abrogated Episcopacy, though Lay
Elders, and Lay Deacons were Novelties in the Church of Christ, though a
Liturgy of Prayers was wanting, and they seemed in several things to condemn
the ancient Church too much; yet they were still regarded by us as Brethren,
their Correspondence desired, and Communion with them maintained.

But when the Neighborhood of Geneva had, with the Doctrine of the
Reformation, carried this peculiar Discipline into France: It began thence to
come over hither as a Mode, and to take, it may be, the more because it was
new. And then it was urged, not as convenient to the Circumstances of a little
Town, or of a scattered distressed People under Popish Bishops, but as
necessary to all that professed the purity of the Gospel: And it was given out
to be as fit to reform from us to them, as it was before from the Pope to us.
The first Rule of this new Method (I mean as imported and translated to us)
was, to have no Circumstance in Divine Worship, that was not expressly
determined in Scripture. By this Rule they cut off all our Establishments, as
they thought, at once; but by this they could have none of their own; for their
Elders were not to be found in the Text, considered better; and unordain'd
Annual Deacons had as little ground, not to mention their lesser Rites. That
Rule therefore failing, they were to have another measure of Purity; and that
was, to be at the greatest possible distance from the Church of Rome: And then
we were to have no Bishops, because the Pope was one; we were not to pray to
God at set hours, or by a set form, because the Papists did; we were to have no
Christian Fasts or Feasts; and all our Observations, though never so Edifying
and Primitive, were to be laid aside by those that would be Pure, if they had
been used at Rome.

We have already, though briefly, discovered the falsity of both those
Principles. The first was a gross Falacy put upon the People by their Teachers;
who, to the great Maxim of the Reformation, That no necessary Christian
Doctrine was to be received not warrantable by Scripture; had Sophistically
joined this great Untruth, That no Circumstance of Worship was to be used that
could not be showed there. The other too, that condemned indifferently all the
Practices of the Roman Church whatever, was nothing else but a Sophistical
Imposture put in the place of this Truth, That none of its Corruptions were to
be retained; it was nothing but a dis-ingenuous unchristian abuse of good
Peoples Zeal; to make them dislike the good usages of ours and the ancient
Church, with the same warmth they rejected the Depravation of the Roman.

Either of these two Principles, if they had been true, would have put an end
to the Dispute about Church Ceremonies; and therefore, though Baffled and
Confuted, they failed not to be always inculcated into the Ears of the People.
To prove the Rites of our Church unlawful step by step, had been a troublesome
Task, and might not have succeeded well; either the People might not have born
the length of their Discourse, or seen through the weakness. But here to cut
the work short, they had a Maxim or two, that their Followers might easily
grasp, and it may be as easily swallow. And accordingly one, or both of these,
the People were always taught to believe. These were the little lumps of Leaven
that were cast in, and all along fermented the Nation, till the whole was
Leavened; and they were worked up at last to the utmost Perfection, and most
exalted state, to the Holy Covenant; whose great ends forsooth were, to pluck
up Episcopacy Root and Branch as Popish, and to Establish Presbytery, the Form
of Gods own appointment.

But these false Principles could not be fixed so; they were pursued by their
own Party, and run down in Fact. For as to the First, there rose up those that
could no more spy out Presbyterianism in the Bible, than they had been
suffered to see Episcopacy before: Ministry and Tithes were not to be found in
the Gospel, they said: They asked you your Text for every thing you did; for
saying You rather than Thou; for taking off the Hat before God or Man. And so
as to the other Maxim, it was found out at last, that Geneva it self, was not
far from Italy; and Classes and Synods (who would have thought it?) were
esteemed a little Popish too; if they valued themselves on their distance from
Rome; there were those that could go farther than they. The Independents
presently outwent them: these were outstripped by others; and at last the
Quaker seemed before them all, but all things moving circularly, these last
came very nigh to that point on the one side, from which they were most remote
on the other; instead of one pretending Infallible Spirit, we had Legions; and
all the Opposition to the Pope of Rome ended in this, that every Man was to be
Pope himself.

These were the visible and palpable absurdities, consequent to those two false
Maxims; and those Maxims have been mentioned here upon occasion indeed of the
Geneva Reformation; but with no design of undue Reflection. They being but
Additions grafted on that way since it was brought into England, not natural
nor proper to it, though with us too closely combined: Ridiculous untruths of a
destructive Nature, to be disclaimed and discountenanced by all sober Men.

However our Foreign Brethren of that Constitution, as they designed their Form
of Government for themselves, and not for us, for a Bond of Peace and
Discipline at home, and not to give disturbance abroad; so they will, we do not
question, give us leave to think so well of our own way, as not to be willing
to exchange it for any other; that may in Charity be allowed to stand on equal
terms, but will not we hope pretend advantage.

For Good Men, and who know the grounds and reasons of our Reformation, were at
a loss, what the late Design might mean of bringing our Church nearer to the
Protestants abroad (to those of our Brethen of Calvin's way we suppose they
intended.) We hope the Intention was not to insinuate an unjust reproach; as if
we had not the Amity and Affection for them which we ought, did not rejoice in
their Edification, or compassionate their Affliction: but only this, to alter
our Constitution into a nearer resemblance with theirs: But if any of ours
desired this for Amendment, as a farther Reformation and greater Perfection, it
was because they were not pleased to consider their own frame well: nor could
any honest man of our Church, and who understood her right, have ever
Consented. And if the Designs was only Political, (though the Policy appears
not) yet why might it not be as fit for those Protestants to come nearer to us?
But, not to stand on such terms, how could we have went nigher to the
Calvinist, without departing from the Lutheran? Our Church is already in the
middle, and reaching out her Hands on either side; settled there long ago, by
weighty Reason, and upon mature Deliberation: for although the word Protestant
has been here at home appropriated to a Party; and the Reformed Church abroad
has been still understood only for those of one way: Yet every one knows that
the Lutheran is the first Reformed; and that the term Protestant is only proper
to them, and particularly to those only of the German Nation. This then is the
first Fallacy endeavored to be put upon the People; that those to whom some of
our Dissenters pretend a nearer approach, are the only Reformed and
Protestants in the World: as if the Lutheran were not to be understood by his
own Name. The other is this, that the Calvinist is so great, that the other
deserves not to be mentioned: whereas the other have still been the far greater
Number, and the much more considerable. Our Trade indeed makes us look into
Holland, (where though the true Calvinists make not above a third of the people;)
and our Fashions into France, (and would to God their Numbers increased there;)
we speak much of Switzerland, and the Lower Palatinate: but we forget to take
notice of the large Countries that are entirely of the other Profession; as
Denmark; Sweden, the Dominions of the Elector of Saxony, and Brandenbourgh, of
the Great House of Lunenburgh, and the many Imperial Cities. So that the Design
mentioned before of coming nearer to the Reformation abroad, was nothing else
but this: to persuade us to go farther from the Universal Church Primitive,
from the Major part of the Moderns Reformed, from our innocent agreement with
general Christianity, and from those of our selves who are much edisied by our
Present Constitution; to come nearer to those abroad, who (to speak in the
fairest language) are not better constituted than our selves; and to comply
with those at home, who are certainly neither the greater nor the best part of
us; to give way to the falsest and most destructive Prejudice, opposite to all
Catholic Agreement, and to Countenance and Encourage a most causeless and
Seditious Separation.

But to return from this Digression: We have seen upon the View of the
Particulars most in question no Popery in them, no Superstition nor Idolatry,
no favor nor tendency to any of the Roman Corruptions; nothing in them that is
not directed to the promoting of Gods Honor, the raising of our Devotion, and
the Teaching of our Duty; nothing but what either was in use before Popery took
place, or must be allowed commendable even in the Papists themselves.

And yet notwithstanding all the Zealous abhorrence our first Reformers had for
Popery, declared by their Writings, and confirmed by the Testimony of their
Deaths; notwithstanding the constant continued Professions of the same Faith
still made by all that officiate in the Church; Although all possible care has
been taken to prevent the Suspicion, and disavow all Popish Intention; yet our
Church is Popish, and we all Papists still: The grossest and the most
inexcusable Calumny that ever was invented.

We have seen already to what ends this notorious Untruth was first devised by
the Dissenting Party; to widen the Separation, to six men in it, and to keep
them at an irreconcilable distance: But I cannot tell whether it had not been
more excusable before God and Man to have separated upon no Reason, than upon
one so scandalously false. They had then only been accountable for their
departure, and forsakeing us; but now besides for all this Injustice which they
have done us, and the Calumnies under which they have left us. For so under the
Old Law, where a man might at pleasure have put away his Wife, and without
Cause shown; yet if he had given occasion of Speech against her, and brought an
Evil Name upon her, had accused her to have been Corrupt; he was then by the
Judgment of the Elders to make reparation by a Pecuniary Mulct, to suffer
Corporal Chastisement, and not to put her away for ever. If then those Persons
had not in them that Brotherly Love, which should have made them desirous of
our Company; nor that Sense of their Duty to our common Father, by which we are
obliged to make our joint Appearance before Him; yet in common justice they
should have forbore their Slanders, and in reverence to the God of Truth they
should not have condemned us so rashly, in matters that concern him. For seems
it so small a thing to any man, especially to one that professes a more tender
Sense of his Duty, to accuse one rashly and falsely before God and the World of
Superstitions, Abominations, and Idolatry, of perverting the Gospel of Christ,
and corrupting his Worship, of carrying the Souls of men into Error and Sin,
and endangering their Eternal Salvation: Were this Scandal spoken of any single
Priest, that had the care of the smallest Parish, what Sufficient Satisfaction
could be made him? But when it is spoke of the Pastors and Teachers of a Great
People, of the Constitution and Frame of a whole National Church, what amends
shall be given then? For here the consideration is not only of Disreputation
and Loss of Honor unjustly sustained, but of the Horrible Mischiefs that have
followed: Nor do those suffer so much, of whom the Scandal is said, as those do
who credit and entertain it. The greatest prejudice is not to us, but to those
who on that account are gone from us: who have been scared by it into Schism,
and Faction; have been engaged into uncharitableness, and the breach of the
Peace of God, the Unity of his Church, into Heats and Animosities, into
Temporal and Spiritual Disobedience; who have been thence perverted into Deadly
Errors and Heresies, and hastening from us have run upon Rocks, and made
Shipwreck of their Faith. These are the damages of that Wicked Scandal, to be
estimated by the Hazard and Perdition of thousands of Souls: the loss is to the
Catholic Church, and to be answered for hereafter to the Great Shepherd. So
big is this foul slander of Infinite Mischief: though its single guilt be so
great, that it needs no accumulation.

Judge not that ye be not Judged, says our Lord and Master: And, who art thou
that Judge another Servant? says his Blessed Apostle. So unwarrantable and
dangerous a thing it is to pass a hasty Peremptory sentence, even upon our
fellows and equals, in any thing that relates to God: it is to attempt upon his
Authority, and to usurp his Seat. He then that passes a Sentence notoriously
unjust, what is he to expect at the day of the righteous Judgment of God? And,
who art thou that so judge not only another's Servant, but thy own Superior,
and whom the Great Master has commanded thee to obey? If thy Slanders were
against any foreign Sister Church of God, it were a high breach of Charity, and
for which you ought to beg pardon of Christendom: but to Calumniate maliciously
ones own Church, and to charge her falsely with the highest Crimes; is a Lie
not only against those to whom you owe common respect, but to whom you are to
pay Duty and Subjection; it is as if you Blasphemed your Father or your Mother.

But to pass away from such sad Considerations, on which though the concerned
should reflect very seriously; and to conclude in the easiest and most
favorable manner: Those that go this way to destroy our Reputation with the
Vulgar, have not provided well for their own with intelligent men, they will
not after this, be well able to make good their Pretenses to much knowledge,
and their Profession of greater zeal for Truth. For the difference betwixt us
and Popery is so wide, that those who accuse us of it, except they excuse
themselves by ignorance, cannot be well allowed by the world to boast of
Conscience and Integrity.

I cannot tell whether most of their Teachers are not directly guilty of this
great Untruth: However, whether or no they Preach it for positive Doctrine, yet
this we are sure of; there is nothing more common with their Auditors: it is
this fancy that keeps them fast to their own way, and gives them their greatest
aversion for us.

Some of the People indeed out of Ignorance are betrayed into this Slander: and
yet there too the Ignorance is something too gross, and too easy to be
removed, than that it should Qualify the fault much. They need for better
information but peruse our Articles of Religion, which are very short; and look
into our Prayers, a Book in every ones hand; they need but come to those near
Places, where the Law and their Duty calls them; and have patience to hear
their proper Teachers: And therefore even this their Ignorance is too much
their Fault, to become their Defense.

But however this Blind Zeal and weak Ignorance of the people, if it shall be
allowed in Plea for them, must it not then be charged upon those who have
usurped the care of them? Those who have unwarrantably and in their own wrong
taken upon them their Instruction, are they not to answer for their culpable
want of Knowledge? But how careful should they be that they do not beget these
uncharitable prejudices, nor dis-ingenuously cherish such untruths, that they
are not the Causes of that weakness, and the Authors of their Ignorance?

For whence is it, that those People should be supposed to bring such
Prejudices, but from the Discourses of their Meetings? Do they not there find
Popery and our Church in a breath? the Rites of that Church so mentioned, as to
include ours? and themselves flattered with the Title of True Protestants, to
our Exclusion? If they do not there broadly call the Surplice a Rag of Babylon,
or our Prayers the English Mass; yet are not will Worship, and Superstition,
carnal Ordinances, and Idolatry spoken out on those Occasions? and the People
given to understand by Oblique Reflections, and peculiar Phrases, that there is
as little Difference as they have heard Distinction?

Hence it comes to pass that the True bred Dissenter will no more come into our
Church, than into a House of Rimmon: a Cathedral is a very Abomination. To be
at Prayers, would be to be at Mass: and if you ask them their Exception at the
Book, they Thank God they have never looked in it. They leave their Friends
before they are buried, they are so frighted at the Service that is to be said:
as if the Parson in white were an Apparition. And when a Relation of theirs is
to be Christened; though the Office be performed at home, in no Superstitious
place; yet they will not assist at that for which they came, and fly away from
the Sign of the Cross as fast, as the Papists fancy evil Spirits do. Or if any
of these upon Surprise or mistake chance to be present at the Prayers; they
take care to show their aversion by their looks and gesture; they put
themselves straight in some cross posture of body, or disposition of mind: if
the Minister calls to kneel, they will choose to sit; and when the holy words he
pronounces speak the Worship of God, Praises or Prayers to him, they devoutly
think of the Superstition or Ignorance of the Priest, and smile at the Folly of
the rest. Such Profanation do a great part of them take our Worship to be: and
so fearful are they of partaking in it.

There are the ridiculous and truly ignorant conceits of their better meaning
followers; highly unjust to us, but most Scandalous to their own Teachers. But
these absurd fancies are not more ridiculous, than the pretenses their Leaders
draw from them: when they desire Allowances for the weaknesses of those they
have made so; and would have the Government on all Occasions to indulge such
Errors as they shall be able to teach: using the old known Method, instructing
the People to fancy Grievances first, and then in their Name, but for their own
Interests, Importuning a Redress.

But these Leaders of the Party might Consult better for the weakness of their
People, if they would try to cure it by better Information: and they might
easily acquit themselves of the Guilt of Slaundering our Church, by beginning
to do her Right. Let them then for once come nearer the Reformed Churches
abroad themselves; and own that to the World, which those have never Scrupled
to declare. Let them honestly tell their Congregations the Plain Truth: that we
detest and Renounce the Popish Corruptions and Superstitions as much as they;
that the Belief and Doctrine of our Church is the same with theirs; that the
very few Ceremonies we have retained, have nothing of Sin or Abomination in
them. Let them confess that a good devout Prayer is never the less so, for
being provided before hand, read out of a Bock, or by one in White, and not in
Black or Gray; that if the People will but bring their thoughts to Church as
well prepared as the words are, they will be heard most acceptably by their
God. Let them own that there is no more harm in the Sign of the Cross made by
the hand, than in the word that signifies it from the mouth; and that men may
be as innocently shown one way as another, what thing they are not to be
ashamed of. Let them acknowledge that there is no more Sin intended, in being on
our Knees at the Communion, than there is in being truly penitent and humbly
thankful. And lastly, to sum up all, Let them but declare that a Christian of
our Communion, who Worships God as is prescribed him there, and believes and
obeys the Doctrine there taught him, is by the Grace of Christ in the Ordinary
way of Salvation; Let them, I say, but publish this to those numbers they have
called together (and if they are Truths, in Conscience they are bound to do
it;) they may then be heard to excuse themselves from the blind
uncharitableness and unrighteous Slanders of their Auditors, against a Church
of Christ, so famed and so great a part of the Reformation.

Hitherto I have only represented the strange injustice offered to our Church,
an undeniable and demonstrable injustice: neither is it my intention to speak
of that Personal one, under which its Ministers have suffered besides. The
ground indeed for such a Jealousy, is not impossible in Nature; but it is from
the same want of Charity, that those Persons who are under the greatest
Obligations of Conscience against Popery, must be thought its greatest
Favorers. If in a Multitude one or two single men may have been under the
suspicion of having Apostatized; yet how does that affect the rest of the Body,
who will be the first to disown and renounce them? Were the eleven remaining
Apostles to be termed Traitors for Judas? Or is our Nation to be denominated
from the few Malefactors of its number, which it punishes as soon as it
discovers? We have of Churchmen some too, it may be inclinable to the
Separation: why are not the Dissenters pleased too for their sakes to think
favorably of the whole: and to let us all be True Protestants on the one side,
by same reason we are Papists on the other? But is it not strange that those
who have distinctly subscribed to the Articles of the Reformation at each
Degree in the University, at the promotion to either Orders, at their
Institution to any Preferment, who have publicly read and owned these Articles
in their several Congregations, that those who have given all manner of
assurances to the World, must be suspected still and traduced, by those that
have yet given none, of whom we know not yet, if they themselves do, but at
random and at large, of what profession of Religion they are? God pardon them
their uncharitableness: and we are to thank them, that they have not made us
Jews or Mahumetans.

It may have been enough to all honest Men, and truly Conscientious, to have
shown them the untruth of the prejudice that has been raised against our
Church, and the iniquity of the Irreligious Slander: as they feared God, so
they would be afraid to speak Evil falsely of a Church of Christ, and of the
Service of their Maker; nay, we might hope that such upon the first Reflection
would be the more hasty and forward to return to-our Communion, lest they
should seem any longer to countenance so unjust and ungodly a Calumny. But they
may be pleased to consider further, not only the sinfulness, but the Mischief
of the Action: and that we are not so sensible of the injustice done to our
selves; as of its ill Consequences, the Damage and Prejudice it brings on the
Cause of God.

The Differences and Schisms that have happened in Protestant Churches have, it
is known, been very scandalous to the Common Cause, and formed into an Argument
against us. It is said by our Adversaries, that as soon as we fell from them,
we fell from Unity and Order, and that the infinite folly of the following
Separations, was but a Consequent natural to the first: That it was a Spirit of
Pride and Opposition that engaged us first in the Schism; and that we had no
Bowels for the Divisions of the Church. See therefore, say they, how they break
into endless Fractions; they are no more tender of their own Communion, than
they were of ours; they part out of Humor and Fancy, and in this they do us
right, they submit to no other Constitution.

It is true, that the wantonness and petulance of Men has given too much place
to this reproach already; but when the measure of a thorough Reformation shall
be the utmost Opposition to Rome, and a Protestant Church quarrelled and
reputed Popish for some common innocent Usages; then it it is that the Romish
Advocates may triumph well, then may they justly insult. Here, say they, you
discover the right Protestant Temper; you may see in the True Protestant, and
the True Reformed, the True Spirit of Contradiction: How upon a Pique to us,
they fall out with all Christendom; and will leave the Churches of all Ages for
our sakes: Let us but use what is Primitive or Orderly, and we may have them as
Indecent, Confused, and Ridiculous as we please.

For the Truth is, the Principle those men have chose does not only
scandalously condemn the Churches of the Second and Third Ages; but is the most
inconvenient that could be imagined, and may bring them into as great
Absurdities, as they endeavor to avoid. From this Maxim the Church of Rome
may take its measures; and manage, if they please, the humor of Opposition, as
easily as a Vow of Obedience; it is but their taking one side, and our
Sectaries are bound to take the other side, they are to be led by Contraries,
and out of a Childish crossness will refuse what the other would seem to
direct. So may the Romanist appropriate to himself all Gravity, Decency, and
Antiquity: And should he reform, may he not expect that these would quit the
Reformation?

This is the direct tendency of the Principle; and this way it goes, though the
Papist may not think fit to follow it: However we have seen what occasion of
Obloquy and Reproach it gives, and what a Disparagement and Dis-reputation it
brings on the Cause of the Reformation: Shameful to our selves, and an Offense
to those that otherwise might come to us. We may now see in the next place, how
it operates by the Odium it fastens on our Church, and what mischief it
produces there; how convenient and serviceable the Scandal is to the Designs of
Rome, if not invented, yet fomented by them, and it self therefore to be
esteemed Popish for much better reason than our Ceremonies have been.

For after the Reformation was, by the Grace of God, once brought about, and
the Church of Rome could not hinder her Corruptions from being seen, and her
Usurpations from being laid open; all that they in their Craft could devise, or
the Malice of the Devil could have suggested, was to divide and dis-unite those
that were gone away, and to promote Variance and Disagreement between us. But
the design was never more Artificial, than when they were able to raise a
Jealousy, that one part of this Reformation was Popish still; and could make
men overlook all the substantial difference of this Church from that of Rome,
and conclude them the same, only from the common use of some indifferent
things. The Church of England, they found, had manifested their Depravations,
exposed them beyond any defense, and raised up a fixed and resolute Indignation
against them. This Zeal, as long as it was sober, rational, and well grounded,
they could not possibly withstand: they try therefore whether they cannot
divert it upon something else, and direct it against its own Party; whether
they cannot take this Artillery, turn it upon something laudable and innocent,
and level it against its Friends. Being Hatred to Popery is unavoidable, let
the English Church be Popish too. So are the Romanists content, if we may come
in for a share of the Guilt, that not only part of their Worship, but the whole
may be reputed Corrupt: and they are ready to help to accuse themselves in the
wrong place, that the charge may fall upon those that are in the right.

And now the Romish Emissaries have accomplished their errand in one sense. If
they have not perverted those of our Communion, yet they have seduced others to
believe it done: and we are become all Papists; at least in the Opinion of the
Dissenter. If he may be believed, and we are to be added to the number, the
Roman Catholics are vastly increased: And well may they have the Reputation
abroad, to be very considerable in their Country; at least well may their
Priests report that we are inclinable to return, and easy to be reconciled;
when they have the concurring Testimony for it of the Sectary, their seeming
Adversary; and this, though but a Mistake and Fame, yet has its effect: it
keeps up the hope of the Principals at Rome, and redoubles the endeavors of
their Seminaries. But they have too a more certain and real aim.

For by this Opinion they may either gain some of us to themselves; or be sure
however by the Jealousy to keep us asunder one from another. They may hope
that some even of our Communion may at last have a more favorable esteem of
the Religion, to which they have been joined so long by report; and that here,
as it happens sometimes in Marriage, we may be content to embrace that Faith to
which Fame has said we were contracted before. But to the Honor of our Church
be it spoken, this has not been effected neither by the Caresses of one, nor
Affronts of the other; neither out of Affection, nor Indignation. So little
tendency is there in our Constitution that way, of which we have been
unreasonably suspected. Their greater hopes, I suppose, of this kind are upon
the Party that pretends to be most averse, and makes at Present the more
clamorous and extravagant opposition; for it may be rational to presume, that
he that knows not the Reasons nor Intent of the Reformation, and makes nothing
of the vast difference between us and Rome, may easily therefore step over it,
and be as willing to return to them as us; it may be enough to make such a
Convert, to satisfy him in the sign of the Cross, or kneeling at the
Communion, as soon as he finds himself Convinced of the lawfulness of that
Popery, he may be willing to yield to the rest, and may comply as
undiscerningly as before he abhorred. Such an Intention as this, we may see, is
feasible enough; how far it has been practiced in Fact, I will not say, or
whether the Quakers have not been justly suspected.

For making of Proselytes the Romanist cannot have a more proper Method, than
to infect the People with Prejudices against us, and to hinder them from
settling on the true certain bottom, the Foundation so well laid by the first
Reformers, from keeping in that Church which is so sure a place, and may be so
easily maintained. However, besides the Converts they gain, by the Jealousies
they Infuse they heighten our Divisions and Animosities, break and scatter us,
they hinder us from joining in what might oppose them, and prevail that we have
no common Interest. Nay, things have been sometime, brought to that pass, that
the Sectarians have rather joined with the Papists themselves, and in public
Counsels confederated with their pretended Enemies to impeach our better
Establishment. So much Popish were we then, that the professed Roman Catholic
was less.

And now by force of this accursed Scandal, see into what difficulty the Church
is brought: either engaged in a perpetual intestine quarrel, if she stands as
she is, or else obliged to change at the pleasure, and by the direction of her
sworn Enemies. If she thinks fit to stand on her own bottom, where so many good
and necessary Considerations have fixed her, and where she has rested so long;
she must then expect the continuance of all the Dissenting Outcries; nay, want
of Moderation reproached, and the Schism imputed to her, even by some of her
own popular Sons. If she shall be inclinable to comply, where she lawfully may,
yet there the humorous Exceptions are so various and so unreasonable, that she
sees no good Issue; has no reason to presume that the Faction desires to be
content; neither can she tell what Church she shall be at last, if she is to
alter still, as often as her Establishments shall be accused to correspond with
Rome.

Now the Church of Rome, which has fixed it self invariably upon the Council of
Trent, and for the same Reason would have its Adversaries unsettled still, most
willingly sees us alter, shift, and change; not only that the uneasiness,
inconstancy, and uncertainty may be verified upon us, with which they sometime
reproach us; that ours may be still wavering and more easily drawn to them; and
that theirs may be unwilling to come to us, into a Body so mutable, and after
an whole Age so little satisfied of the Lawfulness of its Rites and Usages; but
in hopes too, nay, out of certain prospect, that by such changes we shall be
further from settlement than before, and nearer to the Dissolution they would
endeavor.

The Demanded Alterations it is plain, are not for the satisfaction of those
that are of our Communion; but of those that are not: and by such our own may
be scandalized and shaken; but the others will hardly be obliged. For when we
are ready to change, not moved by Arguments and Reason, (for those are most
Frivolous and Sophistical) but to comply with Fancy, or gratify Opposition;
the Humor it is certain, will be the more hard to satisfy; and obstinacy,
when in^ourag'd, will onl^ learn to ask more: Especially when the Principle by
which they move is full of endless dissatisfaction, and has an equal quarrel
against the whole Constitution. So that when they have effected one alteration,
they have only made way for another; and are never likely to rest, till they
have destroyed the whole. Now for Example, the Surplice, the Cross, and
kneeling at the Sacrament, are demanded to be released: the particular
objections against them are quite out of Countenance, and no longer pressed;
only that General one of Popery, or a General Scrupulous Fancy and Humor which
they call Conscience, are now urged. It is evident then that it is as casy a
matter for the same Masters of these Scruples to teach their Auditors, for as
worthy Reasons, to be dissatisfied with more: and it is as plain that they have
already taught them a general Avernon. Should they be excus^d kneeling at the
Sacrament themsel^es, might it not then be a great Offense to se^ the Minister,
or any other kne^^: As now they pretend an Offense at the Sign of the Cross,
though they themselves look only on. Would they not think themselves obliged to
avoid the very sight, and separate from the Communion of that Popish Practice.
Is, think ye, the Consecration Prayer free from all Suspicion? The reverence
prescribed in handling of the Elements, may come near the Idolatry of the Host;
and the whole Service accused for the Mass. Is the Cross after Baptism
mentioned by them, because they have forgot their quarrel at Godfathers; and
have a better Opinion of the Office of Confirmation? The Gown may as well be
disputed as the Surplice: Episcopal Orders may be thought a very indifferent
thing: and are they content enough with the Rank of Bishops themselves? The
whole Form of Prayers has its Faults: and how many are there for no Form at
all? So that it is evident those things are rather asked to begin, and break
ground for further Approaches: there are neither better Reasons, nor is there
more Contrariety against them, than against the other parts of our
Constitution: Only these three Circumstantials are most visible, the one upon
the Minister, and the other at either of the Sacraments; and so may be signal
enough for a Dissenting Triumph, a present Ease to their Scruples, which they
will please to accept, in earnest of what is to follow.

Were there any just reason for the Scruple of the meanest person, or
inconsiderablest number, God forbid but the Church should give redress. And
could it have been presumed that the Schism would be healed by the removing of
those three Ceremonies, however innocent and edifying, they would no doubt have
been remitted long ago. But the Governors of the Church know well what the
Spirit and Genius of the Dissent is; and to what it drives; upon what Causes it
is founded, and the medley of the Persons that are engaged in it: How small a
part the Sincerely Scrupulous make; and how the Harmless are in the hands of
the Crafty, and the Weak managed by the Sturdy: that the prevailing governing
Party are not to be satisfied with a Ceremony or two, but with more substantial
Things; Nay that Religion it self is but a Circumstance to their other
Designs. This our Superiors know: who want not the Charity or Condescension
that any Reconciler would recommend; but are obliged in all holy Prudence, and
their Duty to the Church, to take in more considerations, than purchance a
private Writer may Comprehend. They are to be as innocent as Doves, but as Wise
as the Serpents themselves. But this is beyond design of this Paragraph, the
Scope of which is only this. That if things are but indifferently well, to
change is always extreme inconvenient, but then most especially when there will
be no probable Stop: That the Papists will be as well pleased with such
alterations as the Dissenter; and neither fully satisfied but with our total
Abolition.

So is a Change, though in things perfectly Indifferent, no Indifferent thing.
But all things called Indifferent are not of equal Indifference; and
particularly the change This Maxim, we are speaking of, would persuade, which
the Dissenters endeavor, and our Popish Adversaries wish, is still for the
worse. The one pretends to see Popery in our Government and Rituals: the other
with grief sees ancient Order, and approved Decency retained; and the Primitive
Church restored: They are sensible with what disadvantage they encounter us;
that here is no Novelty to reproach; and that the Truly Catholic Church is of
our side. They have a Church in their sight, as it were one of the first Ages
revived; upbraiding them by its Presence, and discovering the Counterfeit by
the Comparison. To disorder and confound this, is the Folly of the one Party,
and the Interest of the other: to drive us off from the Ground, on which we
stand with so much advantage; to take away from her all Order and Beauty; and
to strip her of all the Marks of Antiquity, and Badges of Catholic Agreement.
So shall we be that which the Enemies of our Church desire; their Scorn and
Mockery first, and afterward their easy Prey: While having our eyes only upon
Rome, and running still backwards from her, we fall into the Snare that she has
laid behind us.

It were to be wished, that those who are so jealous of our Symbolizing with
Rome in Indifferent things, would be as Cautious in joining with her in her
pernicious Designs, and Conspiring to the Ruin of the Reformation. If they
will take their Measures in Opposition to Popery; let them then close with that
Church that is most hated by the Pope; and come in and help to defend that
place, against which he bends his greatest Force. And let them take care, lest,
if they know Popery so little now, as to accuse us of it; they assist not that
Religion so long and so effectually, till they bring it in indeed, and learn
what it is by a Dear Experiment.

FINIS.

