THE FENCING-MASTER's ADVICE TO HIS SCHOLAR: OR, A FEW DIRECTIONS For the more
Regular ASSAULTING in SCHOOLS.

Published by way of Dialogue, for the Benefit of all who shall be so far
advanced in the ART, as to be fit for Assaulting.

By the Author of The Scots Fencing-Master, and Sword-Mans Vade-mecum.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Reid, at his Printing House in Bells-wynd. Anno
Domini, 1692.

To the Honorable SOCIETY OF SWORDMEN IN SCOTLAND.
Erected at Edinburgh the 26th. of February, 1692. Gentlemen and
Fellow-Sword-Men,
HAving the Honor to be One of Your Society, and being so Fortunate as to be
elected at Your first Meeting precident for that Year, I think I cannot give a
greater Testimony of my Gratitude for that Favor, and of the respect I bear to
the Society, then by presenting you with this Token, which although I must
confess but a very small One; yet if narrowly canvased, will be found to
contain in it more of the Judgment of the Sword, than probably (considering
its bulk) could have been expected.

It therefore begs your Protection, and with all humility submits to Your
impartial Censure: For who can be fitter Judges of the Subject of this
Discourse, than persons who have so generously engaged themselves to Mantain,
Encourage, and Defend the Usefulness of the ART whereof it treats.

It is true, it treats chiefly but of the Second Branch; or Part of this Art;
for I think the Art of the Small-sword or Rapier may be very justly divided
into three Parts, or Kinds of Practice, which are, The Practice of the Lessons
upon a Master's Breast. The Practice of School-play, or of the same Lessons
against a Commerad with Blunts. And the Practice of the Abstract or most secure
part of the very same Lessons at Sharps, for a Man's Honor, or Life. Now of
the First and Last of these I have writ already; of the first in my Scots
Fencing-Master, and of the Last in the Sword-Mans Vade-mecum: So that to
perfect all I can say upon this Art, there only remains that I discourse upon
this Second Branch, which is of so much the more use, as it is the only means
to make a Man perfect in the Third: For a Scholar may play his Lessons very
exactly upon a Master, who can neitheir perform them in Assault nor at Sharps,
but it is somewhat rare to find a person dexterous and exact in School play,
who cannot perform something at Sharps, I do not mean by his natural Courage
and Forewardness, but by an artificial Conduct and Practice of his Lessons.

And although there may in Our Honorable Society be some, who know as much, nay,
perhaps more of what belongs to this, than I can discover to them, and also
that it cannot be supposed that any will be admitted into it, who do not in
some measure understand how School Play should be performed; yet I may safely
say, we are not all of the same Strength and Adroitness; and however useless
this Piece may prove to some, yet there are others who stand mightily in need
of it, as well in Our Society, as in other Schools throw the Kingdom: And this
in my Opinion can be no more a Reflection upon us, than it is upon any other
Corporation, that all belonging to it are not alike dexterous and expert in the
Trade they profess.

I expect therefore Gentlemen, that You will not be dissatisfied at my
recommending this Discourse to Your perusal, seeing it was merely for the
Encouragement of the Art, and Improvement of the Youth of this Kingdom, whereof
You are a part, that I was at first induced to enter upon this Subject: And
seeing I may without Vanity say, I have been none of the meanest Instruments in
persuading many Gentlemen to apply themselves to it, the good effects of which
I see in the Erection of this Our Society; I rest satisfied as having fully
accomplished my Design, and contemning the Censures of Any, who may Reflect
upon me as meddling too much with what they judge does so little lie in my way:
I think my self abundantly recompensed (by the Encouragement I see You give
the Art) for any small Trouble or Expenses I have been at for the benefit of my
Contrymen upon this Subject, of which, if I be not mistaken, I have said all
that is necessar, either for the Divertisement, or Defense of a Man's Person.

Continue then, Worthy Gentlemen, Your Noble Design, of Encouraging by this
Your Society the Art of the Sword; and as You have cast a generous Copy to the
rest of Britain, whereby they may know what Method to take for the Improvement
of their Youth in so useful an Art; so let Your Practice discover and
demonstrate to the World, That as Scotland comes short of few Kingdoms for
producing of Spirits capable of any Art or Science, so she will be behind none
in advancing the Noble Art of Defense, and training up of Swordmen both to
defend It and their Country, when a fit occasion shall offer. In doing which
You will not only reap the Advantage and Benefit Your selves, but also be an
Honor to Your Nation, which that it may for ever flourish and be Famous for
Swordmen, shall still be the desire and hearty wish of,

GENTLEMEN, Your most sincere Well-wisher and humble Servant W. H.

To all who are fit for Assaulting.
GENTLEMEN,
YOU may perhaps imagine, that after having writ so much already upon this
Subject what I am at present to add to it, is likly to prove either
Superfluous, or at best but a Repetition; but I must tell you that strictly
considered it is neither.

For in this I am to give you a description of neither Guard, Parrade, nor
Lesson; having done that so exactly in my Scots Fencing-Master, that were I to
do it again, I could not perform it better, than by taking an exact Copy of
it, it being so perfeitly conform to the common Method of Teaching, used at
present throw the most part of Europe.

But as all Arts are capable of Improvement; so in Fencing there are
Circumstances used now in performing some of the Lessons, which a few Years
hence may be rectified, (and upon very just and solid grounds) to a great deal
of Advantage: So that although my Book be most exact now, yet it may come to
differ a little in those Circumstances, which may afterward be thought more
agreeable to Reason, and the Natural Situation of the Body.

However I am fully persuaded, that whatever Alterations may happen, they will
contain more of Form than any essential Difference; So that as long as Fencing
it in repute, that Book will still be useful, and therefore to those who are
grounding in the Art I cannot recommend a better: For it traces the Art so
gradually from the simplest to the most difficult Lesson, that I may justly
term it. The Rudiments of the Sword for Beginners, and a sufficient Instructor
and Reviver of the Art, to those who are either advancing to, or arrived at the
greatest Perfection this Art is capable of.

Nor am I to give you an Abstract of the most essential Rules in this Art, that
are only to be practiced at Sharps, having also done that in the Sword-mans
Vade-mecum, and how I have performed it there, I leave to the Decision of those
to whom I Dedicated that Piece.

I confess when I write that Book, I thought never to have had any more
occasion to enter upon this Subject, but my often frequenting the
Fencing-Schools, especially upon the Assaulting-dayes, where I observed a great
many gross Absurdities committed by those who did Assault; which I am afraid
was not only ground of Derision to some, but the reason also of others
altogether absenting themselves from the Schools; I say the observing of these
things made me discover, that I, and all likewise who have treated of this
Subject, had ommitted something which might prove very beneficial for the
improvement of Young, and perfiting of Old Scholars in their Play with Blunts,
and after having a little considered wherein this omission lay, I found it to
be in the not setting down of plain and exact Rules for Assaulting; it is true
in my Scots Fencing Master I hinted a little at it, and gave also some few
Directions to this purpose, but they are not there near so particular upon this
head as I intend they shall be at present.

So for the benefit of Young Scholars, and to prevent for the future the like
abuses, I have undertaken to draw out such Directions as I have by my small
practice found to be most advantageous in School-play; you are therefore only
to expect here those Directions, which are to be as so many Guides, for your
more Decent and Regular Assaulting, in setting down of which I shall endeavor
to be as distinct and compendious as possible, seeing I will easily be
understood by you for whom they are designed, and for others (as I have said
elsewhere) they must not imagine that the reading a a sheet or two of Print
will immediately inspire them with as much Art as can make them Assault, No,
that is not to be expected.

They therefore must at first steer their Course another way, that is, make
Application to some Judicious Master, who by his Repute may be judged capable
to instruct them, under whose Tutorie I shall leave them until he make them fit
to practice the following Directions, which I shall then Recommend to their
Perusal, but at present only to the Practice of You who are Actuallie, or have
been Scholars, and who therefore do commonly Assault in the Schools upon these
days, which by the appointment of the Masters are set apart for that purpose.

Practice then Gentlemen, who ever you are, these following Directions, as
exactlie as I shall set them down, plainly and faithfully, and then we shall
see no undecent Postures nor Grimmaces, no Rambling; and but few Contretemps in
your School play, the neatness and decency of which will not only draw many
People to the Schools upon the days of public Assault, to behold your play;
but also Excite and Encourage many to follow the Sword, which ever was, is,
and shall be the main Design of any thing I shall say upon this, so Noble and
Gentle-manie, but (with a kind of Regrate I speak it) too much neglected
Exercise.

ADIEU.
THE Fencing Master's ADVICE TO HIS SCHOLAR, By way of Dialogue.
MASTER. BOY, Go see who Knoks.


Boy. Sir, it is one of your Scholars, Mr (...)


Ma. Desire him to come forewards.


Sch. Good morrow Sir, I see you are not very early to day.


Ma. No indeed Sir, for you know this is one of my idle days, and when a man
fatigues five days in a week for the benefit of his Scholars, he may very well
be allowed one to himself, to take a little ease and rest in. But pray, what
has brought you so early here this morning, especially seeing it is neither a
day for Receiving a Lesson, nor Assaulting?


Sch. Sir. It was upon that very Account that I made choice of it, and seeing
I have now got you alone, and also that it is as (...) say, an idle day, so
that we shall not be interrupted by your other scholars; I am resolved to
discover freely to you my mind, that so you may Assist me if possible in an
Affair, which I must confess, does at present not a little perplex me.


Ma. Sir, I assure you I take it as a singular Obligation, that you use this
freedom with me, and what ever the matter may be, I shall give you my best
Advice in it: But particularly if it any way relate to the Art I profess, in
which case I think my self doubly concerned: First as a Friend, and then as
your Master, to have your scruple resolved, and taken away.


Sch. Truly Sir, it is concerning the Art, and it is this; You know it is now
more than a twelve month that I have been your scholar, and I have all this
time punctuallie attended your school, both for my instruction and Practice; As
for the first, You know how I have improven in it, so that I think I may
without vanity say, there is none of your scholars who can play their Lessons
more exactlie, and with a better Grace upon your breast then I can; but as for
my Practice (I know not what can be the Reason of it) I find it as well as that
of your other Young scholars, stark naught; for when we play against one
another we are very often to seek what to do, and if we perform any thing it is
done with so little Art, and so frequentlie by way of Contretemps or exchanged
Thrusts, that I think it somewhat difficult to determine whether we are the
better of what you have taught us or not; And then if an ignorant offer to
assault with any of us who are Young Scholars, they put us so to it, and do so
much confound us with their irregular Thrusts, that they have for the most part
the better of it; Now why some of your Old scholars should behave themselves so
well against such persons and we so ill? But particularly my self who has
plied it so hard for more than these twelve months bypast, is what I desire to
be resolved of? And also, if you have any Directions which may be for my
further improvement and Advantage; That you would (as becomes a Faithful
Master) communicate them to me, as to one who designs by all means imaginable
to perfect himself in the Art whereof you make profession, and for which I have
so great an Esteem?


Ma. I confess Sir your Discourse pleases me mightily, and it is no small
satisfaction to me to find you so sensible of your weakness in this Art, and
that you have also with so much clearness and Reason given me an account of
what troubled you; But seeing it is of no greater moment, then what you have
told me, I am hopeful I shall be able to give you full satisfaction, and very
shortly have your scruple in this matter removed.


Sch. Sir, if you can but do that, you shall for ever gain my kindness.


Ma. Be pleased then but to spend this one day with me and with pen and ink
mark down what I shall dictat to you, and if I do not lay down such infallible
Rules for Assaulting, as shall make you (when you come to practice) acknowledge
they are such, then I am satisfied, that you not only quite my school; But also
esteem me as an imposer upon Youth, and one who considers more his private
interest and Advantage, than the public Good and improvement of his Scholars,
and I am hopeful that as yet you do not look upon me as such.


Sch. No indeed sir, for if I did I would not give you this trouble, but now
seeing the Morning is so far advanced let us loss no time; and be you also I
entreat you, as methodical and short in your Instructions as possible.


Ma. I shall endeavor it what I can, but for the more orderly procedure it
will not be amiss to make a little digression, and show what Method all Masters
should take for the better accommodating of their Scholars when they are to
Assault.


How a FENCING-SCHOOL should be Ordered, for the better accommodation of the
Scholars.
FIrst, A Fencing-School being a place, where Persons of the best Quality do
frequently resort for their Exercise and Divertisement: I would therefore have
every Master to make choice of as large, well lighted, and well aired an one as
conveniently can be had, having if possible, a little Room entering from it,
for the Scholars to shift themselves in before, and after Assaulting, which
would be much better then for them to be put to the necessity of shifting
before the whole company: Both which Rooms should be kept always neat and
clean, and sufficiently furnished with Chairs or Forms for the Scholars, or
other Persons who come out of curiosity to see the Assaulting, to sit upon, and
I would have them so placed as no ways to incommode the Assaulters; neither
(unless the School were so throng that there were not seats enough for them)
would I have any to stand save the Master, who is to be as Director and Judge
of every thing which shall pass in the School, because such Persons when they
stand, do commonly shift from place to place, which not only occasions a noise
in the School which is very undecent, but also interrupteth the Assaulters, and
is oftimes the cause of making one of them receive a Thrust, which had they not
pressed and incommoded him with their shifting hither and thither, he might
have prevented: Now the reason why I would have a large and pleasant School, is
because it will prove a means both to draw company thither, and to cause the
Scholars take the more delight in their Practice, which none can do when they
play in a dark and nesty Room.

Secondly. All the Shoes and Flurets should be hung out of the way, the neglect
of which has also its inconveniences: For when they hing near to the place
where the Assault is made; if any of the Assaulters (when they are closly
pursued) do but retire somewhat near to the wall, immediately there comes down
about his ears a pair or two of Flurets, which with the surprising noise they
make, do also many times occasion the receiving of a Thrust, therefore every
thing which may any ways incommode the Assaulters, should be taken notice of
and prevented as much as possible: And thus much for the School it self.

Now a Master having ordered his School after this manner, I would have him in
the next place, affix in some exposed and convenient part of it (that they may
be in the view of all and the better taken notice of) these following Laws,
which indispensably all persons who frequent the school should be obliged to
observe under the following Penalties, it being impossible for any Master to
have either Order or Decency in his School without them.


Laws to be Observed In All FENCING SCHOOLS.
I.
IN the First Place, I would have the days of the week appointed for
Assaulting, named, (which should be at least once a week, and no Teaching to be
upon that day) and every Scholar to be advertised that he is to forefault so
much, if without a reasonable excuse, he shall upon such days absent himself;
of the relevancy of which, the Master is to be the only Judge.


II.
Secondly, All Cursing, Swearing, and obscene or undiscreet Language, should be
banished the School as much as possible, and the better to prevent it.


III.
Thirdly, Not only upon those Assaulting days, but also the whole week throw,
all persons, as well Scholars as others who are only Spectators, should be
obliged to silence, at least to discourse within their Voices: For there can be
nothing more unseemly, than to see a Fencing-school (which should be a kind of
Nursery for accomplishing of Youth) all in confusion and like to a
Bir-law-Court, where there is nothing to be heard but a Clutter and Noise of
Tongues, whereas in a Fencing-school there should be properly no noise heard,
save that (...) the Assaulters Feet, and Flurets, and of the Master's Advices
and Reproofs, which he is to give to those who are Assaulting, or who do not
(...) behave themselves in the School as they ought


IV.
Fourthly, No Scholar or other Person should presume to Assault, or offer to
present a Floret to any, without having first asked the Masters consent.


V.
Fifthly. No Scholar nor Spectator without (...) a license from the Master,
should offer to direct or give advice to any of the Scholars, who are either
taking a Lesson or Assaulting: I have heard severalls when their Commerads have
been Assaulting, call to them after this manner, Why do you not now make a
Feint? There was a good time for Commanding, but you did not take it; Why do
you not now pursue him O, see what a brave opportunity for giving a Thrust he
has lost, because of his not Redoubling! And a great many more such
expressions as these, which are very unbecoming upon two accounts: First,
because without permission they take upon them to play the Master; And
secondly, because they reprove ofttimes their Commerads for the same very fault
they themselves are most guilty of, although perhaps not sensible of it, which
when Bystanders perceive, they smile at them (and with just reason) as being
both ignorant and impertinent; therefore it would be a great deal more
commendable in them, to be more careful in rectifying their own faults, and
less strict in censuring of others.


VI.
Sixthlie, No Scholars under six Months Teaching (unless the Master shall find
them of an extraordinary capacity and adroitness) should be allowed to Assault
in public, but till that time they are by their private Assaults which they
have the rest of the week, to prepare themselves for their public Practice at
the six Months end; And I am confident if this were exactly observed, the
School-play would appear a great deal prettier, and be much truer, than it is
at present in many of the Schools.


VII.
Seventhlie, No Scholars under a twelve Months standing, should be suffered to
play in their clothes or walking shoes, because the playing in that Garb,
hinders them from stretching, and so their Bodies can neither be so pliable,
nor their motions so subtle and swift, as is absolutely necessary for every
Man to have before he can be a good Sword man.


VIII.
Eightlie, None should be allowed to play above three or four fair given or
receive Thrusts at a time, because Men's Vigou^ if they play briskly, as they
should is spent i^ that time, and all that they do afterward (...) but slow
and without life, which makes a^ play to appear but dull and unpleasant, and
therefore they had better after three or four Thrusts give place to the rest;
and suffer any other two to succeed; in which time they may recover their Wind
and Vigor, and fall to (...) again if they please.


IX.
Ninthlie, In Schools all Thrusts at the Face Arms, Wrest, Thighs, or Legs
should be discharged: For although a Man when he is to engage with sharps, may
either for his own safety, or to disable his adversary, Thrust at any part of
the body: Yet in Schools (that the neatness of play may the better appear) no
Thrusts should be allowed or accounted as fair, which are not given in the
Trunk of the Body that is, beneath the Neck, and above the head-band of the
Breeches, as to the length; and within the two shoulders, as to the breadth of
the Body: For all jerking (or popping out as they call it) at the Arms or Legs,
has not only no grace with it, but also spoyleth all school play, which is
what I am at present only discoursing of.


X.
Tenthlie, For the better preventing of Contretemps in School play; when
Thrusts are exchanged, I would have always the Thrust to be decided in the
persons favors who was the first Lancher out of the Thrust, suppose his
Adversary should also give him another, but without ever going to the Parrade,
or offering to defend himself with his Fluret (for I would have all Defense
with the left Hand in School play to be banished, except against Ignorants) and
this is but just, because it can hardly be supposed that a Man will thus
foollishly venture his Life at sharps, and seeing his design was merely to hit,
and not to show his Art, by first endeavoring to parrie the Thrust, (which is
the main end of Assaulting) it is but reasonable that as a punishment for not
first offering to defend his person, he should be charged with the receival of
a Thrust, notwithstanding of his giving another at the same time to his
Adversary; but if after endeavoring a Parrade, and having failed in it, he
shall receive a Thrust, and then give the exchanged Thrust in the time of the
others recovering his Body, then both shall be charged with a Thrust, because
although the one was the first Lancher out of the Thrust, yet the other after
endeavoring a Parrade and failing in it, returned him another before he
recovered himself, or got off: Now his not getting quickly enough off, shows he
committed a gross fault, contrary to the Rules of Art, for which also as a
punishment to him he is to be charged with the Thrust, and so they are to be
considered as still in equal terms until another fair Thrust shall be given: I
know that one Contretemps, or one exchanged Thrust at sharps, is of greater
consequence and more dangerous than a thousand with Blunts, but the best and
only way to prevent them at sharps, is to be very careful, and to avoid them as
much as is possible with Blunts, to which I am confident this Law if punctually
observed, will not a litt^e contribute.


XI.
Eleventhlie, As I said before all Defense with the left hand in School play
should be discharged, (except against Ignorants and great Ramblers) For it not
only takes away a great deal of the variety of play, but it is also noways
Graceful to see two making nothing but Jerks and half Thrusts at one another,
and lying upon a Catch with their left Hand, as if the Sword hand forsooth were
no otherwise useful, nor not to be made use of but in Offending or Thrusting:
I say therefore once again for all, that although at sharps the use of the left
Hand, and thrusting at the Face, Arms, or Thighs, are of great use and oftimes
very surprising, yet because they hinder the variety, and take away a great
deal of the gracelulness of school play, I am clearly of the opinion they
should be discharged in all public Assaults, and only allowed in private, that
so the Scholars may know how to perform them, when there shall be a necessity
for it. But there is as I said, an exception to be made here: For it were most
unreasonable when a Man is to Assault against an Ignorant, or great Rambler, to
discharge him the benefit of using his left hand, because such persons when
they Assault they do it out of no other design, but either to baffle the Artist
if they can, or to show that their Ignorance is as useful to them, as the
others Art is to him: Therefore I say, in this case an Artist should take all
the advantage he can, because his Reputation and Credit in a manner depends
upon it, and therefore the use of the left Hand being so beneficial against
such irregular Thrusts, as in reason may be expected from those who have the
confidence to make Ignorance compeat with Art, it should certainly without
Controversy be allowed; But except in this case, I am altogether against the
use of it in School play, and that for the above written Reasons.


XII.
Twelfthlie, Although in most part of Schools one Command be reputed equal to a
Thrust, yet because a frequent endeavoring to Command does also prevent the
variety of play, I would have that custom altered, and no less than two
Commands to be reckoned equal with a Thrust; I confess at sharps it is one of
the best things a Man can design (although it be both difficult and dangerous
to perform) for by that means he not only saves his own honor, but his
Adversaries life, which all generous Men should endeavor as much as is
possible, but although I allow Commanding to be used in School play; for it
were unreasonable to banish it altogethe; yet I am still of the opinion that
two Commands should only be accounted as one Thrust; also no struggling is to be
allowed to the Commanded after his Fluret is once catched hold of, nor tripping
to the Commander after he is Master of it, any thing which may appear like
strife or contention in Schools being by any means to be avoided, and that also
for the Reasons before mentioned.


XIII.
Thirteenthlie, If in an Assault there shall happen a Fluret to be broke, the
person in whose Hand the Fluret is, shall pay it, according to the value set
upon it by the Master: It is true there have been Debates concerning this, some
alleging that if a Fluret be broke upon any person, it is but reasonable he
should pay it, because he did not defend himself better from the Thrust, but to
give my opinion in this matter, it is to be considered, That in an Assault a
Fluret may be broke two ways, either by a Thrust or a Blow; First, if it be by
a Thrust, then it is most just that he who gave the Thrust should pay it,
because the other has already received Affront enough by getting the Thrust,
and his person being already punished, it were hard to punish his purse also.
Secondly, If it be with a stroke or blow, it must either be by giving one upon
your Adversaries Fluret, and with it break your own, it is but just you should
pay it, because you was the cause of it, but if with your stroke you break your
Adversaries, then he must pay it, because by his Art he should have prevented
such a smart blow, and for not doing of it is justly punished with the payment
of his Fluret: So for these Reasons I would have it declared that the person in
whose hand a Fluret is broke (whatever may be the cause of it) should always
pay it, and this decision I think most equal to take away all debates
whatsoever, which may arise upon this head.


XIV.
Fourteenthlie, It would not be amiss, that as there is one day at least of the
week appointed for public Assaulting, so there should once also a year be a
Prize put forth by the Scholars, to be played for by all persons who intend to
show their Art, and this would not only cause Scholars be more diligent and
desireous to improve themselves, but also excite a curiosity in a great many
people to be instructed in the Art, who now never so much as think of it: For
nothing has a greater influence upon Men's actions than Example, and if people
can be but once drawn to the Schools out of a curiosity to view and observe the
Scholars Assaults, it is ten to one but the same curiosity lead them next to
try what they can do themselves, and by this means the Schools would not only
be crowded with spectators, but the Kingdom also furnished with Adroit and
Courageous Swordmen, to effectuat which, is the main, if not whole design of
our employment.


Lastly, It should be with one consent resolved upon, that whoever shall
contraveen any of the preceding Laws, is to forfeit Toties Quoties, so much as
shall be agreed upon by the Master and Scholars, which shall go to the use of
the Masters Boy, for his greater encouragement to take care of the Scholars
Clothes, and to keep all things belonging to the School neat, and in order,
which Resolve should be affixed to the preceding Laws, and subscribed first by
the Master, and then by all the Scholars and others who commonly Assault upon
those public days.

Thus Sir have I shown you how a school should be ordered to make it
convenient, and what Laws should be observed in it, to make the Assaulting the
more decent and regular, by this nowayes restricting Masters, who are free to
add what they shall think convenient, and take away what they shall judge
superfluous: For I do not pretend to be an infallible Law. giver to all
Masters, but that which remains and is the most difficult of all (although I
expect also with your Aplause to go throw with it) is the giving you such Rules
for Assaulting, as that against whatever person you engage, you may still reap
benefit by your Art, by which means you will not only have the scruples you
proposed to me removed, but also be satisfied that I have dealt ingenuously,
and frankly discovered to you the whole mystery of School play.


Sch. Sir, By the reasonableness of what has been already said, I may judge of
the truth of what is to follow: But it seems to me very strange that when
such exact Rules for decency in schools may be observed, there are few of our
Masters do so much as ever think upon them, although the observance of them
would certainly so much tend to make themselves respected, their Art admired,
and consequently their schools more frequented.


Ma. This Sir, I confess I have marvelled at my self as much as any, and at
first could not imagine what should be the reason of this their so unpardonable
a neglect, but after a more serious Reflection, I found that there are a great
many who take upon them the Name of Master, and pretend to Teach this Art, who
have but little of the Judgment of it, and whatever their Practice may be, yet
their communicative Art is a mere Rote, which by a continual seven years
repetition of Lessons (the ordinary Term of Apprentiship) they have so inrooted
in them, that put them off their common jog-trot of Teaching, they are
immediately put to a Nonplus, and if you ask them a reason for the most part of
what they do, they will tell you that it does not become you to ask Questions;
and that you are only to do what they desire you; and if you press them
further, then is this universal Reason given for all, I was Taught by such a
person who was reputed a brave Master and excellent Sword. Man, and thus and
thus he taught me: Again offer but to discourse with them concerning any of the
intricat Points belonging to the Art, and you shall immediately find them either
shift the discourse, or tell you that these Questions you are asking are
(Arcana Gladii) profound secrets, which must not be discoursed of, nor revealed
to any, but such as intend to make profession of the Art, although perhaps if
put to it, they can give no better satisfaction to the point in question than
this sie dixit Praeceptor, a mean and ignorant kind of Answer, unbecoming any
who pretend to the Name of Master.

Now I say when a man's chief design is only to attain to the superficial
practice of the sword (although I confess this is pardonable enough in
Gentlemen who are not to make any profession of it, but to use it merely for
their Divertisment or Defense) yet for masters to have no more, is an
unpardonable weakness, and let their Practice be never so good, yet not being
able to give a sufficient reason for every thing they do, they ought to be
looked upon as good Practitioners, but bad Instructers, and when a man thus
contemns Judgment and Reason, he makes use of the Husk and throws away the
Kernel, and no wonder then if he also neglect all Decency and Regularity in his
School, his design being only Gain, and more to supply his pocket, then improve
his scholars understanding and judgment, or gain himself Esteem and Repute
where he lives.

But by this I am not so foolish as to maintain, That Masters should
communicate their Art for nothing; yet this I think, that a master should have
an equal prospect, to improve his scholars as well in the Theorique as
Practique part of his Art, as to advance his own Fortune by what they bestow
upon him: Besides the Art of Fencing has such an unexhaustable Treasure of
Varieties, that he must needs have a very shallow Brain, and be strangely
wedded to his Masters opinions, who cannot make some Observations and
Improvements very much to the advantage, and founded also upon solid grounds
and most convincing Reasons: For Invention and Variety are two of the Hinges
upon which the World moves, and which with their Charms do bewitch and delude
the most part of Men, and seeing Fencing is so well furnished with them, I know
no reason why it should not be allowed as well as any other Art, to lay its
Baits and discover its ^nchantments, especially when but few can go beyond it
as to either; but I know none are more to be blamed for this than those
Masters, (I should rather say Pretenders to that Title) I am discoursing of.

For far be it from me to tax all Masters with this Ignorance and meanness of
Spirit, seeing I certainly know there are some to be found in these Islands, who
are most understanding and judicious, and who take delight to communicate what
they know to their Scholars; particularly we have in this Kingdom one Mr.
Machrie, at present Judge and Arbitrator in all public Trials of Skill, who
is so far from being guilty of this Ommission, that he rather I may say,
runs if possible upon the other extreme for which he is very much to be
commended, and for his way of Teaching it is so methodical, and so conform to
the Rules of Art, and solid dictats of Reason, that there can be nothing more
exact, which evidently appears by the regularity of such persons play who have
been any time his Scholars: So that without being thought to Complement him, I
may say that both for his Theory and Practice, he may compeat with most
Masters, having more than once given proof of the Latter at Sharps, and the
truth of the Former will be evident to any who will but take notice to his
method of Teaching; he has also amongst his other Qualifications, this
advantage which many Masters want, for he is not only a great Master of the
Small, but also understands the Art of the Broad or Back-Sword to perfection:
so that I have seen several English and Irish who pretended to be public
Gladiators so baffled by him, when out of civility he presented them in his
School with a Cudgel, that any Artist would have judged them to have been but
the Scholars, and him the Master, as he indeed was but too much, considering
the advantage his just and smart play had over theirs: And really Sir, relating
to this subject I am discoursing of, I can scarce give you a more friendly
Advice, than to desire you to be acquainted with him, and if you will give your
self but the trouble to communicate to him what I have, and shall say to you
upon this subject, I doubt not in the least but he will approve of it, and be
one of the first who shall cause observe in his School these Rules I have laid
down for Assaulting, and also add more of his own to them, as he shall think
fit and convenient.


Sch. Sir, it seems this Master and you must be very intimate, that you give me
so favorable a character of him: For I find the generality of Fencing Masters
now a days do quite the contrary, for instea^ of commending their Brother
Professors, they do all they can to reproach, callumniat, and lessen their
esteem (...) all the mean and base methods imaginable, whereat I perceive you
are quite of another temper; for you (...) prove only those who are guilty of
Errors, and Ommissions but you have an esteem for, and gives a favourabl^
character of such who by their carriage and conduct deserve to be well looked
upon and encouraged.


Ma. Sir, although I cannot deny, but the Master of whom I am discoursing is of
my acquaintance, yet I assure you there is nothing of Flatery in what I have
said, for I am confiden^ every judicious Artist who knows the method he takes
to communicate his Art, will confe^ he fully deserves the Applause I have give
him, and upon any other account, take my word for it, I am no more concerned in
him than i^ any other Professor, but I think every Man should have his due, and
I think his is rathe^ more, as less than what I have given him; for (...) love
to deal fairly and judge impartially, and wish all Masters were of the like
temper: For as you have very well observed, it is a sham^ and reflection upon
persons of the same profession, to see them at such Odds and Variance one with
another, that they are scarcely in speaking terms, and doing all they can to
draw-away and seduce others Schools by making them believe that they have a
mere Dolt and Ignorant of a Master to deal with, and that themselves are the
only Persons should be applied to, to make them Sword men; this way of dealing
is neither generous nor honest, and so long as there are such jarrings amongst
Professors, it is no wonder if the Art decay, and run into de^uitude and
contempt.

Therefore if I might take upon me to advise such persons, I would recommend to
them Concord and Unity, and that they would be so far from contention and
animositys, that they should rather have monthly Conferences concerning the
Art, and Methods of reaching it, and if they observed this they, would not,
only in a short time become cordial and unanimous, but also rectify any
superfluetys or omissions which might be in their teaching, and so make the
Method of communicating the Art to be one and the same throw the three
Kingdoms; for there is but one way of teaching which can be accounted the
truest, and when a man finds every Master affirming that perfection to his
Method and yet such a sensible difference amongst each, it gravells him a
little fixedly to determine which of them he should apply to to be his
instructor, and being with their Debates thus pusled and left in the mist, he
at last resolves to employ none of them, but to make the best use he can of
what courage Nature has bestowed upon him, and thus instead of gaining Credit
or repute to themselves or increassing the Esteem for Art, they both get
themselves Laughed at, and the Art neglected and undervalued; but I am hopeful
that for the future they will be sensible of their Errors in this as well as
other particulars, and endeavor to rectify them, I am sure it would prove
both for their Interest and Advantage if they did, and so I leave them, having
made too long a Digression considering the short time I have to discourse with
you.


Sch. Sir, it is my misfortune that you cannot insist longer upon this matter,
for by what you have said I am clearly convinced, you could say a great deal
more upon the Head.


Ma. Sir, I believe I could, and to satisfy your curiosity, and show that I am
noways nice or scrupolus, to discourse with you freely of any thing I know in
this matter, I am satisfied that when we have a fit opportunity we meet again,
and whatever you propose to me, I shall endeavor to give you all the
satisfaction in it I can, but at present let me prosecute my design to give you
some infalible Rules for Assaulting, which when practiced, may make you
sensible that the labor and pains you have taken in following this Art, is not
so much in vain and to no purpose, as you do imagine.


Sch. With all my Heart Sir, and I most heartily thank you for the proposal
you have made, which I assure you I shall not let flip the very first Occasion
shall offer, there being nothing I take more delight in, than to hear things
rationally discoursed off, especially by one who can do it so well as I
perceive you can.


Ma. This Complement Sir, is I am very sensible far beyond what I deserve, but
least I should loose time, or perhaps fail in giving a Reparty suitable to it, I
shall forbear attempting one at present, and proceed to what I look upon as an
undispensible duty lying upon me to perform to any Scholar, but more
particularly Sir to you who have taken so much pains, and are so desirous to be
informed; therefore that I may omit nothing which may appear necessary to our
discourse, or tend to your further improvement and satisfaction, I am resolved
to lay you down Rules to be observed by all Scholars, in these following
Circumstances: viz.


Circumstance first.
First, When they design by their private Practice to waine themselves from
their Masters Breast, and by so doing prepare themselves for their public
Assaults.


Circumstance second.
Secondly, When being wained from their Masters Breast they are to Assault
publicly against such who are actually Scholars, or who having once been so,
cannot be supposed to be great Ramblers.


Circumstance Third.
Thirdly, When they are to Assault publicly against such who have never had
any Art and therefore are justly to be suspected of Rambling. And,


Circumstance Fourth.
Fourthly, When they are to engage with Sharps for their Honor or Life, or to
Assault with Blunts for a Prize, against Persons they are noways acquainted
with, nor perhaps did ever see or hear of before.

But before I proceed to the Rules, I will endeavor to Answer the first
Question you at first proposed to me, which was, what the reason could be of
your playing the Lessons so exactly upon my breast, but performing them so
irregularly, and to so little purpose in Assault against your Commerades.

In Answer to which, I would have you know that there is as much difference
betwixt taking a Lesson, or playing upon a Masters breast, and Assaulting or
performing the same, Lessons upon your Commerads, as there is betwixt the
repeating of an eloquent Discourse already penned, and the composing of one:
For as this can only flow from a solid Brain, and a quick Conception and
Judgment, so may that be delivered by a Crakt brain fool, void of all good
Qualities, save a good Memory: And so are the Lessons played by Scholars upon a
Masters Breast Plate, delivered for the most part, by the Rote of continual
Practice, without almost ever reflecting upon any reason for what they are
doing, besides that, the Master complies with, and humoreth them in every thing
they are to perform, whereas when they are to play against their Commerads,
instead of being humored by them, they, as they have good reason, do all lies
in their power to cross and confound their designs and motions, which puts
young Scholars so by their Measures (for they expected to meet with no
opposition) that they are put to a stand or necessitat sometimes to use Nature
in place of Art, and it must still be so with them so long as they play only by
Rote, and not with Judgment.

Now Sir, you may easily apply what I am saying to your self: For you may
perceive when I give you a Lesson, I order you to do such and such a thing, as
also that you may perform it the better, and with the more grace and ease, I am
so far from crossing you, that I oftimes humor the motions you are making so
that strictly speaking, you conform your self and are restricted to my
Judgment, and do not follow your own, whereas when you play against any of
your Commerads they behave quite otherwise with you: For you find they do all
they can to counteract and cross your designs, which is the reason you can
scarcely play any one Lesson upon them without being less or more interrupted
in the performing of it: So being by this made sensible of the vast difference
there is betwixt taking of a Lesson and Assaulting, it will be in my opinion no
hard matter for you to conclude upon the reason of your having such bad success
in your ordinary Assaults; to remedy which I shall therefore give you Rules to
be observed in this first Circumstance.


RVLES to be Observed in the first Circumstance.
RULE 1.
First, No Scholar (according to the Laws I have set down for Schools) being
allowed under six months teaching to Assault in public, I do positively also
bind him up for the first three months of those six, from any practice
whatsoever, except what he shall acquire by playing upon his Masters breast, or
by Parrying or Thrusting a plain Thrust upon any of his Commerads at the wall.


RULE 2.
Secondly, The last three months I allow him besides the taking of his
Lessons, to practice privately (that is to say, any time except upon the
public Assaulting days) with any of his Commerads, and therefore to that end I
advise him.


RULE 3.
Thirdly, To make choice of such of his Commerads to play against, as he knows
will not altogether cross, but humor him in some, and oppose him in others of
his Motions or Lessons: For were he altogether croft at first, it might quite
spoil him, undoing more in one day than his Master could repair in six.


RULE 4.
Fourthly, In his three last months private practice, he should keep closs to
the Lessons has been taught him by his Master, doing them all with as good a
Grace, and with as great Stretches of the Body and Limbs as possible, always
performing them with Vigor, and going throw with them: For whether he hit or
miss, plant or misplant at first, it is no great matter, seeing after a little
practice he will certainly come to do both.

Now if this method be exactly observed, he will not only in these three last
months be confirmed in the Lessons have been taught him, but it will also make
him firm upon his Joints, and give him a swift hand and agility of body, which
will consequently make him the more fit for his public Assaults at the time
appointed, and if this do it not, I assure him he may despair of ever coming
any great length in this Art; for six months are abundantly sufficient for any
man to discover and know his own disposition, and if at the end of them he has
not made a considerable advance, he may be fully persuaded that he will never
make an extraordinary Sword man, for as men are said to be born Poets, but by
Practice to become Orators, so a Master may force Lessons upon a Scholar and
give him form, but he can never inspire him with Judgment to contrive, or Life
and Vigor to execute and perform any thing has been taught him, this is the
work of Nature, and therefore a man must have a Natural and Particular
disposition for it.

It is true by a long Practice of many years a man may in some measure force
Nature, and make a more considerable Advance, then in Reason could have been
expected, but this is not to be trusted to, therefore according to the Advance
and Improvement which a man makes in the first six months (provided he has
plied it closely) so let him judge of what he may expect from his Practice
afterward; yet it is also to be observed (and it is very well worth noticing)
that a man will make a greater Advance in the first six months, then he will do
in the next eight or ten, and he will also improve more in that nixt eight or
ten, then he will do in two years thereafter, and the Reason is, because
betwixt Nature and Art there is a sensible difference which is very
perceptable, but once having entered it is Territories, the way becomes so deep,
and there are such Labarinths of Invention and Variety in it, that a man
advances but like a snail, very slowly, but securely, let no man then despair
although after having made a great Progress in the first six months, he do not
find the same proportion observed afterward, for I assure him that although it
be so very little that it is almost imperceptable, yet nowithstanding of that
he is alwise advancing and improving to the better, therefore let him take
Courage and persist in his Practice, and at last he will not fail to attain to
a considerable degree of that perfection he so much aimed at, and for which he
was at so much expenses and toil; but I have insisted to long upon this.


RVLES to be Observed in the second Circumstance.
Having according to my former Directions (by your private Practice) confirmed
your self in your Lessons and prepared your self for public Assaulting, you
must now steer your course another way, and as a skillful Pilote be prepared to
stand out against any storm you may meet with, for as in your private Practice
your play was but loose; and you did meet with little opposition, so now it
must be more closs and secure, and you must expect to meet with all the
opposition imaginable, therefore that you may in such a Circumstance behave
your self the better, I will first give you two general Rules, which must
undispensably be made use of upon all occasions, and against all persons
whatsoever, whither skillful or ignorant, or when you are to engage with Blunts
or Sharps; and then proceed to the Rules which do more particularly relate to
this second Circumstance.


First General RVLE.
First, As you are upon the one hand, to prevent as much as possible all Looks
and Jestures in your self, which may any ways tend to the discovering of your
designs: So upon the other, you must consider and view the person you are to
engage against, to see if you can draw any observation, either from his
Carriage and Jesture, or Countenance, and this may be done almost in the time
you are presenting your Sword, if you once a little accustom your self to it.

Now by this you will reap a great advantage: For if you perceive Fury and
Forewardness in his Carriage or Looks, then you may in all probability expect a
vigorous Attaque, upon the contrary if you perceive a Coldness or Remisness in
his Actions, or concern in his Countenance, then if he be an Artist, you may
expect a very regular kind of play from him, but if ignorant, then he will
probably have neither Heart nor Hand to perform any thing with either Life or
Vigor let it be never so contrary to Art; and therefore in such a case you
will not find it very difficult to oppose and master him: So by those
Observations you may in a manner prepare your self, and in some measure conform
your play to what you shall expect from him, which is no small Advantage,
especially if you are to engage for your Life.

It Is true it may be objected, That no Man upon all occasions can observe this
Rule, because in a sudden encounter a Man has scarce any more time allowed
him, than what he shall take to present his Sword; and it cannot be expected
that in so short a time he can draw any considerable observation from a persons
Jesture or Countenance, whom perhaps he did never hear of, nor see before.

I indeed confess it is somewhat difficult for such who are but Novices in this
Art, to reap upon such an occasion any advantage by it, but for persons who
have been accustomed to Assault with People of different humors and play, if
they will make it their business a little, they will in a very short time
become so expert in it (for custom in this, as in all other things, will prove
a second Nature) that even at the very first or second view they will discover
something: And it is to be observed that every Man when he quarrels in an
Encounter should at the very drawing of his Sword, jump five or six yards (if
he have so much ground) from his Adversary, to prevent being surprised by any
unexpected motion he may make upon him, and in the time he is doing this, and
advancing again upon his Guard, he may always make some observation which may
tend to his advantage, let it be never so small or inconsiderable.

Also People seldom quarrel but there is some discourse or words exchanged,
before they come to draw upon other: Now if the person you are like to quarrel
with be one whom you know, then by the character he has, or by what you know
of him already your self, you may judge what is reasonably to be expected from
him; but if he be altogether a Stranger to you, then also in the very time you
are discoursing, or I may say picking the Quarrel, you may make some little
observation, which may prove advantageous how little soever it be: So that this
objection has not such force with it as it seems to have at first view, and
before it be a little more narrowly considered; and therefore in my opinion
should have no such influence upon any Man as to cause him neglect the
observation of what may be so beneficial and useful to him.


Second General RVLE
The Second is, That you never suffer the person you are engaged against, to
make too full a pursuit upon you: I know it is scarcely possible to hinder a
Man to pursue, who is fully resolved to do it; but my meaning is, that you do
not humor his pursuit too much, by either altogether quiting a half Pursuit
(which you should for the most part make use of till you change it into a true
one) or by breaking too much his measure, which is commonly called loosing of
ground, for a too frequent use of either does both give a man an ill habit, so
that he cannot without difficulty forbear them when he would, and also makes
his Adversary the brisker, and encourages him to continue his Pursuit with the
more violence and furry when he finds he is given so much way to. And it is
also generally observed that he who is the briskest Pursuer has most commonly
the better of it, especially if both parties be alike dexterous and equally
Masters of the Parrade, but this observation does not alwise hold good,
although I cannot deny but if a man make a vigorous Pursuit, conducted so with
Judgment as that he can upon a sudden alter it into a Parrade, he will seldom
find any great perjudice by it, and it is upon that very account I recommend
the preventing of it by a half Pursuit in a man's Adversary as much as is
possible, for to make a full Pursuit without having a fair opportunity, were
but to play at random, and expose ones self to unevitable contretemps and
exchanged Thrusts, and so render Art altogether in effectual. Therefore the
only safe and reasonable Method to prevent any of these dangerous extremes, is
to make use of a brisk Medium or half Pursuit, which you may alter at pleasure,
or as you shall be put to a pinch.


Particular RVLES for the second Circumstance.
Having by these two General Rules laid a solid Foundation, to be used against
all Humors and Persons whatsoever; I shall now proceed to those which relate
more particularly to this second Circumstance. And,


RULE 1.
First, Being to Assault publicly, and having shifted your self and come to
the place of Assault, your Adversary being there also, salute him with your
Fluret as your Master shall have taught you, with as good a grace as possible,
and then put your self into what Posture or Guard you intend to play from,
being sure to do both without your Adversarys measure, least he should surprise
you with any sudden or unexpected motion.


RULE 2.
Secondly. Being thus upon your Guard and resolved to make some Attempt, be
sure before you do it to consider what contrarys he may make use of, against
the Lessons wherewith you design to attaque him, that so you may prevent them
for a man who begins any Pursuit without this consideration exposes himself to
unevitable hazard and danger.

I cannot illustrate this better then by comparing it to a Gamesters conduct at
Chess, which Game although it differ vastly from Fencing, as to the particular
manner of executing its designs, yet the reason upon which both their
executive parts are grounded is the very same, for as at that Game no
understanding player will offer to move any of his men until he has first
reckoned two or three at least of the strokes, which his Adversary can play
against him, if he should make such or such a step, that so he may not only the
better secure his own men, but also endanger the taking of his Adversarys, if
he upon the other hand be not fully as circumspect to defend them. So in
Fencing although it be as quick and active an exercise as the other is a slow
and tedious but most diverting Game, yet notwithstanding of the swiftness it
requires there is an absolute necessity for every man before he engage in an
attaque, first, to consider what he is to do himself, and then what contrarys
his Adversary can use against him, and if he neglect this, whatever he does is
but at random, and he can never expect it can succeed, unless it be by mere
hazard and chance, whereas if he did consider or (as the Proverb is) Look
before he leap, he would not only in a manner prevent his own ruin, but also
make it the more difficult for his Adversary to oppose his Pursuit and defend
himself, and having thus considred what contrarys his attaque may meet with, he
should then go briskly forwards with it and fear nothing, seeing he already
knows what in reason may be expected.

For as it is an old and wise maxim amongst Great and Experienced Generals,
that in their Councils before they venture to give Battle, they ought to forsee
all dangers, but in fighting to oversee them, that by their good example, they
may the more embolden and encourage their Soldiers to do the like, so should
an understanding Sword-man endeavor to forsee what contrarys his Adversary may
use against his pursuit, but when once he is engaged, he should oversee them,
that is not be discouraged, but go boldly foreward as if there were no such
thing as hazard or danger to oppose him.


RULE 3.
Thirdly, Having resolved upon the Lesson you intend to make use of, (of which
you may find a great variety in my Book entitled the Scots Fencing Master)
immediately approach upon him with the half pursuit of it to try how he
receives you, if you find him give way by retiring; then by redoubling continue
your persute, and change it into a true one, having alwise a special care that
he take not time upon you, when you are in the heat of your Pursuit for perhaps
it may be upon that design that he breaks your measure a little at first,
therefore have a care of it, but upon the contrary if you either find him stand
fixed to receive you, or approach and meet you also with a Pursuit, then
notwithstanding of your continuing your half Pursuit (for remember to give
alwise as little way as possible) have your Parrade still in readiness that in
an instant you may defend your self when he shall put you to it, that is when
you perceive he will be at you, although he should do it with the hazard of a
Thrust; Therefore when you find him press so hard home, take your self to the
defensive Part, and breaking his measure a little answer him with Thrusts
smartly given from the Res^ost; and if you perform this neatly you will find he
will have but a small, if any advantage at all, by his so ventorious a Pursuit.


RULE 4.
Fourthly, Whatever part you take your self to, whither defensive or offensive,
perform it alwise patiently and with Judgment, but with all the Life,
smartness, and vigor imaginable, and seeing (according to the Laws for Schools)
you are to play no longer than till the three first fair Thrusts be given or
received, I would advice you when you are once confirmed in your Lessons, and
well accustomed with Assaulting, to play as earnestly and concernedly for them,
as if your Credit and Reputation lay at stake, and by doing this you will find
a great advantage, for it will accustom you to the true play with Sharps, which
is all done in a brush, and like Thunder and Lightning is quick and smart for
the time, but soon over, making a desicion of the quarrel by the victory given
to one or other of the Partys.


RULE 5.
Fifthly, I would advice you not to use alwise one Method of play, for by so
doing a man if he be any ways attentive, will after three or four times
Assaulting with you, discover so much by it, as will make him very near
conjecture what Lessons you are to run upon, and so make it the more easy for
him to oppose you; therefore use one day point or disengaged play, another day
Binding, a third Commanding or Passing, I do not mean that you should use those
days nothing else but one kind of Lesson, but that upon the day you intend to
use point play, your play may run mostly upon that, although you intermix it
also with other kind of Lessons, so when you intend to play from Binding, you
may use some passing, commandings, or other Lessons, although your play for
that day run most upon binding, the other Lessons being but used be the by as
it were, to make it take the more effect; And thus observing no set form, you
will make it a great dale more difficult for your Adversary to conjecture and
find out what you would be at, or by what Method you resolve to attaque him,
then if you should make a constant repetition of the same Lessons; But this
Rule is chiefly to be observed when you play frequently against one person,


RULE. 6.
Sixthly, As I have adviced you when you play often against one Person, to alter
your Method of play, the better to prevent his knowing what Lessons you are to
pursue him with, so is it no less necessar for you if you intend to be a great
Proficient in this Art, to change the Persons you are to Assault against,
therefore I desire that you may accustom your self to play with all kinds of
People, for nothing gives a man more the Judgment of this Art, and Improves
him better then continual Practice with variety of Humors, this makes him to
know all Methods of play, to be acquainted with all constitutions of Ignorants
and Ramblers, to acquire a general and universal defense, and consequently to
be prepared against all Encounters, whereas if he Assault constantly against
one or two persons they come to understand others play so well, that the one
knows almost what Contrarys to make use of, before the other has well begune
his Pursuit, and therefore it is impossible such Persons can ever make that
improvement which they certainly would, were there Practice more universal, and
not so restricted to the particular humors of perhaps but two or three Scholars.

And here I cannot omit to show the folly of such nice young Gentlemen who will
neither take a Lesson but in Private, nor Assault if any be in the Room save
the Person against whom they are to Play, as if forsooth it were a reflection
upon them to be seen receive their Lesson, or a disparadgement to them, to be
thought to stand in need of Assaulting to improve themselves; and yet these
same nice Sparks who cannot endure to be thought ignorant of any thing, will
have confidence enough, and make no scruple to go to a public Ball, and bungle
a Courrant, Minuet or Scots measure, before a great many fine Ladys, perhaps of
the best quality of the Kingdom; which I think cannot but reflect a great dale
more upon their Impudence, then either their public taking of a Lesson or
Assaulting can do upon their Ignorance, especially when it is done before
Persons who have so much Reason as to consider that no man is born an Artist,
and that he must in all other things as well as Fencing, either suffer
Instruction or remain in Ignorance; besides if such Persons knew that it is
impossible for them with such private Practice, ever to make any considerable
advance in this Art, I am fully persuaded they would apply themselves more to
public: For Fencing is an Art which depends mainly upon Practice, and who ever
thinks to acquire it any other way, is I assure him mightily mistaken, and the
more a man practice and with the more different humors, so much the better for
him, so that let the greatest Artist in the World forbear but the Practice of
it for a twelve month, although I confess he can never loss the Judgment he
has acquired, yet he will certainly when he comes to practice again, find his
Body and Limbs stiffer, and his Hand and motions both for Defense and Offense,
neither so exact, nor by far so swift, as if he had been in a continual
Practice, I mean at least once a Week or Fortnight, therefore I would gladly
advise such persons both for their own advantage and public encouragement of
the Art, to lay aside such shallow and and nice Fancys, and with a firm
resolution apply themselves to the more sollid Practice of it, and let them
take my word for it, they will at last find the benefit of this my Advice, and
confess it is not so much to be contemned, as perhaps they at present in the
opinion they are of, imagine.


RULE 7.
Seventhly, Although Binding be certainly the only truest play a man can make
use of, yet I would not have you quit too soon your point play for it; because
it is point play which must make your Body and Wrest, and give you variety of
play, and therefore your public Assaults being at first as much to improve
your Art, as offend your Adversary, I advise you for the first three or four
months of it to play more upon the variety of Lessons, then upon binding, and
use it but now and then until you find your self considerably Master of the
other Lessons, and when you can play any of them with ease and at Pleasure,
then take your self to Binding, and the Contercaveating parrade, and make your
self also Master of them; which I assure you will be no small task, for in
performing of them there is not only required Judgment and a considerable
Force and Strength, but also the most extraordinary swiftness, and greatest
agility immaginable.


RULE 8.
Eighthly, When ever you meet with a person whose play runs mostly upon
Binding, do not (unless you think your Binding will master his) so much
endeavor to cross him by Counter-binding, as by slipping him, and keeping a
disengaged point: For this is a contrary which will very often take against such
kind of play, although I confess it can never be so secure as Counter binding,
and therefore all contraries must in all Encounters (but particularly at
Sharps) give place to it, but it is School-play I am now discoursing of, and
therefore point or disengaged play in such a case may with the more confidence
be ventured upon.


RULE 9.
Ninthly, As against Binding in School-play, you may safely keep a disengaged
point, and make use of point play: So against all point play whatsoever, there
are no such Contraries in the World as Binding and the
Contre-caveating-Parrade: for (if swiftly and dexterously performed) they not
only engage the most quick and moving point imaginable, but also cross and put
a stop to the execution of any Lesson whatsoever, so that point or disengaged
play may as I have said prove a contrary to Binding and, the Contercaveating
Parrad, but Binding and the Contercaveating Parrad are the only sure and
infallible contrarys, to all point play that either is, or ever will be
invented.


RULE 10.
Tenthly, I shall close these Rules for the second Circumstance, with two
observations, which if well considered and Practiced with Judgment, will be
found most useful; And the First is, That when ever you find a man designedly
give an open, or voluntarly discover any part of his Body to you to thrust at,
without being forced to it, you should immediately conclude it is done out of a
design to trappan and catch you upon the Respost, if you should offer a home
plain Thrust at that part which he discovers to you; therefore when such an
Opportunity is given you, you must not, unless you have a very swift hand offer
to take it, but are either to force an open in another place, or otherwise to
attaque it with a Feint. The 2d: is, that a man should alwise conform both his
Pursuit and Parrade as much as possible, to the Art and Adroitness of his
Adversary. For Example, if you are to Assault against one who is extremely
Adroit and Skillful, and who has a very swift hand, you would not only take
head how you Pursue him, but also make use of your Parrade with all the
quickness imaginable, because you are to expect that he will not slip the least
opportunity you give him, of either taking time or answering you from the
Respost: Again if you are to play against one who is but an ordinary
proficient, you may both play a little more loose with him as to your offense,
and make your Parrade slower when he Pursues you.

And this is what we call the Executive part of the Judgment of the Sword,
which no Master whatsoever can give to any man, for it must flow from his own
Understanding, Fancy, and Judgment, being as I said the gift of Nature, and
although it may be forced a little upon some people by good Directions and a
continual Practice, yet it is at best but like to the working of Timber cross
the Grain, or Sailing against a Stream, all forced work, and it is because of
this natural inclination and disposition in some persons, that we see them
make in a short time such great advances in any Art, and others so little, or
almost none at all: And so much for this Circumstance.


RVLES to be observed in the third Circumstance.
It has been the misfortune of this Art, because of the imperfection of some,
and bad conduct of others who pretended to it, to be treated En Redicule and
undervalued, by reason of Ignorants having sometimes the better of them, in
Assault with Blunts, or Encounter with Sharps; therefore it will not be amiss,
before I proceed to the Ruls relating to this Circumstance, to explain to you a
little the Cause and Reason of its so frequently falling out, and the rather
because it will exactly answer the second question you proposed to me in the
beginning of our Discourse, which was, why my old Scholars behaved so well
against Ignorants and Ramblers and my young, particularly your self had so
little success in any thing you attemped against them, in doing which I shall
be as plain and impartial as possible.


Sch. Sir, you have now hitt the Nail on the head, for this I confess is my
great Scruple, which I cannot resolve my self of nor give a reason for it, and
I was afraid that having delayed it so long, you should have at last either
altogether forgot, or neglected it, but seeing the thread of your Discourse now
leads you to this point, I am hopful you will enlarge a little upon it, not
only for my satisfaction, which I must confess I long for extremely, but also
for the conviction of many who for no other Reason, but because they could
never have this Objection fully cleared, do forebear the practice of this Art,
and altogether refrain from the Schools, concluding that if they did otherwise,
it would be but so much time lost, and money thrown away to no purpose.


Ma. Sir, It has been all along my design to speak plainly, and if I be not
deceived, with some show of Reason, and if I fail in it now, I assure you it
shall be contrar both to my design and inclination; But, a propos.

The Encountering or Engaging with a forward and unexpert person at sharps
being the point which will resolve all the rest, I shall restrict my self to
discourse only of it, and if I can make it appear, that an ignorant can pretend
to no advantage against a true Artist at sharps, but rather upon the contrary,
have a visible disadvantage, then I think I may conclude, the point gained,
notwithstanding of the bad success many young Scholars, or pretenders to Art,
may have when engadged against such persons, and this I shall endeavor to make
good by answering the following objection.


The GRAND OBJECTION Against FENCING.
FENCING, say some, can certainly be of no Use, but rather a Prejudice to those
who are Taught it, because we see that the most part of Fencers when engaged
with Sharps, are rather timorous than brisk and hardy, and instead of pursuing
their Adversary or keeping their ground (which any brave Man will do) they both
generally take themselves to their defense, and also retire and loose their
ground; whereas a vigorous Naturalist ventures always forewards, and with his
full Blows and irregular Thrusting, puts my poor Gentleman so to it that he is
glad to get rid of him at any rate; and in appearance, were it not more for
shame than an inclination occasioned by Art, would show him that one pair of
Heels is worth two pair of Hands.

Here is a swinging Objection, which takes very much with many unexpert and
inconsiderate People, but with how little reason will appear by the following
Answers? which I am hopeful shall have so much force as to cause such persons
alter their opinions, at least to acknowledge that Art is not altogether so
despicable and useless a thing as they would make the World believe.

As to the first Branch of the Objection, which is Artists being rather
timorous than hardy, I say it is a mistake proceeding from the want of Art, and
a false Notion or Conception which such Persons have of true Valor; For if I
mistake it not, true Courage does not consist in a Fool Hardiness, which
prompts a Man to perform all his Actions inconsiderately and at random, or in
an insensibility of danger to which he may be exposed: But in a composedness of
mind and firmness of resolution to venture his Person and oppose his Enemy,
notwithstanding of his having a true sense of the hazard to which he is
exposed: For that Boldness which is not regulate by Reason, and performed with
Judgment, should be rather termed Brutality than Valor, and more properly
belongs to Beasts than Men, of which nothing can give a more evident proof than
Cock-fighting, where Boldness occasioned by the motion of the Spirits, is
discovered to the highest degree, but neither Reason nor Judgment do accompany
it, and therefore all reasonable Men methinks should disown having any share in
it.

So when Artists are taxed with an aversion to Quarrelling (or Cowardice as
they call it) or with a remisness and coldness in their Pursuit when they do
quarrel, I would have such Persons know that it is not for lake of Courage that
they use that method, but because they are by their Reason and Art, made
sensible of the hazard they are exposed to upon both hands, first by acting
contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom, and then in venturing their Persons;
therefore they are more intent upon their own defense, than the ruin and
destruction of their Adversary, whom they design also (if they must engage) to
save by their Art as well as themselves, unless there be an unevitable
necessity forcing them to the contrary. And no other Reason but this is the
cause of Artists being ordinarily more cautious, and not so foreward and
quarrelsome as generally many ignorant and inconsiderate Persons are, which,
(than to occasion a reproach and crying out against them for it) should I think
upon the contrary far rather tend to their Commendation, and a general
approving of their judicious and considerat conduct and behavior: For a Man
being a rational Creature, should certainly do nothing but what he has very
good grounds for, besides that it is far more easy for a Man to engage himself
in a Quarrel, than with his Honor and a general Applause to acquit and rid
himself of it, and therefore I think it can be no Reflection upon any Man, not
only to be averse from quarrelling, but also to consider well upon what grounds
he make one, least (if he have not a very just cause) he make not only Law, but
perhaps an intimate Commerad his irreconcilable Enemies.

However, I confess this warriness and circumspectness which is enjoined to
Artists in case of an engagement, is by many young Sword Men (both to their own
prejudice and the disadvantage of Art) stretched too great a length: And this
leads me to the second Branch of the Objection, which is, That vigourous
Naturalists with their forwardness, full Blows, and irregular Thrusts do
oftimes so confound Artists, that they are glad to get rid of them at any rate.

I say therefore in Answer to it, That it is only against young Swordmen that
such persons will have this advantage: For although the Rules of Art require a
Man to play calmly and considerately; yet they nowayes order him to suffer the
forward and irregular Motions of any Adversary whatsoever, without opposing
them, but they are only young Scholars that know no better, who are guilty of
this Failure: For believe me, if those persons, be who they will, chance to
engage against one who is really a Sword-man, (I say really a Sword-man,
because there are but too many who pretend to the Name that deserve it not) he
will, I say find himself as the Proverb goes, In the wrong Closs, and that the
Artist will be so far from yielding his ground to him, or allowing him the
whole Pursuit, that he will pay him home in his own Coin, and perhaps with
double, if not triple interest: So that he will be at last forced to
acknowledge that Art has in conscience but too great odds of Nature, to be put
in the same balance with it.

And as for the Third Branch or Particular, That if it were not more for shame,
than an inclination occasioned by Art, Artists would for the most part when
they are engaged, rather retire with their back than their face toward their
Adversary, that is in short, that were it not for shame, they would turn tail
and run, is so frivolous and mean an imputation and aspertion, and so much
against sense and reason, that I think it not worth my while to Answer it.

However to conclude this point, I say upon the whole, that it is somewhat
strange to hear persons of any wit or understanding discourse at this rate: For
can it be imagined, that a Man who is naturely brave should immediately become a
Coward and Cullion, and that only for having acquired a little Art, or must
Ignorance inspire all Men with Courage? and Art bereave them of it, by a
certain kind of transmigration? if I may so say, infusing a mean and timorous
Soul, into a Body formerly possessed by a brave One; No, No, For this were to
make too rash a conclusion, and to encroach a little too much upon the just
dictates of Reason, especially seeing it is most evident, that every Artist has
(as I proved in the Sword-mans Vade-mecum) four undeniable advantages of any
Naturalist or unexpert Rambler whatsoever, which are, Parrying of a Thrust,
Planting or Adjusting of a Thrust, and Judgment and swiftness of hand to
perform and deliver it.

Now a true Artist having those four at command, wherein can any foreward
unexperienced Person pretend to have the advantage? I know it will be said in
his being able to Contretemps the Artist, or give him Thrust for Thrust; but as
for the first of these, I have given in my Swordmans Vade mecum, a clear and
evident demonstration that it is impossible for any Ignorant, unless it be by
mere chance, to do it. And for the second, grant he should venture upon it (but
I am convinced he can be no great Artist who gives him that opportunity) yet I
say he has no advantage by it, because he receives also a Thrust himself,
which if it be with Sharps, because of the Artists knowing to adjust, should in
reason be expected to be directed and planted in a more dangerous and mortal
part of the Body, than the Ignorants which is given at random.

So that the very worst the greatest Enemies of Fencing can say of Art,
(allowing a Naturalist all the pretended advantages he is capable of against
it, which can never succeed or take effect against a true Artist) is, that at
best a forward ignorant can be but in equal terms with an ordinary Artist,
whereas upon the contrary true Artists who are resolved to expose themselves a
little, are not only I may say infallibly certain of their Adversaries life, if
he be no Artist, for their own, which it is impossible any ignorant can be; but
also, it is twenty to one but they save themselves, and they have likewise so
much Divertisement by their common School practice, that the pleasure very far
counterballances the toil and trouble they have been at to acquire it; And
seeing that Art can never be said with any ground of Reason to be prejudicial
to any man, but upon the contrary ofttimes beneficial, and also, that it is
acknowledged by all to be a wholesome Exercise for the Body, and so easily
carried about one; I think this one Reason although there were no other should
be an irresistible and uncontrollable motive to make all persons of what degree
or quality so ever, to have an esteem for, and to follow it; And thus Sir I
think I have sufficiently answered the Question so much troubled you.


Sch. Sir your Arguments I must confess are most convincing, and I am now so
far from repining, or grudging at the pains I have already been at to acquire
the little I have of this Art, that I am resolved so long as I am able either
to handle a Fluret or walk to a School, not only to follow it my self, but also
to encouradge and perswad all I am concerned in, to make themselves in some
measure Masters of it.


Ma. Your resolution Sir is most generous, and I am also glad my Discourse has
produced so good effects, but as I have in general showed you that Art is
useful against all persons, so let me now show you how that Art is to be made
use of more particularly in the third Circumstance, or against those forward
and unexperienced persons we have been discoursing of.


Particular RVLES for the third Circumstance.
It cannot be denied but the irregular Thrusts of a foreward Ignorant are most
difficult to Parrie; And one of the main reasons why young Scholars are oftimes
baffled by such persons, is because they aim at a more perfect defense then the
Art they have acquired does allow them, for a quick, firm, and sure Parrade,
is not the effect of three or four months teaching, but the Fruit and Product
of several years Practice: And it is far more easy to hit one part of a
thousand with a Sword, then it is to defend with a Sword or any thing else, a
thousand of those same parts which are exposed in every man's body to be hit if
he has not a very dexterous and firm Parrade, for to wound there is only
required to hit any one part but to defend, a man must put his Adversaries
Sword not only by one but many, other ways he is hit, and consequently his
Parrade false and imperfect, No wonder then that Thrusting or offending be
natural almost to every man, but a sure and perfect Parrade possessed by very
few:


RULE 1.
Therefore, Young Sholars who are not come the length of a perfect defense,
should when they engadge with foreward Ignorants, be as foreward and vigorous
in their Pursut as they, for they will find but few of them who will be able to
defend one Thrust of six, if they be smartly delivered, and their Pursutes
being as vigorous as the Ignorants, it will be in all probability (as I have
already showed) as dangerous, so that young Scholars will still have this
advantage over them by their little Art, that they can defend some Trusts,
whereas the other can scarsly defend any at all. And therefore I again advice
all young Scholars, or others who are not well confirmed in the defencive part,
not to stand dallying with any Ignorant, but to attaque him immediately with a
foreward and vigorous Pursuit, but alwise without Rambling, and accompanyd with
Reason and Judgment, and also using the left hand for a help to their defense,
and they will find it to have a great deal better success, than the taking
themselves wholly to the defense and playing from the Respost, which they are
not fully Masters of, and which because of their imperfection in it, not only
exposes them more to the fury of their Adversary, but also is the ground of
peoples reflecting upon them as being timorous, and not so hardy and bold as
they ought: Observe therefore this Rule well, and it will not only be a
considerable means to gain you the victory over all such persons, but also for
the future prevent giving people the occasion to charge and reproach either Art
or Artists with the like Imperfections and Faillures.


RULE 2.
But for persons who by great experience and several years practice, find
themselves considerably Masters of the Parrade, I am so far from advising them
to observe the preceding Rule, that I think they may safely make use of any
other method they shall judge most propper and convenient, although my second
general Rule (which was to make always a brisk half pursuit) can in my opinion
never prove amiss to them, especially if accompanied with the help of the left
hand to assist them in their defense, and make their Parrade the more certain:
But least I should be condemned for being to short in a Circumstance which is
of so great import to Artists, I shall lay down one Rule more to be observed
against that humor of Ignorants, which in my opinion is the most difficult of
all others to be opposed, and which if rightly managed, will be also very
useful at Sharps.


The most difficult Humor to oppose in any IGNORANT.
Is when out of a kind of Despair, without having any regard for his life, he
rusheth upon his Adversary discharging Thrust after Thrust in a most irregular
way, neither giving his Adversary opportunity to respost him, because of his
continued redoubling, nor ever offering to defend himself, but still advancing
and thrusting so irregularly and out of the line, that it requires a great deal
of skill in his Adversary so to oppose him, as neither to receive a wound for
nothing, nor an exchanged Thrust if he should venture at the delivering of one,
Now although it be true that a Man must be strangely wild and beyond measure
desperate, before he can be imagined capable of so furious and desperate a
pursuit; yet certainly such people there are (although not many) who are
capable of this extravagance, I should have rather said madness, therefore to
oppose it; observe,


RULE 3.
That if you encounter with any such persons it must be either in a large
ground, where you are at more liberty, or in a narrow bounds where you are
extremely straightened, and which I confess is the hardest Circumstance of all:
Now if it be a in large Field or Street, you must resolve to break his measure
a little, least he should enclose upon you (for you are always to prevent that
as much as possible when you have bounds to do it) until his first fury be
over, which will be after the discharge of half a score, or a dozen of Thrusts
at most, and then making use of your left hand to prevent an exchanged Thrust,
trist your Pursuit so as that you discharge your Thrust when he is drawing back
of his Arm to redouble another upon you; And this is what we call the true
timing of a Thrust, which when it is seasonably performed will make the
simplest Lesson of the Sword not only succeed against any Ignorant, but also
take effect against the most part of understanding Swordmen, seeing there is
certainly no contrary can be used against it, therefore pray mark it: Now if
you take this time exactly and deliver your Thrust smartly having your left
hand ready for your defense, you will not fail to catch him and save your self,
especially if you make use of your Parrade deliberately: For although such
persons Thrusts be very irregular, yet they are also very slow, and most
commonly given all within the Sword, for not one Ignorant of twenty can either
disengage or thrust above the Sword, but they thrust all generally upon the
inside and low at the belly or thighs, therefore if you be not too hasty in
your Parrade, and also observe the preceding Directions, you will find it not
so difficult a matter to oppose and master him as is commonly believed.

But if it be in a narrow bounds or closs room that you are engaged against
such a person, so that there is no possibility to break his measure, then you
must instantly after drawing your Sword enclose with a half pass upon him,
using your left hand for a defense against an exchanged Thrust in the time you
are performing it: So that if he do not offer to go to the Parrade, you give
him certainly a Thrust, and also defend your self from an exchanged one by your
left hand; and if he do go to the Parrade, then you have the fairer opportunity
to command his sword, in both which cases you will still have the advantage;
But this being certainly the most difficult circumstance a Sword man can
possibly be trysted with, it must therefore as I said be very quickly and
smartly gone about, that his irregularity and forwardness, may be put a stop
too, and crushed in its very bud and infancy, and this much for this
circumstance; For to run through all the different methods of pursuit which may
be made use of by every Ignorant, and to set down the particular contraries
most propper for each would have no end, (for so many men as many different
humors;) And therefore it must be left to every man's judgment, to make choice
of what Contraries he shall think most propper for his present necessity; but
what I have given you, is the foundation of all, and ground by which you must
walk. Therefore pray consider it well, for there is here I assure you a great
dale contained in a very few lines.


RULES to be Observed in the fourth Circumstance.
Now for the fourth and last Circumstance, which is, when a man is to engage
with sharps for his Life, or Honor or to play with Blunts for a prize, and
when a man does this he should be certainly almost as circumspect and warry, as
if he were to engage for his life; therefore both these cases falling under
this Circumstance, I am convinced there are such infallible Directions set down
for them in my Sword Man's Vade-mecum, that I cannot do better then advice you
to a perusal of it, seeing all I can say would prove but a Repetition of what
is most distinctly and fully set down in that piece.

But I must recommend to you one thing which I believe I have omitted there,
which is that you would when the weather is good accustom your self to Assault
sometimes in the Fields, either in uneven ground, or amongst stones, or where
there is any thing of raggedness, slipperiness, or uneveness; and this will not
only teach you to move your Limbs warrily, but also give you the true judgment
of what distance you should play at in the Field, which I assure you is more
advantageous then many do imagine, for let a man accustom himself to play only
in a school, and he will find when he comes to play in the Fields, that he
will quite mistake his distance, and think he is within reach of his Adversary,
when perhaps he is not within his measure, by five or six inches at least, and
so all his thrusts will be spent in vain; But accustoming himself to play now
and then abroad, the distance and variety of grounds will become so familiar to
him, that he will not only order his feet with as great ease, but also direct
his Thrusts with as great certainty and success as if he were in a Room or
ordinary Fencing-School.

So all I have to add upon this matter, is that you would make it your business
when you come to Assault, to put these Rules I have given you in practice,
according to the several Circumstances you shall be tristed with; and if you do
not find them answer your expectation (providing the fault^ly not at your own
door) then never give trust to any thing I shall hereafter say upon this
subject: so Sir if I be not deceived I have both performed what you expected,
and what I at first promised, which was to lay you down infallible Rules for
Assaulting, the Observation of which should make you confess, that the Expenses
and time you have spent upon this Exercise, is not altogether lost, and so much
in vain, and to no purpose, as you did imagine.


Sch. Sir, I do confess you have beyond expectation satisfied my couriosity,
and it shall be very much contrary to my inclination, if in my practice I make
not some considerable improvement by what you have taught me; But before we
part I must beg leave, to put you to the trouble of resolving me one Question
more, which because relating to this subject, I would gladly have cleared.


Ma. Although Sir it be now drawing near to the hour I appointed to meet some
Gentlemen in the Tavern, who are to enter my scholars by the great, yet seeing
you say you have but one Question more to ask me, I cannot think it will take
up so very much time, but that I may (rather then disoblige you) venture to
delay my meeting, at least so long, until I give you some satisfaction in it;
And therefore Sir, pray what is it?


Sch. This Sir I confess is the hight of complaisance in you, but a great dale
of rudeness in me, thus to interrupt your appointment; however, least I may not
have such a convenient opportunity to discourse with you another time, I am
satisfied to eneroach a little at present upon the Rules of Civility, that my
curiosity in this point may be satisfied.


The QVESTION.
You know Sir, in your Laws for Fencing Schools, you said it would not be amiss
(for the greater encouragement of Art, and improvement of Scholars) that once a
year there were a Prize to be played for publicly; I desire therefore to know
what methods you would take to have such a thing performed decently, and
without debate or confusion?


Ma. If this Sir be all, it is very easily answered, for First, I would have
half a dozen, or half a score Gentlemen, (it is true, there are some in this
Kingdom, who have been so generous as to do already what I am going to propose;
but what I am to set down, although it be fairly begun in this Country, yet it
will both prove useful to them, and as a Directory for the Youth of other
Kingdoms, to know what methods should be taken, when they shall design any such
thing:) Therefore abstracting from what is already done here (for this is a
general proposal I am making,) I say I would have half a dozen or half a score
Gentlemen who understand the Art, to erect themselves into a Society or
Company, (which should be called the Company or Society of Swordmen) and to
oblidge themselves by a Contract to have once a year a general Meeting, upon
such a day, in such a place, and at such an hour, and to carry at that Meeting
such a Badge, as shall be agreed upon, and specified in the Contract, at the
Subscription of which each should consigne so much as shall be agreed upon,
which they are to forefault Toties Quoties in case of failie: As also, they
should oblidge themselves to obey what Laws and Acts shall be made by the
Society at those general Meetings, under the Penalty of being degraded, and
having their names with disgrace expunged out of the Society Roll.


2.
Secondly, They should choice a Treasurer in whose hands the money is to be
consigned, and who is to be accountable for it, and only to dispose of it as he
shall be ordered by the Society at those general Meeting, or by a Commit
which shall be appointed by them; As also they should appoint one who is to
Officiat as Clerk, and record every thing sha be agreed upon in those Meetings.


3.
Thirdly They should empower a Commit of their number to receive such into
the Society as they shall judge sufficiently qualified (none being to be
admitted but such who have been Scholars) who at their Reception and
Subscription of the Contract, are also to consigne so much as shall be
appointed by the Society (which should be done by way of an Act) in the hands
of the Treasurer, as a pledge for their observing the yearly Meeting and other
Clauses specified in the Contract, at the delivery of which, they should
receive their Ticket from the Clerk, bearing the Badge of the Society, and
declaring that upon such a day in such a year they were admitted to it, for
which they should gratify him.


4.
Fourthly, The day prefixed in the Contract for the general Meeting being come,
and all being conveened at the hour and place appointed, the first thing they
should do, is to order the Clerk to ask their Votes who shall preceed for that
year.


5.
Fifthly, The Precident being chosen, he shall next order the Clerk to call the
Rolls or Names of the whole Society, and to mark those who are absent, and all
who shall be absent, or shall appear without their Badges, shall be declared by
the Votes of those present, to have forefaulted their Consignation money, which
was impignorat as a pledge for their keeping that public Meeting, and which
shall be ordered to be dispursed by the Treasurer for defraying so far as it
will go, the charges of a Collation, which should be alwise provided upon that
day for those who are conveened, and what shall be over and above must be
equally paid by the Company present.


6.
Sixthly, The absents and those who want their Badges being fined, they should
next consider if they will put out any Prize to be played for that year, if it
be carried by the plurality of Votes, that there shall; Then they are to resolve
of what Species it shall be, as whither a Sword a piece of Plate, or what else
they shall think fit, as also of what value, and upon what day, and in what
place it shall be begune to be played for, all which should be carefully marked
down by the Clerk, and then every one shall give in his Proportion for the
Prize to the Treasurer, who under a penalty shall be oblidged to have it ready
against such a day as shall be appointed, which should be at least a fortnight
before the day resolved upon for beginning the Solemnity; least the Society
should meet with a disappointment, and be reflected upon for not having the
Prize in readiness, after having made public intimation of it, and that People
have prepared themselves for it.


7.
Seventhly, These points being agreed on, they should in the next place pass an
Act, declaring that all persons whatsoever (Fencing Masters exceped) shall have
liberty to play for it, providing that against such a day as shall be
appointed, they give up their names, and pay in so much money, both which
should be specified in the Act, as also oblidge themselves to play in the Garb
or Habet which shall be mentioned in it; And the money collected from such
persons who give up their names and are not of the Society, shall be bestowed
upon the Prize the year following to make it of so much the more value: And it
should also be declared that whoever belonging to the Society shall decline to
play for the said Prize, must before he be dispensed with, give in so much
money as shall be agreed upon, and mentioned in the Act, which shall also be
employed for the benefit of the next years prize.


8.
Eighthly, This Act should be Printed by way of Advertisement, and Copies of it
affixed in the most public places of the City, or Town where the prize is to
be played for, and other adjacent Towns, also copies of it should be sent and
dispersed in the Country, that all Persons who design to show their Art, may
have timely enough advertisement to give up their Names, and prepare themselves
for it; And it should as I have said, mention the Liberty given to all Persons,
Masters excepted, to play; with the day and place appointed for taking up their
names; As also, the species and value of the Prize, with the place and day when
the solemnity is to begine; Likewise, a description of the Garb all are to play
in, having at the end of all a Printed copy of the Rules resolved upon by the
Society, to be observed in playing, that so every man may know if Justice be
done him or not; And to deside all Quarrels and Debates which may fall out upon
such an occasion, there should be a Committee of the most understanding and
judicious Persons belonging to the Society, the President being always One,
appointed to deside all such contraversies relating to the Prize, as shall be
brought in before them, who shall be upon their word of Honor bound to give
their Verdict, as impartially, and as near conform to the Printed Rules as
possible.


9.
Ninthly, Before they adjourn their meeting they are to take every thing else
into their consideration, which they shall find necessarly fall under their
Cognizance, as whither to have any meeting or not before the day resolved upon
for beginning the Prize, for the day for their yearly meeting, being once
appointed by the Original Contract, must never be altered, being the
Anniversary of the Society, so all things being thus conserted, and having
resolved what number with the Precident (or Treasurer in his absence) shall be
a Quorum, at those ordinary meetings, they may then adjourn themselves till the
day appointed for the next: All which the Clerk should carefully mark down, and
thus much for what they are to do at their yearly Assemblies; or general
meetings.

But if there be a Prize to be played for, then the day for beginning it being
come, and the place where it is to be played for, ready and in order, I would
have notwithstanding of the former Laws for Schools, these following Rules to
be observed, because they more particularly relate to such a solemnity as this.


RVLES to be Observed in playing for a PRIZE.
RVLE 1.
FIrst, That no disorder may be committed by a Rabble, or otherwise, there
should be Application made to the Magistrates, or commanding Officer of the
place, for a Guard to keep out all common People; As also to prevent any other
inconveniences which may fall out upon such an occasion.


RULE 2.
Secondly, To prevent a Crowd, none should be admitted to be Spectators, but
those who shall have received Tickets, which must be delivered to the Door
keeper as they enter.


RULE 3.
Thirdly, None should be allowed to play, let them be never so desirous, but
such as have given up their names at the time appointed in the Act; also the
number of the persons who are to play, should if posible be evens that so they
may be the more easily Paited, and those who beat their Adversaries also marked
with the less difficulty; Therefore if there be an odd person, they should all
draw Lotts who is to forebear playing for that year, and upon whomsover the Lot
falls he shall have the money he consigned for the Prize returned to him, and
shall therefore forebear playing for the Prize that year.


RULE 4.
Fourthly, None should be allowed to play, but in such a Garb as this
following; Viz. A black Velvet Cap, and white Weast-Coat, Drawers, and
Stockins, of what kind of Stuff every man shall think fit to be at the charges
of, whither Holland, Taffity, Sartin, etc. But in the time they are playing the
lapps of the Weast-Coat must be alwise put within the head-band of the Drawers,
that so it may be the be (...) peceived, where the Thrusts which shall b^ given
have been planted.


RULE 5.
Fifthly, The Flurets they all play with should be of equal length, and the
number three should be also the precise number of given or received Thrusts,
which each player is to play against every one of his Antagonist Players;
Neither should any be allowed to play against more than one in a day, because
after the first Assault a Man's Vigor is spent, and being to play for a Prize,
it were most unreasonable to oblidge him to play against any other fresh person
that day.


RULE 6.
Sixthly, No Thrusts should be allowed, nor accounted as fair, which are not
given in the Trunk of the Body; that is betwixt the neck and head-band of the
Drawers as to the length, and betwixt the two Shoulders as to the breadth.


RULE 7.
Seventhly, Nothing but fair Thrusts being to be allowed and reckoned, all
commanding and enclosing whatsoever should be discharged for if that were
allowed, the most part would aim generally more at it, then at the giving of a
Thrust, which would take away the whole grace, neatness, and pleasure of the
play, but the use of the left hand is not to be discharged, because it may so
fall out that some Ignorant Ramblers may list themselves to play for the Prize,
out of no other design but to see if they can baffle any of the Artists,
therefore the parrying with the left hand is upon that very account to be
allowed; But in case of a Contretemps or exchanged Thrust (as it is in the
eleventh Law for Schools) I would have the Thrust alwise desided in the Persons
Favors who was the first launcher out of it.


RULE 8
Eighthly, Both to prevent Debates, and also that the Thrusts which are given
may the better appear, there should be a little piece of flat sponge fixed to
the button of each Flurret, which should be diped in a little water mixed with
Vermelion, and then it will be impossible for the least touch to be given, but
what will immediately appear to the Judges, who should then interrupt that
bout, and declare that such a Person playing against such another has received
one Thrust from him, which the Clerk is immediately to mark down, and then they
are to engage again for the second Thrust, and when that is given, also to
desist until it be marked; and then they are to play for the third and last
against other for that Prize, and the lame order must be observed by all the
rest.


RULE. 9.
Lastly, Each Person being to play against every One, before the Victory can be
decided in any ones Favors, it will take as many days save one, as there are
Persons to play for the Prize, because it will take so much time (each being
according to the fifth Rule to make but one Assault in a day) before it go
throw them all, and whoever after the last days Assaulting, shall be found by
the account that the Clerk and Judges have kept, to have beat manyest, (for the
Judges are to keep an exact account of who each day beats other as well as
the Clerk; to be as it were a proof of his exactness and impartiality) shall be
declared to have gained the Prize, to whom the President shall deliver it out
of his own hand, passing what Compliment upon him he shall think fit, after
which all may be dismissed.

Thus you see what exact method I would have taken to prevent confusion, when
there is a Prize to be played for, and I am confident if it were punctually
observed, there would be as few Debates, and as little trouble at such a
Solemnity, as there is now in most Schools upon the ordinary public Assaulting
days.


Sch. Really Sir, By the Rules you have laid down, it appears to me that there
is not the least difficulty in going about it, but you talk of erecting a
Society of Swordmen, and your Discourse would also intimate as much, as that
there were one already erected in this Kingdom.


Ma. There is so Sir, and I thought there had been but few Gentlemen such as
you who follow the Sword, but what had known of it.


Sch. Indeed Sir. I must confess my ignorance as to this, for I never so much
as heard of it before, and upon this account I think it the more strange,
because I am daily conversing with those who are the greatest encouragers of
this Art within the Kingdom; However seeing it has been done without my
knowledge, pray do me the favor to show what method they took to Erect it?
For I am extremely taken with the fancy.


Ma. Sir you now ask that of me, which had I not a particular permission from
the Society, allowing me to devulge it, I would be necessitate contrary to my
inclination to give you a Denial, but seeing they at my desire condescended to
the publishing of it when I should think fit; I shall give you a full account
of the whole matter, which I think I can do the more exactly, seeing I was
personally present at the subscription of the Contract.


Sch. But what was the method pray Sir that they took, for I am a little
impatient I confess to know it?


Ma. Sir, Near Twenty of us had a meeting, (to the best of my remembrance it
was upon the twenty sixth of February last) where we all subscrived our
Original Contract: The exact Copy whereof follows,


THE ORIGINAL CONTRACT OF THE Society of Sword Men IN SCOTLAND.
THE Preservation of Life or Self-Defence, being that to which all Creatures by
a Natural instinct are inclined; Nature has thought fit to bestow upon each
kind a particular Defense, that so they might preserve themselves from the
insults of their Enemies: And as she gave to the inferior Creatures different
methods naturally to defend themselves, some with their Teeth, Beaks, Trunks,
and Claws, as may be seen in Eagles, Lions, Wolves, Bears, and Elephants;
Others with their Horns and Feet, as the Bull and Horse; And others with their
natural covering, or Coat of Armor, as the Crocadale, Portpick, Hu^tchen, and
Tortoise. So Man coming into the World naked, and in a manner stripped off all
those Defenses, she has endued him with Reason, that he might by a Judicial
Refl^ction and Contrivance, invent to himself such a variety of Artificial
ones, as might both supply the want of these, and be serviceable to him in
every encounter of Danger.

Now as other creatures have but one life to preserve and defend, so Man may be
said to have two, one of which is his Honor, for he who loses that, although
he naturally lives, yet in respect of the bad character he is under; and
small regard Men of Honor have to him, he is Virtually dead, so that it should
be his chief care and business to defend the one, and if possible preserve the
other untainted; But amongst all the Defenses hitherto invented by Man, there
is none so generally useful, and which shows so much of Art and Dexterity; or
discovers so much the subtility of Adroiss and Invention as the Art of the
Sword, (now a days termed Fencing,) and therefore it must certainly be without
debate the fittest to protect both.

WE therefore Vndersubcrivers, being sensible of the great Advantage this Art
has over all others, which can any ways pretend to a shaire in the Defense of
a Man's person; As also of the great benefit all People, but particularly
Gentlemen, may reap by a right use of it, And considering that the knowledge
and practice of it, is by many who do not understand its worth and Excellency,
undervalued and judged but an useless and unprofitable piece of Accomplishment;
Do for the greater encouragement of the Art; And to excite in all People a
Desire and Emulation to understand and practice so Noble and Useful an
Exercise, Erect our selves into a Society, which we Resolve shall hereafter be
called, The SOCIETY OF SWORDMEN. And by this our Contract, we Bind and Obliege
our selves, to have a Yearly General Meeting upon the (...) of each January, at
two a cloak in the Afternoon, in Our first General Meeting beginning upon (...)
the (...) day of January 1693. And so yearly thereafter upon the (...) of the
said month, any number which shall conveen being a Quorum. And do also obliege
our selves to carry at those General Meet, ings upon our left breasts, and
above our upper coats the Badge following, which is by us established to be as
a Distinction for the Society; And shall be hereafter called its Badge: Viz.

A piece of Plate somewhat larger than a Grown, and in the form of a double
Star, having a Circle within it, and engraven upon each side of the Circle a
Cloud, out of which Cloud there must come from the Dexter an Arm holding a
Sword sloping upwards; And from the Sinister another holding a Fluret likewise
sloping upwards, which crossing the Sword about the middle shall Form a kind of
St. Andrews Cross; And behind the Fluret and Sword there most be also engraven
the Figure of a Man in a fashionable Garb, pointing with his right Hand to the
point of the Fluret; And with his Left to the point of the Sword, Beneath which
points shall be engraven these Inscriptions; Viz. Under the point of the
Fluret, Hac Recreo; And under the point of the Sword, Hoc propugno; And above
the head of the Figure in a scr^l, Sic in utrumque paratus; And beneath his
feet in larger Characters, Gladiatorum SCOTICORUM Societatis Symbolum; And in
the Circle about the Badge the Persons name to whom the Badge belongs, with
the day of the month, and year of GOD, when he was admitted and received into
the Society; Also to give our Contract more force, and that all things may be
done with the more Decency and Order, we all of us Bind and Obliege our selves
to observe and stand to what Laws and Acts this our Society shall think fit to
make from time to time, under the penalties which shall by the plurality of
Votes be resolved upon, to be imposed upon those who shall contra^^een.

And finally, we declare that we have no other intention or design by Erecting
this Society and appointing these our public Meetings and Assemblies, but the
Advancement and Encouragement of this Art, And that thereby we may have a
fairer and better Opportunity to take into our consideration what methods may
be fallen upon, not only to excite all People to its practice, but also to
improve our selves in it, which by our subscriptions we declare, we look upon
to be an Art so necessary and useful, that it can never be either too much or
too exactly practiced and understood by any; And therefore with one consent we
subscribe,

In sempiternum Floreat Gladiatura,
At Edinburgh the twenty sixth day of February, 1692.
This we all subscribed, after which we chose our Clerk, next our President,
then we chose our Treasurer, in whose hands we consigned our money as a pledge
for observing the the general Contract, and then having considered some other
particulars relating to the Society, we appointed a Committee who were
empowered to receive such into it, as should make application to them, and whom
they should think fit to admit, which Commit was to continue until the next
years General Meeting, after which the Committee appointed their next ordinary
Meeting, and then we adjourned.

Thus Sir have I given you a short but exact Account of our first Constitution,
and I am hopeful whoever hears of it, and considers the Reasons which induced
us to it, will think the motives so strong, and our Design so generous and
Honorable, that they will be impatient to be admitted a Member of it.

Sch. Indeed I should think so, for the Fancy is both New, it being the first
of the kind I believe that ever was Erected; and also being so Gentlemany
deserves all the Encouragement imaginable, and for my own part Sir I asure
you, I will take it as a singular favor, if you will conferr that Honor upon
me, which I doubt not but you can very easily do, considering your present
station.


Ma. That Sir as I told you, does not at all ly in my way, but propperly
belongs to the Committee appointed for that purpose; However if you desire, I
shall do you all the service in it I can, and propose it to them, who no doubt
considering the advance you have made in this Art, will make no scrupple to
admit you.


Sch. Pray do so then, and I shall also make Application to them my self, which
will perhaps make them the sooner consent to it; for I long extremely to be one
of your Number.


Ma. I am glad Sir to see you so forwardly inclined to encourage this Art, and
assure your self, I shall never be wanting to give you all the Instruction and
Assistance I can in any thing relating to it; But I must now of necessity take
leave of you, least I disappoint those Gentlemen I tristed with.


Sch. Sir I am sorry I have detained you so long, but the great desire I had to
be informed in what I was ignorant of, (which I must confess you have most
distinctly done) has made me a great dale more rude then otherwise I would,
but I expect that amongst my other failours which are very well known to you,
you will also pardon this; And so I bid you heartily good night, wishing you
good success, and an advantageous agreement with those to whom you are going.


Ma. I shall take care of that Sir I Will warrant you, for it is money now a days
that does all, and he who wants that may go pick straws at home, for he will be
but very little thought of abroad; However I thank you for your good Wishes.


Sch. Well Sir, I am glad considering the great trouble I have given you all
day, to leave you now in so good a strain, but I Will detain you no longer from
your Company. So,


FAREWELL.
POSTSCRIPT
HAving finished the preceding Discourse, I think it will not be amiss to
Answer an Objection, which perhaps some People (particularly after considering
the Rules I order to be observed in the third Circumstance against Ignorants)
may make, in judging that there is a great imperfection in the Art, because I
order the Left Hand to be frequently made use of against such Persons; For say
they, to what use is all your Art with the Sword, when we see that according to
your own Rules, when put to it, your Defense depends most, if not all, upon
the Parying with the Left Hand, so that take away that, and restrict your self
wholly to the Defense with your Sword, and then we shall plainly see, that a
rude foreward Ignorant will be equal with you, do your best.

To this I Answer, that seeing it is evident a Sword cannot perform two
different Actions at one and the same time, that is, cannot both Defend and
Offend at once, especially the Straggling and Irregular Thrusts of a Rambler
which are given at a distance from the Sword, and out of the Line, and that
Ignorants knowing very well this, do therefore commonly never forebear or
desist Pushing and Thrusting until their Strength and Vigor fail them,
concluding certainly that so long as they Thrust so quickly, we must either
Parry, or receive an exchanged Thrust; And also that such Ignorants and
Ramblers do alwise design (seeing they know they can do no better) to hazard
the receiving one Wound for the giving of another, I say therefore upon that
account, an Artist is in such a case necessitate either to Parry with the
Left Hand, or otherwise to give the Ignorant the whole Pursuit, so it is only
that he may become the Pursuer that he defends with his Left Hand; (which
nevertheless, let People think and talk of it as they please, is more difficult
and requires more Art and dexterity to perform neatlie, and without being
wounded in it, then most do imagine) I say then it is only that he may become
the Pursuer that he makes use of it; and not at all because he is not by his
Art capable, (if he had restricted himself only to the Defensive part,) to
defend the Rude and Irregular thrusts of the Ignorant.

Let no man then condemn Art, upon this pretended unsuff^^iency of not
furnishing a perfect defense with the Sword, seeing there can be nothing under
the cope of Heaven more false, for as I said, the chief Reason which makes
Artists use the left Hand against Ignorants and Ramblers, is not so much to be
a defense to them (for if they be Adroit their Sword alone is abundantly
sufficient for that) but that by using it they may be in a better capacity to
offend the Ignorant, and by becoming the Pursuer, put a stop to the ventorious
and foreward Pursuit of the Rambler, who (unless the Artist by using that
Method make him sensible that his continual Thrusting cannot save him from a
wound for nothing) would certainly advance so closs, and redouble so quickly
and irregularly, that he might be fair to put the Artist, especially if in a
narrow Bounds, very hard to it.

Now this point I thought fit to clear, both for the Vindication of Art, and
also to discover to such Persons who may make the preceding Objection, the
true Reason why the use of the left Hand is so much recommend in all
Engadgements, but particularly against Ignorants, or great Ramblers; Therefore
whatever may have been heretofore their Opinion in this matter, I expect that
after the reading of these few lines, they will be convinced of the truth of
what I affirm, which if they are, I have my design in Writing this Postscript,
if not, the worst is theirs, seeing the disadvantage will certainly at last
redound to their own Prejudice, in obstinatly mantaining a point so vastly
opposite and contradictory to the true and solid dictats of both Reason and
Art. And so I conclude, wishing them from all my Heart the true defense of both
Hand and Sword, without which no man can perform in this Art, any thing that is
either great or extraordinary.

FINIS.

