SERMONS PREACHED AT ETON, BY JOHN HALES, Late Fellow of that College. Not
till now Published.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Marriot, and are to be sold at his shop
in St. Dunstan's Churchyard, Fleetstreet, 1660

The Texts of the Sermons.
GALAT. 6.7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked; For whatsoever a man sows,
that shall he also reap.

LUKE 16.25. Son, Remember, that thou in thy Lifetime receivedst thy good
things.

1 COR. 6.13. Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats; but God shall
destroy both it and them.

MAT. 23.38. Behold, your House is left unto you desolate.

Page 7. l. 40. for much (ever) read severer. p. 13. l. 32. read 318. Bishops.


GALAT. 6.7.


WHEN Abraham made that entertainment ( Genesis 18.) to certain men who came unto
him, the Text tells us at first that they were three; And behold, three men
stood by him. Anon, in the next Chapter they are said to be but And there came
two Angels to Sodom at even. But when Lot was now preparing to fly away, they
seem to be but one: For so Lot bespeaks them as one; O not so my Lord, behold
now thy servant, etc. and the answer is but as of one; See, I have accepted
thee concerning this thing. Like unto this Trinity and Unity are these words of
holy Scripture which I have now read in your hearing; for, if you please, these
words, without any wrong unto them, will naturally fall either into three
several parts, every one of them containing in it a great lesson for our
instruction; Be not deceived: this stirs up our watchfulness, and incites us to
a perfect survey of our ways, that so sophistry and deceit creep not in upon
us at unawares to abuse us. The second is in the next words, God is not mocked:
this on the contrary abates in us some conceit which might arise; as if that
craft and subtilty Jeroboam disguiseth her self, and comes to Ahiah the
Prophet; but all in vain, for the Prophet straightway discovers her; Come in,
says he, thou wife of Jeroboam, why feignest thou thy self to be another
woman? We all know that they were devils, and not gods which the Gentiles
worshipped; yet so jealous has God been in this behalf, that he would not suffer
such an abuse, though put upon the Devil himself, to escape unpunished. Attalus
King of Pergamus, whom he had grievously offended, the King brings him to the
top of an high Cliffe, which was called by the name of (...), the Horse, and
What a man sowes that shall he reap; and in this we learn, That let the
pretenses of our actions be never so fair, yet God, first or last, will pull
off their disguise and mask, and show them to the world for such as indeed they
are. We read of one Phryne, a beautiful Harlot, that feasting one day amongst
her Companions, in the end they fell upon a sport, wherein it was agreed,
whatsoever one did all the rest must follow and do the same. It being now come
to Phrynes lot to command, she calls for water and washes her face; which when
all the rest had done, Ludit in humanis divina potentia rebus. It is a sport,
and as it were a kind of recreation to God to discover false play, to wash off
the color and paint from disguised actions, and openly expose them to the
laughter and scorn of Men and Angels. Deus and vocatus and non vocatus aderit;
so the Oracle told the Grecians before the Peloponesian War. There is no action
whatsoever, but God, whether he be looked for yea or no, will be at one end of
it; and Abraham did his guests, and take them for three; neither will I use any
curious division, but I will take them up as they lie, and now Be not deceived.

(...). How you render these words, either thus, Be not deceived; or thus,
Deceive not your selves, it is not a point greatly material. To deceive our
selves, or suffer another to deceive us, arrive both at one point. Seldom or
never was any man deceived by another, who did not first deceive himself. Your
own every days experience you have one with another gives evidence to the
truth of this; for when we speak with any man whom we find to have been abused
or overreached, we evermore blame him, either for some negligence, or some
forgetfulness, or Mephibosheth, Jonathans lame son, came to David to excuse
himself for not attending him in his flight, My servant deceived me, says he,
and thy servant is lame. Indeed if we were either lame or imperfect, had we
some invincible impediment, against which it availed not to strive, this might
be some Apology for us when we are deceived: but it fares with us no other
ways than it did with Sampson when his wife betrayed him; Had you not ploughed
with says he, you had never found my riddle. He that finds himself betrayed,
if he well examine himself, he shall find he has an Heifer, something or other
that is near and dear unto him, which not carefully watched does him many times
ill offices. He therefore that is deceived let him lay the blame no where but
on himself; for in doing otherwise, we do but as little children do, who beat
the ground when they themselves are fallen. Again, this (...), Be not deceived,
seems to be a Precept of great weight; yea, so great, as it may be doubted
whether it be Columella observes, Quicunque sunt habiti mortalium
saepientissimi, multa scisse dicuntur, non omnia; the wisest of men that ever
lived were never taken to know all things, but many things. And secondly, such
things as they do know they know but imperfectly, and in part. Now either of
these is enough to deceived; for it cannot be but we should be deceived in what
we know not. That it was a great Precept the Apostle knew well, and as it seems
to be, purposed that we should know it too. For, for this end, I may well
think, has he in this place almost paralleled God and Man; or, as the
Psalmist speaks in the 8. Psalm. He has made him little less then God. For
that (...), that mockery, which here he denies can befall God, is nothing else
but that deceit which here he teaches ought not to befall us. He might have
changed the words without any wrong to the sense, and placed them thus; Be not
you mocked, for God is not deceived. For whatsoever deceives a man, that may
properly be said to mock and abuse him. So that one and the same thing is here
averred both of God and of us; only there is this difference, in God it is a
necessity, he cannot be mocked, he cannot be deceived; in Man it is a duty, he
ought not to be mocked, he ought not to be deceived. No exception therefore is
it to the precept, that it seems to be proper to God. When Rachel, repining
that she bare no child, came in a whining and discontented humor to Jacob,
saying, Give me children, else I die; He answered, Am I like God, who has
withheld from thee the and with this answer he both reproved her, and excused
himself. But, beloved, if any man should reply upon our blessed Apostle, and
tell him, Am I like God, that I should look not to be deceived? this cannot
excuse him; For behold, as if he had purposely meant to have taken this
objection away, the Apostle joins together both God and us, and tells us, as
God cannot, so we must not be deceived.

Now that we may the better see what is locked up in this Precept, it to as many
more as every Christian is bound to learn; for the assurance that we have of
our Christian doctrine, and every point of it, consists not in opinion, is not
founded upon probabilities,

Rome, and to the Bishop of that See. Every man finds it, or thinks he finds
it, accordingly as that faction, or part of the Church upon which he is fallen,
does direct him. Thus, like the Sodom before Lots door, men have wearied
themselves, and have gone far and near to find out that which is hard at hand.
We see many times a kind of ridiculous and joculary forgetfulness of many men,
seeking for that which they have in their hands; so fares it here with men who
seek for infallibility in others, which either is, or ought to be, in
themselves: As Saul sought his fathers asses whilst they were now at home; or
as Oedipus, in the Tragedy, sent to the Oracle to enquire the cause of the
plague in Thebes, whereas himself was the man. For, Beloved* infallibility is
not a favor impropriated to any one man, it is a Paul, when he gives this
precept, directs it not to Councils, to Bishops, to Teachers and Preachers, but
to all of the Galatian Churches, and in them to all of all the Churches in the
world. Unto you therefore and to every one, of what sex, of what rank or degree,
and place soever, from him that studies in his Library to him that swears at
the Plough-tayl, belongs this precept of S. Paul, Be not deceived.

Which command that you may the better conceive and drink in, let us see what
it is that a man must do who resolves to obey What and Wherefore. First, you
must know what it is that is commanded you: secondly, wherefore, that is, upon
what authority, upon what reason. It is reported of Aristotle, that being sick,
when his Physician came to administer to him, he asked him a reason of his
action, and told him, that he would be cured like a man, and not like a beast.
Deceit and error are the diseases of the mind; he that strives to cure it upon
bare command, Medici, but Veterinarii, they are not Physicians, but Leaches:
and if you so take things at their hands, you do not like men, but like beasts.
I know this is something an hard Doctrine for the many to hear, neither is it
usually taught by the common Teachers; non vestrum onus, bos clitellas? to
require this at your hands, were as improper as if we should clap the saddle on
the back of the ox. And for this you have your reasons too, as you think; you
are men whose time is taken up in your Trades and Callings, you are unlearned,
unread, of weak and Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas; They are men born
underhappier Stars then ordinary who attain to the discovery of Reasons and
Causes of things. Beloved, all this I know, yet I must still go on, and require
the performance of the Apostles precept, be not deceived; which is a point of
perfection which you shall never arrive at, except you forgo these pretenses.
Saint Hierom tells us, that it was a precept of Pythagoras, Oneratis
superponendum opus, deponentibus non communicandum; Where you find a man laden,
there to increase his burden, and never to go about to ease him which would
lay his burden down: which he he interprets, ad virtutem incedentibus
augmentanda praecepta, tradentes se otio relinquendos; The meaning, says he,
of that precept was, To men that go on in virtue and industry you must still
give, and add new precepts, new commands; but idle persons must be forsaken.
Beloved, it falls me by lot this day to act Pythagoras his part; The burden of
this precept laid upon you by the blessed What, and Why: That part of your
burden which contains What, I see you will willingly take up; but that other
which comprehends Why, that is either too hot or too heavy, you dare not meddle
with it; But I must add that also to your burden, or else I must leave you for
idle persons: For without the knowledge of Why, of the true

I will put on this Doctrine further, and convince you by your own reason. It
is a question made by John Gerson, sometimes Chancellor of Paris, Quorsum mihi
mea conscientia, si mihi secundum alienam conscientiam vivendum est and
moriendum? Wherefore has God given me the light of reason and conscience, if I
Non satis est agrum possidere velle, si colere non possis; It is but a folly to
possess a piece of ground, except you till it. And how then can it stand with
reason, that a man should be possessor of so godly a piece of the Lords
pasture, as is this light of understanding and reason, which he has endued us
with in the day of our creation, if he suffer it to lie untilled, or sow not in
it the Lords seed? Needs must our Basil tells us, that the man that is utterly
devoid of all education, and has nothing but his reason to be guided by,
(...): yet even such an one, if he does offend, shall not escape unpunished,
because he has not used those common notions ingrafted by God in his heart, to
that end for which they were given. How

It were a thing worth looking into, to know the reason vicinum pecus grandius
uber habet: and yet we account it a singular virtue to esteem our reason and
wit meaner then other men's. Let us not mistake de ingenio suo pessime mereri,
nothing but poverty of spirit and indiscretion. I will not forbear to open unto
you what I conceive to be the causes of this so general an error amongst men.
First, Rome are not yet sufficiently washed from the hearts of many men. We know
it is the principal stay and supporter of that Church, to suffer nothing to be
inquired into which is once concluded by them. Look through Spain and Italy,
jumenta sunt, non homines, they are not men, but beasts, and Issachar-like
patiently couch down under every burden their superiors lay upon them.
Secondly, a fault or two may be in our own Ministry; Thus to advise men (as I
have done) to search into the reasons and grounds of Religion, opens a way to
dispute and quarrel, and this might breed us some Sibarites, to procure their
ease, banished the Smiths, because their Trade was full of noise. In the mean
time we do not see that peace which arises out of ignorance is but a kind of
sloth, or moral lethargy, seeming quiet because it has no power to move.
Again, may be the portion of knowledge in the Minister himself is not
overgreat; it may be therefore good policy for him to suppress all busy
enquiry in his auditory, that

To return therefore, and proceed in the refutation of this gross neglect in
men of their own reason, and casting themselves upon others wits; Has God
given you eyes to see, and legs to support you, that so your selves might^ly
still, or sleep, and require the use of other men's eyes and legs? That faculty
of Haman, we may the more merrily go in to the banquet provided for us; that so
we may the more freely betake our selves to our pleasures, to our profits, to
our trades, to our preferments, and Ambition* Never was there any business of
weight so usually discharged by Proxy and Deputy, as this sacred business has
been Sl^idan the Historian observes, that it was grown a custom in his time for
great persons to provide them Chanteries and Chaplains, to celebrate their
Obits, and to offer for their souls health even in their life-times, whilst
they themselves intended other matters; and thus they discharged the cure of
their own souls by deputy. Not only in Germany, where Sleidan lived, but even
in England, amongst us, that custom had taken footing, and was sometimes
practiced, R. Lu^^^^.
even in this place, by one sometimes of this Body. Margaret of Valois, not
long since Queen of France, built her a Chapel, provided her Chaplains, and
large endowment for them, that so perpetually day and night, every hour
successively, without intermission, by some one or other, there might
intercession be made to God for her unto the worlds end; a thing which her self
had little care or thought of in her lifetime, as having other business to
think on. So confident are we of the eternal good of our souls, upon the
Knowledge, Devotion and Industry of

Would you see how ridiculously we abuse our selves when we thus neglect our
own knowledge, and securely hazard our selves upon others skill? Give me leave
then to show you a perfect pattern of it, and to report to you what I find in
Seneca the Philosopher recorded of a Gentleman in Rome, who being purely
ignorant, yet greatly desirous to seem learned, procured himself many servants,
of which some he caused to study the Many Scholars prove far better then their
Masters. Would you bear a part in this saying, and prove better then we that
are your Teachers? then make our knowledge yours, not as the Roman Gentleman
did, by imputation, David found by his own experience; I am wiser then my
Teachers, says he in his 119. Psalm; Why? because he believed them? this could
never have made him so wise, much less wiser: why then? for thy Testimonies,
says he, are my studies. Therefore is he wiser then his Teachers, because that
knowing all that they could teach him, he staid not there, but by his own
search and study he arrives at a degree of knowledge beyond his Masters. St.
Basil, in his Sermons upon some of the Psalms, taxes a sort of men, Basil,

Saint Hierome, in the preface to his Comments on the Epistle to the Galatians,
much commends Marcella, a Gentlewoman of Rome, for this, that in her pursuit of
Christian knowledge, she would receive nothing from him more Pythagorico, upon
trust, and upon his bare word and authority, but would so thoroughly sift and
try all things of her self, ut sentirem me (says he,) non tam that she seemed
not so much to be my scholar and hearer as my judge. Beloved, what hinders, but
we should all, all of all sexes, ages, callings, be like to this Roman Matron,
and be not only hearers, but judges too? Nec protinus quicquid respondetur
rectum putare, neither to adore all things for Gospel which our betters tell
us, but to bring all things to the true test; to know the reasons, try the
authorities, and never rest our selves, till we can take up that conclusion of
the Psalmist, As we have heard, so have we seen in the city of our

Now to remove you yet a little farther from this fancy of casting your self
into the arms of others, and to conciliate you the more to God and your Reason,
I will open one thing farther unto you, which is this, That you put off the
care of your Faith and Religion from your selves on other men sundry ways,
when you think you do nothing less; For when we plead for the truth of our
profession, and appeal either to our education or breeding, thus we have been
brought up, thus we have been taught; or to education and breeding is nothing
else but the authority of our Teachers taken over our childhood. Now there is
nothing which ought to be of less force with us, or which we ought more to
suspect: For childhood has one thing natural to it, which is a great enemy to
Truth, and a great furtherer of deceit; what is that? Credulity. Nothing is
more credulous then a child: and our daily experience shows how Epicharmus;
The chiefest sinews and strength of wisdom is not easily to believe. Have we
not then great cause to call to better account, and examine by better reason,
whatsoever we learnt in so credu^ous and easy an age, so apt, like the softest
wax, to receive every impression? Yet notwithstanding this singular weakness,
and this large and real exception which we have against education,

Secondly, Antiquity, what is it else (God only excepted) but man's Authority
born some ages before us? Now for the Truth of things, time makes no alteration;
things are still the same they are, let the time be past, present, or to come.
Those things which we reverence for Antiquity, what were they antiquitas
antiquissima, most ancient. This cannot be but true, for it is God, and God is
Truth. All other parts of Antiquity deceit and falsehood will lay claim When
therefore Antiquity is pleaded for the proof of any conclusion commended to you
for true, be you careful to know whether it be antiquissima, whether it be
most ancient, yea or no: If it be so, then is it an invincible proof, and
pleads for nothing but the Truth; if otherwise, though it be as ancient, I say
not as Inachus, but as Satan himself, yet it is no proof of Truth.

Thirdly, Universality is such a proof of Truth as Truth it self is ashamed of;
for universality is nothing but a quainter and a trimmer name to signify the
multitude. Now humane Authority at the strongest is but weak, but the multitude
is the weakest part of humane Authority; It is the great Patron of error, most
easily maintainer and continuer of error is the multitude. Ubi singulorum error
fecerit publicum, singulorum errorem facit publicus: It is a thing which our
common experience and practice acquaints us with, that when some private
persons have gained Authority with the multitude, and infused some error into
them, and made it public, the publickness of the error gains Authority to it,
Private persons first beget errors in the multitude, and make them public, and
publickness of them begets them again in private persons*
and enterchangeably prevails with private persons to entertain it. The most
singular and strongest part of humane Authority Sed nunquam it a been crit
rebus humanis, ut plures sint meliores, It will excuse an error, but it can
never serve to warrant a Truth.

Fourthly, Councels and Synods, and consent of Churches, these indeed may seem
of some force, they are taken to be the strongest weapons which the Church had
fought with; yet this is still humane Authority after another fashion: let me
Nice met 38 Bishops to defend the Divinity of the Son of God: But at Ariminum
met well near 600 Bishops to deny it. I ask then, what gained the Truth here by
a Synod? Certainly in the eye of reason it more endangered it; for it
discovered the advantage that error had among the multitude above the Truth; by
which reason Truth might have been greatly hazarded. I have read, that the
Nobility of Rome, upon some of it against their Masters. This device of calling
Councels


Son, remember, that thou in thy Lifetime receivedst thy good things.


(...). That man of Misery, whose woeful end occasioned this discourse in St.
Luke, whence I have chosen out these few words as my subject to treat of at
this time, much desires that one Polydor in the Tragedy enters the Stage, and
may speak unto you as he did unto his Auditors in another language, I come from
the pit of the dead, from the Gates of utter darkness, where the Devil has
his mansion far removed from God. First, the sadness of the message with which
I come might easily tempt you to think so, as being very unwelcome to the ears
of flesh and ubi mors non est, where shall we find rest* in what shall we joy,
if the good things of our life deceive us? Certainly so disconsolate a piece of
news could never come, but from some place of extreme sadness. Secondly, the
unfitness of the time might help on well to this conceit: There is (...), says
Abraham in this Scripture, there is a great gulf betwixt you and us. Beloved,
the difference betwixt those two places here mentioned is not much greater then
is the distance betwixt my Text and totum choragium Epicureum, all the rest of
this rich man's daily service, these are the subject of the time; but my Text
pulls you by the ear, and bids you beware, lest even these good things (for so
men commonly call them,) may be amongst those things, which, when time comes,
may draw after them this recordare, Remember, you may be told Remember you had
your Shrovetide; for what else, I beseech you, was the whole life of this
miserable man here but in a manner a perpetual shroving?

But neither the sowreness of the message, nor any pretended unseasonableness
of the times, must hinder us from communicating unto you what the Spirit of God
shall put into our hearts. Let it be unwelcome, what then? (...); Sick persons
must not look for smoothing and much-making, but for that which fits their
malady. And if you plead intempestivity and unseasonableness, for this the
Apostles rule must be my warrant, in season, out of season. Indeed Solomon
tells us that there is a season, a fitting time for all Intempestivity, an
indiscretion by which unwise and unexperienced men see not what befits times,
persons, occasions. But, Beloved, the Ministers of Gods word, who break to you
the bread of life, are secure in this regard; they can never be in danger of
any (...), Intempestivity, indiscretion, so the lesson they teach be true. We
need not to stand removing and fitting our sails, all winds blow for us; for
every good season is at all times, with all persons, upon all occasions, upon
no occasion, profitable. Are you ignorant of your duty? it serves to inform
Jupiters dice, we say, always run fortunately. The word of God, wheresoever,
whenever, by whomsoever sown, never returns back fruitless unto him that
sent it. St. Bernard, commenting upon the Canticles, takes occasion much to
bewail his Brothers death; and by reason of that digression delivers many
profitable lessons concerning our common mortality. But one Berengarius, a
bitter quid funeri cum nuptiis? What has a funeral to do with a
Marriage-song? By his leave that made it, this was but a foolish question; for
indeed our Christian songs are set to a music in which there is no fear of
discords. As it is said of Truth, Omne All Truths agree; so in our Christian
music, every note, bound it as you list, is still in tune. Let therefore no
cavilling Berengarius ask me, quid funeri cum nuptiis? what has a sad Sermon
to do with Shrove-tide? For, cum volet Spiritus, when the Spirit will, who, as
we hope, guides us in our choice, the pleasant Canticles shall yield fit matter
for a Funerall-Sermon, and times of pleasure and merriment shall well enough
combine with sad and melancholic discourses.

Yet one word more, to fit my Text to my Auditors; a thing recordare quod
recepisti, Remember thou have received: For memory is of things past, and
recepisti is not of things in expectation, but of things already received by
us. But we are yet in expectation, what shall befall us we know not; as yet
therefore I cannot say as our Savior does, this day is this Scripture
fulfilled in your ears; let that time never be: for, should we stay to hear
from Abraham a recordare, Remember, it would be too late then to preach unto
you: yet we must find a way to apply this Scripture to us, even for the
present; and indeed it is not hard to do cave, beware; not a recordare
remember; to advise you that you beware how you receive your good things in
your life, not to remember you that you have done so. And this will I do
without any wrong to my Text, for do but turn the picture, that which seems to
gallop will wallow; do but alter the time, and recordare, remember, will
immediately become cave, tells us, that expectation and memory are but the same
thing; for what memory is in regard of things past, that expectation is in
regard of things to come. Expectation is but memory antedated, and memory is
expectation whose date is out. As it is betwixt expectation and memory, so
stands the case betwixt recordare, remember and cave, beware* Cave is but
recordare antedated; what recordare is in regard of things past, that is cave
in regard of things to come. Let us then turn memory into wariness and
prevention, and exprobration into counsel and and forthwith you shall see, that
recordare quae recepisti, remember that thou have received, will become cave ne
recipias, beware that thou receive not; and so the Text will exactly fit us. So
come I to the words, Son, remember, etc. I will branch them into two parts;
first, a preface, in the first word, Fili, Son. Secondly, the body of the
words themselves, Remember thou have received, etc. The words we will further
divide, if need shall be, when we come to consider of them. In the mean time
Fili, Son.

I have heard that Abraham was a great Scholar; what portion of clerkship he
has otherwise and upon other occasion expressed, I know not; sure I am that here
he has showed us a wondrous piece of his Rhetoric: For, two things most
contrary, sweetness and bitterness, compassion and exprobration, in two or
three words so strangely coucht and mixed together I have not lightly found,
Fili and recordare, Son, remember; two words near in site and place, Son, a
word of bowels, mercy, sweetness; a word in which nature and custom has
summed up and concluded all which lies dispersed in all the names of goodness.
Contrarily, Remember, a word (as here it lies) of bitterness, of sarcasme, of
exprobration: For unto this miserable man here in torments what could have been
more irksom, then to be twitted with, and constrained to remember, his sometime
happiness? Could he have learnt the art of oblivion, and quite forgotten that
ever he was happy, his misery had yet been somewhat less. Never to have tasted
happiness abates a fuisse felicem, were there no other misery, yet this were
misery enough, to have been happy. It was observed of Domitian the Emperor,
that when he made a preface of mercy, it was a certain note he would use the
greatest severity: Shall we conceive so of Abraham, that to his Fili he added a
recordare, to his preface of mercy he underjoynes a sentence of harshness and
severity, so to add misery to the enough already miserable, and increase his
woe? (...), Reverence to so great a man must teach us well to weigh what we
speak or what we Abraham uses this gracious compellation of Son unto a damned
ghost; some will tell us, that he does it by way of retaliation: The man with
whom he speaks had called him Father, out of complement therefore and formality
he calls him Son. But this carries a countenance of Courtship and levity.
Others will say that he calls him by the name of Son, because indeed he was so,
though by the flesh only; which proves the weaker side. But this had been
unprofitable, Abraham did this out of his natural goodness, and that he
therefore used this gentle compellation of Fili, Son, to one utterly cast off,
and to be now for ever left under the eternal wrath of God, to teach us this
lesson, That in all cases, how desperate soever, unto all persons, Chrysostom
was the man that told me thus, and I must confess I believed him. Me natura
misericordem, Patria severum, crudelem nec Patria nec natura esse volunt, says
the great Roman Orator; Nature has made me good, but my Country and the
public good made me to be severe, but neither nature nor my Country permit me
to be cruel. Abraham here has well expressed this, for, Fili and Recordare,
Son, Remember, they are no other then natura and Patria: Fili comes from his
bowels and natural goodness; Recordare is but occasioned out of his duty to
God and public good: to teach us still to temper our necessary severity with
some goodness; for, mere severity is nothing else but cruelty, which neither
God nor nature requires at our hands. The master of the feast in the Gospel,
when he came in to his guests, and saw one there without a wedding garment,
though he saw he was constrained to pronounce a sharp and severe doom, yet he
uses Abraham's method, Amice, friend (says he) how come thou hither? Fili,
Amice, Son, friend; Here is the true art of chiding, this is qui ita objurgamus
quasi oderimus, who are wont so to chide as if we hated, who think foul words
to be but ornaments of speech, and enchase our discourse with bitter language
as with pearls, and never think we reprove except we be contumelious.

Amongst the ancient Roman inscriptions which are preserved Nescivit quid esset
maledicere, he knew not how to speak contumeliously to any man: and I have
heard it reported of Philip the second, that famous King of Spain in our own
memory, that he so wonderfully could contain himself, that in his whole life he
never gave any man a harsh word. And indeed I have often wondered with my self
whether there were (not any necessary use, for that I know there is not,) but
any use at all of opprobrious and reviling language: If there be, it must be
either in reproof, or in the It has been observed of the ancient Cornish
Language, that it afforded no forms of Oaths, no phrases to swear in. I
should never think our language the poorer, if it were utterly Nepthali,
eloquia pulchritudinis, gracious language, quae ne illos quidem quos damnat
offendit. Secondly, it is so cheap a virtue; Good words are afforded at the
same price that evil are. Lastly, I know you have heard the parable of the
Northwind and the Sun; the wind with all his raging and blustering could not
make the wayfaring man lay down his cloak; but when the Sun had displayed his
beams, sent forth his heat, and wrought a while upon him, he makes him retire
to the shade and unbrace himself.

Beloved, as we much desire to be the sons of Abraham the faithful, so let us
no less desire to be sons of Abraham the good: Abraham, then let us follow our
Saviors counsel, and do the works of Abraham; let us strive on all occasions
some way or other to express our goodness, and use no more severity then we
must needs. Abraham could not release this poor man of his pain, he could not
so much as procure a mitigation of it, he found no means to provide him a drop
of cold water; yet he found a way to express his goodness, and affords him a
Fili. Love, you say, will creep where it cannot go; it will express it self in
small matters, where greater will not permit. This courtesy of Abraham was the
least of all; yet what

The Psalmist tells us, that the mercy of God is over all his works; and I
infer, therefore over his works of judgment too. And who knows then whether
or no the very damned spirits have not some taste of his goodness? Let us
imitate God and Abraham; Fili, to give him good words; that, as Gods, so our
mercy too may be over all our works. The very faults of men though they deserve
correction, yet withal they deserve pity; and therefore Horace the Poet tells
us of a painter, who having a good faculty in painting a Cypresse-tree,
delighted on all occasions to show his skill there; insomuch that being
requested to express a shipwreck, he asked if he should paint withal a
Cypress-tree. Beloved, let our occasions be as different as the Sea and a
Cypresse-tree, yet, if we love our art of goodness as well as he did his art of
painting the Cypress, erit locus etiam huic cupresso, there will be room enough
to express it, if we shall be willing to lay hold of the occasion. So from
Remember thou have received thy good things, etc.

You may remember I begged leave of you ere while, for the better use and
application I am to make of them, to change the words; and as the crafty
Steward in the Gospel, who advised the creditor to take his book, and instead
of an hundred to write down fifty; so I advised you instead of recordare,
Remember, to write cave, beware. For, as the Apothecary, when he finds himself
at a loss, and cannot procure the drug he would have, quid pro quo, as they
call it, another drug or Simple that shall be of the same, or the like force to
cure the disease; so fares it with me, who now am to cure a spiritual disease
in you; Recordare, as it lies in my Text, can never cure you: If it could, then
might our rich man here have hope to recover Heaven; for Abraham applies to him
long ago. For your use therefore, I am constrained to lay by Recordare,
Remember, and take in Cave, Beware, for an (...), a quid pro quo, because it
serves best for the cure I have in hand: That therefore you may not hereafter,
when it is too late, hear from Abraham, let me entreat you this day, whilst it
is yet time to hear from me, Cave ne recipias, Take heed thou receive not thy
good things in thy life: For, practice but this cave, and you shall never hear
of Recordare; but if Cave come not in time, you must unavoidably expect a
Recordare. Read we therefore our Text thus, Cave, Beware thou receive not thy
good things. Now Beloved, this word Cave, beware, though in place and situation
it reflect only upon the word, recipias, receive, yet indeed it has immediate
influence upon every word I read. First, here is the word, recipias, Cave put
upon that to your hand: In some sense therefore or other you may not receive
the good things of this life, otherwise why is it cast in this man's dish that
he received them? The next word is, tua bona, thy good things: thy, put a Cave
there too; for indeed they are not thine. When we call the things of the world
ours, ours is but a word of usurpation; we peradventure may be some
emphyteuticaries, or farmers, or bona, good things, good; put a Cave there too:
advise well how you call them good. Were our rich man asked, what now he
thought? I persuade my self he would pass another censure of them; for how good
soever they were in themselves, yet to him they were not good. I have heard of
a statue of Venus so cunningly framed, that as men came toward it it seemed to
smile, but as they turned from it it seemed to frown. The things of this life
are somewhat akin to the statue of Venus; as they come toward you they smile
upon you, they are good; but as you things, good things; put a Cave there too.
Take heed how thou cal'st them things; for indeed they are not things, but
nothings. The last word is, thy life; Life, put a Cave there too. Take heed how
thou call this present state of things thy life. Nature taught Euripides the
Poet to ask this question, Who knows whether to live be to die, and to die to
live? But grace taught St. Paul to answer it, Now we live not, for our life is
hid with Christ in God. Cave ne recipias, Take heed you receive not.

Quid Audio? What is this I hear? Must I not receive the good things of this
life? If either right of patrimony and inheritance devolve them to me, or some
casual providence of God cast them upon me, or my labor and industry woo and
win them, must I bid defiance, and shut the doors against them? Is this
precept here like to the command of old Euclio in the Comedy, ne si bona quidem
fortuna venerit, no though good fortune her self should come and knock?
Beloved, here I am in bivio.

For answer to this question; It is reported of Aristippus the famous
Philosopher, that traveling over some parts of Africa, with his servants
over-laden with gold, when they complained of their burden, and told him that
they were so loaded they should never reach their journies end; he bad them lay
down their burdens, proximo occupanti, to the next that came that way. From
this example I draw my answer; Would thou know whether thou should receive
the good things of the world? Try thy strength; art thou able to confront
occasions, to converse amongst men, to wrestle with temptations, Daniel, to go
through the fire, and come out untoucht? Do as Aristippus servants did, take up
thy gold, receive the blessings that offer themselves, entertain them, welcome
them. On the contrary, art thou weak, or suspectest thou thy strength? will
fears, or hopes, or pleasures over-master thee? can thou not touch pitch but
thou must be defiled with it? Then do as Aristippus servants did, leave thy
gold behind thee; these goodly glittering things, refuse them, though they drop
into thy lap. Briefly, two ways is this question answered: Have thou strength
of Receive them. I know that this seems a riddle unto you, for my Text seems to
command you not to receive them; and I have told you that one way to put this
precept in use, is to receive them. This is true, receive them we may, but yet
so as if we received them not. Many of the Saints of God, yea Abraham himself
received large portions of the good of this world: And how then shall they,
with Abraham Recepisti, thou have received, but that some way or other even
they that have received them may justly be said not to have received them? J.
Caesar when he had considered of his estate, and summed it up, and found for
how great a sum he was in debt, beyond what he was worth, he merrily said,
Tantum me oportet habere ut nihil habeam, So much must I have that I may give
every man his own, and my self have nothing. As Caesar found a way to have
much, and yet to have nothing; so thou must find out a way to receive Caesar
did, So much I have that I may have nothing. In debt I say thou art for all
thou have; and will thou know who are thy creditors? even every man that needs
thee. The hungry man begs at thy gate, he is thy creditor, thou art in debt to
him for his dinner: The naked man in the streets ^e is thy creditor; thou art
in debt to him for his garment: ^he poor oppressed prisoner, he is thy
creditor; Kings, run as long as there is a vessel to receive thee; pay all
these thy debts, and leave thy self nothing, and lo, thou have found the
wonderful art of receiving much at the hands of God, and yet receiving
nothing. Had our rich man here done thus, he had never heard of Recepisti, thou
have received; for, to receive here is not to take that which bona tua, and
placing thy felicity in them; this is to receive. Thou sit at thy full
table, and crams thy self with meats and drinks, whilst Lazarus sterves at thy
gate, recepisti; thou cladst thy self with superfluous and gaudy apparel,
whilst thy naked Brother freezes in the street, recepisti; thou refeshest thy
self with dainty restoring Physic, whilst the sick indeed perishes for want
of care, recepisti. Take heed, Recepisti, thou have received. On the contrary,
recepisse, sed non tibi, to have received, but not unto thy self, to have spent
thy self for others good; he that does thus, to him there can be no more
objected a Recepisti, then there can unto the Sun that he received his beams,
which he has communicated to the world; or to the fountain that it received
its springs, wherewith it has watered the earth for which it was given.

Erewhile, when I considered the words in particular, I advised you to put a
Cave upon the word, thy; thy good things: for indeed here is the (...), here is
the ground of all abuse and error, that we take upon us think and call any
thing ours. For now we think, by and by we may infer, May we not do with our
own what we list? we think we are (...), no action of account lies against us,
we fear no recepisti. Beloved, there is more danger in the use of that word
then you are aware of; Ours, Mine, is Laban had overtaken Jacob, and began to
chide with him, These daughters, says he, are my daughters, these children are
my children, these cattle are my cattle, and all that thou see is mine.
Jacob had done enough to style them his, he had bargained, he had served, he
had watched, he had sweat, he had freezed for them; and yet he would not take up
that word, nor count any thing his. Nabal, a man of the same letters, and of
the same garb and quality with Laban, when David sent unto him to require
relief of him, speaks in the Sibboleth; Shall I take, says he, my bread, and
my water, and my flesh, which I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto
men whom I know not? Neither is it any wonder that they thus speak; for this is
the language which they learnt of their Father, of their Prince, of their God,
even the Prince which rules in the air, the God of this world, the devil;
for, he setting upon our Savior in All this is mine, and to whom I will I give
it. He lies, I doubt not, when he thus spoke, (but that is no marvel;) yea and
all those who take up the dialect, are no whit truer of their word. If the
tongues of the children of Light have sometimes tript that way, and fallen upon
some of the same language, it is but out of contagion, an error of
conversation, such as befell Joseph, who conversing with the Egyptian
Courtiers, learnt of them to swear by the life of Pharaoh: For, as walking
David had with great providence, with great hazard of person, treasured up much
for the use of the house of the Lord, and was now come to dedicate it, and
offer it up unto God, he dares not say, Mine, but (...), thine, out of thine
own we present unto thee. Now wherea^ the Holy Ghost is pleased here to use the
phrase to the rich man, and call them bona tua, thy good things, this ours: as
the Poet told his friend, Quem recitas meus est, etc. The Book, my friend, you
read is mine; Sed male dum recitas incipit esse tuus, but if once you read it
amiss, its now yours, and no longer mine. We read in the Book of Joshua, that
the Gold and Silver which was in Jerico was all Gods, and was to be brought
into his Treasury; but when Achan had once Hierom; for, he writing of the Monks
of Egypt, reports of one of them, that laboring with his hands, and living
without scandal, at length he dies: And when the brethren came to do their
last duty to him, they found about him, as my Author tells me, centum aureos,
which was of our money about fifty pounds; and musing much to find Argentum
tuum tecum in perditionem, Thy money perish with thee. It seems therefore that
things abused either to superfluity and wantonness, or to covetous and
unprofitable ends, are no longer fit for God, or good men's service; therefore
they perish with the abusers. Use them as God requires, and they non recepisti,
thou have not received them, they are not thine: abuse them once to folly or
avarice, God ownes them not; recepisti, thou have received them, and made them
tua bona, thy good things, by abusing them.

Yet that we may descend a little more particularly into this question of
propriety, would thou know indeed what it is quod possis dicere jure, meum
est, of which thou may justly say unto thy self, it is mine? Examine thy
self, find out thine own measure, so much as thou need is thine, the rest
thou occupantis. If thy Barnes and Storehouses, thy Wardrobes, thy Treasuries,
imprison and detain any thing, thou art but a common enemy, and offendest
against a common profit. (...). and omnibus undamque auramque patentem; for if
some men had their will, even these should suffer enclosure and restraint,
recepisti, by returning God his own again. But the account with God is in one
circumstance very different from that with men; the Steward that has received
his recepisti; for nothing cleares our accounts with God but pariation of
expenses with receipts, Gods account must have no remain. Secular thrift is
seen in saving, but divine thrift is best seen in spending: whether therefore
thou spendest amiss, or whether thou savest amiss, thou art still liable to a
Recepisti.


Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats; bu^ God shall destroy both it
and them.


WHat then remains but that we take that counsel which St. Ambrose gives us,
Tanquam defunctus omni terreno te abdica negotio: contemn vivens quae post
mortem habere non poteris. As if you were Paul speaks, but even all the goodly
things of the world, which we woo with so much affection, purchase with so
much labor, retain with so much fear, entertain with so much expense; all
these, if at length they betray us not, if they abuse us not, if they pay us
not home with eternal infamy and death, yet we know for certain that at last
they will,

These words which I have read seem to come toward us, like the man that rid
upon the pale horse, in the 6. of the Revelation, and hell followed him. Here
are meats and the belly, the burden and the beast, the horse and the rider;
but death and destruction follow them at the heels, it behooves you to take
heed Caesar was coming out of France, and now advancing toward Rome, the
Senate and Magistrates send him word, that if he would be welcome there, he
must dismiss his companies and followers. Beloved, here now address
themselves unto you meats and the belly; let their welcome be no other then
Caesar's entertainment, let them dismiss their followers; if you admit them
upon other terms, be sure you shall entertain with them death and destruction.
There is in the Roman Story a strange relation of the Equus Seianus, a horse of
one Seius, a Gentleman of Rome, excellent for shape, and color, Seius, his
first master is beheaded; next Dolabella perishes in a battle; Cassius the
next, he murders himself at Philippi; and Antony, his last master, dyed a
miserable death. The belly is indeed the true Equus Seianus, no man ever
entertained him but it ruined him; for, still the last shot, the last reckoning
can never be discharged but by the death of the entertainer. The Ark of God,
though whilst it was abroad in the Land of the Philistines, it plagued every
one that meddled with it, yet when it was at home in its own Land it brought a
blessing to him that Canaan, which is above, there they have no place at all.

I will not study out, as the manner is, any curious division of these words.
The Holy Ghost has here joined the belly and meats together, and God has
entailed destruction unto Pereant res perditae; Belly, Meats and destruction,
all here go hand in hand, and let them so go undivided. And no marvel, for to
keep the belly within bounds there is nothing of power sufficient but
destruction. The tongue (says St. James,) is an unruly evil. Beloved, the
tongue Cato, Venture non habet aures, The belly has no ears; now it is a vain
thing to endeavor to persuade with that which has no ears. Secondly, it is
not time that can over-master it; for Vitia ventris non modo non minuit aetas,
verum etiam auget; The vice and evil of the belly, Esau will forgo his
birthright, his honor, rather then lose his dinner. Paulus Jovius reports of a
captain, one Hugucchio, that lost two Towns, only because he would not break
his meal; for, being invited to a public feast, and receiving tidings of a
revolt intended he neglected Solomon, the most politic and wisest man that
ever was, prostitutes his learning, wit, wisdom, and all, to that base and
sordid appetite. Sixthly, it may be sickness and fear of death may seem to
speak to the belly with some authority, and bear some hand over it. Demades the
Orator was wont to say of the Athenians, that they never came to consult of
peace, nisi atrati, but in blacks and mourning; by which he meant, that that
people, till war had brought some extreme inconvenience Athenians did by peace,
so do we by temperance; we never bethink our selves, or consult of moderate
diet, nisi atrati, but in blacks and mourning, when our folly and intemperance
has cast us into some disease, and affrighted us with fear of death and
destruction. And yet even this, though it be the strongest, cannot much prevail
with the Belly; for how many do we see that in the midst of their sickness and
of death yet cannot forget their trenchers? As they have been wont, molliter
valere, to be dainty in the time delicate aegrotare, to be delicious in their
sickness; vinum aut frigidam concupiscunt, and deliciarum patrocinium in
accusationem non merentis stomachi habent, says Cornelius Celsus; they desire
to please their intemperance with meats and drinks which hurt them, and put off
the fault of a wanton appetite with pretense of a weak stomach. When Philoxenus
the Epicure had fallen desperately sick upon glutting himself on

Yet ere I pass away to that part of my meditations, give me Paul passes this
sentence of destruction upon the belly? Shall not the belly run the same
fortune with the rest of its fellow members? When all the rest of the body
shall be raised from the grave to immortality, shall the belly alone lie
rotting for ever in the dust? Or, if it rise again, wherein then does this
sentence of destruction strike at the belly more then any other part? for, it
were no good congruity to expound it of the common mortality in which all the
members have alike their share. For answer; At that last and great and joyful
day, when all that are in the monuments Paul sentences the belly unto,
concerns not the substance, (for in this respect the head, the hands, the
belly, the feet, all the members are in like state) but only the use. The rest
of the members of our body shall not only rise the same in substance, but
shall remain the same in function they shall neither marry, nor be given in
marriage; but neither shall we hunger, nor thirst, nor receive nourishment, nor
concoct, nor digest; which all are the proper uses of the belly in the time of
our mortality. Arise therefore shall our members from the dust and rottenness,
and though not all quoad usum, for use and function, yet all quoad complementum
corporis, to make the body entire and complete. And so I come to fall upon
those meditations at which I but now pointed.

Meats for the belly. Eating was the way by which sin first eating bred no
other sin but this, yet this one, which was the provoker of Gods wrath, which
expelld' us from Paradise, which brought a curse upon our selves, and all the
world beside, which had laid us for Ahab fell down upon his bed, and refused
his meat, because Naboth would not give him his Vineyard, how much more might
our first Parents have bound themselves to a perpetual sullenness and
abstinence, that thus by eating lost a far fairer Garden than that of Naboth?
But, Beloved, as Sin and Eating were born together, so, like loving twins, they
walk on hand in hand; for Cain, and see if eating have not a hand in that too;
for, whence came it that Cains Sacrifice was not accepted? Male divisit, say
the Ancients; and some have thought that the Hebrew Text says so too, he made
an ill division betwixt God and himself; for whereas Abel brought of the
fattest and the best, and offered them to God, Cain thought worse and meaner
were fit enough for God; the best he kept for his own diet. Go we forward, and
take notice of the sins which drew the flood upon the world, and we shall find
that eating was not behind in helping them on. The Scriptures point out two
Oppression and Lust: Intemperate lust is the inseparable companion of
intemperate eating; Nunquam vidi continentem quem non vidi abstinentem, Seldom
have you seen one continent that is not abstinent. We have thus far surveyed
one world, and the sins of it, and we have found that eating is (...), the
first sin, the next, the last; all thrive by the favor of intemperance in
meats, or drinks, or both. But now we have a new world, clean washed; what is it
which now brings Noah, the father of the second world? even the same in a
manner which brought it upon Adam, the father of the first; Adam sinned by
eating, Noah by drinking: Eating, Drinking, no great matter to choose, both are
gula, both are the intemperance of the mouth, and taste, and belly; and both
intended here by Saint Paul under the name of Meats. Verisimile non est ut quis
dimidiam gulam Deo immolet, aquis sobrius, cibis ebrius, says Tertullian: As
therefore Tertullian acknowledged a drunkenness in meats, so is there gluttony
in wines and drinks. So then, as by the mouth and belly sin comes into the new
world, so it goes on; for, Sodom, and the five Cities: Would you know what sins
they were? the Prophet will tell you, Idleness and fullness of bread: He adds
not Lust, for he needs not; that follows naturally upon the former, tanquam
vara vibiam. Idleness, fullness, and lust, they are a threefold cord, twisted by
the devil, and hardly untwined and severed by any man. Men's enim otiosi nihil
aliud cogitare novit nisi de escis and ventre, says Cassianus; The mind of an
idle person runs upon nothing but his belly and meats. No sooner were the Jews
freed from Agape in cacabis fervet, fides in culinis calet, spes in ferculis
jacet; All their meditations are fixed upon the fleshpots of Egypt, their
devotion is spent upon Onions and Garlic, and those other Egyptian Deities.
Now, the belly once filled, you need not doubt what follows: Repletus venture
facile despumat in libidinem; A full belly easily dissolveth and discharges it
self by lust. Xenophon, disposed to trifle away some of his spare time, writes
an idle discourse, which he calls his (...), his Banquet; where, after much
impertinent talk, for the close and upshot of the meeting, Bacchus going to bed
to Ariadne; which they did in so gross, so unseemly, so loose a manner, that by
and by (says my Author) all that were married hasted home to their wives, and
the unmarried vowed they would not continue long so. Lo here the true issue of
intempestive comessation and compotation; for surfeit and lust dwell never far
asunder. And therefore the Apostle St. Paul, when he had forbidden the Romans
Rioting and drunkenness, he immediately adds unto them, chambering and
wantonness; Appendices scilicet gulae, lasciviae and luxuriae, as Tertullian
upon those very words does note; Wantonness and By all this which I have
delivered I suppose by this time that your selves can conclude, what care and
watch we ought to hold over our meats and drinks; for, if eating were the door
which first admitted sin, if it has been a perpetual fomenter and nourisher of
sin, we can set a watch upon the door of our lips, not only to beware what
goes out, but what likewise goes in there. Unskilful fencers will be sure still
to remove their ward there where they have once received a blow, though they
suffer some other part to lie open: It were a great shame for us, if having so
long combated with the Devil, and received so many blows by incautelous eating,
we should not have so much wit as young and unskilful fencers have, remove our
ward thither. Yet I will endeavor to bring certain reasons, farther to move
you to keep diligent

And first, the error and intemperance of eating is close and retired, it is
not so easily discovered, and so most-what escapes reproof. This security, as
it is a great enticer to the vice, so should it stir us up the more to be
watchful over it. The vice of drunkenness presently betrays it self, crimen
vultu incessuque fatetur ebrius: The gate, the look, the speech, the color of
the countenance, all these betray the drunkard, and lay him open to shame and
reproof. Hence it is that fits of Surfeit upon meats are mostly stolen, no eye
sees them; surfeit upon beer or win not so. As that the earth hides their
faults; so may it be said of those who offend in meats, the earth many times
hides their faults; some sudden, some sharp disease brings them to their grave,
where the cause lies hidden till the resurrection: in the mean time some
ordinary casualty, or the will of God, gives countenance to what is done.
Again, it is not a thing hard to be discovered, that there is a partiality in
men in their censures of these vices; many men are oft-times very angry with
full cups, who can be patient enough at full-fraught tables. Aristotle quae
imprimunt characterem, which leave a mark behind them; others Aristotle knew it
not: Some vices leave a character, a mark, by which you may easily discover
them; others are more close, their way is like the way of a serpent over a
stone, or the way of a bird in the air, they leave no track, no footstep behind
them. Sin in meats is very often committed, but it is not often discovered; you
cannot trace it, it many times leaves no character to betray Some men's sins are
open before hand, going before unto judgment; and some follow after. Open sins,
sins that leave a character, these go before unto judgment; but sins that are
otherwise shall not be hidden.

Secondly, another reason persuading us to keep watch cover the vice of eating,
is, that we have no law to restrain it; for table, Hippocrates complained much
that there was no law to restrain the errors of Physicians, (...), excepting
perchance some small disgraceful report when a fault was espied. Errors of diet
have not so much as this to restrain them; yet to make a law in this behalf
there is cause and ground enough. Interest reip. ne quis re sua male utatur; It
is a rule warranted by all Tertullian spoke, Quibus deus venture est, and culina
templum, and aqualiculus altar, and sacerdos coquus, and sanctus Spiritus
nidor, and condimenta charismata, and ructus prophetia est: Whose god is their
belly, the kitchen is their temple, the dresser is their altar, the cook is
their priest, etc. What examples are extant every where of this kind of men?
Augustinus Chiessius, a Banker, Rome, at the Christning of his son entertained
Leo the Tenth upon the River of Tibris, and all the foreign Ambassadors, with
the Nobles of the City, with all exquisite and curious fare, disht out in
costly plate; and upon the change of every Service, (and they were not a few)
all the meats, plate and all, all was cast away into the River, and new and
costlier still supplied in the room. But what need I seek so far as Rome? our
own Kingdom will yield us examples. Search but our own Records, consult but
with the Author De praesulibus Angliae, Of the Prelates of England, and see
what a prodigious Dinner is Canterbury; and horum tamen nihil Gallion curae
erat, yet was there found none of the Gallions, none of the Magistrates of the
times, that took it to heart, or once thought to chastise it. Yet had the
ancient Romans (to the shame of Christians) their Leges sumptuarias, such laws
as gave restraint to riot and excess at tables. lex sumptuaria, a law confining
Adam in his diet and eating. From this Act of God we may observe these two
things; First, the necessity of circumscribing and giving bounds to that
action. Secondly, which is the best and fittest time to enact this law. And
first, for the necessity; it has been by virtuous men evermore thought, that
the beginning and first step to virtue is, ventri bellum indicere, to bid
defiance to the belly, and betimes to begin to check it. Primum nobis ineundum
certamen est adversus gastrimargiam, says Cassianus; Caesar was wont to
command his soldiers, faciem ferire, to strike at the face; the laws of our
spiritual warfare give us another rule. Men by the light of nature have seen
thus much; it was the counsel of Pythagoras, (...), First, and above all
things, says he, be sure to make your self master of your belly. See you not
what men do in the besieging of Cities? they cut off all convoy of victual, and
that done, they know the place cannot long hold out. He that intends a leaguer,
and purposes to make himself Caesarius, brother to Gregory Nazianzen, had a
conceit, that Adam remained in Paradise forty days, and that the law
concerning eating was not given til the very later end of this time; and that
that part of St. Paul's disputation Romans 7. Once was I alive without the Law,
but the Law came, sin revived, and I was dead, was to be understood in the
person of Adam, for that part of the forty Adam, immediately upon his creation
was brought into Paradise; that immediately upon his entrance into Paradise the
Commandment concerning eating was laid upon him; no footstep of any longer
date of time is allowed. It was the purpose of God that Adam from his very
beginning should be a subject of obedience; wherefore he leaves him not an hour
to his own discretion, but resolves to make trial of those whose education is
committed to our charge; for from neglect Ante palatum eorum quam os
instituimus, We season their palats, and teach them to know delicate meats,
before they can give plain accent to any syllable. From the liberty they see we
take they learn to be licentious; from our full tables they learn to riot; from
our example they learn to love evil before they know what good is. Hence is the
world filled with complaints, Fathers of Children for their luxury, Children of
Fathers for their ill example; for, Petrus Crinitus, a great Clerk in the days
of our Grandfathers, thought it fit (forsooth) when he was now old, to do as
Socrates did, under color of free teaching to converse with youths in the
streets, in the Teniscourts, in Taverns and Compotations: But this error cost
him dear; for being on a time in a youthful meeting, one of his petulant
Convivators poured a cup of cold water on his head; which affront he took so
heavily that he went home and died. Let Parents and Tutors take heed what
behavior they use with those who are committed to their frigida perfundere,
first or last they will pour a cup of cold water upon their heads, to their
grief and shame. To conclude then this point; Find we no law made to restrain
the vice of eating? let us remember what St. Paul says, A good man is a law
unto himself: let every man be his own Magistrate, and let him lay upon himself
this law, omne superfluum vetitum esto, Whatsoever is superfluous in meats and
drinks let it be taken as forbidden. And so I pass away unto another point.

A third inducement unto the vice of eating, of which we ought carefully to
beware, is this; we see that the custom of superfluous eating prescribes upon
us occasions: for, I know not how, generally all the world over, it is become
one of the greatest pieces of State and Ceremony. No solemn day, no triumph, no
public joy, no great business, but eating must be the solemnest and most
ceremonious part. Coronations of Kings, Consecrations of Bishops, Academical
Acts and proceedings, Inaugurations into Maioralties and Offices, Marriages,
Christnings, Funerals, casual salutation betwixt private friends, expressions
of love, Terence or Plautus Comedies, no Scene of it must pass without an
eating and gormondizing parasite. Quid hoc aliud est quam incitare hominum
cupiditates per se incitatas? What is this but to add oil unto the fire; to
set afire those desires and lusts in men Pliny, considering with himself the
nature of the Element of Fire, how rapacious and devouring a thing it is, and
quickly consumes whatsoever it lays hold of; what store of it there was in the
world; how it was in every house, in every man's hand; how it was above us in
fiery Meteors, and beneath us in Fountains in the bowels of the earth; began to
marvel with himself that all the world was not consumed with fire. He that
shall consider with himself how dangerous a thing superfluous eating is, how it
exhausts and wastes away Pliny did at fire, why by means of it the world was
not long since destroyed. All this perchance might yet be tolerable; for we
have meddled yet but with the world: Now St. John compounds the world of three
Elements and principles, the lust of the Flesh, the lust of the Eye, and the
pride of Life. Superfluous eating is one of these three, or at least a part of
one of them. But what shall we say when we find it in Dei rebus, when we shall
find it

The world is apt upon all occasions to fall upon unnecessary comessation and
compotations, the Church needs not strike in to set it forward, and make
feasting a part of Religion, and bring the Church and the Kitchen together. And
yet we see it does; for when we celebrate the memorial of any Saint, the birth
or death of any Apostle or Martyr, do we not call this solemnity their Feast,
and so accordingly solemnize it with excess of cheer? I have often wondered upon
what discretion it is that Christians Stultum est nimia saturitate honorare
velle Martyrem, quem constat Deo placuisse jejuniis; It is a foolish thing,
says St. Hierom, for any man to think he honors the Saints with eating, who
are known to have pleased God best by fasting. The ancient Ethnicks were wont
to celebrate their (...), their feasts of sobriety and fasting in the honor of
Bacchus, who was their god of riot and drunkenness. Upon the like fancy I think
(else I know not whence it should come) have Christians Rome is wont, even to
this day, when she gets the relics and ashes of any of the Saints, to lap
them up in silk and costly stuff, and shrine them in silver and gold; whereas,
whne the Saints themselves were on earth, and their bodies the living Temples
of the Holy Ghost, they would have thought themselves much Scilicet nostros
mores templis immittimus, We think that God and the Saints are like our selves,
and taken with that which pleases us: For, whether or no to expend these
things in honor of God, be a Macchiavel, writing the life of Castruccio
Castracano, a Gentleman of Luca, tells us, that he delighted himself much in
often feasting; and being reproved for it by some friends of his, he gave them
this answer, If feasting were not a good thing, men would not honor God and
the Saints so much with it. Lo here, Beloved, the natural consequence of
Church-feasts;

This splendour of feasting and eating in memory of the Saints has a little
dazel'd the eyes of some great persons; St. Hierom, although a great Clerk, and
singular contemner of secular superfluities, Vigilantius. And what, think you,
might be the cause of so much heat? Understand you must, that there was a
custom in the Church, in sundry places, for men and women, young and old, of
all qualities and conditions, upon the Vigils of the Martyrs, to come together
by night, and meet in Churchyards, and there eat and drink upon the Tombs of
the Martyrs. This corruption Vigilantius had reproved: And good cause I think
he had so to do; Nox, vinum, mulier, when men, women, maids, shall meet
together by night in Churchyards to eat and drink, I think your own discretion
will easily suggest Hierom into so great choler. Yet these men have brought
feasts into the Militant Church; what shall we think of those who have brought
feasting into the Church Triumphant?

There was an error in the Church, very ancient and very general, called the
error of the Millenaries; which arose immediately after the Apostles times, and
strongly prevailed with almost all the Fathers of the Church before the Nicene
Council: These Irenaeus, Bishop of Lions in France, tell it you, who was one of
the great Patrons of that error, and lived within two hundred years of Christ:
He bringing in our Savior discoursing to his Disciples concerning the state of
that Kingdom, amongst other instances of great happiness there to be found,
There shall be (says he) in a field ten thousand vines, every vine shall have
ten thousand branches, every branch ten thousand stalks, every stalk ten
thousand clusters, every cluster ten thousand grapes, and every grape (viginti
quinque metretas) five and twenty pottles of wine. More to that purpose does
that Father speak; by which he evidently betrayed what a childish gross conceit
he had of the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, which he took to be like Mahomets
Paradise, and measured out the Kingdom of Heaven by meats and drinks; which,
above all things in the world that carry any necessity in

Again, for the better countenance of this outward jollity in the Church, I see
some men have attempted to entitle our Savior Jesus Christ himself unto it;
for, First, it is espied in Scripture, that our Savior is often found at
feasts. Now for the rest, that which the Scripture cannot do, Tradition shall
help us out in; for, in the Second place, Tradition will instruct us, that the
seamlesse Coat which he wore was of a precious stuff and admirable texture.
Thirdly, Tradition will tell us that Rome. Fourthly, in the public Treasury of
the Commonwealth of Genoa, there is a Charger made of an holy Emerald; a very
rich and precious piece: If we consult with Tradition, that will tell us, (and
the whole Commonwealth of Genoa does believe it) that this was the dish
wherein our Savior Christ had his diet served. Thus, Beloved, Habent enim
qualitatem symbolam, they sympathize all three; for, as God shall destroy both
it and them, so must this world pass away, and the form of it; only let
Christians and the Churches hope be immortality. Give me leave to conclude with
the very words with which I began; What then Ambrose gives us? Tanquam
defunctus, etc.


Behold, your House is left unto you desolate.


SEverity in God seems to be a quality not natural, but casual and occasioned,
unto which in a manner he is constrained besides his nature: (...), For God,
says Trismegistus, has but one only property, one quality, and Prior bonitas
Dei secundum naturam, posterior severitas secuncum causam; illa ingenita, haec
accidens; illa propria, haec accommodata; illa edita, haec adhibita, says
Tertullian. The prime quality in God is goodness, for that is natural; severity
is later, as being occasioned; that is eternal, this is adventitious; that is
proper unto him, this is but borrowed; that inwardly flows from him, this is
forreignly fixed upon him. We usually observe, that if we would know things
what they are by nature and of themselves, we must consider their first actions
and Men and Angels, in that wonderful order, who counseled him? otium sui
natura non patitur; hinc censetur, si agatur. Goodness is a restless thing,
always in doing, and it loses his nature if it be idle: It is like a fountain,
it cannot stay it self in it self, it must find vent and disperse it self. Even
so, Beloved, God, because he was good, could not contain himself within
himself, but his goodness forced him to break out, to communicate himself, to
give being unto other He would not be in Heaven were he to live there himself
alone. God seems to have been of this man's mind, and to have thought Heaven it
self unpleasant, till he had provided him companions. Secondly, when he had
created man, he leaves him not, as the Ostridge does her young, upon the shore,
but he takes him to himself, and places him in a place of pleasure. This was no
doubt a further argument of his goodness. Thirdly, when it was not good for man
to be alone. Fourthly, that he gave him a law by which he was to order his
steps, this was yet a farther degree of goodness: For, thinking it not enough
that man should enjoy only earthly pleasures, he ordained him a law, by
observation of which, as the Angels by Jacobs Ladder, he should ascend up to
supernatural and heavenly bliss. Hitherto, Beloved, whilst all that he is he is
of himself, his countenance is fair as the Sun in its strength; no frown, no
wrinkle in his forehead: But look upon him after this, when man's folly had
wrought him against Naomi speaks of herself in the Book of Ruth, Call him no
more Naomi (that is, Pleasant) but call him Mara (that is, Bitter) for he has
dealt very bitterly with us. He is now no more that God that made us, but he is
that God that we have made: Fecimus enim, non accepimus severum, for we
received him a Creator, a good, a calm and a gentle God; but we have made him a
destroyer, a fierce, a stern, a severe and angry God. Marcion the Heretic,
considering with Marcionist, and think there were two Gods; but that our common
experience tells us that Furor fit laesa saepius patientia, no men more
implacable and fierce when they are moved, then those who are by nature most
patient: as we see that stone and iron, and such like bodies which hold out
most against the fire, being once hot do far exceed the heat of slax and tow,
and those combustible bodies that do so easily kindle: Therefore, Beloved, is
our God so fearfully enraged when he is moved, because he is by nature slow to
wrath, and abhorring all severity. Now, Beloved, of this fiery and angry God, I
am, by the incestum addit integro, Pell-mell, without any respect or
distinction of persons, good or bad, he carries away all before him. (...),
many times one man's sin ruins a whole Country, as Achans offense turns all
Israel to flight; or, as when for the sin of Saul, in the Second of Samuel, all
the people are like to sta^ve with famine. Thus does he visit, not single
persons, but whole Nations, with famine and pestilence, with the sword, with
fire, with Earthquakes, and the like, which, like the rain in the Gospel,
David's Sword, which devours one as well as that every man let his life be what
it will, gather he little or gather he much, yet he must have his omer full?
that There is one event (as the Wiseman speaks) to the righteous and to the
wicked, to the clean and to the unclean, and to him that sacrifices not: as is
the good so is the sinner* and he that swears as he that fears an oath? But
this seems not to stand with Gods Justice; for Abraham, in the Book of Genesis,
urges God with this, and God replies not to him; Will thou (says he) destroy
the righteous with Beloved, at this depth of Gods judgments I now stand, to see
if peradventure it be any way foordable, if by the grace of God I may find a
passage through for your and my own instruction. Search therefore we will, so
far as Christian sobriety shall give us leave, how it comes to pass that it is
a just thing with God, in those common calamities of War, and Famine, and
Pestilence, and the like, which many times befall whole Countries, to wrap up
both good and bad without any difference, and at once to sweep them all away:
For, you may be pleased to remember, that at my first

I made no artificial or curious division of the words, but went over them as
it were step by step, word after word, in order as they lie. And, first, I
considered the word Your, which is the first round and step in my Text, Your
house. Which word, I told you, was a word of contumely and disgrace; for our
greatest glory is to be his, and not our own; You are not your own, you are
bought with a price, says the blessed Apostle. When therefore speaking of
Jerusalems house, he calls it yours, this was, I told you, a term of
reprobation, and signified that it was no more his, he would no longer own it.
From this word, yours, I went forward to the next word, house, which is the
next step in my Text; and finding that this word might bear a double
interpretation, I drew from it a twofold lesson; First, I told you this word
house might signify the Temple, wherein he then was when he spoke these words.
Hence therefore, in that we might well understand him to threaten that he would
therefore leave the Temple desolate, I drew a house might by a Figure signify
the City Jerusalem, or rather that whole Estate and Kingdom; for it is an usual
phrase in Scripture, by these words, the House of Israel, and the House of
Jacob, to express that whole Commonwealth. Hence therefore, in that we may
understand him to threaten the ruin of the whole Estate and Kingdom of the
Jews, I drew a second lesson, teaching us to consider B^^otians were generally
held for blunt and dull-spirited men, yet they yielded Pindarus, one of the
prime and chiefest Ethnic Poets. The Scythians were accounted barbarous, yet
they gave the world Anacharsis, one of the best Philosophers. The Idumaeans
were held for aliens and strangers from the Covenant of grace, yet unto them we
owe Job, that most glorious pattern of patience. But, Beloved, our God regards
not what is written in the Pandects* he governs not the world by the Civil Law;
but out of a law of his own not only speaks evil, but does worse unto whole
Nations, amongst whom notwithstanding some righteous Ah sinful Nation, a
people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, Princes of Sodom, people of
Gomorrah! These be the names by which he styles the inhabitants of Judah and
Jerusalem; amongst whom I doubt not but many good men were, though no other,
yet Esaias the Prophet, who spoke these words. And as he gives them all, without
regard of difference, one name, so he makes them all, good and bad, to drink
alike of one cup of captivity, notwithstanding there were many among them of
great uprightness; witness Daniel and his fellows. Again, Theodosius the
Emperor, when the inhabitans of Thessalonica Ambrose, at that time Bishop of
Millaine, that he put the Emperor from the Lords Table, forbad him the Church,
and ere he would restore him, made him in public bewail his error, and crave
forgiveness of God for it. Thus indeed it was betwixt St. Ambrose and
Theodosius the Great; But a greater then Theodosius, God, the great Emperor of
East and Ambrose must dare to question the justice of his action. Last of all,
in the world, that which makes sins many times escape unpunished, is the
multitude of offenders: Noscio, (says a heathen man in the Historian) an
suasurus fuerim omittere potius praevalida and adulta vitia, quam hoc assequi,
ut palam fieret quibus vitiis impares simus. Sins many times do reign amongst
men, and That a thousand years with him are but as one day; but, in the case
we now Caligula the Emperor wantonly wished that all the people of Rome had
but one neck, that he might strike it off at a blow. Beloved, when the Lord
Chief Justice of Heaven and Earth shall sit to do judgment upon sinners, all
the world has before him as it were but one neck; and if it please him, as
once it did under Noah, he will strike it off at a blow. I know the world
sometimes does acknowledge a necessity of such proceeding, though joined with
some injustice: Habet aliquid ex iniquo omne magnum exemplum, etc. Exemplary
Rome, that if a Master were slain by one of his servants, all the servants
under his roof were to dye for it; also accordingly was the practice: For,
when Pedanius was slain by his slave, 400 of his servants were put to death.
This severity they thought fit to practice, so to secure the lives of men, and
to restrain such mischiefs as might come by the insolency of servants. Yet,
Beloved,

And first I ask, what if peradventure we were able to render Austin having
written to a scholar of his, and opened many points unto him, tells him, that
if he had given him at all no reason of such things as he had written, yet he
ought to be with him of such authority and credit, that he should take them
upon his word, without any farther question. Was it thus betwixt St. Austin and
his scholar? how much more then ought it to be so betwixt God and us? how
readily ought Hiero King of Sicilie when he had seen those wonderful devises
and engines which Archimedes, that great Mathematician and Engineer had framed,
and considered what mavelous eff^cts they were able to produce beyond all
expectation, he commanded to be proclaimed, that whatsoever Archimedes
hereafter affirmed, how unlikely soever it seemed to be, yet sans question it
should be taken to be true. Beloved, the great Geometrician of Heaven, which
made all things in number, weight and measure, has infinitely surpassed all
human inventions whatsoever; Hiero did to Archimedes, then cause it to be
proclaimed throughout the world, that whatsoever he says or does shall be
taken for just and true, howsoever no probability, no reason can be assigned?
The whole disputation of the book of Job does drive at this very Doctrine; for,
when that God had afflicted Job in that fearful manner, and his friends were
come to comfort him, there arises a question concerning the reason why Job
should thus be handled: His friends, grounding themselves upon this conclusion,
that all affliction is for sin, lay folly and iniquity to his charge, and tell
him Job on the contrary stoutly pleades his innocence, and marvels for what
reason the hand of God should be so heavy upon him. And when their controversy
could have no issue, behold, Deus e machina, God himself comes down from
Heaven, and puts an end unto the question; and having condemned Job of
ignorance and imbecility, tells him, that it was not for him to seek a cause,

Secondly, it may well be that we may save our labor, that we need not move
the question, or seek a reason at all: For, in these common calamities which
befall whole Kingdoms, it may be God does provide for the righteous, and
deliver him, though we perceive it not. It is the property of God, (...), to
find means when all men's inventions fail: He brings down into says Hannah
in the first of Samuel. Some examples in Scripture make this very probable: The
old world is not drowned till Noah be provided for; Sodom cannot be fired till
Lot be escaped; Daniel and his fellows, though they go away into captivity
with rebellious Juda, yet their captivity is sweetened with honors and good
respect in the land into which they go. And who knows whether God be not the
same upon all the like occasions? How many millions of righteous persons have
thus peradventure been delivered, whose Pliny, Facta dictaque virorum
illustrium alia clariora, alia majora: All men have not gained credit in the
world according to their desert. Some things of no great worth are very famous
in the world, whereas many things of better worth are less spoken of, or
perchance ly altogether buried in obscurity, caruerunt quia vate sacro, because
they lighted not on such who might transmit their memory to posterity. The
examples of Daniel and Lot, and sundry others, which because they stand upon
record, take up the talk and speech of the world, may peradventure clariora,
they are only more spoken of; and others, whose memory is lost, are non
minora, sed obscuriora, are no whit less then they, only they are less
spoken of. St. Austin observes out of Sallust, that diverse reading the ancient
Stories, and finding many famous persons mentioned in them, much commended
those times, because they thought that all the men had been such as those. As
this was an error in those that read the ancient Stories, so let us take heed,
lest we reading the holy Stories of the Bible fall upon a contrary error; and
finding the memory of Daniel and Lot, and Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona,
doubtless, both before and since, millions have made the like escapes, though
their memory lies buried in oblivion.

Thirdly, be it granted that in these ecumenical, these general plagues, the
righteous and sinner speed alike, yet there is great reason it should be so:
For though in great and crying sins the righteous partake not with the wicked,
yet in smaller sins the righteous and sinner evermore concur. For who is
amongst the Austin lays upon smaller sins, that they are tanto crebriora
quanto minora, because they be less men presume the oftener to commit them. It
is good wisdom therefore when ordinary punishment will not serve to redress
them, to enhance and improve A. Gellius reports that there was a law in Rome,
that he that gave a man a box on the ear was to pay him about the sum of
twelve pence of our money: Now there was a loose, but a rich, fellow, that
being ^isposed to abuse the law, was wont to walk the streets with a purse of
money, and still as he met any man he would give him a box on the ear, and then
a twelve-pence, and a box of the ear, and so a twelve-pence: to repress the
insolency of such a fellow, there was no way but to increase the value of the
mulct. Beloved, the same course does God take with us; when his ordinary and
moderate punishments

A fourth reason I will borrow from St. Austin, who in his first Book De
Civitate Dei, touching upon this question, Why the righteous partake with the
wicked in common calamities? notes Tertullian spoke in another case, In
majestatis reos and publicos hosts omnis homo miles est, Against Traitors and
common enemies every man is a soldier: so Thou shall not see thy brother sin,
but thou shall rebuke and save thy brother, says God in Leviticus. He speaks
it not unto the Priest, but to the people. Cura animarum, the cure of Souls is
committed to every man as well as to the Priest: Every one of you has cure of
Souls, either of his child, or his servant, or of his friend, or of his
neighbor; and if any of these perish through your default, his blood shall be
required at your hands. The man in the Cain, Am I my brothers keeper? The
neglect

And first of all, the consideration of the general judgments of God is a
notable argument to work out the conversion of the obstinate sinner: For,
howsoever many times sinners, in the heat and prosecution of their sins, forget
and neglect themselves, yet when they shall be put in mind what a train their
sin has, how it may enwrap their posterity, their family, their whole country*
how like it is unto the Dragons tail in the Revelation, which drew down the
stars from Heaven; how even good men and the Non nobis solis nati sumus, partem
amici, partem patria, etc. No man is born only for his own good, Ulysses
feigned himself mad, because he would not go to the Trojan War, and in his
madness drove his plough fantastically, those who were sent to discover him,
laid his young son Telemachus in the furrow, to see if he would drive over him;
Jehu did, yet if we lay before them their wives and children, and dulcia
pignora, if any sense remain, they will forget their madness, and not drive
over them. It is a great means of looseness in many men, that they stand
alone, and have none to depend from them, none to care for but themselves. And
those who seek out persons whom they may employ in desperate purposes, will
soonest fasten upon such an one who is sine re, sine spe, without house, or
lands, or kindred; for such commonly are the fittest pieces to make instruments
of villainy who have nothing to lose. But, Beloved, in the case we now speak of,
no man can assure himself he stands alone, and sins only to his own danger;
for if he live amongst men, he sins with the loss and hazard of millions more
besides himself.

Our second Use shall be a note of comfort for those good men who bear a part
in any common calamity, it is this, That they Austin spoke, Manet dissimilitudo
passorum, etiam in similitudine passionum; howsoever the penalties be alike,
yet God sees a great difference betwixt the Patients, though the world
perchance cannot distinguish them. The gold and the dross lie in one fire, yet
the Workman can distinguish them, and puts the one into his Treasury, the other
to the Dunghill. The Wheat and the Chaff are both under one Flail, yet the
Husbandman severs Jacob, it occasioned much mischief, that their Father, in
token of his love, had given his son Joseph a gayer Coat than unto the rest of
his brethren. To take therefore away from us all strife and emulation, it
pleased God to clothe us all alike, and to leave no difference betwixt the
Coats of Joseph and his brethren. It

FINIS.

