Imprimatur.

Geo. Royse, R. R. in Christo Patri ac Dom. Febr. 5. 1694.
Dom. Johanni Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacris Domest.

A DISCOURSE Concerning LENT, In Two Parts. The FIRST, an Historical Account of
its Observation: The SECOND, an Essay concern ing its Original:
This Subdivided into Two Repartitions: Whereof The First is Preparatory: and
shows, that most of our Christian Ordinances are Derived from the Jews: And The
Second Conjectures, that Lent is of the same Original.


LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1695.

TO THE READER.
I Am not unsensible, that a Discourse, concerning Lent, which declares not
against it, may be apt to be suspected at first sight, of a very Ill, or
Morose, Design; either of retrieveing some Antiquated Superstition; or of
bringing back upon the World some old Rigours and Austerities, from which they
have been happily set Free.

But the Title Page, or at least the Summary of the Contents, may, I hope, ease
the Reader of that Jealousy: and if he will bear but the Penance, of perusing
the Treatise; he will find, that the Historical Part aims only at Truth in
matter of Fact; and that such an Origination is offered, as neither complies
with the Romish Errors, nor induces any other Restraints, than what he, in the
Liberty of his own Discretion, shall think fit to Injoin himself.

The Derivation of our Christian Lent, from a like Preparatory Time of the
Jews, has seemed to me to be very Probable, a long while: and having intimated
so much of it in a late Royal Audience, as served to Exhort, and to Direct, to
the Duty of the Season; I was easily persuaded to consider it more expressly, in
some, as I then thought, short Discourse, but which by degrees has increased to
a greater bulk.

For presently it appeared necessary, to the better Adjusting this Parallel
Line, as it were, of Jewish Practice; that I should first distinctly view that
of the Christian; tracing it from its beginning, by the Elder Accounts; and
Ascertaining it, as I went, with what exactness I might. And here, the
differing Opinions of, the justly Celebrated, Monsieur Daille meeting me in in
my Progress, obliged me, to stay longer on some Places; and to clear the
Ground, of the Objections he had thrown in the Way.

And then, when this Work was dispatched; and there seemed to remain no more,
than that I should bring forth the Reason, and Usages, of the Jewish Lent, and
propose its Agreement and Affinity with ours: it was further judged Requisite,
lest this single Similitude should be thought only Casual; to show, that there
were, in the Christian Religion, many other like Correspondencies, which must
apparently be attributed to the same Original.

This therefore chiefly occasioned that Addition to the second Part, which
makes the first Repartition: and finding the subject to be copious, I enlarged
the more willingly upon it; not only to serve my first Intention the more
effectually; but to try, if by this means some more tolerable account might not
be given of many an Ancient, and now Uncouth, Christian Practice. For, though
of late many very Learned Men of our own, and Foreign Nations, have much
illustrated the New Testament by such Comparative Observations; yet their
Curiosity has not happened to carry them so far, as to hold their Jewish Light
to the dark Corners of our Unscriptural Antiquity. A Task, I heartily wish such
a one, as our Able Dr. Lightfoot, had undertook: if only, that he might have
saved me the Hazard I now run, in pretending to make Other things understood,
by the help of what I understand so little.

But concerning these elder Unscriptural Customs, the Reader is desired to
observe, that I intend not to Recommend them, by the Original I endeavor to
Assign: my Attempt designing nothing more, than to propose the Fact, and
Conjecture at its Rise; a Curiosity allowed in all searches after Antiquities,
of any kind; and commonly received by the Learned World with Favor. For as the
Scripture commands us Jerem. 6.16.
, to stand in the Ways, for our Direction; and see, and ask for the Old Paths,
that we may walk therein: so we may also stand a little, and see the Old
Disused Paths, though we are to leave them; as we view the Old, Forsaken,
Fosseways; looking about, for our Delight, and Instruction.

For, if the Derivations I offer at, should have the good fortune to Obtain;
there will be no worse Consequences than these: On one hand, That such Rites
were not so much borrowed from Heathenism; nor otherwise contrived, and
super-induc'd, toward the latter end of the second Age; as some have
suggested: and on the other hand that though they might be as old as the
Apostles, and have had the honor to be practiced by them; yet they were not
then newly Erected, and purposely Instituted, as the Popish Authors would
persuade us; nor all of them Recommended, much less given in Precept, to
Posterity.

But the Obligation, or Unlawfulness, Expedience, or Inconvenience, of their
Continuance, is a consideration of another kind; to be judged by the Nature of
the Respective Rites; by the Intimated, or Presumed, Intention of the Apostles;
and by the Declaration of the Primitive, Apostolical Church. I pretend not
therefore to Intermeddle in it; nor undertake to determine, whether some of
those Customs, though designed, as they say, for a more Honorable Interment,
were not however kept too long; or whether some have not been since Buried,
that were never Dead: professing, in this whole matter, to adhere still to the
Judgment of our Church; whose Prudent and Pious Moderation, if I may speak from
my own Experience, the further any one shall Consider, the more he will see
cause to Approve.

This Allowance for the Sincerity of my Intention, the Justice, I hope, of the
Reader will not deny me: but I shall never the less want the Pardon still, both
of the Learned, and Unlearned. For, though I have endeavored, what I could, to
make the Discourse Plain, and Intelligible; and have therefore rid it of all
strange Languages, and their Criticisms, setting them aside, and by themselves;
yet the subject it self may in some places be strange, and nice, to the
Unacquainted; and require a little better Attention. And so, though I designed
to shun being Tedious, especially in matters commonly known; and would have
been glad, elsewhere to have avoided Mistakes: yet, I know, I am much at the
Mercy of the Learned; as I shall be always ready to be instructed by their
Corrections.

A SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS.
PART I. THE Historical Account of Lent. Chap. I. Concerning the Festival of
the Resurrection. Sect. I. The Weekly Festival, or Sunday. Sect. II. The
Yearly; the many Differences about it. Sect. III. The Difference between the
Asiatick Churches, and the Others; and the Proof thence in general, for the
Apostolical Antiquity of Easter: Sect. IV. In Particular, from the Letters of
Polycrates and Irenaeus Page 1, 2 Chap. II. Concerning Fasting. Sect. I. The
several Kinds of Fasts. Sect. II. Several Occasions of Fasting: particularly
Penitence, and Baptism p. 20 Chap. III. Concerning the Fast before the Festival
of the Resurrection. Sect. I. The General Presumption for its Apostolical
Antiquity. Sect. II. A Particular Proof of it from Irenaeus. Sect. III. The
different Length of that Fast down to Irenaeus his time: with some, probably,
of 40 days p. 31 Chap. IV. The Practice of Fasting mentioned about the Year
200, by Clemens Alexandrinus and Tertullian. Sect. I. The Weekly Fasts of
Wednesday and Friday, mentioned by Clemens Alexandrinus. Sect. II. Testimonies
out of Tertullian, concerning both the Weekly, and Ante-Paschal Fasts. Sect.
III. Observations upon those Testimonies. Some part of the Ante-Paschal Fast
thought Necessary by the Catholics of his time; the rest Discretionary p. 46
Chap. V. Sect. I. A Testimony from Origin for the Devotion of Fridays, and of
the Paschal Season, and thence to Whitsuntide. Another from him, but of
Ruffinus his Transtation, concerning the Fast of the Quadragesima, or the Forty
Season. Sect. II. A distinct Account of the Passion-Week from Dionysius of
Alexandria, about the middle of the Third Century. Sect. III. What were the
first Paschal Solemnities mentioned by St. Cyprian: and concerning the
Passion-Week. p. 70 Chap. VI. Sect. I. A mention of a Forty Days Fast, by Peter
of Alexandria, before the Council of Nice. Sect. II. Very probably they were
the Days before Easter p. 88 Chap. VII. Sect. I. Good Friday, and Days of
solemn Fasting mentioned by Constantine. Sect. II. The Forty Season expressly
mentioned by the Council of Nice. Sect. III. And that Forty Days are to be
understood, proved from St. Chrysostom p. 98 Chap. VIII. Sect. I. This Forty
Season particularly observed by the Candidates for Baptism. Sect. II. And by
Penitents p. 112 Chap. IX. Sect. I. A Lent always, and every where observed,
though not of Forty Days. Sect. II. Mr. Daille 's Objections against it from
Cassian; Sect. III. From St. Jerome; Sect. IV. From St. Chrysostom p. 122
Chap. X. Sect. I. Sozomen 's Account of the keeping of Lent, in his Time, about
Ann. Chr. 440. Sect. II. What Additions have been made since. Sect. III.
Socrates his Account of the Practice of the same Age, I suppose, by the
Novatians. Sect. IV. His Wonder, That Lents of differing Lengths should all of
them be called the Forty Season. Sect. V. The Conclusion p. 133
PART II. The Essay concerning its Original. Preface p. 149 REPART. I. That
most of the Ancient Christian Ordinances were derived from the Jews. Chap. I.
[or II. for so it is to be reckoned hereafter, by the error of the Press] Sect.
I. Not dishonorable for Christian Ordinances, to be borrowed from the Jews:
and they generally were. First such considered, as are mentioned in Scripture:
as Sect. II. Baptism. It was a Rite by which, as well as by others, Proselytes
were admitted into Judaism. Sect. III. Christian Baptism, as expressed in the
New Testament, an Imitation of it p. 153 Chap. III. Sect. I. The Nature of the
Paschal Sacrifice, and the Description the Jewish Traditions give of that
Supper; Sect. II. Agreeable to the History in the Gospels of our Lord's Supper,
and to the Nature of it p. 167 Chap. IV. Sect. I. The Church of Christ succeeds
to the Church of the Jews. Sect. II. The Officers of the One, raised from the
Officers of the Other. The Apostles of each. Sect. III. And the Bishops. Sect.
IV. The Presbyters, or Elders of the Jews. Sect. V. The Christian Presbyters,
and their Power. Sect. VI. The Ministerial Officers of the Jews; Sect. VII.
Answered by our Deacons p. 175 Chap. V. Sect. I. The Excommunicates of the
Jews, and their Condition. Sect. II. The Condition of Mourners among the Jews,
compared with that of the Excommunicate. Sect. III. Their Excommunicates
restrained from the Liberty, not only of Civil Conversation, but of Religious
Communion. Sect. IV. Excommunication mentioned in the New Testament, as
practiced by the Jews, and by Christians p. 209 Chap. VI. Sect. I.
Circumstances relating to Baptism, under Five Heads; practiced in the Church of
Christ, in the Second Century. Sect. II. These all agreeable to Jewish Custom:
and First, in General; as to the Persons baptized and Baptizing, and the Solemn
Time of Baptism: Sect. III. In Particular; Secondly, as to the Distinction and
Instruction of its Candidates; Sect. IV. Thirdly, As to the Action of Baptism;
Sect. V. Fourthly, Its Confirmation; Sect. VI. And Lastly, the Sequel and Close
of the whole Ceremony p. 236 Chap. VII. Sect. I. Several Particulars practiced
in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, by the Primitive Christians, which
varied from those of the Paschal Supper. Sect. II. These speak Our Lord's
Supper to have succeeded the Paschal in its general nature, as a Memorial of
Thanks. Sect. III. The Description of a Jewish Offering of Praise and Thanks,
with the Feasting upon it. Sect. IV. The Christian Eucharist answered to it:
and in what manner. Sect. V. A Tradition of the Jews, That in the days of the
Messiah, only the Eucharistical Sacrifice should remain. p. 266 Chap. VIII.
Sect. I. The Distinction of Clergy and Laiety, specified by Tertullian: That of
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, by Him, (Irenaeus also being his Leader, for the
Apostolical Authority of Bishops;) Sect. II. And by Ignatius; as the other, at
least of the Laiety and Clergy, by St. Clemens of Rome. Sect. III. The First
Distinction, derived from the Language of the Old Testament: The Offices of the
Second, from those of the Jewish Sanhedrim, and likewise of the Temple; the
Upper parts of our Churches, being also supposed to answer the Temple Courts,
of the Priests, and the Altar. p. 291 Chap. IX. Sect. I. The Sentence and
Effects of Excommunication with Christians, as with Jews: and the Relaxation of
it alike. Sect. II. Their Agreement, in the estimate of the Guilt of Sins; and
the appointments of Penance p. 318 Chap. X. Sect. I. A Parallel of Christian
Rites, mentioned by Tertullian: and Sect. II. Of those Vsages mentioned by
Origin, particularly about Prayer: (1.) Disposition of Mind. (2.) Posture of
Body. (3.) Direction of the Face. Sect. III. (4.) Times of Daily Prayer. Sect.
IV. (5.) Matter and Method.
Sect. V. The Ancient Order of Christian Prayer, Sect. VI. And the Order of the
Jewish, Sect. VII. Compared. Sect. VIII. A Parallel of some few other Usages p.
332 Chap. XI. Sect. I. The Second Prejudice against a Jewish Origination of
Lent, from want of Authority in the Talmudical Writings; Sect. II. Answered: by
showing (1.) That those Traditional Accounts were not without some Ancient
Foundation of their own; Sect. III. (Secondly,) That they are Confirmed in many
points by Collateral Evidence; Sect. IV. And (Thirdly,) That they were not
borrowed by the Jews from Foreign Authors. Sect. V. The Third Prejudice against
such an Origination, from the Novelty of it: Answered p. 364
REPART. II. A Conjecture concerning the Original of Lent. Chap. I. Our Easter,
kept for some time with the Jewish Passover. Sect. II. The Notification of
Easter by Paschal Letters, agrees with the Practice of the Jews. Sect. III. The
Ante-Paschal Preparation of Christians, answers to a like Preparation of the
Jews before their Day of Expiation p. 389 Chap. II. Sect. I. The Sacrificial
Performance on the Jewish Expiation Day, Sect. II. Compared with that of our
Savior on his Passion-Day p. 396 Chap. III. Sect. I. The Devotional Duty of
the Jews on their Expiation Day, Sect. II. Practiced by Christians, on the
Passion Day. Sect. III. Some Circumstances of the Eves of those Days, Compared
p. 406 Chap. IV. Sect. I. A Penitential Season with the Jews, Preparatory to
their Expiation Day: some certain Days next before it, kept Uniformly by All;
More also, generally, though in various numbers; and Forty, by many; but the
First of the Forty, Universally observed. Sect. II. Forty Days, a solemn space
of Penitence in the Jewish Discipline. Sect. III. The Christian Lent, compared
with the Jewish p. 418 Chap. V. Sect. I. This Origination of Lent, very
Probable: and its Observation, a Testimony to our Lord's Expiatory Sacrifice.
However, Sect. II. The Consideration of that Expiatory Sacrifice, is a good
reason for our observing the Passion Day; and likewise Sect. III. Some
Preparatory time before it p. 431


Corrigenda, and Addenda.
PAge 7. line 21. dele that he may if, etc. p. 19. l. 15. dele in, p. 30. l.
12. read Oris de Jej. p. 67. l. 23. r. Paschatis, p. 68. l. 5. r. choose, p.
69. after the 18. line add, However I will venture to offer, that the following
Sabbatum continuatis, may be understood of Saturday alone, and without any
Connection with a Friday preceding; and mean no more, than the Passing it
without food, the (...) of Dionys. Alex: [See the next Ch.. 2. and Note (e).]
p. 75. l. 7. put. II. l. ult. for Trusty, Faithful, p. 79. l. 12. put. III. p.
87. for (n) put (p) p. 122. l. 16. for Fast r. Fact, p. 153. l. 6. etc. Chapter I.
to be reckoned Chapter II. p. 224. l. 8. put in the Margin See Fig. I. l. 14. for
impurer r. certain, p. 229. l. 21. dele from him, p. 231. l. 24. dele so, p.
232. l. 6. after anon, add (n); and in the Margin, n. chapter 9. p. 252. l. last
save 3. for little r. tittle, p. 267. l. 24. r. Ingenuous, p. 317. l. 11. r.
High Priests, and are in some, l. 12. for now, r. also, p. 323. l. 27. r.
Pattern, p. 326. l. 3. dele the second that, p. 328. l. 26. r. Lapsed, p. 336.
l. 15. dele (l) l. 19, 20. dele of some, l. 20. r. (l). p. 381. l. last save 2,
for from r. for, p. 385. l. 5. r. (...), p. 392. to p. 401. the Running Title
to be, as afterward it is, A Conjecture, etc. p. 403. l. 16. r. Depellendus ab
Hominum consortio, [under a Niddui, See page 232. lit. (b)] whose, etc.

PART I. AN Historical Account OF THE Observation of LENT.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Festival of the Resurrection.
. I. The Weekly Festival, or Sunday.

. II. The Yearly: the many Differences about it.

. III. The Difference between the Asiatick Churches, and the Others; and the
Proof thence in general, for the Apostolical Antiquity of Easter.

. IV. In Particular, from the Letters of Polycrates and Irenaeus.

LENT, in the old Saxon, is known to signify the Spring; and thence has been
taken in common Language, for the Spring-Fast, or the Time of Humiliation
generally observed by Christians before Easter. And as it is a Season of
Recollection and Repentance, ending at that Festival of our Savior's
Resurrection, and annually regulated by the Time of it; so the Historical
Knowledge of the one depends upon the other, and the Fast cannot well be
understood, without the Feast be first settled, and some Account of it premised.

. I. NOW the Feast of the Resurrection is of two Sorts: either the Weekly, the
Lord's Day; or the Yearly, called Easter. And as to the Weekly; It is on all
hands acknowledged to have been perpetually and universally observed, ever
since the beginning of Christianity. It is particularly remembered in the New
Testament, as a Day for Christian Assemblies, under the name of the Acts 20.7.1
Cor. 16.2.
First Day of the Week: and in the Book of Revelation it is called Rev. 1.10.
the Lord's Day. Pliny in his Relation he made to Trajan, concerning the
Christians of Bithynia, about the Year of our Savior 104, is supposed to have
intended it, when he says, (c) They were used to meet together before Light, on
a Certain day. And Justin Martyr (d) in his Apology about the Year 138, giving
an account of the Day of their ordinary Assemblies, expresses it to be Sunday.
So has the weekly Day of the Resurrection been all along kept Holy; nor has any
Christian Church ever censured, or thought fit to set aside, the Practice.

. II. AND if there has been constantly such a Weekly Memorial of the
Resurrection, we shall little doubt but it had too an Yearly Solemnity. It is
true, there is not so early a mention of that Annual Festival, (neither is it
likely, that there should have been as much occasion for the Remembrance of
what happened but once a Year, as of that which was done every Week:) but
neither has there been wanting very good Evidence for its great Antiquity; a
Dispute that arose about the Year 190, concerning the Time of keeping it;
giving us accidentally to know, That such a Day had been always kept, down from
the Apostles time.

About the Time of the Weekly Feast, the First Day; there could be no
Disagreement: but about the Annual there might be very much. For if all Nations
of Christendom had then reckoned by the same kind of Year; (suppose by the
Jewish, which was Lunar, and consisted of so many Revolutions of the Moon;) and
besides, if all had agreed, That our Savior arose on the 16th. day of the
first Month; yet, after all this, there was a very obvious Question, and which
would frequently return: Whether they should keep the Yearly Feast on that
16th. day precisely, whatever day of the Week it happened to be, if on a
Friday, the Weekly Day of the Passion; or whether they should not rather make
the Yearly Remembrance to fall in with the Weekly, and so keep it on some First
day of the Week, which should be near to that 16th. day of the Month.

This was the Variety which was actually the Occasion of that Debate I am now
to mention. Other Differences there might have been raised from the difference
of Years, and some were insisted on in after times; which I shall here remark,
not for present use, but to help the understanding of what may be hereafter
incidentally mentioned. For if all had agreed to celebrate the Annual Festival,
on the Sunday near to the Annual Day; yet this Yearly Day must have been
different, if they reckoned by different Years, or by different Beginnings of
the same sort of Year. So those Montanists in Sozomen, Lib. 7. cap. 18.
who went by the Solar Year, and kept the Resurrection-day on some Sunday near
the sixth of April, would no more agree with those who placed it by the 14th.
day of the first Lunar Month of the Jews; than the 14th. day of the Moon 's
Age, would always be upon the same day of April. And so those who agreed to use
the Year of the Moon's according to the Jewish Form, might still differ among
themselves; if some followed the erroneous Calculation of their cotemporary
Jews, and begun their Year sooner than Moses had directed, as the Christians of
Cilicia, Mesopotamia, and Syria, did before the Council of Nice: and if others
amending the Jewish Calendar, stayed till the Aequinox, according to the
Original Appointment, as the rest of the World did, to whom those Easterns
therefore by the direction of that Council, in a little while conformed.

And further, those who were so far agreed, as to keep their Easter Day on a
Sunday, and to observe the same Reformed Jewish Year, might yet differ in their
placing of the Sunday in that Year: Some, as the Latins Buch. in Victorii Can.
Pasc. c. 11.
, assigning it to the 16th day of the first Month, on which day our Savior was
by them supposed to have arose; and thenceforth to any of the six days after,
on which the Sunday should happen; and some to the 15th day, the first and
great day of the Jewish Paschal Feast, and thenceforward to any of the six days
after of the same Jewish Solemnity; (a Practice to which the Western Church has
since agreed); as the Alexandrians used to do, who supposing the Resurrection
to have been on the 17th (f), might think they came near enough to it, when the
Sunday was never to be further from it, than two days before, or four after:
And some might allow it to be on the 14th day, the day in which the Paschal
Lamb was sacrificed, as amongst others, the old British Inhabitants of our
Isle were found to do; who, if they thought our Savior to have risen on the
16th day, placed their Easter-Sunday as exactly near it, as the Alexandrians
placed theirs; and if they thought he rose on the 17th, they were yet more
exact than any, and put it as near as was possible; so as never to be more
distant from it than three days, either before or behind it. For such Reasons
our old Predecessors might have thought fit thus to keep their Easter: however
they were blamed by our Austin for it; and afterward called Heretics and
Quartodecimani, a term of Dislike more justly given to those of whom we are
going to speak, and who occasioned this too nice and too long Digression, which
the Reader therefore finds in another Letter, that he may, if he pleases, pass
it over.

. III. THE most likely Question to happen, concerning the Place of the Yearly
Resurrection-Day, [whether it should be always kept on a Sunday, or no,] was
the great Controversy between the Churches of Lesser Asia and Rome, and in
which all Christendom became engaged: a Dispute managed by the Bishop of Rome
too warmly, but which has done so much good, as to give occasion for the
preserving some Records relating to this part of the History of Christianity,
by which we are certainly informed of the Great and Universal Antiquity of
Easter, and its preceding Fast. Those Asiatick Churches, besides their
singularity in breaking off their Fast on the 14th, day, celebrated the
Solemnity of the Resurrection on a fixed day of the first Month of the Jews,
whatever day of the Week it proved to be: and the rest of the Christian World,
if it happened not to be a Sunday, observed it on some Sunday near it. But both
the Parties kept the Festival, and each of them contended, That it had been so
kept in their several Churches from their first Plantation.

For about this Matter, at the Request of Victor Bishop of Rome, the several
Bishops of Christendom met in their several Synods; and all of them, except
those of Asia, properly so called, agreed on these two Points, as derived to
them from Apostolical Tradition.

1. That the Solemnity of our Savior's Resurrection was not to be celebrated
on any other day, but the Lord's Day:

2. And that the Paschal Fast ought not to be ended till that Day.

This was the Answer of all those Synods, to the Questions in difference: and
the Returns of many of them are mentioned by Eusebius to have been extant in
his time (g).

The general Result of those Synodical Determinations, which Eusebius gives us,
is sufficient to satisfy us, That the Bishops of both sides were fully
possessed of the Apostolical Tradition of their different Customs of observing
Easter. And such an uniform Concurrence of so many venerable Persons, from such
distant Places, about such a solemn and observable a Practice, and at a time no
more remote from the Age of the Apostles, cannot but induce us to give credit
to this their single Affirmation, as it is by him Authentically reported. For
as to the time of this Dispute, it is well judged to have been agitated about
the Year 190 of our Lord's Birth, not 160 after his Passion and Resurrection,
the Memorial of which we now speak of; not much above 120 Years from the
Martyrdom of St. Peter and St. Paul, nor above 90 after the Death of St. John.

. IV. GREAT Regard is therefore to be had to the Judgment of the whole
Christian Church of that time, which Eusebius summarily reports to us (g), of
their Tradition concerning Easter. Had indeed the several Answers, the Bishops
of the Provinces sent, remained to our days, or had Eusebius given us more
Extracts of them; we could not have failed of many remarkable Particularities,
alleged by them, in Favor and Justification of this general Assertion. But
they are all lost: neither was it agreeable to that Historian's purpose, to
fill his Books with Proofs for the Antiquity of this Solemnity, a Matter in his
days never doubted by any. For which Reason, neither does he give us out of
them any Instances in Confirmation of that particular Usage, in which the great
part of the World agreed with Victor, and which afterward generally prevailed:
He rather thought fit, at a time when the Asiatick Custom was left off, to
preserve some little Account of what they had to say for their singular
Fashion: and even out of that little, we shall be able to see, how well the
general Tradition was grounded.

Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, the chief of the Asiaticks, in his Letter to
Victor, (a Fragment of which Eusebius gives) Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. 5.24.
professes, That they kept the true Day unfalsified; and then says, (in answer,
I suppose, to Victor, who had boasted of the Sepulchers of St. Peter and St.
Paul, and other Saints, from whose Authority he might have recommended the
Custom of his side,) That there were too deposited in Asia, the Remains of very
great Saints and Martyrs, Philip and his three Daughters, St. John who lay in
our Lord's breast, Polycarp, Thraseas, Sagaris, and Melito, who all had kept
the 14th day of the Passover, according to the Gospel; and so (adds he) have I,
according to the Tradition of my Kinsmen, [or Countrymen, or my Predecessors in
this See (i)] with some of whom I conversed. They were seven and I am the
eighth; and they always kept the Day when Leaven was forbid: I therefore, who
am now 65 Years old in the Lord, and have conversed with our Brethren of the
whole World, and have perused all holy Scripture, am not at all moved at those
who trouble and threaten me. For my Betters have said, God is rather to be
obeyed than Man.

This Holy Man was himself a great Evidence of the Antiquity of the Custom for
which he stands. He was about the 8th Bishop from St. John, (for however the
Word is to be rendered, about so many sat in the same interval at Rome) and
writes this about 90 Years after his Death, when he himself had been a
Christian 65 Years of them, and able to testify of all those Years, if he was
baptized Adult, as they then generally were. We may too think, that he had some
particular Instances in his View, of the Practice of those Persons, whose Names
he vouches, if we may infer from what we chance to know of two of them, Melito
and Polycarp. For Melito, who was Bishop of Sardes, had, (as Eusebius tells us
in another place) Hist. Eccl. 4.26.
, some twenty Years before, wrote a Treatise of the Lord's Day, and two Books
concerning the Passover, or the Christian Solemnity at that time of the Year;
there having been a great Dispute raised about it at Laodicea, then when
Sagaris, the Bishop of that Place, (named here by Polycrates) received his
Martyrdom; a Dispute, I suppose, of the same nature with This. And in it
Polycarp (here too mentioned) had been engaged before; who went to Rome (as St.
Jerome Catal. Sc^ip. Eccl.
expresses it) about some Questions, concerning the Paschal Observation, in
Anicetus his Pontificate. And the Conversation which he had with Anicetus,
about that Subject, we have related by Irenaeus a Disciple of Polycarp's, and
who had been bred up in Asia. He, now Bishop of Lions in France, though
declaring for Victor, yet interposing and endeavoring to moderate the Heat of
the Controversy, in a piece which Eusebius has saved of that Letter 5.24.
, among other things, told Victor as follows.

And the Presbyters before Soter, who presided in the Church which you now
govern, I mean Anicetus, and Pius, and Hyginus, and Telesphorus, and Xystus,
neither kept [ the 14th day] themselves, nor permitted those of their Church to
do it. And, nevertheless they, not keeping [it], held Communion with those who
came from other Dioceses, where it was kept, Although [then when they were
together in Rome] the keeping [[it] was more contrary to those who kept [[it]
not (n): And none were ever refused Communion for this Matter. But the
Presbyters before you, who kept [[it] not, sent the Eucharist to those of the
Dioceses who kept [it]. And when Blessed Polycarp was at Rome in Anicetus his
time, and there were some Differences between them about other things, They
presently agreed, never proceeding to have any Contention on this Subject:
Anicetus not prevailing with Polycarp, to forego a Custom, which he had all
along observed with St. John, the Disciple of our Lord, and the other Apostles
with whom he had conversed; and Anicetus alleging, That he, for his part,
ought to keep the Custom of the Bishops his Predecessors. And these things
standing so, they communicated together; and in the Congregation Anicetus gave
Polycarp the Respect of Celebrating the Eucharist: and they departed from each
other in Peace: in all the Churches, those who kept, and those who did not
keep, preserving Peace [and Communion] one with another.

Here then we have Polycarp a Disciple of St. John, attesting to the Asian
Tradition, an undeniable Witness of its Apostolical Antiquity. We know too that
this Discourse of his with Anicetus must be at farthest in the year 161, if we
reckon Anicetus his Death, with Bishop Pearson; and in the year 153, if with
Mr. Dodwell; between 30 and 40 years before this Dispute of Victor's. And
indeed it seems plain from the same piece of Irenaeus his Letter, that this
Difference had been taken notice of almost from St. John's time, though
mutually tolerated. For to that purpose he mentions the behavior of Anicetus,
Pius, Hyginus, Telesphorus, Xystus, all Bishops of Rome up to the year of our
Lord 101 by Bishop Pearson, 102 by Mr. Dodwell, very near the time of St.
John's Decease.

From all which we see not only what good Authority the Asiaticks disputing
with Victor, had for their Tradition: but that this matter had been long before
brought into Question; and made so remarkable very early, that those of both
sides, must have had some distinct, and more than general remembrance of the
successive Practice of their several Customs conveyed down to them. Neither
indeed could those of Victor's Judgment have ever opposed the Asiatick
Observation, whose Antiquity was so well proved; if they had not produced on
their side as good Evidence for their own: such Evidence, I say, as they might
well be furnished with, from the elder Memorials of the same debate.

And thus did both sides of this Great Dispute, however they differed in the
particular manner of their Paschal Observation, absolutely agree in the
general, concerning the Apostolical Antiquity of it. A little while after this
time, Clemens of Alexandria wrote a Treatise concerning the Paschal
Observation, and some Dissertations concerning Fasting, all which are lost. And
the Design of his Paschal Book, as Eusebius tells us Eus. Eccl. H. l. 6. c. 13.
, was to deliver down the Traditions, which he had received from those before
him, about that subject: and in it he made mention of Melito, and Irenaeus,
whose Relations he set down. Hippolitus likewise a Bishop, and Martyr, a
Disciple of Irenaeus, in the year 221, wrote a Book of the Paschal Season: in
which Eus. E. H. lib. 6. c. 22.
as Eusebius says, he gives an Account of the past Times, by a repeated Cycle
of 16 Years; concluding in the first Year of Alexander the Emperor's Reign,
which Book is wanting. But a Table of his, engraven in Stone, was happily dug
up at Rome the last Age; which, beginning at that first Year of Alexander,
gives all the Easter Days which were then to come for 112 Years, with as much
Formality and Method, as they have been used to be calculated since, Apud
B^^her. in Vidorium.
.

Such express Accounts of the Paschal Season, there have been heretofore given,
very near the Apostles times; which, had they been preserved, might have more
particularly informed us: serving however to let us know in gross, That the
Solemnity was not then held an inconsiderable Matter; but all along much
debated, and studied, and determined with great Exactness.

Upon the whole Matter therefore we have seen, that as we had some reason to
presume the Apostolical Observation of a Yearly, from the Weekly day of the
Resurrection; so this Presumptive Probability is besides actually confirmed to
us by sufficient Authority. And from these Premises I hope I may have leave to
conclude, if not, That this Paschal Observation was delivered by the Apostles
to all the Churches with the Weekly Lord's Day; yet, That it was a Tradition
received by many Churches in the Apostolic Days. And this I presume to take
for a Truth in so high a degree of Evidence, that it will not be questioned, by
such as shall consider impartially.

(c) Plin. Ep. l. 10. Ep. 97. Soliti stato die ante lucem convenire.

(d) (...).

(g) Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 23. In that time a great Controversy was
raised: the Bishops of Asia [strictly so called] judging, by their Ancient
Tradition, That the Paschal Solemnity was to be kept on the 14th day of the
Moon, then when the Jews sacrificed the Lamb; and that their Fasting ought to
break off on that day, whatever day of the Week it happened to be: and the
other Bishops, of the rest of the World, observing from Apostolical Tradition a
different Custom, and which now obtains, That it was not fit to break up the
Fast on any other day but the Day of the Resurrection. Upon this there were
several Synods and Consultations held by the Last; and they all unanimously by
their Letters declared this to the World for an Ecclesiastical Rule, That the
Solemnity of our Savior's Resurrection from the Dead, was to be kept on no
other day but a Sunday: and that on that Day only, the Paschal Fasting was to
cease. There is yet to be seen the Writing of those of Palestine, over whom
Theophilus Bishop of Cesarea presided; and Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem. There
is another too from those of Rome, concerning the same Question, speaking
Victor to be Bishop. Another of the Dioceses of France, where Irenaeus was
Bishop. Another of those of Osroene, and the Cities thereabouts. One
particularly from Bacchyllus Bishop of Corinth: And several others, all
concurring in the same Opinion, and giving the same D^termination.

(i) (...) is here commonly translated Kinsman: but I have ventured to guess it
may signify a Countryman; one of the same City, (...): or a Bishop of the same
See; making the Succession to have been in a Family, and the Kindred Spiritual.
This is certain; the Number of Seven Predecessors agree well with the Distance
between Him and St. John.

(n) (...), in this Epistle of Irenaeus it seems very evident, That (...) is to
be understood, not absolutely, but in construction with (...), as well in this
place as others; according to the common rendering: notwithstanding a contrary
Suspicion elsewhere suggested, and to which a Defect in this place, of some
Particle to be understood, gave the Occasion. That Defect Valesius supplies, by
reading from Conjecture (...), I have rather supposed then, or something of
that Sense, to be understood.

CHAP II. Concerning FASTING.
. I. The several Kinds of Fasts.

. II. Several Occasions of Fasting: particularly Penitence and Baptism.

. I. SO far we have viewed the Evidence, for the Antiquity of the Paschal
Solemnity in general, with a more particular respect to the Festival of the
Resurrection: we now come expressly to consider the preceding Fast, and its
various Observation.

But first, for the better understanding of what is to follow, it will be fit
to premise some Account of Fasts, and their Variety, and what were the more
solemn times for that Duty.

There are Three Sorts of Fasting, which Tertullian reckons up to us De Je.
jun. c. 2.
; consisting either in the Lessening, or Deferring, or Refusing, of our Food.

The first sort is Abstinence, not from all Food, but from some kinds of it; a
Fast in part, as Tertullian calls it Tert. de Jejun. c. 9. Portional. Jejunium.
: Abstinence from Flesh especially and Wine; Or not only from Flesh and Wine,
but from any thing of Broth, or any Juicy, Vinous Fruit. Such a Dry Diet as
Tertullian speaks of, appropriated by him to his Fellow-Sectaries, the
Montanists De Jejun. c. 1.
; but used by Christians before, and by Daniel Dan. 10.2, 3.
; when he mourned three full Weeks, and eat no pleasant bread, neither came
flesh nor wine in his mouth; neither did he anoint himself at all.

The second sort was, when they did not Dine, but deferred their Eating to some
time of the Afternoon, till after Three; as the Catholics did in Tertullian's
Age, who on certain days continued their Assemblies to that hour De Jej.
: and both that their Assembling, and that Fasting, was called a Station, from
the Military Word, says Tertullian De Orat. c. 14.
; but immediately from the Jewish Phrase, and the Custom of those devout Men,
who either out of their own Devotion, or as Representatives of the People,
Assisted at the Oblations of the Temple, not departing thence till the Service
was over (g). Such Stations are termed Half-Fasts De Jejun. 13. Stat.
semijejunia.
by Tertullian, and were held later by the Appointment of Montanus. But before
their time we know from Hermes, an Author very ancient, and in the beginning of
the Second Century, that the Stations of the first Christians were sometimes
kept as severely, and that when they came at last to Eat, nothing was to be
tasted but Bread and Water that day (i).

Such a kind of Fast as this, ending in a moderate Refreshment toward Night,
is generally to be understood, when any great number of Days is said to be
fasted together.

This Fast is too supposed to have begun from the Evening before, when the
Stars appeared. For then the Day began with the Jews, as well as with the
Athenians (k).

But under this kind, which allows some time for Food in the 24 hours, the
Periodical Day, we may too reckon that manner of Fasting, which forbids to eat
or to drink while the Sun is up, the Vulgar Day; but either gives liberty all
the Night; the Fast of the Mahometans, during their Month Ramazan Ricau^^ l. 2.
c. 22.
: or else gives leave to refresh themselves, provided it be done before their
first sleep, as is the manner of the Jews, in all their ordinary Fasts Maim. de
Jejun. c. 1.. 8.
.

The third sort is, when they Eat not at all, the whole day, from Sunset, or
the Appearance of the Stars, till the same season again: as the Jews now do in
their strictest Fasts, as on the Ninth of their Month Ab, or on their
Propitiation-Day Ibid. c. 5.. 6.
.

And in this manner not one, but more days were sometime passed in a continual
Fast: as three days were by Esther Esther 4.16.
, and the rest of the Jews of that time: and as the forty were miraculously by
Moses, Elias, and our Blessed Savior. And such a protracted Fast of two, or
three, or more days, was afterward in Use with Christians; especially before
Easter, as we shall find hereafter.

These are the several Kinds of Fasting, a Duty all along observed by devout
Men, and acceptable to God under both Testaments; whether as it was helpful to
their Devotion, or as it became a part of it. It was helpful, as it served
medicinally to restrain the looser Appetites of the Flesh, and to keep the Body
under; and as it gave Liberty and Ability to the Mind, to Reflect, and
Consider, and Attend, either while they were actually assisting at Divine
Service, or preparing for some solemn part of It. It was too an Act of Worship
it self; either as it proceeded from a Sense of their Sins, and of the Misery
of their Condition from those Sins: or as it was expressive of that Sense
before God, and intended to deprecate his Anger, and to supplicate for his
Mercy and Favor; to which purpose it was accompanied with such Circumstances
of an Afflicted, Humbled State, as were proper to raise Commiseration, and
obtain Relief. Thus under the Old Testament, they put on Sackcloth, lay in
Ashes, mourned and wept: and thus Esther is expressed by J^s^phus (p), to have
supplicated God (as he says) after the Custom of her Nation. Casting her self
down upon the Ground, Putting on a Mourning Habit, and Abstaining from Meat and
Drink, and all things Delightful for those three days. Neither was the Practice
of the first Christians much different from this of the Jews, on the like
occasion, as we shall presently find.

. II. We have seen the various Manner of Fasting, and proceed now to the
Occasions and Times of Fasting in the Primitive Church.

That which I shall first mention, was the Fast of a Penitent; one who had
committed after Baptism some grievous Sin, and was excluded from the Assembly,
either by his own Conscience, or by Public Sentence; and desired to be
reconciled to God and the Church. The Course of this their second Repentance,
was much more severe than of that before their Baptism; it appeared so upon the
sight of them, as they are described by Tertullian (then a Catholic, and about
the Year 200). (q) Neither Washed nor Trimmed, Neglected and Unclean; taking no
Delight in any thing; living in the Roughness of Sackcloth, and the Filth and
Harshness of Ashes; their Faces disfigured with Fasting. For the Discipline
they were under directed them (as before he tells us at large, in his manner of
Style (r),) To lie in Sackcloth and Ashes; to disfigure their Body with a
neglected Uncleanness, and to deject their Mind with Grief: All the while to
use no other Meat or Drink, but what is simple and natural, [Bread and Water];
not to satisfy the Appetite, but to keep up Life: and frequently to nourish
and strengthen their Prayers with [strict] Fasting; to Groan, to Weep, to Roar
to the Lord their God, day and night; to fall down at the feet of the
Presbyters, to kneel to the Friends of God, and to beg of all the Brotherhood
to intercede for them. Such was the rigorous Penance of lapsed Christians, and
their Fasting truly an Affliction of their Souls, as it is termed in the Old
Testament.

Another solemn Occasion of Fasting was the Profession of Repentance those made
who were converted to the Faith, and preparing to be Baptized. Before the
Reception of that Sacrament, it was not only the Practice of the Candidates to
Fast, but of the whole Congregation with them: as Justin Martyr in his
admirable Apology has informed the Emperor and us. He is supposed by Mr.
Dodwell to have wrote no later than the Year 138; and there, after he had given
an account of our Faith, he adds this Relation. (s) As many as are persuaded,
and do believe, that these things taught and said by us are true, and promise
to be able to live accordingly; they are instructed to Pray, and, with Fasting,
to beg of God Remission of their Sins, we Praying and Fasting together with
them. Then they are brought by us to the Place where Water is, and are
regenerated in the same manner of Regeneration wherewith we were regenerated
before. For, in the name of the Father, etc.

Such a Common Fast there was anciently at the Administration of this
Sacrament, that it could not be the work of every day of their Assembling, but
must have had some set time: as we know the most solemn time was on Easter Day;
those who were baptized into his Death, then as it were rising up with him: The
whole Congregation having Fasted together with them before, not only upon that
particular Reason, but upon a common Account, as we shall immediately see.

And though the Fast and Humiliation of the other Penitent, was proper to his
Person, and to be undertaken at any time whenever he was sensible of his
Offense: yet there might too have been some more solemn time, even for this
Duty; whether the Penance were enjoined upon a notorious Sinner, or something
of it voluntarily undergone by a more secret Offender. And no time could be
more fit for this purpose, than that in which the whole Congregation would join
together in Prayer and Fasting, for themselves and them: such a time as the
Season before Easter was, in which all prepared more worthily to receive, and
some therefore strove to be again thought worthy in any degree to receive, the
solemn Communion of that Great Day.

Thus did the Fasting on both those occasions, frequently take the opportunity
to close in with the Fast before Easter: an Observation I now only mention
incidentally, designing no more by the early Practice of these two occasional
Fasts, the one Public, and the other both Public and Common; than to prepare
the Reader the easier to admit the great Antiquity of this both Public and
Universal Fast, which we are now coming particularly to consider.

(g) Maimonides de Cultu Divino, put out by Lud. de Viel, Tract. 2. Cap. 6.
Because the Sacrifice of the Congregation belonged to all the Children of
Israel, and all of them could not assist; it was provided of old, that there
should be chose ^it Men, who should be present at them, as Deputies of the
whole Nation. And as the Priests and Levites were divided into their Courses,
so were these; each Course serving their Week, and giving their Attendance,
either at the Temple, i^ they lived near it, or else at the Synagogues of their
Habitation: Praying four times a day, and Fasting the Mundays, Tuesdays,
Wednesdays, and Thursdays of their Week. Their meeting at these Prayers, and
their Attendance on this Duty, was called a Station: and they, the Men of the
Station. This is to be seen more at large in Lightfi^^ of the Temple-Service,
cap. 7.. 3.

(i) Hermae Past. l. 3. sim. 5. Cum jejunarem and sederem in monte quodam, and
gratias agerem Deo pro omnibus que fecerat ^^cum; video Pastorem illum sedentem
juxta me, and dicentem mi^^, Quid tam mane hue venisti? Respondi, Quoniam,
Domine, Sta^i^^^ habeo. Quid est, inquit, Statio? and dixi, Jejunium -- Ill^
D^e quo jejumbis, nihil omnino gustabis nisi Panem and A^^^^. Here Statio is
taken simply for a Fast, from the Practice, I suppose, of those Stationary Men
on those four Days: as it is otherwise in Tertullian, for a Fast till after
Three, from the Custom, it may be, of other Devout Men, who might not depart
from the Temple till about that Hour, when the Evening S^^ris^ce was done.

(k) Plin. Not Hist. l. 2. c. 77. Ipsum Diem alii aliter observavere. Babylonii
inter duos solis Exortus: Athenienses inter duos Oceasus: Umbri a Meridie in
Meridiem: Vulgus omue a Luce ad Tenebras: Sacerdotes Romani, and qui Diem
definiere Civilem, item Aegyptii and Hipparchus, a Media Nocte in Mediam.

(p) Jos (...) Arch. 11.6. (...)

(q) Tert. de Poenit. c. 11. Illotos, Sordulentos, extra laetitiam oportet
diversari, in Asperitudine Sacci, and Horrore Cineris, and Oris Jejunio
Vanitate.

(r) Cap. 8. Exomologesis prosternendi and humilificandi hominis disciplina
est, conversationem injungens Misericordiae illicem; de ipso quoque Habitu
atque Victu mandat; Sacco and Cineri incubare, Corpus Sordibus obscurare,
Animum Moeroribus dejicere, illa quae peccavit tristi tractatione mutare;
caeterum Pastum and Potum pura nosse, non Ventris seilicet sed Animae causa:
plerumque vero Jejuniis preces alere, Ingemiscere, Lachrymari, and Mugire dies
noctesque ad Dominum Deum suum; Presbyteris advolvi, and Caris Dei
adgeniculari, omnibus Fratribus Legationes deprecationis suae injungere.

(s) Justin. Apol. 2. Edit. Commel. p. 73. (...) etc.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Fast before the Festival of the Resurrection.
. I. The General Presumption for its Apostolical Antiquity.

II. A Particular Proof of it from Irenaeus.

. III. The different Length of that Fast down to Irenaeus his time: with some,
probably, of 40 days.

. I. IT is to be remembered, That the second Point of that Dispute between
Victor and the Asiaticks, was concerning the Ending of the Ante-paschal Fast;
whether or no it ought to be left off before the Resurrection-Day: the
Asiaticks, as it seems, concluding their Fast at the Lord's Supper, on the 14th
day of Nisan in the Evening; and the Others, who kept the Festival of the
Resurrection on a Sunday, not breaking off their Abstinence before,
thoughpossibly their Fast might have been more strict on the Friday, the
Anniversary of the Passion of our Lord.

Now this Question, concerning the Determination of the Fast, so summarily
reported by Eusebius, is sufficient to let us know, That there was such a Fast
then kept by both sides; and had been, in all probability, as anciently kept as
the Feast of the Resurrection; (for, of That, we do not perceive that there was
the least doubt made:) so much, to use Ensebius his Words, which here follow,
to this purpose, Does their Difference of Fasting commend their Agreement in
the Faith.

For a further Confirmation of this Truth, it were to be wished, now in an Age
wherein it is doubted, That there had been preserved to us, either Melito's
Treatises, or the several Synodical Answers upon this Debate, with Victor's and
Irenaeus his Circular Letters; or at least, That Eusebius had given us a more
circumstantial Extract. But those Writings are lost, either by the common Fate
of many other Books; or else because neglected, when the Dispute was given up,
and the Practice of Victor universally prevailed. And Eusebius for his part
might not think himself concerned to collect out of them any Authorities for a
Practice, in which those of that time all agreed, and which none of his time
questioned. It was the more proper business of his History, to give an Account
from them of the Controverted Points; and for the rest to leave us to this
their general and common Conclusion, That each way of Ending the Fast (and
consequently the Fast it self) was derived from Apostolical Tradition Faseb.
E^d. Hist. 5.23.


. II. HOWEVER it has chanced, that a short Scrip of the former part of the same
Letter of Irenaeus we cited before, and which Eusebius produced to give a taste
of the Temper and Address of that Good Man; does not only serve to inform us,
with what Variety this their Lent was then kept, (which is one part of our Task
to observe), but helps us besides to a particular Argument for its High
Antiquity.

For that Numerous Part of the Church that agreed with Victor about the Time of
Ending the Fast, did however observe that Fast very differently, though without
any Opposition or Division: The Account of which amicable Variety among
themselves Irenaeus thus briefly gives to Victor, the better to qualify his
heat against the Asiaticks, raised by that other angry Difference (b).

For there is not only a Dispute about the Day, but also about the Manner of
the Fast. For some think they ought to fast One day, some Two, A B and some
More. Some too measure their Day by Forty Hours, both of Day and Night. and
some More, some Forty. Their Day too (c) they measure by the Hours of the Day
[only] and [also] by the Hours of the Night. And this Variety of those that
keep the Fast, is not now risen in our days, but long before, in the time of
those before us: those who it seems governed [in the Churches] with less
exactness than they ought, giving down to their Successors such Custom as had
its Beginning from Simplicity and want of Knowledge. those who it seems (d)
retained [what had been delivered to them] with less exactness than they ought,
delivering to their Successors such Custom for Traditional, which had been
taken up by Simplicity and want of Knowledge [Singularity]. And yet
nevertheless all of them did, and we now do, keep Peace [Communion] one with
another: and the Difference of our Fasting commends the Agreement of our Faith.

Differences, we see, will still happen upon this Subject: for neither is the
World at an Agreement about the Meaning of this Place. Though indeed it be no
great wonder, that the sense of such a concise Fragment should be a little
uncertain; where we have no help, from what went before, or came after, to
determine it. I have therefore given a double Rendering of the doubtful Passage;
One marked with the Letter A, according to Valesius, which is embraced by
Daille, and those who have a mind to depress the Antiquity of Lent, and
especially of the forty Days: and another marked with B, much according to
Russinus his Version, made about the End of the fourth Century.

And, to begin with what concerns the Fast in general, it can never be
supposed, though some would be willing it should, That Irenaeus, in the last of
the two doubtful Passages however rendered, speaks any thing to the
Disparagement of the Fast it self: as if those who long before his time had
Governed the Church less exactly, had showed their less Exactness in the
Institution of a Lent. Had He said so, he had indeed effectually silenced one
part of the Grand Dispute, that concerning the End of the Fast; for he had
declared against any Fast at all: but he must have been taken then for an ill
Arbitrator by Victor and the rest, as well as by Polycrates, who all equally
joined in the Tradition of the Fast; and must of necessity, by the change of
the Question, have become a common Adversary and turned the whole Dispute upon
himself.

But this Great Man used another method, and went by the common Principle. For
he speaks to Victor of the Practice of those of his own side; who differed from
the common Custom, but with whom Communion had been always held, and was not
now refused by Victor himself. Some of those Differences, it is plain, he
charges with less Exactness; and reflects upon the Authors of them, whoever
they were, but not upon Victor's Predecessors or his own: and his Argument then
for Peace proceeds thus with great force, That the Bishop of Rome should not
break off Communion with the Asiaticks for their different manner; for those
who joined with him against them, and remained in his Communion, had their
different Customs too.

There is therefore no Reflection from this place upon the Original of Lent:
but, on the contrary, there is a strong Confirmation of its Apostolical
Antiquity under either Version. For those who (according to Valesius) Governed
the Churches with that little Exactness, as to be Authors of an undue Custom,
were very Ancient, long before the days of Irenaeus, and are supposed here to
have had Cotemporaries, who observed the right Manner. But further, in the
other, I think, more exact Interpretation, those who were long before Irenaeus
his time, and consequently very near to the time of St. John, are said expressly
to have been, (though not faithful and exact, yet) Retainers and Keepers of a
Custom, which had therefore been rightly practiced yet earlier, even before the
days of those, who were long before Irenaeus.

. III. Thus much concerning the Antiquity of a Lent, I could not omit to add,
from these few Lines of Ireneaus, casually preserved to us, and which speak
very casually to that Matter: To the Manner of Keeping Lent they are more
express and direct; but very brief and concise, as wrote on another design, and
not for Victor's or our Information in the Particular we desire to see.

In this transient Mention of the Manner, he says, some observed One day, some
Two, and some More: not expressing who they were, or in what they were less
Exact, for Victor might understand him well, though we do not. Those who kept
but One day, and whose Resurrection-day was a Sunday, in all probability kept
what we call Good Friday, the Weekly Day of the Passion: and if they did not
too use some sort of Abstinence though not so strict on the Saturday, they were
so little exact, as to offend against the Rule, and to br^^^ (...) their Fast
before Easter Day. But if there were any, whose One Day was the Saturday, they
who begun their Fast so late, little wanted that Rule to tell them when to end
it; and their neglecting the Passion-Day could not seem very exact to those
that observed it.

As to the Two or More days, it is not neither determined after what sort they
were kept: whether in One continued Fast uninterrupted by any Food, as two or
more of those days were certainly fasted by some of the next Age, especially in
the Passion-Week; or whether the Fasts were several, though the Days were
continued, each Day ended with some Refreshment. If those More days were very
Many, they were (as we have intimated already Chapter 2.. 1.
) likely to have been kept in the last Manner. There might too have been more
Days than Two kept together, not only once just before Easter, but oftener, and
at some distance within the Compass of a larger time. Hereafter Examples will
appear of such Fasts: and the several Practices may have been old, though the
mention of them in Books be later.

Hitherto the Words are plain, and of certain Construction; though we may not
know every particular Case to which they might refer^^ but those that follow
are of ambiguou^ Interpretation, and particularly the word Forty is expounded,
as we see* by some of Days, and by some of Hours.

It is not absolutely necessary to any design of these Papers, That forty Days
should be here named expressly: for they may well be admitted under the latitude
of the word More, if we shall hereafter see Reason to understand them so early.
I hope therefore I am not partial, when I judge the Old Translation of this
Place, to be preferable to the Modern.

For first, a Day of 40 Hours, is a space of time never before heard of;
neither determined by the Sun's Appearance, nor Revolution. And if we should
admit of such a single Day, measured not by the Sun's Motion, but by our
Savior's lying in the Grave; yet it would be strange to join two or more of
those days together. Valesius, therefore wonders, That the Absurdity has been
endured, and that no Body has seen, that the Greek word for Day must be changed
into that for Fast, and the Sentence run so. Some measure their Fast by 40
Hours, etc. This Change he is forced to by the Sense, not countenanced by the
Authority of any Copy. But not to object the Odness of this Fast, that was to
begin at soonest after Breakfast on the Friday, and which took notice of our
Lord's Burial, but not of his Crucifixion, much less of his previous Sufferings
and Apprehension; to pass this over, for this might be one of those less exact
Manners, which once had place, though afterward left off: yet still the
mention of Hours of Day and Night would be very redundant, especially where the
Author is so Brief; for what need is there of this Circumstantial Description?
and how could Forty Hours have otherwise come together?

Such Objections as these, to which the New Interpretation lies open, do put us
upon looking out for another more proper: which I take that of Ruffinus to be.

For the Forty Days, which some are unwilling to find so soon in the Church,
will appear hereafter not to have been so unh^^^^ ^f, for a Fast, as 40 Hours:
but rather to have been a Number much celebrated within (...) little while in
the Christian Lent, and in all probability sacred before to Abstinence in the
Jewish Church.

Ruffinus his Version is thus, (e) And some Forty [Days]: so that they make the
Day, by Computation of Hours of Day and Night. And if the Place be understood
as commonly it is, and there be no more meant by it, than that the One or More
days before spoke of, were the Civil or Periodical Days, and consisted each of
24 Hours; yet the Inconvenience Valesius urges will not follow; and a Fast of
Forty such Days will not exclude, we know, so much Refreshment every Evening as
may support Nature. The greatest Incongruity I can find in that Acception of
the Words, is, That it makes Irenaeus, on a Subject he does but touch, to give
Victor unnecessarily a verbose Description of a Day, one and the same thing;
where the only Intention was to put him in remembrance of a Variety. I should
rather therefore think, That when he had given a short Account of the different
Numbers of Days, he should then add a short mention of the different Quantities
of a Day: That some computed the day Vulgarly, by the Appearance of the Sun;
and some Civilly, by its Revolution. And according to this Design of Irenaeus I
have directed one of the Translations above, to which this of Ruffinus will
agree.

Neither will it, I suppose, be very material to object, That a Fast only from
Sunrising to Sunset, has not been usual since among Christians: for it might
have been practiced then, though disused afterward as less exact; and (as we
have seen) the Jews have all along fasted in that manner upon most Occasions,
and the Mahometans continually do. Neither will it be wondered, That so known a
Difference, as that of the Vulgar and Revolutional Day, should have been
expressed so negligently in few Words. And as for any other lesser Criticism
(c), it may easily be satisfied for, if only by the natural force of the Sense,
and its apposite suitableness to the Scope of the Place.

And thus far have we learned from Irenaeus, That the Observation of Lent was
very Ancient: and that its Fast then consisted not of One, or Two days, but
More; and in some Places, very probably of Forty.

(b) Eusebius. Hist. 5.24. (...) (c) (...), (d) (...) (e) (...).

(c) All Valesius his Manuscripts put no stop after (...) and that determined
him to his way of Rendering this Place. But Ruffinus his Copy seems to have had
the stop; and Sir Henry Savil reads so, as to change the place of the
Copulative Particle thus, (...) and Mr. Thorndy^e [in his Service of God at
Relig. Assemb. p. 247.] says, This Reading is acknowledged by Petitus. This
Lection (...) -- if it has any Copy to justify it, is certainly to be
preferred for the Reason at the End of this Chapter. But if it had no
Manuscript on its side, and a Change must be somewhere made in this Sentence,
such a Trajection of a Particle by conjecture is much more allowable, than the
Substitution ^ alesius makes afterward of (...) for (...) as the Sense by the
one is much more advantaged than by the other. And indeed the advantage of the
Sense is so great, that if such an Alteration is not to be admitted to join
this last Sentence to the preceding, I should then take the Sentence to begin
there without Connection, and as it might happen in the Excerpts of a Letter.

(d) (...) it is true, may signify to Govern in a Church, but it does as well
to ' Hold or Keep a Practice; as in St. Mark vii. 3, 4. And this last Sense is
more suitable to the Place.

(e) Quidam enim putant uno tantum die observari debere jejunium, alii duobus,
alii vero pluribus, nonnulli etiam quadraginta: ita ut Horas diurnas
nocturnasque computantes Dient statuant.

CHAP. IV. The Practice of Fasting mentioned about the Year 200, by Clemens
Alexandrinus and Tertullian.
. I. The Weekly Fasts of Wednesday and Friday, mentioned by Clemens
Alexandrinus.

. II. Testimonies out of Tertullian, concerning both the Weekly and
Ante-Paschal Fasts.

. III. Observations upon those Testimonies. Some part of the Ante-Paschal Fast
thought necessary by the Catholics of his time; the rest Discretionary.

. I. NEXT in Order of the Christian Authors that remain to us, is Clemens of
Alexandria; and who would have assisted us much in this Argument, had his Book,
Of the Paschal Season, his Dissertations about Fasting, and possibly that about
the Ecclesiastical Canons, and against those that followed the Error of the
Jews Eusebius. Hist. 6.1^.
, been now extant. In what is come to our hands, there is nothing to be found
of the Anniversary Ante-Paschal Fast, or Paschal Feast: of the Weekly Fasts and
Festivals there (...) ac^^^ental mention made, and only for the sake of an
Allegory. (b) The truly knowing Person says he, knows the hidden Meaning of the
Fast of those two days, Wednesday and Friday: whereof the first belongs to
Mercury [the Idol God of Gain]; the other to Venus [the Heathen Goddess of
Pleasure]. For he fasts all his Life from Love of Money, and of Pleasure. --
And such a one having performed what is commanded, makes that the Lord's Day,
in which he puts off the Evil Mind, and takes up the Knowing one: celebrating
that Resurrection of our Lord, which has been so wrought in himself.

This is indeed Allegorical all: but it has a certain Ground, upon which it
descants; and supposes as constant an Observation of those two days of the
Week, as of the weekly Day of the Resurrection. They were the ordinary days of
Christian Assemblies, the Stations we before heard of Chapter 2.. 1.
, commonly fasted to a Certain Hour; as the Jews had their Meetings in their
Synagogues on their Mundays and Thursdays, when generally the devouter Sort did
likewise Fast Luke 1^.12.
. Of these Days Friday was apparently chose for one, because on it our Savior
had suffered; and Wednesday is said to be the other, because he had been then
sold to the High Priests: and further, we cannot but think, that these which
were kept in some manner every Week, in the Memory of our Lord's Passion,
should, in the Passion-Week it self, have been kept with great Solemnity.

. II. But this stated Observation of those two Days in the Week, is more
directly mentioned by Tertullian, a Cotemporary of Clemens: as the Paschal
Solemnity is also expressly remembered by him. He wrote the Treatises now extant,
about the year 200 and a little after: and when most of them were wrote, was of
the Heresy of Montanus; so that what we are to cite out of him, cannot be well
understood, without some knowledge of his Sect.

Montanus, whom our Author unhappily followed, is supposed to have begun his
New Doctrine about the Year 172. He is said not to have differed from the
Catholics in the main Articles of Faith (e), (though some of them were accused
of Sabellianism (f), but only in some Rigours of Practice, which he enjoined as
by Divine Command. He absolutely forbad all second Marriages: condemned all
declining of Danger in time of Persecution: made the Abstinence of the ordinary
Stations to be longer, and more severe, dismissing their Assemblies later, and
allowing then a very spare Refreshment. He ordered the Fast before Easter to
consist of Two Weeks (f 2); and besides, instituted two New Lents, or Seasons
of Fasting (g), each of a Week, excepting the Saturday; for they fasted no
Saturday, but that before Easter (b). These and such like Ordinances he
pretended to be dictated by the Holy Spirit, to him and his two Prophetesses;
on whom the Comforter had at last, according to our Savior's Promise,
descended, in a more plentiful manner than upon the Apostles, and with fuller
and more perfect Instructions. Consequently those of this Sect, from the^r
pretenses to the Spirit, and to a stricter manner of Life, took themselves to
be the only spiritual Persons, calling the Catholics Carnal and Animal Men
(i): and esteemed the Writings of their two Prophetesses, above the other Books
of the New Testament (k); supposing them to be both the Completion and
Conclusion of it, and admitting afterward no more (l).

Of this Sect was Tertullian, a Man of an austere Life, and rigid Temper, and a
fierce Disputer: but excellently Learned, and after his peculiar fashion very
Eloquent. His Book concerning Fasting happens to be preserved; where in
Justification of his own Party, he sums up the Opinion and the Practice of his
Adversaries, the Catholics, about that Matter. (m) They accuse us, says he,
that we keep Fasts of our own; that for the most part we prolong the time of
our Stations to the Evening; and that we use the Dry Diet, feeding on no Flesh
nor Broth, nor any Juicy Fruit, neither Eating nor Drinking any thing that is
Vinous: and that besides we then abstain from Bathing, an Abstinence consequent
to such a Dry Food. This they object to us for an Innovation, and conclude it
to be unlawful; either to be judged Heretical, if it be a Humane Doctrine; or
to be condemned for false Prophecy, if it pretends to be an Ordinance of the
Spirit. So that we are either way to be Accused, as those who preach another
Gospel. For as to Fasts, they tell us, That certain Days have been appointed by
God. As when, in Leviticus, the Lord commands Moses, That the 10th day of the
7th Month should be a Day of Propitiation; saying, Lev. 2^. 27.
It shall be holy to you; and you shall afflict your Souls; and every Soul that
afflicts not it self that day shall be destroyed from among my People. And in
the Gospel, they suppose those Days determined to Fasting, in which the
Bridegroom was taken away; and that those only now are the days appointed in
ordinary for Christian Fasts; the old Observances of the Mosaical Law and the
Prophets being now abolished, ( for when they have a mind, they can understand
what is meant by that, the Law and Prophets were unto John:) and therefore
that, as for any other time, Fasting is to be used according to Discretion, and
upon particular Occasions and Causes, not by the Command of any new Discipline:
For so did the Apostles, not laying upon the Disciple any other Burden, of Set
Fasts and such as should be observed in common by All; and consequently not of
Stations neither, which have indeed their Set Days, Wednesday and Friday, but
so as that they are to be kept discretionally, not by force of any Command, nor
beyond the last hour of the Day, the Prayers then being generally ended by
Three in the Afternoon, after the example of St. Peter mentioned in the Acts
10.30.
Acts. But the Dry Diet, our Xerophagy, is, they say, a new Name for a new
affected Duty; too like the Heathen Superstition: being such an Abstinence as
is used to Apis and Isis, and the Mother of the Gods.

This is his Representation of the Catholics Thoughts, concerning the
Ante-Paschal Fast, from which he argues in the 13th Chapter. (n) You plead,
says he, that the Christian Faith has its Solemnities already determined by
Scripture or Tradition; and that no other Observation is to be super-added,
because of the Unlawfulness of Innovation. Keep to that ground if you can; for
here I find you your selves both fasting out of the Paschal Season, besides
those days in which the Bridegroom was taken away: and also interposing the
Half-fasts of your Stations, and sometimes too living on Bread only and Water,
as every particular Person thinks fit. You answer indeed that these things are
done at your Liberty, and not by Command: but then you have quitted your
Ground, and gone beyond your Tradition, when you do such things as have not
been appointed you. And so in the next Chapter (o), in answer to those who
compared them to the Galatians, as Observers of Days and Months, he replies;
That they observe not the Jewish Ceremonies: but that to the New Testament
there belong new Solemnities. Otherwise, says he, if the Apostle has abolished
all Religion of Days and Times, and Months and Years; Why do we [ both
Montanists and Catholicks] celebrate the Paschal Season yearly in the first
Month? Why do we pass the fifty days following in Joy and Exultation? Why do we
consecrate Wednesday and Friday to Stations, and Friday, [ or Good Friday (p)]
to Fastings? -- Although you Catholics also sometimes continue Saturday, a day
never to be fasted, except in the Week before Easter, for a Reason given in
another place (q). And lastly, in the next, the 15th Chapter (r), taking notice
that the Apostle condemned those who commanded to abstain from Meats,
foreseeing Marcion and Tatian, and such Heretics, who would enjoin perpetual
Abstinence in contempt of what the Creator had made; in Vindication of their
own Sect from Heresy, he subjoins; For how very little is the Prohibition of
Meat we have made? We offer to our Lord two Weeks of Dry Diet, and those not
whole Weeks neither, Saturdays and Sundays being exempted; abstaining then from
such Food, which we do not reject, but only defer.

To these Testimonies of Tertullian out of this Book, we may subjoin another
out of his Dissertation about Prayers. (s) Where after he has explained the
Lord's Prayer, and spoke of some Requisites to Prayer, he then comes to censure
some superstitious Observances about it, and particularly taxes a Custom that
had began to prevail: Those who were in a Fast, toward the Conclusion of their
Assemblies, and just before the Communion, not saluting their Brethren with the
Holy Kiss, then always used on that occasion. This declining to salute had been
the Fashion of the Jews in their Fasts, as a sign of Sorrow: and is reproved
here by Tertullian in Christians, as being a kind of Ostentation of their
Fasting, and contrary therefore to the Direction of our Savior, which commands
us not to appear to men to fast. For now, says he, we are known to fast by
abstaining from that Salutation. But if there be any reason for such a Custom,
you may at your own home if you please, and among your Family, from whom your
fasting cannot well be concealed, defer that Ceremony of Peace: but otherwise
wherever you may conceal your Fast, you are to remember the Command; and by
this means you will both keep your Rule abroad, and your Custom at home. For so
on Good Friday, when the Devotion of Fasting is Common, and as it were Public;
we justly forbear the Salutation; taking no care to conceal from the rest, what
is done together by us all.

. III. NOW from these Testimonies of Tertullian, it appears, First, That the
Religious Assemblies, or Stations, of Wednesday and Friday, were now well known
and practiced in the Christian Church, and generally supposed to have descended
from the Apostles; as recommended by their example to the devouter Christians,
and not as enjoined the whole Body by any Precept.

Secondly, The constant Opinion of the Catholics of his time presumed, That
those days in which the Bridegroom, our Savior, was taken away, were to be
fasted not at Pleasure, but by Direction; being designed and determined to that
Duty from the Beginning. This is certainly the Catholic Sense; as it is
represented by Tertullian in the second Chapter in express words, where he
speaks both of the Designation of our Savior, and the Observation of the
Apostles; and as it is again intimated by him in the 13th. Nor could it have
been brought in question by Mr. Daille, had he not studied his own Hypothesis
too much.

Neither is that judgment of the Catholics, concerning those days, any ways
disparaged by the Interpretation they give there to our Savior's Words Matthew.
^.15.
For though this Saying of his may be well understood at large, as it is by
most Commentators, of those Distresses and Afflictions the Disciples should
fall under upon his Departure; the very mention of which they could not now
bear: vet it will too very properly admit the other Meaning, and particularly
imply some stated Days of Fasting, hereafter to be observed by them: and which
our Savior here predicts at least, if not directs. They were privileged now,
by their attendance on the Bridegroom the Messiah, from the ordinary Monday and
Thursday Fasts of the stricter Jews; or from others extraordinary set up by
John: but when the Bridegroom should be taken away, that Exemption, he tells
them, would cease; and, withal, new Cause of Fasting would arise, and new times
be appointed. And then he adds, under the Figures of a Garment, and of Bottles
of Wine; That neither would those Fasts of his new Institution be proper as
yet, under the old Dispensation; neither were his Disciples prepared now to
undertake and observe them: but that hereafter, when all things should be new,
his New Dispensation should have New Fasts of its own; and his Disciples too
become for them New Men, by the Renewing of the Holy Ghost. This Exposition of
the Text, concerning such new Fasts in general, after our Savior's Death,
seems to be most natural; very apt, I am sure, it is to the Occasion, and
Prosecution, of that Saying. And if then those general Words were by the first
Christians applied in particular, to that very time of the Year in which He
suffered, and on which they fasted, as by Apostolical Tradition; it is no
wonder. For such secondary Applications of Scripture, to Subjects not seeming
at first sight to have been intended by it, is very usual in the New Testament.
And it is the known manner of the Jews, to accommodate the words of the Bible
to such Practices as they take to be of Divine Authority, though they are
hinted only and alluded to there, not expressed, much less commanded.

Thirdly, Those Days which were to be so fasted, are twice expressly mentioned
in the Plural Number. And of Those Two are obvious, the Friday and the
Saturday, in which he was Taken, Crucified, and Buried. These at least, must, I
think, be understood by Tertullian's Catholics: neither has he given any where
any contrary Intimation. For in the 14th Chapter of his Treatise of Fasting,
the Saturday said there to be fasted sometimes, is, in all probability, not the
Holy Saturday, but any other Saturday in the Year. (p) And in his Book of
Prayer, Good Friday is mentioned peculiarly, not simply, for its being a Common
Fast Day; but because it was a Fast Day in which there was the usual
Opportunity for the Holy Kiss, and in which it was omitted. Whereas on the
Saturday they Assembled late, and spent the Evening in Baptizing the
Catechumens: and that Day having in its Office no Place for that Ceremony,
consequently gave not our Author the same occasion to speak of it. And thus
much seems evident concerning Two of Those Days. But they were reckoned by
others, as we have observed before, from Wednesday; and by some from Monday,
the Fifth day before the Passover, the day of the Caption of the Paschal Lamb,
ordered by Moses Exodus 12.3.
: in conformity to which they supposed our Savior to have been at that time
singled out, as it were, by the Highpriests, and determined for Sacrifice.
This is certain, That, by many, all those Days were particularly observed; as
we shall presently know from an Author but fifty Years younger: who is indeed
the first that tells us of such a Practice; but, as we often intimate, must not
therefore be supposed the first that knew it done.

Fourthly, Of Those Days the Friday was the most remarkable: for in that He was
taken away actually; Apprehended, Crucisied, and laid in the Grave; and
accordingly It was always kept with a singular Devotion by the whole Church:
the latter half of the Night (in which the Apostles should heretofore have
watched) in Watching, and the Day too in Fasting and Praying. And for this
Reason only we need not have wondered if Good Friday had been particularly
mentioned in the 14th Chapter of Fasting, as it is in the Treatise of Prayer. I
confess from some words of the last Mr. Daille would infer, That Good Friday
was not then observed by all Christians: because the Devotion of that Day is
said to be Common, and as it were Public; or, as he sometimes understands,
almost Public. And his Observation would have been true, had Tertullian said
as it were or almost Common: but when it is first termed Common, without any
Restriction, and after too said to be kept by All; that Consideration alone
should have lead that very Learned Person to the true Meaning of this Phrase,
as it were Public. For Public, he knew, does not only signify what belongs
to all; but what is exposed, or appears to all: which last Sense, opposed to
Hiding and Concealing, the Scope of the place evidently requires. And besides
it is plain, why Tertullian puts in his as it were: for he had after his strict
manner urged the Command of not Publishing a Fast so absolutely; that he could
not, in the usual Nicety of his Style, call even this Public without some
Limitation.

Fifthly, Of other Days than those in which our Savior was taken away, there
is no express mention in Tertullian. But for ought appears thence, other Days
there might have been observed, and some reason from him there is to think they
were.

We have seen before how very probable it is, That the Montanists had a Fast
before Easter of Two Weeks, besides their other two Fasts at other times of the
Year: and had not the Catholics of that Age observed some such Lent too,
additionally to the ordinary prescribed Days; Tertullian must have been obliged
to have accounted for this Innovation also, as well as for the other. Whereas
in the 15th Chapter, he thinks himself bound to defend the other two Weeks
only, as the Fasts peculiar to those of his own Sect: and leaves us therefore
to infer, That there was little difference between them concerning the
Ante-Paschal Fast: the Catholics, it seems, having nothing to object to the
Montanists about the Length of it, but only about the Necessity as by Divine
Command; and the Montanists, on the other side, not being able to defend their
certain fixed Fortnight, by producing any number of Days though more, which the
Catholics kept, because they were kept by them uncertainly, and under no
Divine Obligation.

From Tertullian's Management of this Dispute, such reason there is to think
that the Catholics of his time had a longer Lent than of those days only. And
upon the same Considerations, the violent Presumptions of Mr. Daille against
it, will be found of no force; neither is he to be suffered to conclude, That
the Catholics then kept no such Lent, because he did not find it formally
mentioned amongst Tertullian's Objections in the 13th and 14th Chapters. Had
indeed their Lent been then as Determined and Formal, as that of the Latin and
Greek Church is now; the Forty Days before Easter might probably have been
mentioned, as well as the Fifty after: but in that Age there was a great
difference between them. For the Feast of the Fifty days was universally kept
by all, and very solemnly: conspicuous if only by the Posture they used, their
not kneeling at their Prayers. But neither was Forty, nor any other number of
Days fixed then generally for a Fast: and besides, as the Days were at
Discretion, and rarely, I suppose, Forty; so the Fast was for the most part
Private, and not distinguished by any Public Action. For the same Reason of
Uncertainty, the same Additional Days ought not to have been specified in the
13th Chapter, nor mentioned in any other manner than they there are, under the
general Title of other days besides those in which the Bridegroom was taken
away. Neither, I suppose, did he in that place think so much of justifying his
Ante-Paschal Lent, (a thing the Catholics would easily allow in Substance,
though not in Form;) as of his other two Lents, which were absolute Novelties
in the Church of Christ: and upon that account he might retort so upon the
Catholics in general, concerning the Abstinence they thought fit to use
through the Course of the rest of the Year. But if any Adversary will impose
upon Tertullian the necessity of pleading there only for his Ante-Paschal Lent;
I may then, I think, with as much reason desire him to understand the Author
there (as the word will signify, we know ( n 2)) not speaking of other days
Besides, but of other days Before those in which the Bridegroom, etc. And then
this Passage, instead of being an Objection against such a Lent at that time,
will become an express Testimony for it.

(b) Clem. Alex. Strom. 7. 'O (...)

(c) Theodoret (...)

(f) Hier. ad Marcellum. Theodor^t. Ibidem.

( f 2) In Sozomen's Time, as we shall find hereafter, Chapter 10.. I. the
Ante-Paschal Fast of the Montanists was of Two Weeks: and there is all Reason
to think, That it had been so from the beginning of their Separation. For by
that time the Catholics, we shall see, fasted a much longer Space: and these
great Fasters would hardly have been left behind, had not those Two Weeks been
the Space determined them by their Prophet; and they obliged, as here follows,
to keep punctually to all his Institutions.

(g) Hieron. ad Marcel. Illi tres in anno faciunt Quadragesim^s, quasi tres
Passi sint Salvatores. This is express for Three Lents: and that one of them
was kept after Pentecost, the same Author informs us in his Comm. in Matthew.
cap. 9. Montanus, Pris^illa, and Maximilla etiam post Pentecosten faciunt
Quadragesimam. When the other New one was kept, I do not find ascertained. But
it is plain from Tertullian that both made but Two Weeks, without the Saturday;
as you may see in his Book, de Jejun. cap. 15. which we are going to cite. They
were therefore of a Week each; and were kept, as appears from the 13th Chapter,
at the same time when their Two Yearly Synods were held.

(h) This I take to be evident, from that place of Chap. 14 de Jejun. hereafter
to be alleged; where Tertullian expressly says of the Saturday, and according
to the Opinion of his Sect, that it was Nunquam nisi in Pascha jejunandum.

(i) These Names occur every where in Tertullian, and in this Treatise de
Jejun. particularly.

(k) Theodoret. in loco supra alleg. (e).

(l) Epiphanius concerning this Heresy, numer. 2.

(m) Tertul. de Jej. c. 1. Arguunt nos, quod Jejunia propria custodiamus, quod
Stationes plerumque in Vesperam producamus, quod etiam Xerophagias observemus,
siccantes Cibum ab omni Carne and omni Jurulentia and Vvidioribus quibusque
Pomis, nequid Vinositatis vel edamus vel potemus: Lavacri quoque abstinentiam,
congruentem arido Victui. Novitatem igitur objectant de cujus Illicito
praescribant, aut Haeresin judicandam, si Humana Praesumptio est; aut
Pseudoprophetiam pronunciandam, si Spiritalis Indictio est: dum quaqua ex part
Anathema audiamus, qui aliter adnunciamus. Nam quod ad Jejunia pertineat,
certos dies a Deo constitutos opponunt. Vt cum in Levitico praecipit Dominus
Moysi decimam Mensis septimi, Diem Placationis; Sancta, inquiens, erit vobis
dies, and vexabitis animas vestras, and omnis anima quae vexara non fuerit die
illa exterminabitur. Certe in Evangelio illos dies Jejuniis determinatos
putant, in quibus ablatus est Sponsus; and hos esse jam solos Legitimos
Jejuniorum Christianorum, abolitis Legalibus and Propheticis vetustatibus. Vbi
volum enim agnoscunt quid sapiat, Lex and Prophetae usque ad Johannem. Itaque
de caetero indifferenter jejunandum, ex arbitrio, non ex imperio novae
Disciplinae, pro temporibus and causis uniuscujusque. Sic and Apostolos
observasse, nullum aliud imponentes jugum, certorum and in commune omnibus
obeundorum Jejuniorum; proinde nec Stationum, quae and ipsae suos quidem dies
habeant, Quartae Feriae and Sextae, Passive tamen current, neque sub lege
Praecepti, neque ultra supremam diei; quando and Orationes fere Hora Nona
concludat, de Petri exemplo quod Actis refertur. Xerophagias vero, novum
affectati officii nomen, and proximum Ethnicae superstitioni; quales
castimoniae Apim, Isidem and magnam Matrem certorum eduliorum exceptione
purisicant.

(n) Ibidem Cap. 13. Praescribitis constituta esse solennia huic Fidei,
Scripturis vel Traditione Majorum: nihilque observationis amplius adjiciendum,
ob illicitum Innovationis. State in isto gradu si potestis. Ecce enim convenio
vos, and praeter Pascha jejunantes, citra (n 2) illos dies quibus ablatus est
Sponsus, and Stationum semijejunia interponentes, and vero interdum pane and
aqua victitantes, ut cuique visum est.

( n 2) The very Learned Dr. Beveridge [in his Cod. Canon. Apost. Vindic. l. 3.
c. 6.] suggests, That citra illos dies may well signify the Season just before
them, and denote a larger Lent to have been kept by the Catholics of that
time. That Meaning the Phrase will bear, but I have not given the Translation
according to it, lest any one should complain, That I produced a Testimony in a
straitened, though a very proper Sense, which was capable of a larger.

(o) Quod si nova Conditio in Christo, jam and nova Solemnia esse debebunt. Aut
si omnem in totum devotionem temporum, and dierum, and mensium, and annorum
erasit Apostolus; Cur Pascha celebramus annuo circulo in Mense primo? Cur
quinquaginta exinde diebus in omni exultatione decurrimus? Cur Stationibus
Quartam and Sextam Sabbati dicamus, and Jejuniis Parasceven (p)? Quanquam vos
etiant Sabbatum siquando continuatis, nunquam nisi in Pascha jejunandum (q),
secundum rationem alibi redditam.

(p) Parasceve by many is understood here to signify Good Friday in
particular: because of the ordinary Fridays, as well as of Wednesdays, mention
is made before. But the Word is never found to signify after that manner in
any other place: and besides, our Author has already spoke of the Pascha in the
same Period; and with him we know Dies Paschalis is Good Friday, (as we may see
in the next Testimony to this, cited out of his Book de Orat.) and here in the
Close of this Passage, the Saturday following is Sabbatum Paschae. He seems
therefore, after he had mentioned the Yearly Solemnities of the Pascha, and the
Pentecost which begun on Easter Day, to come now to the Weekly: and is
understood by Petavius, [in his Notes upon Epiphan. p. 358.] to imply, That as
both Wednesdays and Fridays were the Days assigned for Stationary-Meetings, So
the Fridays were appointed for Fasts: supposing the Word Statio not so much to
signify the Half-Fast, as the Assembling; and the Jejunia to be much above
those Semi-Fasts, and of the stricter sort. This is certain, though Wednesdays
and Fridays are joined together often; yet Friday is at other times
particularly remembered, and as the more solemn Day: as you will see hereafter,
Chapter 5.. I. and Chapter 7.. I. And such a Sense the Words may carry, if at that time
all the Wednesdays and Fridays were Stationary, and all the Fridays were
fasted. But if the Fridays were not always fasted, but only held the most
proper Days of all the Week for a Fast; yet then there might remain a Sense apt
enough, after this manner; How come we to appoint Wednesdays and Fridays as
most proper for Stations, and the Fridays as most proper for stricter Fasts?
And so the Christians might have chose a Friday, as the Jews, if they are to
have a solemn Fast, chose for it their Monday, or Thursday.

All this is said upon this Passage as it is now read. But if there were any
Manuscripts to be consulted, I should look after the Words Quartam and Sextam
Sabbati, to see whether and Sextam were not an Interpolation of some Copyist,
who had observed them above, and thought they were wanting here.

(q) Mr. Daille, willing to have Montanus the Enlarger of the Ante-Paschal
Fast, would fain suppose the Two New Weeks of Fasting, which he instituted, to
have been placed by him before Easter: and for that purpose cannot allow, That
the Montanists fasted the Saturday before Easter; because, as we see out of
Tertullian in the next Paragraph, in those Two Weeks they fasted not the
Saturdays. But, on the contrary, we have learned from St. Jerome, That those
Two Weeks were Two New Lents (note g): and we have found too ( f 2) some Reason
to think, That their Lent before Easter was of Two other Weeks, differing, we
suppose, from such a Lent of the Catholics only in this, That it was enjoined
as by Divine Precept. And besides, this very place will not endure such an
Interpretation easily. For the Montanists are known to have declined Fasting on
Saturdays, as much as the Catholics: and upon that Account only, the Sabbatum
nunquam jejunandum nist in Paschate, may be said by them as of their own
Judgment, and their own Practice. It is too most reasonable to understand it in
such a manner. For here Tertullian speaks, and not the Catholics; and must be
therefore rather presumed to have given his Own, than Their Opinion: which
Opinion besides, he says, was founded upon a Reason elsewhere given; and to say
elsewhere, might be proper enough, if the Reason was any where given by himself
in some Treatise of his, but it was too loose and uncertain, if the Reason was
given by some Catholic in general; for where should one look for it? And who
was he that gave it? To all this we may add, That if a Catholick's Opinion were
here expressed, and his Reasons meant, it would have been rather thus, Quanquam
vos etiam Sabbatum siquando continuatis, in Paschate Jejunandum secundum
rationem alibi redditam: for the Fasting on the Saturday of them who did it but
sometimes, was to be the Doubt, and to require a Reason: though for Tertullian
to give a Catholick's Reason, and not to censure it, would have been very
unnecessary and very flat; Faults not usual in his Style. And on the other
side, if the Montanists Judgment is there spoke, and they fasted not that
Saturday, but the Catholics did; it should then instead of nisi have been nec,
and conceived in this manner, to the Reproach of the Catholics, Quanquam vos
etiam Sabbatum siquando continuatis nunquam nec in Pascha jejunandum, etc. Such
a Reproof of the Catholics was likely from Tertullian, and such a Reflection is
obliquely made in the Translation above; which tells of the Catholics, That
they too continue the Saturday, but that they should only fast that Saturday
and no other, which yet some of them were used to do.

This is all true upon the common Supposition, That Parasceve signifies
Good Friday in this place. But if it be to be taken for any Friday, the Sense
of the place is plain, and Mr. Daille has nothing to say.

(r) Cap. 15. Quantula est enim apud nos Interdictio Ciborum? Duas in anno
Hebdomadas Xerophagiarum, nec Totas, exceptis scilicet Sabbatis and Dominicis,
offerimus Deo.

(s) De Orat. cap. 14. Jam enim de abstinentia Osculi agnoscimur jejunantes.
Sed and siqua ratio est, ne tamen huic Praecepto reus sis, potes domi si forte,
inter quos latere jejunium in totum non datur, differ Pacem. Vbicunque autem
alibi operationem tuam abscondere potes, debes meminisse Praecepti: ita and
Disciplinae foris, and Consuetudini domi, satisfacies. Sic and die Paschae, quo
communis and quasi publica jejunii Religio est, merito deponimus Osculum; nibil
curantes de occultando, quod cum omnibus faciamus.

CHAP. V.
. I. A Testimony from Origin for the Devotion of Fridays, and of the Paschal
Season, and thence to Whitsuntide. Another from him, but of Ruffinus his
Translation, concerning the Fast of the Quadragesima, or the Forty Season.

. II. A distinct Account of the Passion-Week from Dionysius of Alexandria,
about the middle of the Third Century.

. III. What were the first Paschal Solemnities mentioned by St. Cyprian: and
concerning the Passion-Week.

. I. THE Age in which we now are from the 200th to the 300th Year from our
Savior's Birth, afforded not many Ecclesiastical Authors; and of their
Writings most is lost: Neither was there any Dispute then in the Church about
any thing relating to our Subject; so that we are not to expect very much Light
thence. Hippolytus indeed, as we have mentioned above, wrote a large Treatise,
as it should seem, concerning the Paschal Season, Entitled, A Declaration of
the Times of Easter: but of that, as we have seen, a very small Fragment is
preserved. Neither, may be, would it have conduced much more to our present
Purpose, than that Ancient Treatise which we have ascribed to St. Cyprian, or
that other of Anatolius which Bucherius has given us: which are only
Calculations of the Time in which Easter should be kept, and not Accounts of
the Duty and Season that was supposed to go before it. The little help
therefore we shall find will be from Origin, and his Scholar Dionysius Bishop
of Alexandria.

And from Origin we have but a transient mention of the Devotion of Fridays,
and of Easter; and a doubtful one of the Season before it. The first is in his
Apology for the Christians against Celsus: and there in Answer to an Accusation
of our Religion, as if it were ill-natured, because the Christians did not join
in the Festivals of those Times; he replies, that, according to the excellent
Saying of one of the Heathen, To do ones Duty, was to keep a Holy Day; and that
St. Paul had truly said, ye observe days and months, etc. I am afraid of you.
But, continues he, (a) if any one shall object to us our Lord's-Days, and
Fridays, and the Passover, and Pentecost: we reply, That a Perfect Man being
always conversant in the Words and Works and Thoughts of the True Lord, makes
every Day His, and always keeps the Lord's Day. And so being always in a
Preparation of the True Life, and always abstaining from Pleasure, and keeping
under the Body, he always keeps the Preparation-Day, [Friday]. In such a manner
he keeps the Passover, passing from this Life to God, and hastening to his
City. And thus he who can say with Truth, We are Risen with Christ, keeps the
Pentecost. But one of the Common Believers, and not of the better kind, who
cannot, or who will not keep every day a Holy Day, wants such sensible Images
for his Remembrancers, that he be not wholly deficient. This Passage is
Allegorical, and like that of Clemens, our Author's Master, which we have cited
above (in Chap. 4.. I.): and it is here given, not only for a further
Confirmation of the Practice of observing Fridays and Easter, etc. but that the
Reader may the better judge of a Reflection he may find made by Socrates, as if
Origin had done wisely to turn the Passover into Allegory, as he has done here,
but more largely in that his Homily upon Leviticus which we shall next mention.
For such Allegorical Speculations, to which the Platonists were much inclined,
may be admitted to refine and spiritualize, but not to evacuate the Letter.
This we find here, where the Observation of the Lord's-days is allegoriz'd, as
well as of Fridays, and of the Passover. And we might give another Instance
from the same Clemens of Alexandria, who refines in the like manner upon the
Ten Commandments Strom. 6. versus Finem.
; but when he assigns his Spiritual Meaning, of Thou shall not commit Adultery,
or Kill, or Steal, must not be therefore supposed to have set aside the Plain
and Literal Sense.

Much more to our Design would that other Passage of Origin be, which we find
in his Tenth Homily on Levitisus: where, after he has enlarged in an Allegory,
against those who thought the Propitiation-day of the Jews was to be kept by
Christians, he subjoins; (c) But this we do not say, to let loose the
Restraints of Christian Abstinence; For we have the Days of the Forty Season
consecrated to Fasting, and we have Wednesdays and Fridays in which we solemnly
fast. And here, under that name of the Forty Season, now first met with, we
should either understand a Lent of Forty Days, or some number of Days
denominated at least from Forty; were we assured of our Authority, and had we
the Text of the Author, and not the Translation of Ruffinus, for it. Ruffinus,
I know, lies under an ill Name for Translating; and has not the Reputation of
any great Exactness: but we have found reason to think, that he did not do
Irenaeus wrong; and it may be he has been suspected here much more upon Design,
by those that are against Lent, than he has been asserted by those that are for
it. However I shall be content at present, that this Testimony at the second
hand, may pass for a Half-Proof; both out of the just Confidence I have, That
within a little time it will appear, we wanted not this single Evidence; as
also with a certain foresight, that it will then become highly Credible, and be
seconded and supported by the whole Church.

In the mean time, from a Letter of Dionysius, a Scholar of Origen's, and
Bishop of Alexandria, which chanced to escape the Fate all his other Writings
have suffered, and which was writ about the middle of this Age; we may learn
something more particular, concerning the Fast of the Passion-Week. We have
seen above, what a great Controversy had risen about the Day, in which the
Ante-Paschal Fast should end: and some, it seems, in those Parts were now grown
so curious, as to desire to have the Hour determined, if not the Minute;
proceeding upon that general Supposition, That the Fast was to end at the Time
of our Savior's Resurrection. A Bishop of the Neighborhood having been
troubled about this Nicety, sends to Dionysius, the Famous Bishop of that
Capital City, for a Resolution; and his Answer here follows. (d) You wrote to
me, right Trusty and most excellent Son, inquiring what Hour of Easter Day the
Fast should end. For some Brethren, you say, think it ought to end at
Cock-Crow, and some the Evening before. For the Brethren of Rome, as they say,
wait for the Crowing of the Cock: and those here, you tell me, are something
sooner. But you desire me to give you the exact Hour, and that very precisely
and scrupulously determined; a thing troublesomely nice, and in which it is
easy to mistake. This indeed will be agreed by all, That we ought to begin our
Festival Joy after our Savior's Resurrection; Humbling our Souls with Fasting
till that time comes. But you have proved in your Letter very well from the
Holy Gospels, That it is not very exactly determined there, at what Hour it was
that he arose. Those places of the Gospels he then considers, and infers thus:
That the Setting out, and the Going of the Disciples, to the Sepulcher, was in
the deep of the Morning, and very early; but that they spent in their Going,
and about the Sepulcher, to Sunrising. This (says he) being the State of that
Case. To those who are so scrupulous as to inquire for the very Hour, or Half,
or Quarter of an Hour, when to begin the Festival, we Answer thus. We blame
those who make too much haste, and give over before Midnight -- And those who
hold out longer, and continue till the Fourth Watch, we commend -- But to those
who leave off in the mean time, as their Inclination or Ability has served
them, we are not severe. For, (not to be nice about Hours) the Six Days of
Fasting themselves are not kept equally, and alike by All. Some continuing
without Food pass over (e) the whole Six Days; some Two; some Three; some Four;
and some not One. Now to those who have endured such Passings over without
Sustenance, and grow unable to hold out, and are ready to faint, to them leave
is to be given for an earlier Refreshment. But if there be any, who have been
so far from thus passing over the preceding [Four] Days, that they have not so
much as fasted (f), nay, it may be, have feasted, and then coming to the Two
last and only Days, and passing over the Friday and Saturday, think they do a
great thing if they hold on to Daybreak: As to these, I cannot think that they
have strove alike [for the Mastery], with those who had been engaged in the
Exercise more Days before.

Here is, from great and unquestionable Authority, a very accurate Account of
the Manner in which the Christians of Alexandria, and that Country, passed the
Week before Easter. Nor is it to be doubted, but that those generally of other
Places observed it with more than ordinary Abstinence; though they might not
come up to all this Austerity; and though the Egyptian Christians, as well as
Jews, (for so I take Philo's Essenes to have been) may have been the greatest
Fasters each of their own Religion. Some, we are told, wholly abstained from
Food, or passed over all the Six Days; some Four, beginning with Wednesday;
some Three, and some Two. And these last did the least of those who pretended
to Pass Over: for he mentions none who thought fit to begin on the Saturday,
and so to pass over but One whole Day. He mentions indeed some who passed over
not so much as One: but it is plain, that these were very few in comparison of
the Rest; and it is besides observable, that those who did not Pass over a day
altogether, might however in the Language of this Author have Fasted a day till
the Evening: and in this manner it is probable they that Passed not over one
day, did however Fast more than one, and possibly all the Six, in the self-same
Manner in which we now keep the most solemn of our Fasts.

Such Abstinence was used in the Passion-Week at Alexandria; and, in
probability, in most other Churches: for the Account of Dionysius begins with
the mention of Rome, and Other places; and does not at all seem to appropriate
the Practice to that single City. When therefore St. Cyprian, a Cotemporary and
Correspondent of Dionysius, speaks occasionally of the first Solemnities of the
Passover, which detained his Brethren, the Bishops, at their own Churches (g);
we may very well understand them to be the Devotions of the Holy Week: and
suppose, that the Season of Seven Days before Easter, and Seven after, which by
the Law of Theodosius the Great was made a Vacation in the Courts of Justice
(h); had been before kept holy by the pious Usage of the elder Christians.

And this will seem the less strange, if we reflect upon the Practice of the
Jews about the same Season. We shall hereafter endeavor to show, that very
much of the Christian Usages were derived from them: and it will not be denied
by any, That our Easter answers in some sort to their Passover-Day, and the
Seven Holy Days after the one, to the Seven after the other. This is
acknowledged: but it is not improbable, that the Days before Easter had some
such regard too. The Monday of that Week, we have seen in the last Chapter, was
supposed to be the Day, in which the Highpriests resolved on our Savior's
Death; as it was appointed in their Law for the Day, in which they were to
single out their Paschal Lamb: and this, as we there observed, may have seemed
sufficient Reason to the Ancient Christians, to begin their stricter Devotion
then. But it is besides observable, and remarked by Theophylact (i), That the
Jews commonly began to make Entertainments, and commenced their Festivity the
Day before, that on which he supposes our Savior was entertained at Bethany,
the sixth day before the Passover: (if they did not earlyer). And this, in the
general, is the more probable, from the Appellation the Jews now give the
Sabbath before the Passover, calling it the Great Sabbath: a Greatness, I
suppose, in which the rest of the days of that Week had their share. For as the
Scripture tells us John 11.55.
, That many came up before the Passover to purify themselves, and to offer
Sacrifices for their Sins: so too we may presume, many came to pay the
Peace Offerings they had vowed; and of them, the most solemn, the
Eucharistical, were not capable, by reason of their Leavened Bread which
accompanied them Levit. 7.13.
, to be offered on any of the latter seven days, and made up therefore, as we
have reason to think, the Solemnity of the Season before. Now if those days
before the Passover were thus distinguished among the Jews, by their Festivity;
they might be among Christians as much distinguished by their Abstinence:
according to the Rule of that Apostolical Constitution, (produced by the
Audaeans, for their keeping the 14th Day, after the manner See Chapter 1.. 3.
, I suppose, of the Asiaticks); which Epiphanius thus gives us (m). When They
[the Jews] Feast, do you Fast, and Mourn for them; for in the day of their
Feast, they Crucified Christ: and when they Mourn, eating their Unleavened
Bread, with Bitter Herbs; do you Feast. For here the time of Feasting, first
mentioned, might be extended also to those Days Before See Part 2. Rep. 2. Chapter
1.. 2. Chapter 3.. 3.
: and not to a Week only, but a Fortnight. For with the Jews the First Twelve
Days of that Month are esteemed Festival, Buxt. S. Jud. c. 17.
as sacred to the Erection of the Tabernacle. And though we are told, that the
Jews do no Penitential Office this whole Month; yet its Festivalness must be
understood of its first half. For from, the Morrow of the Passover, the 16th
day, they are like Mourners; and continue under that sadness; some, above
Thirty Days; and some, all save one, to Pentecost Ibid. c. 19.
. And so, though that Constitution specifies the 14th day only, for the time of
Jewish Mourning; because on that only they were bound to eat the bitter Herbs,
and that (p) Unsavory Bread; yet the reason of the Ordinance might reach to
the 7 Weeks from the 16th, in which the Jews forbid themselves all
cheerfulness; and which, as we have seen, were still passed by Christians, on
the other hand, with all demonstrations of Joy.

But to return to the Instances of this Age, of which we were now speaking. It
is plain, from what we chance to know of this Matter, That the Passion-Week was
strictly observed: And it will be unreasonable to think, as some would persuade
us to do, That there was then no time fasted before that Week, because here is
no mention made by Dionysius of such a Time. For the Holy Man describes the
Fasting of this Week but casually, and upon occasion only; being led from the
different Ending of the Fast, to consider its different Beginning. The
Beginning therefore of such a Fast only was to be considered by him, which
continued without Interposition of Food till Easter Day: and for that Reason
the Fasts of the preceding Weeks, which were discontinued, and separated from
the last Week, by the intervening Saturdays and Sundays, had no place here, and
could not properly be mentioned by him on this Argument.

On the contrary, we cannot but presume, That those who kept this Week so
strictly, did not fail to use some sort of Abstinence more than ordinary in the
time before; if any such Season was then any where in use with Christians: such
a Season as we had some Reason to infer from Irenaeus, and Tertullian; and
shall find in the beginning of the next Age much celebrated, and observed well
nigh universally. To which I may add, That if the Conjecture I offer at on
Socrates Chapter 10.. III.
be admitted; it will then be probable, That full Three Weeks were formally
kept at this time in Rome. For if in the Days of Socrates, when the Catholics
generally observed so large a Lent, the Roman Novatians observed but Three
Weeks; it was, in all likelihood, for this Reason; Because the Novatians of
that Place, where the Schism was first founded, adhered more stiffly to the
Usages of their first Separation, and would not comply with the Enlargements
the Catholics made, as those of the same Sect, in other Cities might have been
induced to do.

(a) Orig. cont. C^is. l. 8. p. 392. Edit. C^^^. (...).

(c) Orig. Hom. 10. in Levit. H^^ tam (...) ideo (...), ^t Abs^inenti^
Christianae fran^ lax^^^^. (...) Qua^^ag (...) die^ jejuniis consecratos:
liabemus Quartam and Sext^^^ Septiman^^ dies (...) solenniter jejun^m^s.

(d) Dion. Alex. Can. 1. (...). (...)(e) (...) (f) (...).

(e) (...) may properly signify to Passover, Put off, Postpone; from (...)
Vltra, Post; [as in Phot. (...), is, Post quinque dies]: and so (...), or
(...), may be that their Food was put off for a Day, or a Day put off for their
Food; as the word Prorogate will agree in both Constructions: and, in the
latter, I suppose, Dien Cibationi solitoe superponere, is to be taken in
Solinus [Cap. 28.]; though Salmasius understands it not de cibo sumendo, but de
sumpto, [ Exerc. Pl. in Sol. p. 324. Epist. Simplic. Ver. p. 203.] as if the
Day were put upon the Food. Or, (...) may answer to that other signification of
the Latin Pro in Prorogare; as in Prolatus, productus, protractus: and so
(...), may be, to Prolong, and Protract, or put over the Fast for one, or more
Days; in which sense Jejunii superpositio [ Conc. Illiber. Can. 26.] and
(...)[See Chapter 8. lit. e] may be well understood: And possibly (...) [ (...)],
may also be much the same with our Authors (...); and signify transigere,
Producere Diem, jejunio; to Pass the Day, in Fasting; so, as Tertullian might
mean by his Sabbatum continuare. [See the last Chapter lit. (0)].

(f) Fasting a Day, must be understood here in Contradistinction to (...), or
the passing over a Day: and must therefore be taken for such an Abstinence, as
will allow some Sustenance, at least, at the latter end of the Day.

(g) Cyprian. Epist. 56. Edit. Oxon. Quoniam scripsistis, ut cum plur thus
Collegis de hoc ipso plenissime tractem; -- and nunc omnes fere inter Prima
Paschae Solennia apud se cum Fratribus demorantur: quando Solennitati
celebrandoe apud suos satisfecerint, and ad me venire coeperint, tractabo cum
singulis before.

(b) Just. Cod. Lib. 3. Tit. 12.. 7. Inter dies Feriales recensentur, Sacri
Pasch^e Dies, qui Septenario numero vel pracedunt, vel sequuntur.

(i) Theophyl. in Joan. 12.1. (...)(i 2) (...).

( i 2) This Particular may be spoke by our Author out of Exodus. For according
to Maimon. ( De sacr. Pasch. Tract. 1. Cap. 10.. XV.) this Circumstance, with
some others praescribed at the first Institution, were observed the first
Passover only, and never after.

(m) Epiph. Haer. 7.. XI. (...).

(n) Maimonid. de solenn. Pasch. seu de Ferment. and Azm. Cap. 6.. I. This is
observed by Petavius upon the place.

CHAP. VI.
. I. A Mention of a Forty Days Fast, by Peter of Alexandria, before the Council
of Nice.

. II. Very probably they were the Days before Easter.

. I. AND so have we seen all along through the three first Centuries, as much
mention of the Ante-Paschal Fast, as could be expected from the scarcity of
Authors, and the rarity of the Occasion for such a mention: the Church having
been generally employed hitherto, either in Apologies for their Religion
against the Heathens, or the Defense of it against Heathenish Heresies, or the
suffering of Persecution for it. But now in the next Age, when Christianity
comes to be owned, and countenanced by the Government; their Writings will be
more frequent, and more copious, and express: and amongst other Observations of
our Religion, we shall not fail to find sufficient Information of this, after
which we are inquiring.

But before we come to those happy Days; the last fierce Persecution it self
began by Diocletian in the East, according to Baronius, in the Year 302, and
there continued by the Cruelty of those who governed that part of the Empire,
gave occasion for some sort of mention of Forty Days, which it may be to our
Purpose to observe. Before the Persecution began, and in the beginning of this
Century, the Episcopal Chair of that great Christian City, Alexandria, in which
the above-named Dionysius had sat, was now filled by one Peter, a very
venerable Person, Eminent for his Knowledge and Sanctity, and who at last
suffered Martyrdom in the Year 311. And upon the rising of this sharp
Persecution, the Christians had behaved themselves very differently; some had
endured to the last with admirable Constancy; some yielded and denied their
Religion, after the suffering of grievous Torments; some upon the offer of
Torture, after they had undergone the Pains of Imprisonment; and some at the
first Accusation. Of those too, who had not renounced, some had escaped by
Flight; some by buying off the Prosecution; and some by hiring Witnesses, to
attest to some Idolatrous Act of theirs, which had been never done. Of all
these sorts, there were many who desired to be readmitted to the Communion of
the Church, and some had now long sought it with much Lamentation: to whose
various Circumstances different Rules were therefore to be suited, such as this
Peter, after deliberation had with his Brethren, delivered in a Discourse now
lost; but from which some Excerpts had been made in form of Canons, and by that
means preserved to us. The first Canon, as Zonaras and Balsamon give it, is
thus (a);

Whereas now the fourth Easter is come upon this Persecution; it may suffice
for those, who were accused, and imprisoned, and endured insufferable Tortures,
and intolerable scourgings, and many other grievous Cruelties, but after all
were betrayed by the Weakness of the Flesh; [for those, I say,] though they
were not admitted into Communion at first, by reason of that their great
Apostasy; yet because they strove much, and resisted a long while, (for they
fell not upon Choice, but were betrayed by the Weakness of the Flesh,) and
because they bear still in their Bodies the Marks of their Lord, and some of
them have been mourning these three Years; [for these, I say, it may suffice,]
That a Penance of Other Forty Days, to be reckoned from after their Admission,
should be additionally inflicted on them, for their Admonition: which Forty
days, though our Savior had fasted after Baptism, yet He was tempted of the
Devil; in which they too being exercised super abundantly, and more earnestly
sober, may watch unto Prayer, continually meditating on that Answer, given by
our Lord, when he was urged by the Tempter to fall down and worship him; Get
thee behind me, Satan, for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve.

This is the first Canon: and for the better understanding of it we only add,
That the second imposes another Year's Penance, upon those who had suffered the
Pain and Misery of Imprisonment, but did not resist Torture; and that the third
puts those off to the End of another Year for Trial, and not till then to
receive their Sentence, who out of Fear and Cowardliness had yielded presently.

. II. Forty Days of Fasting, and strict Devotion are here singularly and
eminently mentioned: but in what part of the Year they were placed, it is not
here certainly determined. If by the fourth Easter is come, as I have rendered
it, may be understood is now coming; and the Bishop's Discourse may be dated
before Easter: those Forty Days would then be in all probability before Easter
too, and the very Lent which we are now looking after. They must undoubtedly
have some near Aspect upon Easter: For why else is it mentioned, and the Years
of Persecution reckoned by it? And no time was so proper to re-admit Penitents
solemnly to Christian Communion, as this of the Passover; when the Pardon of
our Sins was recognized, by the solemn Memory of our Savior's Death on the
Friday; and the Holy Communion, the Sacrament of his Death, was so solemnly
frequented on the Sunday: neither was any Season of the Year more fit for the
stricter Humiliation of the Penitent, than that on which all good Christians
were ready to join in something of the like Devotion. For this Reason, we may
justly suppose, St. Cyprian Ep. 56. Edit. Oxon.
was consulted before Easter, about the same Case, the Reconciliation of those
who had been Penitents three Years; that if he had answered favorably, they
might have been admitted at the approaching Festival. So have we, under this
Supposition, a Lent of Forty Days for Penitents at least, to be kept throughout
by them, and with great Severity: while the rest, beginning as early, and using
such Abstinence as their Discretion directed, and the Necessities of their
Conscience required; equalled generally the Austerities even of those, at the
latter End. And this way if we are allowed to conceive the Canon, the Other
Forty Days there mentioned, may then respect the former Three Lents that had
gone before: except any one would rather understand that one particular Lent to
be intimated, which had been kept by these Christians just before they were
Baptized, (which too was done generally at Easter,) and which they were now
ordered to keep in the same manner again, before they should be again received
into the Church.

And thus the Forty Penitential. Days will be the very Forty Days of Lent, if
we suppose the Synod to be held before Easter: as the Nicene Council did order
afterward. But if it was not, and they did not concur with such a Lent, they
will however infer It. Let us then suppose the Synod to have been assembled
after Easter. And very probably it was; for it is not unlikely that the Order
of the Council of Nice, in this Particular, was a Change of the old Practice;
which Order was reversed in a little time, by the Council of Antioch: and
besides we see that the Synod of Ancyra, a Synod held on occasion of the same
Persecution, and much about the same time, did meet after Easter; for they
speak of the Great Day, the Day of Easter; and seem to reckon it to be about a
Year, before it would come again.

Under this Supposition, that Synod of Ancyra will help us to understand the
other of Alexandria more particularly. In its 6th Canon, it decrees, (c) That
those who had yielded cowardly to bare Threats, and had not professed their
Repentance till the time of the Synod, should be only admitted to Hear the
Scripture and the Sermons, (as hopeful Unbelievers were permitted to do) until
the Great Day: and that after the Great Day they should be of the Class of
those who Kneeled, and Prayed, and Supplicated for Pardon, (as the Catechumeni
did for Baptism) and so continue three Years: And then for two Years more, they
should Communicate with the Brethren in Prayer, but not in the Eucharist: And
finally, after six Years thus spent, they should be received into full and free
Communion.

We find by this Canon, that the Penitential Space of time, were it longer or
shorter, was generally determined by Easters: and see that Peter of Alexandria
therefore reckoned by them. And further, when he does those miserable Penitents
the Favor, after some Years Mourning, to enjoin them only the Penance of Forty
Days: we understand his Indulgence to have been so much, as to have remitted
that Yearly time, they should otherwise have been kept, at least, from the
Eucharist; and to have given them their Lent immediately. For lastly, when he
says they should fast other forty days, and says this after Easter; we cannot
doubt but that he refers to the Forty days lately passed in Abstinence, and
which concluded the preceding Year; which too, as it seems, were passed in
ordinary course, and not by any particular Injunction of his, for he appears
not to have given any Orders in this Matter before. So very probable it is,
even from this accidental Testimony, That a Lent of Forty Days was kept at
Alexandria before the Council of Nice: and that we should so think, we are now
going to see what great Reason there is from that Council it self.

(a) Dion. Alex. Can. 1. (...).

(c) Conc. An^yr. Can. VI. (...).

CHAP. VII.
. I. Good Friday, and Days of solemn Fasting mentioned by Constantine.

. II. The Forty Season expressly mentioned by the Council of Nice.

. III. And that Forty Days are to be understood, proved from St. Chrysostom.

. I. WE come now to the first General Council, Assembled at Nice, under the
first Christian Emperor, in the Year 325: and amongst other things taken into
their Consideration, another Paschal Difference was then adjusted. The Syrians,
it seems, (a) and Cilicians without Taurus, and the Mesopotamians, though they
kept the Resurrection-day on a Sunday, according to the Resolution in Victor's
time (b); yet agreed so much with the Jews, as to follow their wrong
Calculation, and begin the Year sooner than they ought; by which means this
Paschal Season often happened before the Aequinox: whereas the rest of
Christendom had all used a more Reformed Account of their own, agreeable to the
Directions of Moses. It was therefore thought fit by the Council, That such a
notable Difformity among Christians, and such an Agreement with the Jews, in
the Principal Christian Solemnity, things in that time, as it appears, very
scandalous, should no longer continue: which Regulation the Emperor himself
considered so much, as to notify and recommend it to the Churches in a
Circular Letter, transmitted to after Ages by Eusebius. There (c) he tells
them, That a Question having been raised about the most Holy Day of the
Passover, it was thought fit, by unanimous Consent, to keep it every where on
the same Day. -- That it was extremely improper to keep that most Holy Feast,
from which we have received the Hopes of Immortality, after the Custom of the
Jews, who embrued their hands in that wicked Action. That setting aside the
Jewish Manner, there was a truer Course and Calculation, by which the Solemnity
of that Observation, which had been kept from the first Passion-Day, might be
hereafter perpetuated to all Ages --. That besides, the Absurdity of Erring
with their Enemies the Jews, there was an Unfitness in their Disagreement among
themselves. That our Savior had delivered to us One Feast, the Day of our
Redemption or Freedom, that of his most Holy Passion, and that he had ordained
one Catholic Church: and that therefore they might consider, How improper it
was for some Parts of that Church to be Fasting, whilst others were Feasting;
and some after the Days of the Passover were over, to be in Joy and Festivity,
while others were at their Solemn Fasts; and both of them for the same common
Reason. -- That he promised himself their Assent to that, which was already
uniformly observed in Rome, and Africa, and all Italy; in Egypt, Spain,
France, Britain, Libya, all Greece; the Dioceses (d) of Asia and Pontus, and in
Cilicia within Taurus; and not only because there were the Greater Number; but
because it was the right Course, and the Christians were besides to have no
Communication with their and our Savior's Enemies the Jews.

In this Imperial Letter, we may (1) observe the extraordinary Notice that is
taken of Good Friday: That alone of all the Paschal Season is specified; and
Easter Day it self is unmentioned, as if it were the less Principal. And this,
it may be, was done in Honor to the Catholic Doctrine, and against the New
heresy of Arius; which depressed infinitely the Dignity of our Savior, and
the Merit of his Sufferings; as it was the Day of the Passion of God, and not
of any Creature. Whereas on the contrary, the Resurrection of a Creature,
should have been mentioned before its Passion, as the more Extraordinary and
Remarkable of the Two, both for its Cause and Manner, and its Effects and
Virtue. But whatever might be the Reason of this singular Mention of
Good Friday; this is certain, That every Friday, for the sake of the Passion,
had by an Edict of this Emperor (e) the like Exemption from Civil Business
with the Lord's Day it self: as, we may remember, Origin above gave it an equal
Remembrance, if Tertullian too did not distinctly specify it before. (2.)
Solemn and prescribed Fastings are here spoke of, and before Easter: But how
many they generally were, and how far they reached, we are not told from this,
no more than from other Authorities we have heretofore vouched. We should
indeed presume that they might have made up the Holy Week from Dionysius; or it
may be a Week or two before, from what we observed on Tertullian; and when we
concluded from Peter of Alexandria, That they were about Forty, a Term
remembered by Irenaeus before, we could not have been thought to have stretched
too far, and been overfond of that Number. But a Canon of the same Council,
accidentally mentioning the Ante-Paschal Fast, will sufficiently authorize the
Opinion.


. II. THE 5th. Canon (f) after it has decreed, (upon the Occasion, it is
supposed, of Arius, having been received into Communion by Eusebius,
notwithstanding his Excommunication;) That those who have been Ejected by one
Bishop, should not be Admitted by another: to provide against unjust
Excommunications upon Quarrel and Passion, does order, That for the Examination
of such Causes, Two Synods a Year should be held in every Province. And these,
says the Canon, shall be held, The One before the Forty Season, that all
Quarrel and Animosity being first laid aside, [as our Savior directs,] a Pure
and Acceptable Gift may be offered unto God, [in the Devotions of that Holy
Time;] and the Other in Autumn.

Here now is a certain undisputed Mention of the Forty Season, made by this
Great Assembly of Confessors: but Mr. Daille is very unwilling to understand
them of Forty Days. He rather would think, because the word Forty Season will
be found hereafter some times to signify a Lent in general, and of uncertain
Space; that therefore it arose first from the Forty Hours he fansied in
Irenaeus, and afterward gave its name to that Fast as it increased in Space;
and was now at length come to signify the Passion-Week; as it will hereafter
in some time have so many Days added to it as shall make up the Number Forty.
And, he says, Forty Days must not be understood here: for in so large a time,
new Quarrels might be raised; and the Synods too must be held in February, an
inconvenient Season for the Bishops to travel.

But this Original of the Forty Season from so many Hours, is a mere
Singularity, and grounded upon a very doubtful Construction of Irenaeus his
Phrase, which rather requires to be understood of Forty Days, as has already
appeared. Neither is it reasonable to imagine, That a Word which signifies
Forty, should be put to signify Six Days of Fasting; now when we know from the
Church of Alexandria, that Forty Days have been before observed for a Solemn
Space of Penitential Devotion: and much less reasonable when we shall know,
that so many Days in this self same Age hereafter will always be aimed at, and
as near as may be approached to, in the Computation of Lent, as we shall
presently see.

. III. THERE is therefore little need that I should go further for the fixing
the Signification of that Word in this Canon: but it may be further cleared
from St. Chrysostom. He was in Antioch, the chief place of the East, where
that Jewish Account of the Passover was kept, which the Council of Nice had
ordered to be reformed: and the People were so addicted to it, (as they were
too to other Customs of the Jews); that though the Observation of it was again
forbid by a Council at Antioch in the Year 341; yet some of them continued
superstitiously to adhere to it, and obliged this Eloquent Priest, to interrupt
the Order of his Discourses, and to bestow one whole Sermon upon the Correction
of their Schismatical Dissent. They imagined that Easter was necessarily to be
kept at the Time of Unleavened Bread, and pretended that this had been their
Ancient Use. St. Chrysostom therefore acquaints them, That the Alteration was
made by the Wisdom and Piety of the Great Council of Nice, those illustrious
Confessors of the Christian Faith: that they thought it unfit for them any
longer to follow the Jews in their erroneous Calculation, and that the whole
World agreed to the Ordinance. He tells them, That the Jewish Passover is
abolished; That Christ is the Passover of the Christians; and That it is
celebrated by them every Communion. To which he adds, (g) Why then, say you, do
we fast these Forty Days? Because anciently many were used to come to these
Mysteries without due Preparation, and particularly at this time in which our
Savior instituted the Sacrament; the Fathers knowing well the Mischief of such
a Negligence, being come together, appointed Forty Days of Fasting, Praying,
Hearing, and Assembling; that we being all carefully purified in these Days
both by Prayer, and by Alms, and by Fasting, and by Watching, and by Tears, and
by Confession, and by all other Duties; may so draw near, as far as is possible
for us, with a pure Conscience. And how great the Success of this Ordinance
was, in bringing us to a Custom of Fasting, is very evident hence. For if we
all the Year long Cry up and Preach the Duty of Fasting never so much, there is
no body that hearkens to what is said: but when the Season of the Forty Days is
once come, though none exhort or advise them; yet every one, even the most
negligent, sets himself to it, by the Advice and Exhortation of the Season.

Now I take it to be very plain, That the Fathers here spoke of for Lent, are
the same with those mentioned but just before for Easter. For had they been of
any other Council, or Synod; they would have been named with some distinction.
And if any one would be so unreasonable, as to suppose some other Council
meant, yet he must remember, that it must be such a one as might be styled
Ancient about the Year 390; and therefore rather before that of 325, than
after: and then he must withal reflect, that he gives me an Earlier Authority,
than that for which I now contend. But unquestionably, as I think, St.
Chrysostom must be understood of the Nicene Fathers: and if we take his
Judgment, we see evidently that they, by their Forty Season, could intend
nothing else but their Forty Days. It is true indeed, that there is no
particular Canon to be found, that injoins this Lent of Forty Days: but neither
is the Ordinance about Easter, found in the Canons, though it was such a
disputed Point. A^^ it may too very well be, that the Observation of Forty Days
was rather interlocutorily agreed upon, than formally determined; and not
therefore enjoined in any other Canon, but implied in this of which we now
speak; and that the Churches of differing Customs, voluntarily came in to this
Uniformity of Lent, upon the general Direction they received to Conform in the
Celebration of Easter.

So has it appeared, That Mr. Daille's Refusal, to understand Forty Days by the
Forty Season, was not only ungrounded and arbitrary, neither derived from the
Practice just before the time of the Canon, nor agreeable to that after; but
withal directly contrary to the express Affirmation of St. Chrysostom. For as
to the Objections he has brought, if they are worth mentioning: the
Inconvenience he fancies, that in so long a time as Forty Days they might
quarrel again, after their Synodical Reconciliation; seems to be said with more
Favor to his own Hypothesis, than Respect to those Venerable Persons: and the
other of a February Journey, though of Elder Men, to the Metropolis of a
Province, where other Business too might call them, is not very great; it was
not at least so considerable to the Nicene Fathers, as that of their continuing
at Difference one with another in the Holy Season. But not to be difficult in
small things; we will grant that this Inconvenience might be one of the
Reasons, why the abovenamed Council of Antioch, by the 24th Canon, restored it
to its former Place after Easter, and settled it in the 4th Week: and it seems
indeed by the special Assignation of a Reason, for the time of a Synod before
Lent; that it was first fixed there, by this Council of Nice. However after
all, the Forty Season there must stand for Forty Days: and we cannot but
observe, That it is not set down as any newly raised word, but as one already
well known, and of as common a Signification as Spring or Autumn. From whence
what we have before suggested, plainly now appears, That such a Number of Days
had been in much Use before in many places, at least in the last Age: though no
mention of them happened to occur, in the few Writings that remain.

(a) Athan. ad Afr. Ep. (...)

(b) So Socrates understands. For after he has given an Account of the Astatick
Custom, against which Victor declared; he proceeds to peak of the Usage this
Council rectified, in these Words. (...). Socrat. l. 5. c. 22. Beside, it is
plain from that Homily of St. Chrysostom we shall presently cite,
(notwithstanding what is said to the contrary by Mr. Daille, de Quadrages. page
422; that those of Antioch in his time, who did not conform to the Council of
Nice, did however keep their Easter on a Sunday. For he tells them, That were
the Calculation of the Jews never so exact, etc. yet they could not keep the
precise Day, because the First of Unleavened Bread and a Friday would not
always come together. [Edit. Savil. Tom. 6. p. 383. l. 7.] and it is in that
Case, says he, impossible for us, you, or my one else, to hit the very Sunday,
(...). [ ibid. p. 384. l. 33.] He lays the Difference too in the different
Reckoning of the Months, (as Socrates does;) when he says, That they should be
careful of coming to the Sacrament worthily, and with the Wedding Garment; but
that they need not be so fearful of keeping their Easter after the Christian
Account, were it less accurate. For they were to Answer, and should be
Punished, for the other Neglect: (...)[ ibid. 382. l. 32.] b^^ no man was ever
punished, or so much as found fault with, for keeping Easter in this Month, and
not in another.

(c) Eus. de Vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 17, 18. -- (...).

(d) (...) is in this place to be understood properly, and exclusive of the
Asia Proconsularis; if the Bishops of Asia Minor, strictly so termed, continued
to observe the 14th Day, as Anatolius affirms for his time, and Socrates seems
to assert for the time of the Nicene Council. Though it be hard to think that
the Churches of the Proconsular Asia, if they had still retained the old
Quartodecimarian Error, should not have been included in this mention: and
that the Council would have been so silent concerning this Error, kept up
against the Ancient Determination in so near and famous a Country; when we
find them so zealous against those who were at a greater distance, and whose
Practice was less Judaical.

(e) Eusebius. de Vit. Constantin. l. 4. c. 18. ex emendatione Vales^i. Sozom. l.
1. c. 7.

(f) Council. Nicen. Can. V. -- (...)

(g) (...) Tomo Sexto Savil. (...) page 381.

CHAP VIII.
. I. This Forty Season particularly observed by the Candidates for Baptism.

. II. And by Penitents.

. I. FOR the time that follows, we shall have little Dispute about the Practice
of Forty Days: that there was such a Solemn Time before Easter, some way or
other observed in all the Churches, none will deny. This is evident and
absolutely unquestionable, from St. Cyril of Jerusalem, St. Ambrose of Milan,
St. Chrysostom, St. Jerome, and St. Augustine; who expressly mention Forty
Days; as the Council of Laodicea, and Athanasius, speak of more Weeks than one
of the Forty Season. I shall not therefore trouble the Reader with the
unnecessary Allegation of all those Testimonies; but only with such who inform
us, That this Lent was still most particularly observed by those two kinds of
Men we heretofore intimated Chapter 2.. II.
, the Candidates for Baptism, and the Penitents.

Of a Fast before Baptism, I gave there a very early Testimony from Justin
Martyr: and what was then further intimated, might have been confirmed from
Tertullian, That for Baptism the Paschal Season afforded a solemn Day. And now
in this Age, we cannot but think, That the Lent of Forty Days, which is
acknowledged to have been kept commonly by all the Faithful, was more
particularly observed by those who were to be baptized at the conclusion of it.
On this Subject therefore it will be enough, to produce the single Evidence of
St. Cyril of Jerusalem.

He is judged to have been made Bishop there in the Year 350: and was Presbyter
Catechist before; whose Duty it was to instruct and prepare those Candidates,
and whose Catechistical Lectures are still preserved. In the Prologue he
forewarns them, to take care and provide the Wedding Garment. I admonish you,
says he, (b) now before the Bridegroom of our Souls comes, and sees your Dress.
There is a large Time given you. You have the Penance before you of Forty Days:
sufficient Space and Opportunity, to put off the old Garments, and to wash off
their Filth, and to put on the new ones, and to come in. Likewise the first
Sermon to them, he thus begins: (c) You Disciples of the New Covenant; and
Partners of the Mysteries of Christ, by Call and Invitation now, and within a
little while by actual Gift and Grace; make to your selves a new Heart and a
new Spirit. Then he tells them, That they shall have a new Name; and he that
was called a Catechumen before, shall now be styled Faithful. -- But though
this Grace is freely given, they must not therefore be negligent: the present
Season is a Season of Confession -- All worldly Cares are to be laid aside: for
you strive, says he, for your Souls. Adding, And you that have been busy about
the things of the World, troubled in vain so many Years: Will ye not bestow
Forty Days in Prayer, for the Salvation of your Souls. And when the Catechumens
had in this manner spent the Forty Days, abstaining from Flesh and Wine (d);
and had passed over the Friday and the Saturday of the Passion Week, in Vigils
and a continued Fast (e); they were then in the Evening before Easter baptized.

This was unquestionably the Practice of the Fourth Century: and now I shall
leave the Reader to observe, how much of this Tertullian, in his Book of
Baptism, describes as done in his time. After he had said what we now cited,
That there was in the Paschal Season a more solemn Day for Baptism, he adds in
the next Chapter, (f) Those who are going to be baptized, ought to pray with
frequent Prayers, with Fastings, and Kneelings, and Watchings, and with the
Confession of all their former Sins. For by this Affliction of the Flesh and
the Spirit, we at the same time make some Satisfaction for what is past, and
fortify our selves against Temptations for the future. Watch and pray, says
he, that ye enter not into temptation. And I presume they [the Disciples] were
therefore so far tempted, because they slept -- Our Lord himself was surrounded
with Tentations, presently after his Baptism, when he had performed [his] Fasts
Forty Days. And therefore may some one say, We too should rather fast after
Baptism: -- Now in this place I confess, it is not evident, that the Paschal
Vigils, and the Forty Days Fast before Easter are particularly meant; and
therefore heretofore I did not bring this Passage for a Proof: but neither is
it improbable that they are intended; for the time of the Apostles sleeping
agrees to the time of those Vigils; and the Forty Days Abstinence of our
Savior, being not mentioned with any intimation of the one continued
extraordinary Fast, but as so many Fastings, may also well refer to those of
the Catechumen.

. II. IT has appeared already from the Synod of Alexandria, That Forty Days had
been in Use for a Penitential Fast before th^^ (...); and that in all
likelihood those Days were just before Easter. I shall therefore be content to
add only two Authorities: The one concerning the Number of those Days, and the
other concerning their Place.

And as for the Fast of Penitents, how proper Forty Days are for that Office, I
shall give the Authority of St. Jerome in his Commentary on Jonas: excribing
the whole Passage, the rather because it will be of further Service hereafter.
The old Translation of the 3d. Chapter of Jonas at the 14th. Verse, was thus,
Yet three days and Nineveh shall be destroyed: upon which he says, (g) The
Number Three, which is put by the Septuagint, is not proper for Penitents. And
I cannot but wonder how it came to be so translated; seeing in the Hebrew there
is no Agreement either in the Letters, or Syllables, or Accents, or Words.
Besides the Prophet sent from Judaea, on so long a journey, was to require a
Penitence worthy of his Preaching; that such old and putrid Ulcers might be
cured with a Plaster, that should lie some longer time upon them. Now Forty is
a number that is proper for Penitents, and Fasting, and Prayer, and Sackcloth,
and Tears, and Perseverance in deprecating God's Anger. For which reason Moses
also fasted forty days in Mount Sinai: and Elias, flying from Jezabel, and the
Wrath of God impending upon Israel, is described to have fasted forty days. Our
Lord likewise himself, the true Jonas, who was sent to preach [Repentance] to
the World; fasted forty days: and leaving to us the Inheritance of his Fasting,
still prepares our Souls for the Eating of his Body by the same Number.

Here we have the Fitness of Forty Days for Penance, in the Judgment of St.
Jerome, and we suppose of the Church of his time; the only Remark thence we
make as yet.

The Fitness of Easter Day for the Readmission of those Penitents into the
Bosom of the Church, we shall find from Gregory Nyssen; in the Preface of that
excellent Letter, which he wrote to Letoius Bishop of Metilene about Canonical
Penances, and sent him probably for an Easter Present. It thus begins: (h) This
too is one of those things which appertain to the Holy Festival, the
consideration of the Rightful and Canonical Dispensation which is to be
exercised upon Offenders; that every Spiritual Malady, which has been
contracted by any Sin, may have its proper Cure. For seeing this Catholic
Festival, the Festival of the Creation, kept throughout the World every Year,
in the stated Period of the Annual Circle, is celebrated for the Resurrection
of him that fell; and Sin is a Fall, and Rising up from the Fall of Sin is a
Resurrection: it must be very proper on this Day, not only to bring to God by
the Grace of the Font, such as are transformed by Regeneration; but those too,
who by Penitence and turning to God are come back from dead Works into the way
of Life, to lead these as it were by the hand to that saving Hope, from which
they have been estranged by Sin.

The meaning of this Preface is plain, That a Penitential Discourse was as
proper a Subject before Easter, as a Catechistical. And this he might think fit
to premise; because in those times there might seem to be more occasion for the
Catechistical; then when by the Grace of God the number of those who needed
solemn Penance was very inconsiderable, in respect of the multitude of Adult
Converts to Christianity. And for the same reason, I presume, Penance appears
more formally in the Lents of some Ages hereafter, than it did before; because
few grown Persons were then to be baptized, to whom Catechistical Discourses
belonged; and occasion for the other, the Penitential Exhortations, there was
then too much: not but that the solemn Preparation of Penitents by Lent, might
have been as ancient well nigh, as that of the Candidates for Baptism. The
Reason certainly for their Admission at Easter was the same: as our Author has
suggested, and we have before observed.

(b) Cyr. Hieros. Prologus. (...).

(c) Catech. 1. (...), --. (...). -- (...);

(d) Catech. 4. (...).

(e) Catec^. 18. In his Discourse on the Saturday, he tells them, he spares
them, in Consideration of the fatigue they had undergone, from their continuing
on the Fast begun on Friday, and from their Watching. (...). And this both
Watching and Fasting, is expressed by St. Hilary to have been commensurate to
the time of our Lord's Passion: and is therefore reckoned to have continued
three days. Hilar. in Can. 15. Matthew. Venturi ad Baptismum prius confitentur,
credere se in Dei Filio, and in Passionc and Resurrectione ejus: and huic
Professionis Sacramento sides redditur. Arque ut bane verborum sponsionem,
quaedam rerum ipsarum veritas consequatur; toto in Jejuniis Passionis Dominicae
tempore demorantes, quadam Domino Passionis societate junguntur. Igitur sive ex
Sponsionis Sacramento, sive Jejunio, omne illud Passionis Dominicae cum Domino
agunt tempus: and huju^ spei ^rque comitatus Dominus misertus, ait. Secum
Triduo esse.

(f) Tert. de Bapt. c. 20. Ingressuros Baptismum Orationibus crebris, Jejuniis,
and Geniculationibus, and Pervigiliis orare oportet, and cum confessione omnium
retro Delictorum -- Simul enim and de Pristinis satisfacimus conflictatione
Carnis and Spiritus, and subsequuturis Tentationibus munimenta praestruimus.
Vigilate and Orate, inquit, ne incidatis in tentationem. Et ideo, credo,
tentati sunt, quoniam obdormierunt, --. lpsum Dominum post Lavacrum statim
tentationes circumsteterunt, quadraginta diebus jejuniis functum. Ergo and nos
dicet aliquis, a Lavacro potius jejunare oportet. Et quis enim prohibet, nisi
necessitas Gaudii, and gratulatio Salutis?

(g) Hieron. in Joh. c. 3. Trinus numerus qui ponitur a Septuaginta, non
convenit Poenitentiae: and satis miror cur ita translatum sit; cum in Hebreo
nec Literarum, nec Syllabarum, nec Accentuum, nec Verbi sit ulla Communitas. --
Alioqui and de Judea tanto itinere missus Propheta in Assyrios, dignam suae
Praedicationis Poenitentiam flagitabat: ut antiqua and putrida vulnera diu
apposito curarentur Emplastro. Porro Quadragenarius numerus convenit
Peccatoribus, and Jejunio, and Orationi, and Sacco, and Lachrymis, and
Perseveranti^e deprecandi: ob quod and Moses quadraginta diebus jejunavit in
Monte Sina: and Helias fugiens Jezabel, and Dei desuper ira pendente,
quadraginta dies jejunasse describitur. Ipse quoque Dominus verus Jona missus
ad Praedicationem Mundi, jejunavit quadraginta dies: and haereditatem nobis
Jejunii relinquens, ad esum Corporis sui sub hoc numero nostras animas
praeparat.

(h) Greg. Nyss. Ep. Can. ad Letoium. (...).

CHAP. IX.
. I. A Lent always, and every where observed, though not of Forty Days.

. II. Mr. Daille's Objections against it from Cassian.

. III. From St. Jerome.

. IV. From St. Chrysostom.

. I. THE Reader may perceive, by the liberty we have taken of this Digression,
concerning Baptism and Penance, that we are now at leisure, and free of all
Difficulties concerning the Actual Observation of the Forty Season. And indeed
about the Fast of it Mr. Daille henceforth gives us no trouble; but against the
Apostolical Right, he is still looking out for Evidence. But in that Point the
Reader may have already understood, how little we are concerned: who do not
pretend to prove, That a Lent of so many certain Days was observed in the
latter end of the Apostolical Age; but that some Lent there then was generally
kept by all, and probably of Forty Days by some in the second Century; a thing
that will not, I presume, appear so strange, when we come to the Second Part of
this Discourse. Though therefore I am inclinable to believe, that there was
very anciently some regard had to the Number Forty; and that this in process of
time increased very much, so as to have been the Solemn Number of Lent in many
Churches by the End of the Third Century: yet I am willing to allow, from what
we have seen of St. Chrysostom, That this Observation grew so universal from
the Recommendation of the Nicene Fathers. Those Forty Days too, though regarded
and observed, yet I do not say, that they were all of them fasted, and every
where equally: but am ready to allow what St. Chrysostom intimates (...)15.
, that in his time at Antioch, some fasted Two, some Three, and some all the
Weeks of them, at their own Discretion; and what Socrates will hereafter tell
us of the same kind.

. II. That also which Cassian a Disciple of St. Chrysostom's says, and is used
to be produced upon this Argument, as an unanswerable Objection against the
Antiquity of Lent, I have no need to dissemble. It is to be known, says he, (b)
that this Observation of forty days, [as it is now strictly enjoined,] had no
being as long as the Perfection of the Primitive Church continued. For those
who enlarged the Fast throughout the whole Year, were not confined by the
necessity of this Ordinance, nor within such narrow bounds of Fasting, as if
under a Legal Restraint. But when the Multitude of Believers, daily falling off
from that Apostolical Devotion, began to grow worldly --: then it was thought
fit by the Bishops of the Universal Church, That Men, immersed in the Cares of
the World, and wholly ignorant, if I may so say, of any such thing as
Abstinence and Repentance, should be reduced to the Holy Duty by this Canonical
Injunction of Fasts; and compelled to it, as it were, by the Imposition of a
Legal Tenth (c): An Injunction advantageous to the weak, and which cannot be
prejudicial to the perfect; those, who being under the Grace of the Gospel, by
their voluntary Devotion [already] exceed the prescribed Law.

I shall not now observe, what some might venture to say; That Cassian speaks
all this upon Mistake, supposing with Eusebius here, what he evidently does in
another place (d), That the Egyptian Essenes, described by Philo, were
Disciples of St. Mark, and that the Primitive Christians lived all at first in
that Austerity. I shall only remark, that Cassian speaks here of the forty
days, and not of a Lent in general; and of their being fasted by Injunction,
and not at Discretion. And therefore those Perfect Men of his, who fasted the
whole Year, might however have fasted some peculiar time before Easter, with a
more peculiar Devotion; (for that they fasted all the Days cannot be meant by
him, much less with an equal Abstinence:) and they might too, some of them,
have so particularly fasted Forty Days, though not by Legal Direction, yet by
their own Choice, notwithstanding any thing said in this place. If too we
understand the time, when these Forty Days were first imposed by common
Consent, to have been that of the Nicene Council; this is no more than we
before had from his Master St. Chrysostom. But if he means some elder Times,
and he may the very first Age; (For they began to be lukewarm very early, as we
learn from some parts of the New Testament); we have then a Testimony from
Cassian of a much higher Antiquity, for this Quadragesimal Institution. However
that which he adds, concerning the Imposition of Forty Days, whenever it began,
that it was no hinderance to the Perfect; is very observable, and to be
considered by all Pretenders to Perfection. For the Injunction, he intimates,
though not made for the Perfect, would however be kept by them: and they would
show they were under Grace, by Exceeding, and not by Transgressing the
Ecclesiastical Law. In as much as he that fasts every day, will not fail to
fast forty: and he that is ready to offer his whole Time, will not hold back
the Tenth.

. III. WE see how far Cassian's Expressions are from any Reflection upon the
Institution of Lent: and those of St. Jerome, alleged usually for the same
Purpose, apparently require the same Construction; and need only to be seen, if
the Reader will bear the length of the Passage. (e) Some may say, if it be not
lawful to observe Days and Months, etc. we then are under the like Guilt, who
observe Wednesday, and Friday, and the Lord' s Day, and the Fast of the Forty
Season, and the Holy Days of the Passover, and the Joy of the Pentecost, and
the several Days that are kept in several Countries in Honor of Martyrs. To
this he that will give the plain Answer, will reply; That the Days the Jews
observe, are not the same with ours. For we do not celebrate the Passover of
Unleavened Bread, but of the Resurrection, and the Cross: neither do we in
Pentecost reckon the Seven Weeks with the Jews, but in Veneration of the Coming
of the Holy Ghost. And least the want of orderly Assembling should be a Cause
of Decay of Religion, therefore Days in which we should come together have been
appointed: not that the Day in which we meet is of it self more solemn; but
that in what day soever it be we meet, there may arise a Festival Joy from our
mutual sight one of another. This is the plain Answer. But he that would
endeavor to give a more Acute and Refined one, will say; That all Days are
equal, and that Friday is not the only day of the Crucifixion, nor the Lord' s
Day of the Resurrection: but that there is always a Resurrection-Day to Him,
and that he always feeds on our Lord's Body: but that such Days of Fasting and
Assembling have been prescribed by Wise Men, for the sake of those who are
employed more about the World than God, and cannot, or rather will not,
assemble together every day of their Life.

The Plain Answer, for ought appears, is not judged by St. Jerome to be the
worst. And the other, the more Subtle one, relishes, we know, of the Refinement
and Allegory of Origin, and Clemens Alexandrinus, from whom, I suppose, it was
taken: and what we before observed, is now to be remembered, That the Lord's Day
it self is here put in the same Case with the Days of Lent, etc. and that the
reason for their Institution is common, and that they are said alike all of
them to have had Prudent Men for their Authors. Now those prudent Men, if they
were the Authors of the Observation of the Lord's Day, must have been the
Apostles themselves, as we presume the Authors of the Observation of a Lent
were at least Apostolical: but if they are to be understood the Authors of the
Injunction of such an Observation; in that sense possibly the Authors for the
Lord's Day, might have been Apostolical; and those for an Additional Lent
beyond Good Friday or Saturday, yet later. He too that makes this last answer,
and seems to slight the Ordinance of Times and Days; does it in Virtue of his
great Perfection, such of which Cassian now spoke: One who is above the
Ordinance, because he never wanted it; as a charitable Christian is above the
Law against Stealing: and does not plead for the Abridgment of the Fast, but
for the Extending it throughout the Year; therefore accounting no Single Day
Holy, because All are so to him.

IV. THESE are the Objections against the devout Institution of Lent, brought
out of St. Jerome and Cassian: others there are from St. Chrysostom, but of
the like Nature, and not worth the answering. As when he says, in the Passage
above produced, That every Communion is a Passover; he speaks it partly in the
sense now mentioned; and besides in opposition to the Jewish Superstition of
those Syrians, who took the Levitical Designation of the Passover to be still
in force. And when he elsewhere prefers the Abstinence from Vice, as from
Swearing, before that from Meats; it is plain he speaks not against the
Observation of that Abstinence, as a thing not to be practiced; but as a thing
absurd and unprofitable, without a suitable Conversation, a necessary
Concomitant, and always to be presumed.

As therefore we have Mr. Daille's Confession for the Universal Observation of
these Forty Days at the latter end of this Age, and that Lent hereafter
increased rather than diminished: so we hope the equal Reader will confess,
That the Prejudices that very Learned Person would have raised against it, from
some Authors about that time, are very unjustly grounded. I have therefore now
no more to do in this first Part of my Task; and am to shut up my Evidence, and
conclude here with a brief Recapitulation: But in that I shall be assisted by
two Cotemporary Authors about the Middle of the fifth Age. Sozomen, and
Socrates, whom the Reader will be pleased to hear.

(b) Cassian. Coll. 21. Cap. 30. Sciendum sane bane Observantiam Quadragesimae,
quamdiu Ecclesi^e islius Primitivae ^ers^^tiv permansit, penitus non fuisse.
Non enim Pracepti bujus necessiate, nes quasi legali sanctione constricti,
ar^tissimis J^^^ierum ter^^inis cla^debantur, qui totum anni spariam aquali
jejan^^ concludebant. Verum cum ab illa Apostoli^a Devotione d^scendens
quotidie Cred^^ium multitudo suis opibus ^^cubaret; -- id tune universis
Sacerdotibus placuit; ut bomines this secularibus illigatos, and pene ut ita
dixerim continent^e and compunctionis ignaros, ad opus sanctum ^^anonied
jejuniorum indictione revocarent, and velut Legalium Decimarum (c) necessitate
compellerent: qua^utique Infirmis prodesse possu, and Perfectis prajudicare non
possi^, qui sub gratia Evangelli constiu^i vol^^^aria Legem devotione
transcendunt.

(c) This Tenth of the Days of the Year is 36, the Number of Fast Days in a
Lent o^ 6. Weeks, such as the Alexandrians kept as well as the Lui^s. And this
Number is the Integral Tenth of the Days of a Solar Year: but exactly so of the
Egyptian Year, which reckoned but 360 days, and accounted the other as
super-numerary. For this Notion of Tithing of the Year, looks like a Subtilty
of their Calculation.

(d) Cass. de Coenob. Inst. 2.5. In primordiis ^id^i punck quidem, sed
proba^issimi, snui a Marco Norman sus^^p^re ^l^^^^l non solum illa magnifica
retinebam, quae pri^^us Cr^^enti^ (...) bas legimus celebrass^; verum his multo
sabl^^lo^^ ^^^rant -- Ea igitur tempasiate, cum E^ele^i^ (...) Perfectio penes
sucessores suos adhue recenti memoria inviolata permaneret, fervensque Paucorum
sides needum in Multitudinem diffusa repuisset; --

(e) Hieron. in cap. 3. Ep. ad Galat. Dicat aliquis, si Dies observare non
licet, and Menses, and Tempora, and Annos: Nos quoque simile Crimen incurrimus,
Quartam sabbati observantes, and Parasceven, and Diem Dominicam, and jejunium
Quadragesimae, and Pasch^e Festivitatem, and Pentecostes Laetitiam, and pro
varietate Regionum diversa in honorem Martyrum tempora constituta. Ad quod qui
simpliciter respondebit dicet; non eosdem Judaicae observationis dies esse,
quos nostros. Nos enim non Azymorum Pascha celebramus, sed Resurrectionis and
Crucis: Nee septem juxta morem Israel numeramus Hebdomadas in Pentecoste; sed
Spiritus sancti veneramur Advemum. Et ne inordinata congregatio populi fidem
mimueret in Christo; propterea dies aliqui constituti sunt, ut in unum omnes
pariter veniremus: Non quo celebrior sit dies illa, qua convenimus; sed quo,
quacunque die conveniendum six, ex conspectu mutuo latitia major oriatur. Qui
vero oppositae quastioni acutius respondere conatur, illud affirmat; omnes dies
^quales esse; nec per Parasceven tantum Christum crucifigi, and Die Dominica
resurgere, sed semper sanctam Resurrectionis esse Diem, and semper cum Carne
vesci Dominica. Jejuniorum autem and Congregationum interea dies, propter cos a
Viris Prudentibus constitutos, qui magis seculo vacant quam Deo; nec possunt,
immo nolunt, toto in Ecclesia vitae suae tempore congregari. Quotus enim
quisque est, qui saltem b^co pauca quae sta^uta sunt, vel Orandi tempora vel
Jejunandi, semper exerceat?

CHAP. X.
. I. Sozomen's Account of the keeping of Lent in his Time about Ann. Chr. 440.

. II. What Additions have been made since.

. III. Socrates his Account of the Practice of the same Age, I suppose, by the
Novatians.

. IV. His Wonder, That Lents of differing Lengths should all of them be called
the Forty Season.

. V. The Conclusion.

I. THE Novatians, who held it unlawful to re-admit any into the Church, who
had either renounced the Faith in time of Persecution, or had committed some
other grievous Crimes; and who had on this account themselves renounced the
Communion of the Church in St. Cyprian's time, about the middle of the Third
Century; were now greatly divided among themselves in this Age, about the
Observation of Easter: the same Dispute, which the Authority of the Nicene
Council had composed among the Catholics, now breaking out among those
Schismatics, and making a new and very angry Schism between them. This Quarrel
of theirs Sozomen relates; and upon occasion of it, he mentions the peaceable
Behavior of Anicetus and Polycarp, remembered on the same Subject by Ireneus:
and in Imitation of the same Author, and to show that it is not fit to break
Communion about such Traditional Differences, he represents at large the great
Variety of Usages in the Churches of his time professing the same Faith (a):
That among the Scythians, there is but one Bishop over all their Cities:
whereas in Arabia, etc. there are Bishops in Villages: That in Rome, there are
no more than seven Deacons; and they sing Halleluiah there, but once in the
Year on Easter Sunday: that there either (b) the Bishop preaches, or some one
else; but in Alexandria the Bishop only, etc. And (he adds) the Forty Season,
as it is called, before Easter, in which the People use to fast, some reckon by
six Weeks; as those of Illyricum do, and all Europe, westward; and those of
Africa, and Egypt, and Palestine: some by seven; as in Constantinople, and the
Countries about it, as far eastward as the Phoenicians. And some fast three of
the six or seven Weeks discontinued: and some the three before Easter together:
and some two, as the Followers of Montanus.

That the Followers of Montanus kept their Lent the Fortnight before Easter, we
find here, and have observed in its proper place.

II. WHAT the Author says concerning the different Reckoning of the Forty
Season in the West, and in the East, is not only observable for the History of
his time, but for the understanding of modern Practice. The Western Empire,
with Egypt and Palestine, accounted the Forty two Days of six Weeks, to be
their Forty Season; as the LXXII Interpreters are commonly called the LXX: but
of these they fasted only Thirty six; all the Sundays being exempted. The
Eastern Empire ( Palestine and Egypt then excepted) called seven Weeks, that
is Forty nine Days, their Forty Season: for they were still under the Number
Fifty. But then because they did not think it fit to fast on the Sabbath, no
more than on the Sunday, unless only on the Saturday of Passion-Week; they
likewise deducting their seven Sundays, and six Saturdays, fasted effectually
no more than thirty six Days. Since that time, the Greek Church, that they may
in some sort be nearer to the Number Forty, have added an Eighth Week of
previous Abstinence; beginning on those five days to fast from Flesh, though
they allow themselves the use of Eggs, and Milk, and Cheese, and Butter, things
from which in the seven following Weeks they strictly forbear. And they
besides, for an Introduction to this whole Fast, set apart another ninth Week,
wherein they specially prepare for it, by Confession of their own Sins, and
Forgiveness of the Sins of others against themselves. This is the additional
Practice of the Greeks. And the Latins likewise have enlarged their Lent: and
whereas before they rather adjusted the space of Time within which they kept
their Fast, than the number of Days they did actually fast, to the Number
Forty; ( forty two being nearer to Forty, than thirty six); they have since
thought it better to make up the Number Forty precisely of such fafling Days;
and have therefore added Four to the former, beginning on the Wednesday of the
seventh Week, as is well known.

III. WHAT we have from Sozomen is express, and without Dispute: what follows
from Socrates is more confused and ambiguous, but may serve however to give us
some light. He, writing at the same time with Sozomen, and taking the same
occasion from the Novatian difference, to enter upon the like Discourse, says,
among other things, ( b 2) Those of the same Faith differ in their Vsages --
The Fast, for Example, before Easter is differently observed in different
places. For those in Rome fast Three continued Weeks before Easter, except
Saturdays and Sundays: But the Illyrians, and Grecians of Europe, and
Alexandrians keep a Fast of Six Weeks before Easter, calling it the Forty
Season. And besides these, there are others, who beginning seven Weeks before,
and fasting by Intervals only Three Weeks of five Days a-piece, call that space
of Time nevertheless the Forty Season. And I cannot but wonder, how those who
differ so in the Number of the Days should agree to give them that common Name,
of which Denomination several inquisitive Men have given several Accounts.
Neither is there a difference only about the Number of Days, but about the
Abstinence of their Diet. Some abstain from all that has Life: some eat of no
Animal but Fish; some of Birds too: some abstain from Fruits and Eggs: some
take only dry Bread; and some admit not that: but others Eating not till Three
in the Afternoon, after that use their Liberty. And infinite are the
differences about these things; concerning which we have no written Precept:
and thence it is plain, that they are left by the Apostles to every ones own
Judgment and Choice; that every one may voluntarily do what is Good, not for
Fear, or out of Necessity.

This Account of Socrates has been much questioned in what relates to Rome: it
being apparent from Sozomen and otherwise, That in that time not Three Weeks,
but Six were observed in that City. He himself too afterward says, that they
fasted there all Saturdays (as they are known to have done in that Age from
other hands) excepting that before Easter only. The Author for this has met
with a very hard Censure from some: others have endeavored to salve the Matter
with new Readings: and Valesius stands so much on his side, as to take up the
Paradox, and justify every Tittle, he is supposed to say, against all
Opponents. But, it may be, the fairer way would be, not to understand him of
the Practice of the Catholics, of which Sozomen and others speak; but of the
Novatians, of whose Affairs all own that he had a particular Knowledge, if he
was not inclined to their Sect. From their Dispute it was, he entered upon this
Discourse; and from some Memorials of theirs, he may have drawn up something of
this Account; which otherwise might easily have been as plain and full as that
of Sozomen, had it not been wrote in a different View. And so, if we suppose
the Regard to Forty Days to have first prevailed universally from the Council
of Nice; we may suppose, that the Novatians having had no share in that
Council, continued at least at Rome in their old Custom, and kept on their
Three Weeks. If this Conjecture pass for the Three Weeks. I should then either
think that the Romans had not begun to fast on Saturday, till after the
Novatians had left them: Or that a Word, or rather a Numeral Letter (c) should
be supplied in the Original, and Thursday be understood: a Day, as St.
Augustine tells us (d), not commonly fasted in his Time, and possibly not in
Lent by the Romans in the Time of Novatian.

. IV. BUT on this I lay no stress; and shall only take notice of the Remark
which Socrates makes with some Wonder, That Numbers of Days so different should
all have the same Denomination, and be called from the Number Forty. It is
plain, that neither the Western nor Eastern Church of his Time did measure
adequately either the Days they fasted, or the Term of Days within which they
fasted, by the Number of Forty: but however a regard they had to it, and a
Forty Season they all pretended to keep. We have withal seen how that
Denomination obtained so much, that all spaces of Fasting, and in all Seasons
of the Year, were called by it. For so St. Jerome termed the Two Fasts
instituted by Montanus Chapter 4. Note (g).
: though they were but of a Week each of them, and in other times of the Year.

What Reasons were then assigned for this Common Name, Socrates tells us not,
and I wish we knew. It should seem at first sight, That the Christians aspired,
in a Fast of so great Devotion, to the Imitation of the most Solemn Fasts
recorded in Scripture, those of Moses and Elias, and that particularly of their
blessed Master. And then, when the Church had once fixed upon that Number of
Days for their Example in general; the Fasts of lesser duration might well go
under the same Name by an easy Metonymie. But all this will be yet more
natural, if those Fasts so recorded, were rather miraculous in the Manner, than
singular in the Extent of Days; and the Number Forty had been always with the
Jews the proper Number for an extraordinary Humiliation: a Conjecture we are to
offer hereafter, in the other Part of this Discourse.

. V. AND thus have we viewed the Practice of Lent through the first 400 Years.
We have seen in the last of those Centuries, when Christianity came to be more
openly professed under the Christian Emperors, and abounded in Writers, many
express and undeniable Testimonies of the general Observation, though in a
different manner, of the Forty Season, then commonly so called from Forty Days.
In the next Age above it, the Third, and as high too as the middle of it, a
time that affords us not many Authors, and when there was little occasion to
speak of this Matter; we have however a very punctual Account of their strict
Manner of keeping the Passion-Week, from one of the greatest Men of the Church,
who happened to be consulted about a Nicety of Ending this Lent. And that their
great Strictness in the Holy Week, equal to any that was used after, may well
induce us to imagine, That these Men had not left the Devotion of all the
preceding Weeks to be added by the very next Generation: Especially when we
find the Forty Season expressly mentioned in Origin, a Master of this Dionysius,
as consecrated to Fasting. For that place of Origin, though we have it only
from the Version of Ruffinus, and he none of the most exact Translatours; yet
certainly if he was not the worst that ever was, is much more likely to be
truly rendered than wrong: there being no reason to fasten the Falsity on this
Word, more than on any other of the Sentence; nor any wonder to find that spoke
of now, which not long after was celebrated so much. But to proceed, we have
seen further from Tertullian, an Author to be reckoned to the Second Century as
well as to the Third, that the Days in which our Lord was taken away,
Good Friday and the Holy Saturday at least, if not the whole Week, were in the
Opinion of the Church of his Time, to be fasted by all from Apostolical
Authority; and that no other Days were to be fasted necessarily, and as by
Divine Precept, but at Discretion only, and as Christians should think fit in
Godly Prudence. Upon the account of which Discretionary Uncertainty, the
Argument he was engaged in made it not proper for him to say any more
concerning them, nor to tell us the several Customs of several Churches about
that Arbitrary part of Lent: though it may otherwise be collected, even from
him, that there was then such an Additional Time observed. But to go yet
higher, and nearer to the Apostolical Age; about the Year 190, and not 90 from
the Death of St. John, Irenaeus a Venerable, and now a very Old Bishop, who had
conversed familiarly with the great Polycarp, as Polycarp had with St. John and
other Apostles, has happened to let us know, though incidentally only, the
various observation of his Time; that some thought they ought to fast One, some
Two, and some More Days, and some Forty: as we have learned too in the general,
both from him and the Bishops of almost the whole Church concurrently with him,
that some such Ante-Paschal Fast had been all along observed in all Places, up
to the Time of the Apostles themselves.

(a) Sozom. l. 7. c. 19. -- (...) (b) (...) -- (...).

(b) In this place, that our Witness may be the more credible hereafter in our
Cause, I have ordered at a small Correction of the Text, to reconcile it to the
Truth of the Fact. For it has been abundantly proved, and particularly by
Quesnel, in his Edition of Leo, That the Bishop of Rome preached there very
often in Sozomen's time: who is therefore commonly delivered up here to a
Charge of ^gaer^^^ an^ Neglig^^ce: whereas a very slight Change of (...), (a
thing in which Critics are not used to be difficult in Favor of any Author;)
would have saved his Credit, and rectifi^d ^he whole Matter.

( b 2) Socrat. Hist. E^^les. 5.22. (...) (c) (...).

(e) The Guess, I intimate, is that (...) or (...) should be inserted before
(...), and the Exception run thus, (...).

(d) August. ad Casulan. Videant ergo Romani quid agant, quia etiam ipsi nimium
contumeliose bujus Disputatione tractar^tur: apud quos omnibus istis sex
diebus, p^ater pauciss^^os clai^es out Monachos, quotusquisque invenitur qui
frequentet quo^^lima J^junia, maxim quia ibi jejunandum quinta Sabbati non
vid^^^? Hoc de omni Septimana dictum, ut e praemidis patet.

PART II.

AN ESSAY Concerning the ORIGINAL OF LENT, Subdivided into Two Repartitions.

PART II. AN ESSAY Concerning the ORIGINAL OF LENT, Subdivided into Two
Repartitions: The First Showing preparatorily, That most of the Ancient
Christian Ordinances were derived from the Jews. The Second Conjecturing, That
Lent is of the same Original.
HAving viewed the Ancient Observation of Lent, we now proceed to enquire into
its Original: and concerning That, the Conjectures are various. Some ascribe
its Rise to Apostolical Constitution; some to casual Practice, imitated and
enlarged by others: the one supposing forty Days to be the prescribed Number,
and that those who fasted sewer were deficient; others imagining, That one Day
only, the Day of the Passion, was first kept by the Grief, rather than
Devotion, of some good Christians, and that this afterward grew to that large
number of Days by the Piety, if not Superstition, of following Ages: all
agreeing in this, That it was a novel Institution at the earliest, being wholly
Christian, and having no Precedent from any former Usage. Now to these
Conjectures not seeming to be very satisfactory, I have adventured to add
another, drawn from the Custom of the Jews, concerning their Great Fast, and
their Penitential Preparation before it: hoping if it appears reasonably well
grounded, that it may help to give a clearer light, as well as a better color,
to a Season so much and so long observed in the Church of Christ.

And here I intended at first to have entered immediately upon the View of the
Expiation-Day of the Jews, and their Preparatory Season, comparing them with
our Expiation, the Passion-Day, and its previous Lent: and the Parallel, if I
mistake not, is so exactly correspondent, as to make one apt to believe at the
first sight, that one of those Lines was drawn by the other. But because I am
sensible that some Objections may be raised, both against the Design it self,
and the Authorities I am to use; I shall endeavor first to remove them: and
possibly by the Answers I am to give, I may not only smooth the way; but make
such Advances, as may bring us at the same time nearer to the Admittance of
what I have proposed.

There are Three Prejudices, I foresee, which may encounter this Undertaking.

1. The first may be, That it is not probable the Primitive Christians would
imitate the Jews, or fit they should: 2. The other, That the Traditional
Writings they have, are not sufficient Authority for the Knowledge of their
ancient Customs: 3. And the last may be this: That such a Derivation of Lent
must be false, because it is new.
These Three Prejudices have occasioned the Addition of the first Member of
this Part, and the Reader, if he pleases, may pass it over. But of Those the
Two last will be easily satisfied by the Consideration of the First, and upon
that Subject I shall enlarge the more freely, because it may be as delightful
and instructive to observe the Original of many other Christian Institutions,
as of Lent.

PART II. REPARTIT. I. That most of the Ancient Christian Ordinances were
derived from the Jews.
CHAP I.
. I. Not dishonorable for Christian Ordinances to be borrowed from the Jews:
and they generally were, First such considered as are mentioned in Scripture, as

. II. Baptism. It was a Rite by which, as well as by others, Proselytes were
admitted into Judaism.

. III. Christian Baptism, as expressed in the New Testament, an Imitation of it.

. I. AMONG the Ancient Heretics, some, it is known, received our Savior and
his Gospel, but rejected the Mosaical Law, and blasphemed its God. And there
may be many now (though more innocent) who at this distance from the Rise of
Christianity, may either have lost the Remembrance of its Original, and forget
that the last Covenant has any Dependence on the first: or else in Pride of our
greater Privileges, may scornfully overlook the Dispensation of Moses as a
beggarly Element; and in the Vanity of a Neighbour-Nation, may think it a
Disparagement to the Christian Religion, to be thought of Jewish Extraction.
And there may seem to have been more cause given for this Conceit, from some
learned Books of late, which have treated concerning the Jewish and the
Egyptian Antiquities; and which have been misunderstood so far by some to the
Prejudice of the old Testament, that those who have not considered the Matter
well, may look upon it as very dishonorable to Christianity, to borrow any
thing from that Nation, which is suspected to have borrowed so much of all its
Neighbors, and to have robbed even the Religion of the Egyptians. But they
need not fear; for Truth can never suffer from Truth: and if it shall indeed
appear, that the Mosaic Religion was conformable to the Worship of their
Eastern Neighbors; It may notwithstanding no less maintain its Divine
Authority. Knowledge, we know, as well as Empire, began in that part of the
World; and there the many Traditions concerning God, descended from Noah and
others of his inspired Sons, were lodged and preserved: blended, we may think,
and much corrupted with many Falsities and Superstitions; variously too by its
various Depositaries, the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Phoenicians, Arabians, etc.
Now all These had something of the same Religion, as they had of the same
Language, but in a different Dialect and Manner: and what if God was pleased,
by the Ministry of Moses, to reform it from the many Additions, impious or
immoral, with which it had been severally adulterated, Retaining some
indifferent Customs innocently introduced, Instituting others in opposition to
the more dangerous Errors, and directing some eminent Parts of the whole to a
further Prospect of another and more perfect Revelation yet to come; and all
these Laws, for the Use of a Peculiar People, to reduce into one Code, and
authorize by a new Sanction.

Such a Reformed Religion, we may suppose that of the Jews to have been; and
need not therefore be afraid, if our Religion be said to be a further
Reformation of that Judaism: a Title Mr. Seldom frequently gives it, but to be
understood, not as if it were a Repurgation of the Old from any Error, but as
it is the Completion and Perfection of it according to the Original Design. And
as certainly as our blessed Savior and his Apostles were of Hebrew Lineage, so
certain it is, that our Religion is grafted on the Jewish. Neither do the
Expressions only and Allusions of the Gospel relate to the Customs of the Law,
not well otherwise to be understood: but some of its chief Institutions are
known to be derived thence. For as before, many of the Mosaic Rites were
unquestionably designed to presignifie our Savior; so some of them were
afterward taken into his Service, always to minister unto him: not admitted
only for the present, out of condescension to the Native or Proselyte Jews, of
whom then the greatest Number of Converts consisted; but some formally adopted,
and others laudably continued, for Perpetuity. This has in part been already
copiously demonstrated by many very Learned Writers: and if any thing shall
chance to be added by me, I offer it with all submission. And indeed it would
not be pertinent to my Business, to pretend in this Matter to any new
Discoveries; who am rather now, by such Observations as are well Agreed and
Received, to try to favor another Guess, I am by and by to advance.

But besides, to be honest to the Reader, and withal to put him out of any
fear; I am here to profess, That I pretend not to the Depths of the Talmudical
Learning, nor intend to engage him in it: having never dug in the dark Mine my
self, but only seen something of that which has been brought above ground by
others, and exposed to common Use, either in the Translations of the Misnah, or
of Maimonides, (for of him I have not read much more than is in Latin) or in
the Works of modern Authors.

The Reader therefore will be pleased to go on and see how much of the
Christian Appointments appears to have been copied from the Jewish. And here he
will presently find it agreed by all, That the Two Sacraments were taken
thence; That the Weekly Observation of the Lord's Day, was in Imitation of
their Sabbath; That the Discipline of the Christian Church came from the
Jewish; And that the Apostles, Presbyters, and Deacons, were Officers after
their Model. But besides these Principal Ordinances, which are expressed in the
New Testament, he will find too, That many Circumstances, which in the second
Age attended those Ordinances, were likewise Jewish; as well as many other
Unscriptural Customs, which are known to have been in use in those Days.

I shall first consider the Scriptural Vsages: and afterward those which are
remembered in the next Age* And the Scriptural I take by themselves, both
because of the Authority for their Practice, and of the Consent for their
Derivation: though in the expounding of the Jewish Customs for the first, I may
happen to join what belongs to the later sort, to avoid hereafter unnecessary
Repetition.

. II. AND to begin with Baptism; This was with the Jews a Sacramental Rite,
whereby those who were converted from Heathenism, were initiated into their
Religion. A Rite little practiced among them now: for they have had a long
while but very few Converts; and such People, as they tell us M^i^^. Issure
Bia^ c. 13.. 14, 18. ex Ed. Dom. Prideaux Oxon. 1679.
, were always suspected by them, as apt to Apostatize, and draw away others; as
it happened, in their Opinion, in the Matter of the Golden Calf, and at Kibroth
Hattaavah. For these Reasons, it may be, the Jewish Traditionaries have not
been very particular on this Subject; neither has Maimonides treated of it by
it self, and expressly, but occasionally only, in a Treatise of Prohibited
Marriages.

There he tells us Issure Biah, c. 13.. 1.
, That the Admission of a Convert was made by these Three Steps: First, If he
was a Male, by Circumcision; Then, By Baptism; And, Last of all, By Sacrifice.

First, He that offered to become a Jew, was examined by them concerning the
Cause of his Conversion, whether it was Religious; and had some Part of the Law
especially proposed to him, that of the Unity of God, and of the Crime of
Idolatry: and if he professed himself willing to adhere to it, they circumcised
him Ibid. 14, 15.
. Then, after some convenient time, they proceeded to baptize him. This was to
be done in the Presence, and by the Authority, of Three, at least, as
Commissioners for the Action. They stood over him when he was in the Water, and
again interrogated him, proposing some of the harder, and some of the easier
Precepts of the Law; and if he persisted in his former Resolution, of taking
upon him its Obedience, they baptized him c. 14.. 6.
. Thus were Grown Persons baptized upon their own Engagements: and Children too
were admitted to the same Favor, by the permission of the Consistory, their
Fathers, or three others instead of a Father, undertaking for them c. 13. 7.
Lightfoot. vol. 2. p. 118.
.

And now by Virtue of this his Baptism, he is taken out of the number of the
Gentiles Iss. By. c. 13.. 17.
, and ceases to have any Kindred upon the account of his natural Birth; so much
that, as they say, if his Mother should turn Jew also, he may marry her by the
Letter of Moses his Law, though by the Decretals of the Canon Law he was bound
to observe the prohibited Degrees on the Mother's side Ibid. 14.12, 13.
. So was the Proselyre held to be as an Infant then new born 14.11.
, and to have become an Israelire; to be in a state of Sanctity 14.14.
, and under the Wings of the Divine Majesty 13.4.
.

So absolutely are they understood to be rendered Israelites now by this
Baptism only; but heretofore, when their Temple was up, the Proselytes were not
reckoned to be fully Holy, nor to have lodged themselves perfectly under the
Wings of God's Majesty, until they were further admitted to his Worship by
Sacrifice. This Sacrifice is said to have been a Burnt-Offering, either out of
the Fold, or else of two Turtles, or two young Pigeons, for an Atonement 13.5.
. For he was (it seems) in the condition of those Israelites, who when they
were free from their Uncleanness, and had washed, wanted still an Atonement for
their complete Purification, that they might be able to partake of the
Sacrifices Maimon. ex Interpr. Lud. deVeil. Lib. de Sacr. Tract. 5. c. 1.. 1, 2.
: Only in this he differed, that he wanted no Sin-Offering, as they did,
because the Sins of his former State were already entirely remitted by his
Baptismal Regeneration. And to this I suppose I may add, under the favor of
the instance which follows, and upon which they ground the Proselyting method;
that the Proselyte was (like a Leper washed, and wanting the Atonement) himself
Sprinkled and Purified by the Blood of his Offering. And lastly, according to
the same Pattern I am just going to mention, there was commonly after the
Burnt-Offering May. ibid. item Interpret eodem de Cultu Divino Ir. 5. c. 1.. 6.
a Peace Offering presented; that when he was in the Morning by the one made
capable of partaking of the Sacrifices, he might exercise that capacity in the
Afternoon, and by the actual partaking of the other, be rendered in all Points
of Privilege a perfect Israelite, being admitted up to the Altar, and entirely
taken in under the Holy Wings.

The Pattern I now spoke of, upon which they found this Proceeding, is the
course that was taken with the Children of Israel before Mount Sinai, upon
their Receiving of the Law May. Issur. Biah. 13.2, 3.
. They are supposed to have been all already Circumcised, the House of Levi all
along in Egypt, and the Rest before the First Passover; and now being come to
the Mount, they were Interrogated by Moses concerning their Obedience to the
Covenant offered them c. 19. Exodus 5.
, to which when they had agreed, they were then directed to Sanctify
themselves, and to wash their Clothes v. 8.
, [their whole Bodies]; upon which the Decalogue, and some other Precepts were
delivered them. And then after another Stipulation made by the People, both
Burnt-Offerings and Peace Offerings were Sacrificed Exodus 24.^.
, with the Blood of which themselves, and the Book of the Covenant were
sprinkled. And lastly, afterward the Elders, in their Name, were admitted to
come nearer to the sight of God; and when they returned, they eat of the
Peace Offerings Aben Ezra in lo^um.
given them, as it were, from the Table of God.

. III. THIS was the manner of Initiation into the Jews Religion. And when our
Blessed Savior was pleased to Ordain a New Covenant, though he set aside
Circumcision, as belonging to one Sex, and not agreeable to his general Design,
with whom there was to be neither Male nor Female, no more than Jew or Greek:
Yet he retained Baptism for the same use, and commanded the Apostles to admit
the Converts to his Religion by that Ceremony, Go teach, says he, [or make
Disciples of] all Nations, baptizing them Matthew. 28.19.
. And accordingly the Baptized Christian was esteemed thenceforth to be born
again by that Water Joh. 3.
, (for so Nicodemus, who was a Master in Israel, ought to have understood our
Master;) and Baptism is also styled the Washing of Regeneration 1 Pet. 1.23.
. And with such a regard St. Paul might say, 2 Cor. 5.16.
thenceforth he knew no man after the flesh, whatever Kindred he might have had
with him as a Hebrew of the Hebrews; no, not if he had so known Christ himself,
as some might then pretend to do. For he that is in Christ is a new Creature,
and old things are past away. And as the new Man, and new born Babes are spoke,
in the Phrase of the Jews, of the Baptized; so in respect to the Interrogatory,
used in that Office, after their Example, the Answer of a good Conscience
toward God is mentioned, we find, together with the washing by Water, or the
putting away of the filth of the flesh 1 Pet. 3.23.
. And lastly, the Christian Proselytes, by being baptized, were likewise
rendered capable of receiving the Holy Ghost; or, as the Jews would speak, of
being over-shadowed by the Wings of the Divine Majesty; and from that also they
were in a State of Holiness, and to be called the Saints of God.

So plainly does what the Scripture speaks concerning the Sacrament of Baptism
discover to us, that our Savior was pleased to take it up from the Jewish
Church, to use it to the like purpose, and to assign to it the same effect, not
varying so much as the Phrase. This Accommodation in the general is manifest I
say from the Scripture, where Baptism is simply mentioned, and without such
Circumstances as might have attended it, though not expressed. But in the next
Age we shall find it accompanied with such Rituals, as may answer those other
particulars of that Jewish Sacrament, which we have set down above, and are to
remember in their proper place Chapter 6.
.

CHAP. III.
. I. The Nature of the Paschal Sacrifice, and the Description the Jewish
Traditions give of that Supper;

. II. Agreeable to the History in the Gospels of our Lord 's Supper, and to the
Nature of it.

I Come next to the other Sacrament of our Lord's Supper, which He was pleased
to institute at a Paschal Supper; and to borrow thence its Provision, the Bread
and Wine.

. I. THE Paschal Lamb was a Sacrifice of a peculiar compounded Nature Exodus 12.
. As it was to be roasted with Fire, it had something of a Burnt-Offering, and
might seem to be expiatory; as it was then, when the Blood of it was sprinkled
upon their Doors at the first Institution. By the same Blood it was federal
also, the Children of Israel entering by it into a New Covenant. And as it was
to be eaten all that night, or burnt with fire, and none left to the morning;
so it seemed to be as an Offering for Thanksgiving Le^. 7.15.
. Now answerable to the kind of the Sacrifice, was the Supper for which it was
prepared. It was a Festival Entertainment for Joy of the great Deliverance: but
it was to be eat with unleavened Bread, and with bitter Herbs 8.
, as Memorials of their former Afflictions. And the manner of this Supper was
thus, as Maimonides pretends to tell Tract. de Solemnitat. Pasch. eodem de Veil
interpret, Cap. 8.
.

In the first place, They mingled a Cup of Wine to every one of the Company;
and the Master of the Family praising God the Creator of the Fruit of the
Vine; [in the ordinary Form which they use at other Meals]; He and they all
drank: beginning so, and consecrating the Paschal Action, which they were going
now to celebrate. [For so too they used to consecrate, and separate other
sacred Actions from the common Actions of Life: the Solemnity of the Sabbath,
for Example; beginning it with a Cup of Wine, at the Supper of the first
Evening, and concluding it with another, at the close of the next Day.] And
now, after they had washed, with a Common Prayer used at other Washings, the
Table was set, furnished with bitter and sweet Herbs, unleavened Bread, a Sauce
red like Brick, and the Body of the Lamb, [for that is their manner of
Expression,] together with the Flesh of the solemn Peace Offering, [which was
to be offered on some day of the Feast Deuteronomy. 16.2.
, and was commonly sacrifc'd on this Day in the Morning Maim. de Sacr. Pasch.
cap. 10.. 12, 13.
, to help out the Supper.] When the Table was so set, the Master, blessing God,
for having created the Fruits of the Earth, [in the ordinary Form, and as at
other times they use to do;] took of the bitter Herbs about the Quantity of an
Olive, and dipping them in the red Sauce eat of them, and distributed as much
to each of the rest. After this, the Table was to be removed a little way from
him, to give Occasion and Space for the Questions supposed in Exodus, Exodus
12.26.
about the Particularities of this Supper. And in Answer to them, the Master
tells the Story of the Miseries of their Forefathers; using also the Words in
Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 26.5.
A Syrian ready to perish was my Father, etc. Upon this the Table was brought
again; and He taking the Paschal Lamb in his hands, and Elevating it, proposed
to himself the Question, Why it was offered, and gave the Reason. And so he
elevated severally both the bitter Herbs, and the unleavened Bread; and after
all the several Reasons given, he subjoined a Hymn, Let us therefore celebrate,
praise, extol -- him, who has done so many and so great, and such stupendous
Wonders -- To Him let us sing Hellelujah, Praise the LORD, ye Servants of the
LORD --: concluding so, Thanks be to thee, O GOD, King of the World, who did
redeem us and our Ancestors, and have brought us to this Night.

Here they all drank again, in the same manner as at first, and washed again
likewise; [here again beginning their Supper.] For then he took two unleavened
Cakes, and dividing one, he put one half of it over the other Cake; [the half
Cake being, as they say, to remember them of their former Poverty]: and so said
over the Bread a Blessing. After he dipped a piece of the Cake, with some of
the bitter Herbs, in the Sauce, and eat; having blessed God with a proper
Prayer; [and distributing to the rest to eat likewise.] So with a proper Prayer
they tasted of the Peace Offering; and with another, of the Lamb: and after
they fed freely of what was before them. Only each was bound at the close of
the Supper, to end with some of the Lamb; eating the Quantity of an Olive at
least: [as they now do with a piece of one of the half Cakes, which they
substitute in place of the Lamb.]

When they had done eating, they washed their hands: and each having a third
Cup distributed to them, the Master having said over it the Grace after Meat,
[and it is termed thence the Cup of Blessing,] they drank it off. And then
there was another, the fourth Cup, put into their hands; and the Hymn being
re-continued, with its proper Conclusion, they again thanking God for the Fruit
of the Vine, drank that also; and after that no more that night: [it being now
toward midnight, and they being after this to meditate yet on their Paschal
Deliverance].

Thus, according to the Tradition of the Jews, the Paschal Supper was
celebrated, while the Temple stood: and ever since it has been kept much after
the same manner, though the Paschal Lamb has been wanting. And possibly, (if I
might be allowed to interpose a Guess in this matter,) this Supper might have
been observed, as now it is, without the Sacrifice, even when the Temple was in
being; by such as after the first Dispersions by the Assyrian and Babylonian
Kings, continued afterward in remote Parts; and not being able to keep the
Feast at Jerusalem, by reason of their Distance, were however willing to keep
up the solemn Memorial of that great Deliverance, in the best manner they
could, and as it is now done.

. II. NOW to this Account the History of our Savior's Paschal Supper agrees.
The Cup mentioned by St. Luke Luke 22.17, 19, 20.
, which he took before the Bread, and, giving thanks, divided it amongst his
Disciples; seems to have been their first Cup; and might be however their
second. And the Bread which after he had given thanks, he brake, and gave to
them; was the same they now so bless, and distribute after the second Cup. And
lastly, the Cup after Supper, the Cup of Blessing, as it is called by St. Paul
in express Terms 1 Cor. 10.16.
, what should it be, but what the Jews call by that name, and with which they
thank for the Meal, the third Cup? Neither because our Savior says in St.
Matthew 26.29.
after the Cup, that he would not henceforth drink any more of the fruit of the
vine; will it therefore follow, that he did not drink the fourth Cup. For the
same Saying is put in St. Luke, Luke 22.18.
before the first Cup; and can there signify no otherwise than in general, and
that after that Solemnity was wholly over, he would not drink of it: except we
will suppose, that what he gave to the Disciples, he took not himself. But
however this may be, the Gospel has yet one farther Particular, agreeable to
the Description of the Jews: That when they had supped, they sung a Hymn, and
went out to the Mount of Olives Matthew. 26.30.
[to meditate]. And it has besides been observed, that our Savior, when he
spoke the Bread to be his Body, might have had a peculiar respect to that
Phrase of the Body of the Lamb: and could it be admitted that in those days, as
now, an unleavened Cake was by any substituted for the Body of the Lamb; It
might then have been the easier understood, to represent our Lord's Body. These
are the particular Correspondencies, between the Paschal and the Lord's Supper:
and there was too another general one in their Nature; as they were both of
them to be Memorials of a former bloody Atonement; Feasts of present Joy and
Thanks, but not without some afflictive Remembrance for the Past.

Here therefore it appears, and from the Relation of the Scripture, that our
Lord thought fit to raise his other Sacrament likewise out of a Festival
Commemoration, the Jews were commanded to keep for their old Deliverance. And
hereafter it will appear further, by the Construction the Primitive Church
made, that our Savior in the Institution of his Feast, did not consider only
that single Annual Solemnity of theirs, but their other more frequent
Sacrificial Entertainments of Praise and Thanksgiving See C. 7. of this
Repartit.
.

CHAP IV.
. I. The Church of Christ succeeds to the Church of the Jews.

. II. The Officers of the One, raised from the Officers of the Other. The
Apostles of each.

. III. And the Bishops.

. IV. The Presbyters or Elders of the Jews.

. V. The Christian Presbyters, and their Power.

. VI. The Ministerial Officers of the Jews;

. VII. Answered by our Deacons.

THE Two Sacraments, we see, as they are described in the Scripture, appear to
have been transferred from the Old Testament to the New; and by the one of them
we are Admitted into the Christian Covenant, and by the other we Recognize it.
Now those who were admitted into the Mosaical Covenant, were admitted into a
Body or Society; and this Body had its Governors and Officers: and whether the
Christian Church were not a like Body, and with like Officers, we shall next
inquire, and from Scriptural Authority.

. I. And first, It is plain that the Church of Christ comes into the place of
the Congregation of Israel. For it is known that the Word in the New Testament,
which we Translate Church, is the same with that which stands in the Greek of
the Old for the Congregation or Body of that People: and as they had Moses for
their Leader and Lawgiver under God, their King, and also Chief Priest, (for
he consecrated Aaron and his Sons;) so are we a Society or Body united in One
Head, our Lord Jesus, who under the Father is our King, and High Priest. And
accordingly we succeed to the Style and Title of the Children of Israel Exodus
19.5, 6. Deuteronomy. 7.6.
, and their Dignity and Privileges are devolved upon us. For so are we become a
peculiar People, which Christ has purified to himself Tit. 2.14.
. We are made by him Kings, and Priests unto God the Father Rev. 1.6.
. We are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation 1 Pet. 2.9.
.

. II. THIS his People, Our Prince and High Priest himself still Governs; but by
such subordinate Officers below, as are denominated from the Jews; and also
with the same Discipline; as far as was consistent with his Empire, which was
to be neither Local nor Temporal, not dependent upon any one place, nor
regarding Worldly Interests.

The Officers of the Christian Church, mentioned in the Scripture, are
Apostles, Bishops, Elders and Deacons: and what signification such Titles did
bear in the Church of Israel, we are now to see. Only I am to premise, That as
we shall find all those Titles in several significations; so we are to observe
the same of the Words Church and Synagogus, to whom those Titles belong. For
each of these, as is well known, signifies either the People united under the
same Covenant, a Society; or a Local Assembly of those of that Society; or the
Place where they are to Assemble.

The highest Office of the New Testament is that of the Apostles: and it is a
term of large signification, both in Greek, and Hebrew or Chaldee. It is in
both Languages the same as Sent, (a) and so may stand for a common Messenger,
Deputy, or Mandatary, or for an Envoy from some great Person, for an Ambassador
Ordinary, or Extraordinary, or any Plenipotentiary-Commissioner. With the Jews
therefore the Minister of the Synagogue, who takes care of the Business of it
under the Superior Governors, and reads the Prayers, and who is called now
more commonly Chazan See. VI.
; is also known by this Name, as being the Deputy of the Congregation. It is
said too (c) that he goes by that Name with them, who was sent by the Priests
to collect their Dues, the First Fruits and Tenths; and so they are termed in
the Imperial Law. Neither do I find that the Talmud speaks of any higher
Authority under that Style; nor I suppose will the Rabbis themselves pretend,
that they have a complete Information of all their former Government. But
however, it is certain from Epiphanius, that it was the Name of such
Plenipotentiary-Commissioners, as were sent by the chief of the Jews, the
High Priest, or Patriarch, not only to gather Money, but to visit and reform a
Province, and to confirm and displace its Officers: For so he says (d) of one
Josephus, who was sent with that Power, from their Patriarch, then residing in
Palestine into Cilicia; that he brought back to him the Tenths, and First
Fruits of the Province; and besides had displaced there many of their Rulers of
the Synagogues, and of their Priests, and of their Elders, and of their
Azanites, which are their Deacons or Ministers. And before ( d 2) Apostles are
described to be Men of great Authority, who are Assessors to the Patriarch.

Answerable in some manner, to this different acception of the Word with the
Jews, is the Use of it in the Christian Church. For it is observed that
Epaphroditus is called by St. Paul Phil. 2.25.
an Apostle of the Philippians, in an inferior Sense; for the Office he
discharged, of conveying their Contribution to him, their great Apostle, and as
it were Patriarch. And such it is justly supposed those Brethren were, who are
spoke of to the Corinthians, (in a Discourse concerning Contributions) and are
termed 2 Cor. 8.23.
the Apostles of the Churches, the Glory of Christ. But this Name imported a
higher Dignity, and greater Power, when it was attributed to the Twelve, or to
St. Paul. They were as Assessors to Christ, our Priest, and our King: hereafter
in the places of the Princes of the Tribes, to sit on Twelve Thrones, and judge
the Twelve Tribes of Israel Matt. 19.28.
; and in the mean time, endued with Power from above, to Act and Speak in his
Name, and to Govern his Church, appointing Officers and prescribing Orders. Of
this sort was Saint Paul; and such an Apostle he professes himself 1 Cor. 15.9.
, not worthy to be called. And further, as They all were in this manner
Apostles of Christ, so is Christ himself said Heb. 3.1.
to be our Apostle, (as well as High Priest), being John 20.21.
SENT by the Father, as they were sent by Him.

. III. NEXT to the Apostles are Bishops: And this too is a Word that signifies
at large, both in the Hebrew and Greek (a) of the Old Testament In the Greek of
the Septuagint, it is said of the Officers of an Army, both Captains over
hundreds, and Captains over thousands Nu. 31.14. 2 Kings 11.15.
; of the Provost or Alderman of a Ward Neh. 11.9.
of Overseers of Works and Payments 2 Chr. 34.
. And so the Office is an Oversight or Charge; as Eleazar had the Oversight and
Charge of all the Tabernacle Number. 4.16.
; and his Office or Charge let another take Psalm. 109.8.
. The word answering to this in the Hebrew, denotes a Steward over a Household
Genesis 39.5.
, a Superintendant over a City 41.34.
; and in the Temple it stands for the Head and Director of any Office. And the
Overseer or Officer of the High Priest 2 Chr. 24.11.
, is said, by Rabbi Solomon on the place, to be the High-Priest's Vicegerent,
usually called the Sagan Jer. 20.1.
; as also, the chief Governor in the House of the Lord (k) is understood to be
by Jonathan the Targumist, (l) whom Kimchi (m) therefore styles the High
Overseer under the High Priest. Thus is this Word found to signify in the Old
Testament: but the Talmudists, as far as I can see, take no notice of its
Office, and leave us to be informed of this, as well as of the Apostleship,
from other hands.

The same Word in the Greek of the New Testament is taken in some Latitude too.
First of all, our blessed Lord himself, is called the Bishop and Shepherd of
our Souls 1 Pet. 2, 25.
, as having the chief Oversight and Care of the Flock. In a lower degree, the
Office of Bishopric, mentioned in the 109th. Psalm, is applied to the
Apostleship, which Judas lost and Matthias took Acts 1.20.
. And yet lower; Those also who are called Presbyters, are at the same time
named Bishops; as those Presbyters or Elders, which S. Paul sent for from
Ephesus, were admonished to take care of the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost
had made them Bishops Acts 20.28.
. And the Presbyter, of whose Ordination St. Paul speaks to Titus, is in the
next Verse save one, styled Bishop Tit. 1.5, 7.
.

We see therefore that the New Testament has not only taken the Name from the
Old, but the largeness of its signification too; which is all at present I am
concerned to observe: Though I presume this Word, as well as Apostle, had now a
peculiar Office, of which it was properly spoke, and to which, in the next Age
it is known to have been always determined See Chapter VIII.
.

. IV. THE next that follows, (for so I take leave to place in the Christian
Church, what some would set in equal rank,) is the Presbyter or Elder. This
Word in the Greek of the Septuagint, is known (answerably to the Hebrew) to
signify not only a Man of Years, but Authority; as Words of the like import
have always done in Ancient and Modern Languages (a). So the Steward of
Abraham's House, (styled by our Translators the eldest Servant of his House,)
who ruled over all that he had Genesis 24.2.
, is supposed to be called by those Interpreters, the Presbyter, or Elder of
his House (c). In that Sense we have the Elders of Pharaoh's House, and of the
Land of Egypt Genesis 50.7.
. And when it is said, Hezekiah took Counsel with his Princes and his mighty
Men 2 Chr. 32.3.
, in the Septuagint it is with his Presbyters and mighty Men. And in like
manner by the Presbyters or Elders of the People of Israel, Princes and great
ones of them are understood at large Number. 11.16.
, of which the greatest and chief were the Twelve Heads or Princes of the
Tribes.

Of such Elders or Governors there were Seventy, we know appointed by Moses,
at the command of God Number. 11.16, 17.
, to bear part of the burden of the Magistracy with him, and to be a Council
unto him, endowed therefore with a Communication of the Spirit. Of this great
standing Council, known afterward by the Name of the Sanhedrim, the Jewish
Tradition speaks very copiously; and though the Scripture says nothing of any
Superiority amongst those Seventy, yet they tell us expressly, what otherwise we
must have presumed, That one of them was President of this Council, and
Vicegerent to Moses the Prince. Such a Council as this, they say, sat at
Jerusalem in after Ages, and governed the whole People; consisting of a Chief
and Prince, (for that is the signification of Nasi) in the place of Moses, and
of Seventy more, one of whom was the Vicegerent of that Chief or Prince, called
by them, the Father of the Council.

Besides this Sovereign Court sitting in the Temple, there were also Inferior
Provincial Consistories, according to the appointment of God in these words,
Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all the Gates which the Lord thy
God gives thee Deuteronomy. 16.18.
. And whereas the number of these Judges or Elders is here left undetermined,
Josephus, repeating the same Injunction, directs them to be Seven Archaeol. 4.8.
; supposing, I presume, that they were so many in the times near to Moses. But
the Traditionary Jews, will have them in every great City to have been twenty
three; they too, as I also presume, speaking from the practice of some later
times. Of these twenty three, they tell us, One was styled also the Nasi, or
Prince, (the Chief of that Tribe or Place); and another likewise was his
Vicegerent, called also the Father of that Consistory. And the like distinction
we may suppose to have been between Josephus his Seven; and that Two of them,
were a Chief, and a Deputy, and the other Five ordinary Elders.

These were the Consistories of great Cities; but in lesser Districts there
was, as the Rabbis tell us, a Magistracy or Presbytery of Three, which Judged
in lesser Matters. And further, it seems (k), there are those who sometimes go
by the Name of Elders; but whose chief business is to take care of the Goods of
the Commnnity, and whose Authority extends only to causes of voluntary
Jurisdiction: and these are called the Seven good Men of the place; retaining
the number, though not the Power, of Josephus his Magistrates.

The Talmudists, who have been silent concerning Apostles and Bishops, are very
particular, as we may perceive concerning Presbyters, and pretend to give us a
punctual account of their Creation and Office, as we may see at large in Mr.
Seldom De Syn. l. 2. c. 4, 5, 6.
. And an Abstract of what is further necessary here follows, out of that very
Learned Gentleman's copious Collections on this Subject.

These Presbyters then were of two sorts, the One had a Full, and the other a
Limited Authority Seld. de Syn. lib. 2. cap. 7.
.

An Elder of the first kind was capable of being called up to the Courts of
great Cities and Provinces, having Authority not only to expound the Law, and
to resolve Cases of Consciences, but to Judge in all Causes both Criminal and
Civil: And these were called Rabbi.

The other, the Limited Elders, were either such as had Power to be of one of
the inferior Consistories of Three in lesser Districts, and to Judge only of
Pecuniary Causes; or such who were not capable of Jurisdiction, and could only
expound the Law; or else who were not qualified to direct in the whole Law, but
were confined to particular Cases.

To this Office of Eldership they were ordained by Imposition of Hands, with
Words signifying the Authority committed; or else by Letter-Patent, or Missive.
And every Presbyter of the first sort was, they say, permitted to Ordain at
first; but afterward it was not to be done but by Three, and not without the
leave of the Prince or Chief, or by the Chief and his Vicegerent together.

Now there are three things concerning these Presbyters which Mr. Seldom
particularly remarks; and which we will not therefore forget, but remember as
occasion shall offer. The first is, That no Presbyter with full Power, could be
Ordained by any out of the Holy Land; for from that place only Authority in
Criminal Causes could proceed, and thence only a Faculty could be given, that
would be good thorough the whole World. Whereas those whom the Head of the
Captivity himself ordained out of that Country, had Jurisdiction in none but
Pecuniary Causes, and were called only Mar or Rab; and those who were ordained
by others, had Jurisdiction only in the District where they were ordained Seld.
Ibid. cap. 7.. 5.
.

Accordingly, as Buxtorf observes, Buxt. Syn. I. 46.
The Jews of Spain and the Levant do not honor themselves with the style of
Mar or Rab, being content to be called the Disciples of the Learned: though in
Germany they make bold with those Titles, and promote with the old Formality;
where too they have an order of Rabbis above the ordinary Rabbis, who preside
over them, and are as the Princes or Fathers of the Consistory heretofore.

Secondly, As the Talmudists tell us, there Presbyters were indifferently of
any Tribe; neither was it necessary that they should be of the Tribe of Levi,
who composed the great Consistory of Jerusalem Seld. Ibid. cap. 7.. 5.
; though that Consistory, in their opinion, governed even in the Temple, and
over all that officiated there Ibid. cap. 8. cap. 15.. 12, etc.
.

And the Truth is, according to the Modern Traditions, those of the Tribe of
Levi were not so absolute in the Temple, nor of that consideration out of the
Temple, as they seem to have been by the Scripture, and by Josephus. And now at
this time, though the Priests receive sometimes some little due for the
Redemption of the Firstborn, and are called before others to Read the Law, and
are preferred to give the Solemn Blessing in the Synagogues, and to say Grace
at Meals; yet for the rest they are as common Israelites, and under the
Jurisdiction of the Rabbis. For these Rabbis have ordered the Matter so, that
they are reputed, to Represent the Priests, and to succeed into their
Sacerdotal Right, claiming therefore to be free from Taxes, and from Watch and
Ward, to have the Prevendition or Pre-emption in the Market, and to have their
Causes first dispatched in Courts of Justices Leo de Mod. Cere. des Juifs. S.
12.3. Buxt. Syn. J. 46. Maim. Tal. Tor. cap. 6. (...). 10.
. And this possibly came to pass, not only from the superseding of the main
part of the Priestly Function, by the Destruction of the Temple, and from the
ceasing of their Tithes and other Dues, by the banishment of the People from
their own Country; but also from the great destruction that must have been
^uf^er'd by the Tribe of Levi, in those cruel Devastations made by Tites and
Adrian of the Holy Land and City, in which places the Levites had their
Residence and Employment, and which they would be sure to defend most
zealously: Whereas many other Jews lived at the same time dispersed in remote
Provinces, escaping the War and its fury. For then, when very few Priests
remained, and those of all Jews durst least own themselves; and when they were
debarred from the Execution of that Office, by which they had been so
honorably distinguished; no wonder if the other Tribes took the advantage,
and, as it happens amongst Rival Offices, encroach'd and usurped upon them: And
if any of the Rest were to deliver down the Law, which the Priest's Lips had
been used to preserve, as Rabbi Juda took upon him the Office; He, as Holy as
he was, might comply so far with Modern Usurpation, as to record it with the
Traditions from Mount Sina.

And lastly, We are all along bid to observe, that these Presbyters and Rulers
were Civil Magistrates, who had the Government of the Commonwealth, and by
that Title controlled the Highpriests themselves Ibid. l. 3. c. 8.11.
: an observation we need not dissemble, if we are at the same time allowed to
remember, that God Himself was the Supreme Governor of that Commonwealth;
that even its Civil Laws were enacted by Him; and therefore that the Judges of
that Law were Sacred Officers, and of a Policy that was Divine.

Hitherto these Elders have been chiefly considered as Administrators of their
Civil Policy; they had too the direct Administration of all their Worship, that
was not Sacrificial, directing its Services, and appointing its Officers.
Whereas therefore in a great City, the Nasi, or his Vicegerent, and even the
Presbyters in a larger Sense, were the [Archisynagogi] Rulers or Heads of the
Synagogue, as it meant the Body or Community of the City: So they were also
Rulers of the Synagogue, or Synagogues of that City, as they were Congregations
for Worship. And where there were many Synagogues, (as there were in those
Cities,) the same were Rulers over all of them; though by their appointment,
and in their Name to particular Synagogues, particular Presbyters, and
sometimes possibly of Limited Power, might be especially deputed to take care
of them.

. V. SUCH were the Elders of Jewish Commonwealth and Church: and correspondent
in some manner to these, are the Christian Presbyters in the New Testament.

And first, those properly called Apostles are styled Elders; as representing
the Twelve Princes of the Tribes, who were the first and great Elders of
Israel. So St. Peter styles himself a Fellow-Elder 1 Pet. 5.1.
; and so the Appellation of Elders seems in one place of the Acts Acts 11.3^.
, to comprehend the Apostles also.

Next there are Elders distinct from the Apostles, those mentioned often in the
Acts just after them, The Apostles and Elders Act; 15.2, 4, 6.
And these, because there is no mention made before of their Creation, as there
is of the Deacons; may be presumed to be the Seventy, whom our Savior had
ordained; according to the Number of the Consistory erected by Moses, and then
continued at Jerusalem.

And if these were Seventy Elders; then St. James the Bishop of Jerusalem, may
be supposed to have been the President of them; and if not the Prince (for that
honor they might leave to our Savior, always reputed as present with them)
yet the Vicegerent of the Prince, and Father of the Council of the Seventy; to
which the other Apostles had joined themselves, in the manner of Assistants
Extraordinary, and as the High Priests and Princes of the Tribes had, I
suppose, used to have an extraordinary Place in the Consistory of their
Sanhedrim.

We find too, that in all the considerable Cities, where the Apostles founded
Churches, they Ordained Elders; as Barnabas and Paul are recorded Acts 14.23.
to have done in Derbe, Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch. What was the number of
these we are not told, nor what Superiority there might be amongst them: and in
these circumstances also they answer to their Predecessors, the Presbyters or
Judges of Israel; of whom (as we have seen) the Scripture has only said, Judges
and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy Gates, not expressing the number
of those Provincial Judges, nor distinguishing between the Prince or his
Vicegerent, and the rest of them. The number, I presume, of our Christian
Elders, was various in various Places. Where there were many, one of them was
appointed to be their Chief, and Father of the Consistory; if we will be guided
in our Opinion by the very early uniform Practice of the next Age Chap. VIII.
: and where there was but one, he too in probability was a Presbyter of that
rank, and had Authority to assume to himself Colleagues, as the occasions of
the Church should require. And in this Supposition these Fathers Presbyters,
are those who are properly to be called Bishops, in the determined sense of the
Word; as all Presbyters might be, in the larger acception of it.

These Christian Elders have, by Mr. Selden's Concession, the Power of the
Limited Elders of the Jews De Syn. 2.7.^.
: and so, in his Opinion, they were only to Instruct and Direct, by Expounding
and Exhorting; and to Bind and Loose, by Decision of Cases of Conscience, and
pronouncing Lawful and Unlawful, as in the First Council at Jerusalem. And this
Limitation he thinks proper, because the Presbyters of the Jews, we have seen,
had no power in criminal Causes, if ordained out of Judea; and in his Opinion
even their other Authority, out of their own Country and Dominion, was only
from the Agreement of their People, and the connivence of Princes under whom
they lived.

It were enough for my present Intent, if the Christian Elders answered the
Jewish but thus far. But that they had a greater Authority given them, the very
Expressions of the Scripture seem to speak: As, Obey them that have Rule over
you, and submit your selves Heb. 13.17.
: Those that are over you 1 These. 5.12.
, preside over you; such who are over the Church, so as to Rule it 1 Timothy 5.17.
, as the Master of a Family is over his own Children, and Rules his House 4.4.
: Which Expressions, though they may be strained by narrow Construction to
signify Teaching and Exhortation only; yet they most naturally imply something
of Coercion besides; and that they were used always to connote in the Old
Testament. But the comparison St. Paul makes in the last place, between a
Family and a Church, will hardly bear the restrained Interpretation; unless the
Paternal Power was abridg'd as well as the Presbyteral, and was left to
Instruct and Exhort only.

Now as the Words are ready to signify a greater Power, so such a one there
was remaining to be signified; that of Admitting into the Christian Communion,
suspending from it, and ejecting out of it; a Power which the Jewish Presbyters
had, and the Christian Society did not want, as we shall presently find Chap.
5. and. 9.
.

Neither did even Capital or Civil Power cease to belong to Christian
Presbyters, for the reason given by Mr. Seldom: not because they were created
out of Judeas for Christ's Kingdom was no longer confined to one Country, and
every Land was holy: nor because no sort of Civil Power could be exercised in
another Kingdom; for such a Power might have demanded Obediences in Conscience,
though it could not have obliged it by armed Force: But rather, because the
Kingdom, in which they were Officers, was not of this World; was not to judge,
or divide Inheritances; nor to entertain Legions for the Peace of its
Government, and Execution of its Sentences; they being to conduct the Church to
another Life, and Authorized to Rule over it and control it by that Respect.

Though therefore the Christian Elder be not ordained to Temporal Power, yet he
succeeds to the Jewish Presbyter in his fullest Right; not wanting that Power,
because he wants any thing of Proper Authority; but because he is commissioned
to act in another Sphere, and above these lower concerns: as our blessed
Savior's Authority, abstracted from his Omnipotence, was not less than that of
the former Lawgiver, Moses; though he was pleased to waive the Power of Life
and Death.

And thus far we have considered the Christian Elders resembling the Jewish, in
respect of the Church, as a Society; in like manner they presided over it as an
Assembly, Appointing, Directing, and Governing their Meetings, by Doctrine and
by Censure; as is well known, and will appear further hereafter.

VI. FROM this Agreement of the Jewish and Christian Church, in the Superior
Officers, we have reason to look for the same in the Lower which remains, that
of a Deacon.

In the Appointment before cited from Deuteronomy, we are to remember, That
Officers are mentioned as well as Judges; and these, though acknowledged to be
Rulers and Men of Authority (a), were yet of an inferior rank, and subservient
to the Elders. And accordingly Josephus styles them Ministers, or
Underofficers; and speaks as if to every Court of Seven Elders, there were (in
the earlier Days) two of these ^^^^^ers appointed, and out of the Tribe of Levt
(b).

This Ministerial Office seems to have consisted of several Employments, and of
different Degrees; whatever belongs to Sheriffs, Protonotaries, and Clerks of
Courts, to Marshals and Cryers, Bailiffs and Executioners: The business of it
was, to write the Orders of the Senate, and to Proclaim and Execute them, to
send out Process, to Summon, Arrest, and Punish. And it is observable, that the
Rabbis Seld. de Syn. 2, 5, 4. Maim. Tract. San. c. 1.. 10.
allot to every Consistory of Twenty Three, two Scribes Attendant (d), and also
two Under-Sheriffs, or Executioners, whom they call by the same Name they give
to the Reader of their Prayers, as we shall presently see; a Name common
heretofore to all Underofficers, in the head of whom were the Two Scribes,
mentioned therefore by Josephus more particularly.

Besides these Officers of Judicature, there were others who had the charge of
their Charity.

Now the Jews take themselves to be very strictly obliged to provide for the
Necessitous of their Religion, and to support them in some measure answerably
to their Quality Maim. de Donis Paup. cap. 7.3.
. For this purpose there are Collectors in every City deputed, some who go
about every day to gather Bread and Meat, Collectors of the Basket. Others,
commonly two, and to whom a third is to be joined in the Distribution, who go
about every Week to gather the Alms, and if need be, the Tax for the Poor
Ibid. c. 9.
. These were called Collectors from their Gathering, and Parnasim ( f 2), or
Pastors from their supporting and Maintaining; a Word that signifies not only
this Office, but Government in general, and might be said of Elders, or any
other Rulers.

Answerable to these Collectors of Cities, there were in the Temple Light^oot's
Temple Service.
Collectors too; called Gizbarim: and it may be observable, that these were
under seven others named Immarcalim, who had the Custody and Keys of the Sacred
Treasury. We have seen also. IV.
that Seven good men of a City are particularly remembered, and though their
employment be not well ascertained; yet it is plain, that the Goods of the
Community were under their Ordering.

The Officers now spoken of, belong to their Civil Society: for their Religious
Assemblies there are others.

The ordinary Synagogue-Officer is known by the name of Chazan; (the same, as I
have said, which they give to their Executioner.) This Name Epiphanius, one not
unacquainted with the Affairs of the Jews, expressly renders by Minister (i):
the very same word, which Josephus had used to signify those Officers in
Deuteronomy, attendant upon the Judges.

This is their Praecentor, who under the Higher Rulers, the Elders (now the
Rabbis,) takes care of the Service of the Synagogue; Says Prayers, shows the
Lessons, calls and directs those who are to read; such a one as that Minister
is supposed to be, to whom our Savior, when he had closed the Book, gave it
again. And this Minister has commonly under him another Servant of the
Synagogue, a Sacristan, who looks to it, and keeps all things safe and clean.

. VII. TO these Civil, and Religious Officers of the Jewish Synagogue, Deacons,
I suppose, are answerable: Bishops and Deacons, or Presbyters and Deacons,
being joined together in the New Testament, as Judges and Officers were in the
old.

Now in the Christian Use the word Deacon or Minister is very differently
applied, according as the Services are different, in which he is employed. Our
Savior is the Minister of Circumcision Romans 15.8.
a King the Minister of God Romans 13.14.
. And the Apostles Ministers of Christ 1 Cor. 4.1.
. But a Minister or Deacon, absolutely so called in the New Testament, is an
Officer under the Bishop or Presbyter: and the first appointed were the seven
Act. 6.
, Ordained by the Apostles with Imposition of hands.

These were Men of Honest Report, who were to ease the Apostles of the
Administration of the Charitable Revenue of the Church; not to be Gatherers of
the Basket, I suppose, or Servers of Tables; for that the Apostles sure did not
do before: but to be Treasurers and Superintendants, such as were the Seven of
the Temple, or the Goodmen abovementioned of a City.

For though the Greek word for Ministering, does sometimes signify, to wait and
serve at a Table; yet, as we just now noted, it is by no means restrained to
that low sense; but is said as well of the Office of our Blessed Lord, and of
his Apostles, and also of Kings; that is, of any the Noblest Administrations;
and may therefore answer the word Parnas, in its Highest meaning.

Neither is it at all necessary, that the Office of a Deacon should be wholly
Oeconomical; because it was first erected in the Christian Church, on that
occasion. While the whole Church was yet but as one Family, under the immediate
Government of the Apostles, and they had not yet Created any other Officers;
the first Officers were indeed instituted upon the first emergent want, and
were ordered then especially to take care of that, and to manage the public
expense: but they were also to be, as we may well suppose, subservient to the
Apostles in other administrations, and to Publish and Execute all their Orders.
For the Qualification of them was, to be full of the Holy Ghost and Wisdom: and
certainly a Wisdom, beyond that of common managery; and a Spirit, more than
Oeconomical, was then understood. Though therefore those Deacons were not to
give themselves up to Prayer and the word only; yet they might have had their
part even in those Functions: as St. Stephen we find had; whose Preaching the
Scripture records, more than his Good Husbandry; and who speaking by that
Wisdom and Spirit, for which he was but now chosen into his Office, became the
first Martyr, as well as first Deacon, of the Gospel.

These Deacons, it should seem, were Extraordinary; attending Ministerially
upon the Apostles, as upon the twelve Princes of Israel: having been created
before the appointment of any Bishops, or Subaltern Presbyters. But afterward
in every City where Bishops or Presbyters were placed, the Officers of this
Order were constantly subjoined. So the Epistle to the Philippians is addressed
to the Saints there, with the Bishops and Deacons: and so in the Epistle to
Timothy, after Directions given concerning Bishops, there follow others
immediately concerning Deacons: Likewise must the Deacons 1 Timothy 3.8.
. And there, we may observe, the Qualifications of the lower Office, are near
the same with those of the Higher, and as much almost required in the Deacon:
enough to induce us to think, that some Spiritual Duty was also to be
discharged by Him.

So much Reason there is from Scripture to conclude, that Christian Deacons did
not only Keep and Dispense the Public Contributions, as the Jewish Parnasim;
but that they served under their Superiors even in the Ministry of the Word
and Prayer: as we shall certainly find them hereafter Chap. VIII.
, to be Attendant upon their Bishops upon all other Business; and particularly
employed in Assemblies, in the Office of a Jewish Chasan.

. II. (a) (...).

(c) Grot. in Matthew. c. 10. v. 5.

(d) Epiphan. Haeres. 30.11. (...) -- (...).

(d 2) (...) Epiph. Haeres. ead.. IV.

. III. (a) (...) a (...) Visitavit, Praefecit: cui respondet Arabicum (...),
(Conjugat. octav.) Inquisivit, Inspexit. (...).

(i) (...) exponitur per (...)

(l) The Chaldee of the Targum is much the same with the Hebrew of Rabbi
Solomon.

(m) (...)

. IV. (a) (...) Senatus, Seignieur, Alderman. Vid. Seldom. de Synedr. l. 1. c.
14.

(c) (...).

(k). (...) De quibus consuli poterit Rhenfordius, Dissertat. Philolog. 1. de
december O^iosis Synag.. 109. etc.

. VI. (a) Upon those Words of the Text, (...) R. Solomon expounds the last by
(...); and Aben Ezra by (...). And upon this occasion I would only offer,
whether the (...) of St. Paul, [1 Cor. 12.28.] may not be understood of this
Office, as it was supplied by the Deacons of the New Testament, according to
what is proposed in the next Section. And this the rather, because the (...),
mentioned just before these (...), may well be taken for Presbyters: the Word
in the Old Testament, by which their Duty is expressed, and which we translate,
Bear the Burden with thee, [ Exodus 18.22. Numb. 11.17.]; being in both places
rendered in the Septuagint by (...). These Offices, I would suppose, had, in
the Beginning of the Gospel, the Spiritual Gifts of proper Abilities: as the
first Seventy Elders were endued with a Portion of Moses his Spirit; which is
judged too by the Jews not to have rested upon them long, much less to have
continued to the Order. For as to the Higher Degrees, with which the Apostle
there begins, of, first, Apostles; secondarily, Prophets; (to which Evangelists
are subjoined in the Enumeration made Ephesians. 4.11.); and thirdly, Do^tours;
these also may well be taken to bear Proportion to the different Distributions
of the Holy Spirit, which the Masters of the Jews observe to have been made to
the Authors of the Old Testament, and according to which they are known to
divide its Volumes: The First consisting of the Five Books of Moses, their
great Apostle; the Next of the Prophets, whom they distinguish by the First,
(as Joshua, Judges, etc.) and by the Latter, (as Isaiah, Jeremiah, etc.) who
may be reckoned for Evangelists; and the Last, being made up of the Holy
Writings, (as they call them) which are chiefly Doctrinal.

(b) Joseph. Archaiol. 4.8. (...) --. (...) where (...) is known to stand for
Minister Publicus, qui Magistratui apparet.

(d) (...) the Word of the Text, has, in the Hebrew and Chaldee of the
Scripture, the general Signification of Government and Command. And in the
Arabic Dialect (...) signifies Praefuitut Inspector; as (...) is Praefectus,
Inspector: but this last Word is, besides, the same as Commentarie^s^s, Is qui
annotat quae cunque ad rem curandam aut gerendam spectant, as Golius renders
it; and so carries the Signification of its Original (...), Delineavit,
Scripsit; and likewise expresses the (...), or (...) of the Septuagint, and
the Scribes attending upon the Rabbini^al San^^drim.

( f 2) (...) Signifies Gubernare, Regere; and also Pascere, Cibare: and so in
the Arabic (...) is Summus Pagorum Praefectus; and (...) Mulier oeconomica,
quae rem Domesticam egregie administrat.

(i) Azanitae are rendered by Epiphanius (as above, II. d.) (...): and (...)
with the Jews signifies not only the Minister of the Synagogue, as a Place of
Worship, but any other Minister of a Society; and is the Name of those that
have the Night-Watch of a City, and of those who wait upon their Judicial
Consistories, and serve their Writs, and keep their Prison, and execute their
Sentences even to Corporal Punishment. It is used to be derived from (...)
vidit; and so has been supposed by some to answer to (...) as if from this
Employment the Episcopal Office was to be derived likewise. But this Etymology
begins to be disliked, and is rather fetched from the Arabic, where it seems
to be answered in part by (...) custodivi^, and by (...) Thesaurarius, Condus:
though if a Radical Mem may be admitted to be changed into a Nun, (as the
Servile, it is known, usually are in the Chaldee Dialect); I would then choose
to bring it from (...) whose simple Signification is Inservivit, Ministravit,
and directly answers to the Greek (...) and (...).

CHAP. V.
. I. The Excommunicates of the Jews, and their Condition.

. II. The Condition of Mourners among the Jews, compared with that of the
Excommunicate.

. III. Their Excommunicates restrained from the Liberty not only of Civil
Conversation, but of Religious Communion.

. IV. Excommunication mentioned in the New Testament, as practiced by the Jews,
and by Christians.

AFter this Parallel of the Officers of either Church; I proceed to the
Discipline they are remembered in Scripture to use, That of Excommunication: A
Subject upon which Mr. Seldom has much enlarged; and an Abstract of it from
him I here give you.

. I. EXCOMMVNICATION, or the Debarring a Man by Command from the Liberty of
Conversation with his Brethren, was a Method used by the Jews long before our
Savior's time, as well as the other corporal Restraints by Imprisonment or
Banishment; and the Shame and Inconvenience, even of the lighter kind of it,
was almost equal to that of Stripes, and intended to prevent them.

Indeed there was with the Jews a kind of Censure, called by them a Rebuke (a),
which, from the Mouth of a Grave Person pronounced for an Offense committed
before him, had that Force, as to shame the Delinquent, and oblige him to his
good Behavior, and a particular Modesty, for the space of Seven Days. But this
was a Reproof, rather than a Sentence; and seems to have obliged in good
Manners only: neither did it restrain the Party from ordinary Converse: or
needed any Satisfaction to be given, but expired at the end of the Week.

But the Excommunication of which we speak, was a formal Sentence, pronounced
for some Misdemeanour or Crime; either by the Consistory, or by a Qualified, or
even by a Private, Person.

The First and lighter Degree of Excommunication (b), was that by which the
Person was obliged to keep from all other Israelites, (and they likewise, in
most Cases, from him) the Distance of Four Cubits, a Distance the Jews are
bound to put between themselves and some sorts of impure things, whenever they
are about their Prayers or their Law; as he was also obliged to suffer some
other Inconveniences, which shall be presently mentioned.

This Sentence was inflicted either by a Private Man, for some Offenses done in
his Presence, whereof there are Twenty four Cases expressed Maim, Jad. Chapter l.
1. Tract. 3. cap. 6. sub finem.
; or further, by a Graduate in their Law, for the Contempt of his Person; or by
the Magistrate, as they should see Cause: and in Pecuniary Causes brought
before the Consistory, it is particularly noted, that they proceeded not to
Excommunication, until three Admonitions had been made to the Defendant, three
Court-days before; and that then the Excommunication passed, not in
Consideration of the Plantiff's Wrong, but for the Contempt of the Court.

This Excommunication, of Course, was to continue upon him Thirty Days; and
within that time he was to endeavor for Absolution, making Satisfaction as the
Case should require. And this Satisfaction possibly was to be offered in
Judicial Cases to the Injured Party, by the same Method we find directed on
another Occasion Buxtor. Syn. Jud. cap. 25.
: as when an Offender, endeavoring on the Expiation-Eve to be reconciled to
his Brother, is first ordered to go to him, and beg Pardon; and if he obtains
it not, then to take with him three Witnesses, and twice more to make the like
Application; and until then he is not supposed to have discharged his Duty.

But if this Sentence, though passed by a Private Man, was suffered by the
Excommunicate to remain upon him those Thirty Days; he was then to be
excommunicated by the Consistory for that his Contumacy, and so remain for
another Thirty Days, if not restored before by their Decree.

This, all the while, is that Lighter kind of Excommunication; and in all those
Cases the Restraint of the Distance of Four Cubits did certainly obtain. There
are also other Inconveniences and Penalties, that belong to this sort of
Sentence as certainly; (for whether they lay the first thirty Days in the Case
of one suffering under a private Excommunication, I need not determine;) and
they are these, according to Maimonides Maim. ibid. c. 7.. 4, etc.
. It was not lawful for him all the Days of his Excommunication, to trim his
Hair, or cut his Nails; to wash Himself, or his Clothes, or to put on New: no
more than it was for a Mourner. He was not to be one of those with whom Grace
was said, at a Meal where there were Three or more; neither was he to be
reckoned one of the Ten, who were to make up the full Number of a just
Assembly: although he might Teach the Unwritten Law, or be Taught; and might
Hire, or be Hired. But if he died excommunicate, they sent and laid a Stone
upon his Coffin, declaring thereby, That they stoned him, for his Separation
from the Congregation.

There was another, a heavier and more Terrible, kind of Excommunication (f),
which the Consistory might upon some weighty Cause pronounce at the first
Instance, but which was inflicted generally upon those who persisted
excommunicate those abovementioned Sixty Days. And then the former Penalties
were aggravated with others: and the Party was Disabled to Teach, or to be
Taught; to Hire another, or be Hired himself; to Give, or to Receive: neither
was there to be any Communication with him, but for Sustenance only Maim. eodem
c. 7.
.

This was a Horrible Sentence, full of Curses and Execrations upon the Party;
and to the Observation of it, the Congregation was obliged, as by a Vow
confirmed with an Oath. It was therefore, and is Leo de Mod. 2, 3, 4.
, pronounced with great Solemnity; by Sound of Horns, and Black Torches burning.

The Penalties I have specified above belonging to both these Degrees of
Excommunication, (for the Third commonly added (i), seems now not to be well
grounded), are from Maimonides; where he speaks succinctly and occasionally
only of Excommunication. But of the Second Sort of Excommunicates I am to add,
That in some Cases they were not only kept at the ordinary Distance, but were
absolutely secluded from promiscuous Conversation, as Lepers, (for with them
they are ranked Mor. de Poen. 4.25.7.
); and shut up in some remote Cell: and that their Estates were sometimes
forfeited to Sacred Uses; and they themselves reputed as wholly separated, and
cut off from the Congregation of the Children of Israel; as the Decree in Ezra
Ezra 10.7, 8. Seldom, de Syn. 1.7.
imports.

I am likewise to add further, what belongs certainly to this Second kind; if
it does not to the First, as Morinus supposes; that it was much questioned by
the Ancient Masters, whether an Excommunicated Person were not bound to Rent
his Clothes, to Cover his Head, and to Turn his Bed, (the lower Part, I
suppose, upwards;) and whether he were not forbid, (as to wash, so) to anoint;
to come near his Wife; to make, or return Salutations; and to wear the
Tephillim or Praying Ornaments Mor. ib. 4.23.4.
: as it was commonly agreed by them, that he was not to wear Shoes in a City,
though abroad and in the Country he might; and that he was not to exercise his
Trade by day; nor to wash, except Face and Hands, and Feet, and in cold Water.

. II. AND these Particulars, though very minute, I have the rather mentioned,
that the Correspondence, which is generally supposed, between the Excommunicate
and the Mourners, may better appear.

For a Jew that has lost a near Relation, is obliged to mourn for him Thirty
Days, (for a Father or Mother Eleven Months): and, besides that, the next of
Kin to the Dead is bound to tear his Garment, upon the first News of his Death,
and at his Burial, (as all are bound to do who are present at his Death); all
Mourners on the First day, for their deep Sorrow are supposed to Groan; the
Three First, they are presumed to Weep; the Seven First, to Lament; and on all
the Thirty, to express their Sadness by some Neglects of themselves, Maim.
7.14. Tra^tat. 4. seu de Lugeme, cap. 13.. 11.


On all the Thirty, those who mourn for any of their Near Kindred forbear to
cut their Hair or Nails; to wear any Garment that is White, and Pressed and
New; to Marry; to be present at any Feast of Mirth; and to go Merchandising
from their own Town to another Maim. ibid. c. 6.
: neither was it proper for others to ask after their Health by way of
Salutation Ibid. c. 5.20.
.

On the First Seven, it was further forbid the Mourner to wash his Clothes; or
to wash himself, except his Feet and Hands only, and that in cold Water; to
anoint; to come near his Wife; to have Sandals on in the City; to do any Work,
either hired himself, or hiring others; or to open his Shop, or give and
receive in Merchandise; to read the Written Law of Moses, etc. or to learn or
explain the Oral: To have any Bed in his House standing, and not to lie himself
upon one turned; to have his Head and Upper part of his Face uncovered; or
lastly, to salute or ask after another's Health, except saluted first Ibid.
cap. 5.
. Further, on the Three first Days, He was not to resalute, though he were
saluted cap. eodem.. 20.
; nor to do any Work, not in Private, and though he were fed by Alms 8.
.

And lastly, on the First Day, it was unlawful for him to eat or drink of his
own Meat or Drink, (though even Flesh sent by others he might eat, and drink
for Digestion of their Wine;) neither was he to wear his Tephillim; and he was
bound to sit upon his Bedstead turned Ibid. c. ^. 9.
.

But if his Dead was yet in his house, (and their Dead they think it their Duty
to bury as soon as they can;) he was not to eat in his own House, if any
Friend's were near: however (except on a Sabbath) he was not to eat sitting;
nor to eat Flesh, or drink Wine; nor to say a Solemn Blessing or Grace himself,
neither was any other of his Company to do it before him; and he was excused
from all Offices of Worship and Prayer. 6.
.

This is an Abstract of the Usage of Mourners among the Jews; and may help us
to understand the better, what shall follow, as well as what has been premised,
concerning Persons Excommunicate: the same Restraints, as we see, lying upon
Both. And it may be, as Thirty Days were a common Number both to Excommunicates
and Mourners, so the Excommunicate of the first Thirty Days, were first
reckoned as Mourners at large; of the latter Thirty, as the Mourners of the
Seven Days; and the Excommunicates of the other Degree, the Cherem, might be
ranked with the Mourners of the Three days, or rather of the First, if not with
those that had not buried their Dead; while some of them, the Cut off, were
esteemed even in a worse Condition than the Dead themselves.

. III. AND thus I have given you a brief Account of the Jewish Excommunication,
and not disagreeable to wha^ Mr. Seldom has discoursed at large in his Book de
Synedriis: though in what I am next to mention, I shall be obliged to differ from
him.

He indeed has given himself some pains to prove, That this Excommunication was
not directed by Moses, nor is observed any where in Scripture before the
Babylonish Captivity: neither am I much concerned in that Point; it being
sufficient for our purpose, that it had been in Practice four or five hundred
Years before our Savior, and was in his time the Received Law, and Canonical
Discipline of their Church.

But of their Church I desire to be understood, and in the fullest Sense;
notwithstanding Mr. Selden's Express Dissent: which I am bound therefore, with
the Reader's Leave, a little to consider.

This eminently Learned Gentleman, as he observes, that Excommunication with
the Jews was a Civil Punishment, inflicted in Civil Cases, and by Civil
Officers; so he very frequently, and very positively affirms, That it did not
take place in their Synagogues or Temple, and had no Influence at all upon
their Religious Worship De Jure N. and G. juxta Heb. lib. 4. cap. 9. De Anno
Civ. veterum Judaor. cap. 18. De Synedr. lib. 1. cap. 7.
.

But how far this first Observation is true, we have seen already Cap. 4.. 4.
in the Case of Presbyters, by whom the Sentence was juridically pronounced.
For as they were Civil Officers, but at the same time Sacred, as being Officers
in God's Commonwealth, and for the Execution of His Laws; so this
Excommunication, however Civil, was in the same manner Sacred, being the
Punishment used in that Nation, which was the Church of GOD.

And as for his other Assertion, That Excommunication did not operate in the
Synagogue or the Temple; it is both very strange, and, I believe, not well
founded.

Strange it is at the first sight, that those who were separated from their
Brethren as unclean, in all Civil Conversation, should freely mingle in
Religious; and should be allowed to tread on their Heels in the Synagogues,
from whom they were to keep such a distance in the Streets. And very strange it
is, that those who were esteemed as Lepers, much more those who were cut off
from the People of Israel, should be admitted into the Temple, and
promiscuously allowed to worship in that Holy Place in the Company of the Holy
People. Though all this might not seem so strange, when Mr. Seldom wrote; then
when People were privileged in the Houses of God, from such mannerly Ceremony,
as they observed in their own Houses, and in the Streets.

But this peremptory Assertion is not only Suspicious, but Erroneous. And as to
the Synagogue, I have the express Affirmation of Leo de Modena (an Author in
Esteem with Mr. Seldom) directly to the contrary Cerem. des Juifs, 2.3.3.
. I shall not therefore urge any more Authority than what may be useful on
another Occasion; and that is of the Practice of the Jews, the day before their
Expiation-Fast. In that Evening before the Prayers for the following day begin,
from the Desk of the Synagogue they suspend the Excommunications of all
Transgressors whatsoever, without their Desire; and give them leave to come
in, and pray with the Congregation, which in that day reputes it self as a
Company of Sinners. And that such a Relaxation may appear to be more necessary,
it is very formally pronounced by the Praecentor, assisted with two of the
chiefest Rabbis on either side; and is conceived in this Authoritative Manner:
By the Power of the Consistory above, and of the Consistory below; by the
Authority of GOD, and by the Authority of the Church; we grant Leave and
License, to pray with the Wicked Buxtor. S^n. Ju^. cap. 26.
.

Now if Excommunication excludes from the Synagogue, we may presume it does
from the Temple. But Mr. Seldom offers to prove for the Temple, what he
supposed only of the Synagogue: and his Proof is from a Passage in the Misnah
Midd. c. 4.2.
, which Maimonides has also exscrib'd Maim. de Aedif. Temp. c. 7.. 3.
, and which with him runs thus: All who entered into the Temple, went in on the
Right Hand, and came out on the Left. But if any one lay under any Misfortune,
he went on upon the Left Hand: And then they asked him, Why go thou to the
Left? and, if he answered, Because I am in Mourning; they replied, He comfort
you who dwells in this House: but, if he said, Because I am Excommunicate; they
replied, He who dwells in this House give thee Grace to hearken to thy
Brethren, that they may restore thee.

And here indeed we find one Excommunicate within the Precinct of the Temple;
but it is neither considered, how far he was suffered to go, nor under what
Excommunication he lay; things Mr. Seldom would have examined with great
Accuracy, if they would have made for his Design.

For if we do but read what follows of the very same Chapter, we shall see
(what is to be remarked also for other Purposes) that the Ground belonging to
the Temple was very large, and several Courts to be passed, before one came to
the House or Temple properly so called. Six are reckoned from the first Gate,
and in this Order: Into the First and outmost Court [A], the Gentiles, and the
Defiled by the Dead, and even the Dead Bodies themselves, were admitted: though
not only Lepers were excluded, For they might not come within Jerusalem; but
others, who were under some impurer kinds of Uncleanness. Into the Second [B],
neither Gentiles, nor the Defiled with Dead, could enter: but those might, who
were washed for Lesser Defilements which polluted but for a Day, and waited
only for Sunset to be perfectly clean. The Third [C], was what was called the
Court of the Women, and into it the last mentioned could not come: but they who
were otherwise Purified, and only wanted to be Expiated by Sacrifice, might.
The Fourth [D], was the Court of the Israelites, for those who were Clean and
Perfect. Beyond this there was a Fifth [E], for the Sons of Levi: and then,
lastly, a Sixth [F]; where the Altar [G] stood, and the Sacrifices were made,
just before the Porch [H] of the House [I K].

And now what sort of Argument is this, that the excommunicated Israelite was
not debarred the Liberty of worshipping in the Temple; because he was admitted
into the Outmost Court, and where a Gentile might come as well? Whereas, for
ought appears, he might be suffered to go no further; and might be kept off at
the Distance of Three Courts from the Place of the Israelites Devotion. But how
much less will this avail for an Argument, if the Excommunicated Person there
spoken of was not one of the more guilty sort, or not of that kind which are
compared with the Leper, much less of those who are wholly Cut off from the
People of GOD?

Notwithstanding therefore this Argument of Mr. Selden's, the Presumption from
the Practice of the Synagogue would hold good for the Temple; and on that I
might rest: but there are other very probable Arguments that will concur to
exclude the Excommunicate, at least, from any near Approach in the Temple.

For though Excommunicates are not at all reckoned by Maimonides in this place,
and those only are mentioned here whom the Law pronounces unclean; yet we may
suppose that these were named only for Example sake, and that other States of
Men lay under the same Restriction.

For, First, it appears from the same Author (g), that none was to come into
the Court of the Israelites in an uncomely Dress, with torn Clothes, or long
neglected Hair. By which it is plain, That Mourners were not permitted to enter
there during the whole Thirty Days; and consequently that all Excommunicates
were likewise debarred thence.

And further, of the Mourners of the first seven Days, he elsewhere (h) tells
us, That they sent no Offerings to the Altar, not so much as Wine, or Wood, or
Frankincense: [not for their Sins, and less of Peace, and much less of Thanks.]
By this Prohibition of Sending, it is implied, They could not come: and seeing
it is the same Prohibition which lay upon the Defiled with the Dead; we may
conclude, That these Mourners likewise were obliged to stop with them in the
Outer Court, and could not pass beyond.

Now that there were Excommunicates who answered these Mourners, we have seen.
II.
; and that they kept them company there in the Court of the Gentiles, we might
well presume. But the Excommunicates happen in this Case to be mentioned by our
Author: and in a manner, that though it may seem to weaken the Inference, will
be found to confirm it. It is said there (k) of the Excommunicates, That it was
doubted whether they might send; and also that if they did send, the Oblation
would be good. And if this Place would have concluded any thing for their
Freedom of Access, or for their Advantage from those Sacrifices; it would not
have been omitted by Mr. Seldom: whereas he rather seems to have passed it by,
because he foresaw it would make against him. For he knew well that the
Offering being good, signified no more than that (though it were regularly to
be forborne, yet) the Reception of it by the Priests was no Profanation (k):
and he could not but discern, That this Unlawfulness of Sending impli'd the
Unlawfulness of their Coming; for otherwise no such Doubt could have been made
concerning them.

And lastly, As for those Excommunicates, who were ranked with Lepers, or who
were absolutely Cut off; it cannot but seem probable, That these were denied
Entrance not into the Temple only, but even into the Holy City.

The contrary therefore to what Mr. Seldom so often asserts is very evident,
That no Excommunicate Person could go into the Court of the Israelites, and
that many of them could go no further than the Outmost Court: and it appears to
be very likely, That those who lay under the more grievous Sentence, were
utterly excluded even from the Privileges of a pious Heathen. This distance
They themselves were obliged in Conscience to keep: and if any of them were
suffered by the Priests to come nearer; it must have been from the Want, either
of Authority in the Judge that did excommunicate, or of a Certificate of the
Excommunication.

. IV. AND now we come to the New Testament; and there possibly we may have an
Instance of the abovementioned Rebuke, in that Reproof given by our Savior to
St. Peter, Matthew. 16.23.
Get thee behind me, etc. but of their Excommunication the Mentions are
confessed. And in that Case when any One is said there to be put out of the
Synagogue Joh. 9.22.16.2.
, as Mr. Seldom is ready to understand him separated and secluded from the
Communication of the People of Israel in Civil Affairs; so we are to have leave
to suppose him ejected likewise out of the Synagogue Place, and deprived of the
Liberty of the Temple.

And further, when our Savior directs Matthew. 18.15.
an offended Brother to admonish the Offender first in Private, afterward
before Two or Three Witnesses, and then to bring him before the Church or
Consistory, and if he does not then amend, but continues obstinate, to esteem
him as a Heathen and a Publican: this may well be taken to direct a Private
Charitable Course, (used on other Occasions by the Jews. I.
,) to be tried in this Case, before the Judicial Proceedings begin. And then
what follows, may be very properly understood of the Validity of the Sentence
of Excommunication, if, by the Obstinacy of the Party, the Process must be
carried so far; What ye bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and what ye
loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. That is (in the Jewish way of
Speaking, something of which may be seen in this Chapter. III.
,) the so Condemned and Excommunicated Below, and by Men, shall be held as
Excommunicated Above in Heaven, and by GOD himself: and the Absolved by the
Consistory below, shall be Absolved by the Consistory above. This Meaning
supported by the Practice of the Jews, and consonant to their Expressions (f),
the Place certainly admits; and so naturally, as not to be easily set aside by
the bare force of an uncertain Criticism upon a single Word (g).

Our Savior in all probability may be supposed to speak of Excommunication
there: but we find expressly the Actual Exercise of it in the Church of
Corinth, directed by St. Paul upon the Person of a grievous Offender; and the
Sentence given, Therefore put away from your selves that wicked Person 1 Cor.
5.13.
. And though any one should insist upon the Variety of Rendering which may be
used on that Text, and translate it wicked Thing, yet that Thing must be
understood of the Person that did this Deed 5.2.
, and who ought to have been taken away from among the Congregation, and
delivered to Satan 5.
, that is, Cast out of the Communion of Christ our Savior and Comforter, or
Advocate, and delivered up to Satan, to be accused and tormented by him. Here
is an Act of Excommunication: and a Precedent of Absolution from it we have
upon the same Person in the Second Epistle; the Forgiving and Comforting of him
by the Church 2 Cor. 2.7.
, confirmed by the Apostles Forgiveness also 2.10.
.

And thus Excommunication, so which whenever it was introduced among the Jews,
whether by Moses, or some other Prophet, had long obtained among them before
our Savior's time; is, as we find, in probability countenanced and ordered by
Him, and certainly commanded and executed by his Apostle: and how this Practice
was continued in the succeeding Ages, we shall see anon.

. I. (a) They call it (...) See Morinus de ^oen. lib. 4. c. 28.4.

(b) This is known by the Name of (...) Niddui, a word that signifies
Separatio, Elongatio; as (...) is Separatio, Amotio, propter Immunditiem. And
to this the Arabic (...) Abegit, and (...) Aversatus est, Abhorruit, agree.

(f) Called Cherem from (...) Excludere, Anathematizare, Devovere, Disperdere:
The Hebrew word, as is usual, containing in it the Signification of two Arabic
Words of similary Initial Letters; the One (...) firmiter Ligavit, Repulit,
Prohibuit, Vetuit; and the Other (...) Resecuit, Excidit, Perdidit, Extirpavit.

(i) The supposed third Degree was styled (...) Shammatha: and taken to be
derived from (...) Ibi est mors; or from (...) Deus venit, as if it were the
same with Maranatha. But the Word (...), instead of such a peculiar Notion, is
known to signify at large separare, excludere a Societare hominum; and to be
put frequently for (...): and so it may be the same with the Arabic (...),
which is of the like Signification, connoting the same Inm^ndities.

. III. (g) Maim. lib. 8. seu de Cult. Divin. Tract. 3. cap. 1.. 17. ex
Interpret. Ludov. de Veil. Porro cuivis Interdictum erat Sacerdoti, juxta atque
Israelitae, ne Vino usus, vel quacunque ratione Temulentus, neu inculte atque
horride Capillatus, aut Pannis Obsitus, omnino in Templum veniret; ne intra
primum quidem illud Atrium Israelitarum. Id enim lege sancitum non erat: verum
Gloria and Reverentia hujus Magnificae Domus non patiebatur in eam quemquam
intrare Sordidatum [ (...)].

(h) Ibidem cap. 2.. 11. Lugens igitur Hebdomada tota munus ad Alta^e mittebat
nullum, nec Vinum quidem, neque Ligna, neque Thus. Similiter Homo Leprosus
nihil quicquam muneris ad Altar mittebat. Nam quamdiu hominem intra Castra
venire non licebat, nec licebat cum Sacrificia facere. De homine autem ab
Ecclesi^ communione sejuncto [ (...)] dubium est, Is utrum munus ad Altar
mittere posset, necne. Quare Sacrificium ejus, si factum esset, been fuisset [
(...)] (k).. 12. Nam per Serpentem Animantem aut Rem Consimilem Inquinatus
Homo, item and Incircumcisus, si Sacrificia ad Altar misisset, sane pro illo
sierent. -- Verum enim pro homine Funere Poliuto nullum siebat Sacrisicium,
interea dum Purificabatur.

(k) (...) signifies in many places not an Acceptance with Favor, but with
Pardon; a Connivance and Sufferance. For so it is used often; as, (to give but
one Instance) when it is said, [ Lib. eodem, Tract. 7.11.20.] That a Handful of
Frankincense, taken out of an Offering afterward Polluted, was it self not to
be burnt on the Altar: but if it were burnt, it was accepted [ (...)]. And so,
though in another Phrase where the Discourse is concerning the Intention with
which the Sacrifice was to be offered, [ Cap. 14.. 1.] It is also said, That
the wrong Intention of the Priest made the Abomination: but if That was Right,
though the Owner of the Sacrifice were heard to speak what would cause
Abomination, yet the Sacrifice was Good [ (...)].

. IV. (f) Several Persons are said by the Jews to be Excommunicated in Heaven,
or by GOD, [ (...)]: as the Children of Israel in the Wilderness, (so mentioned
in the Cheseph Misna upon the above cited Place of Maimonides, 8, 3, 2.11.);
and those spoke of in the Gemara, alleged by Mr. Seldom, de Syn. 1.7. The Form
too of a Cherem, produced by him in his Book de Jure Not. and Gent. 4.7. is
said to be pronounced ex sententia Dei, and ex sententia Ecclesiae, (...).

(g) His Assertion in his Book, de Syn. l. 1. c. 9. toward the End, is thus:
Expresso Obligationis seu Ligationis nomine ipse Excommunicandi actus nuliibi,
quantum observavi, apud Hebraos veteres d^^iga^^ur: And he had shown there
before (and afterward at large, l. 2. c. 7.. 2.) That the Phrase to Bind and
to Loose, in the Usage of the Jews, signifies to Declare Unlawful and Lawful,
to Forbid and Permit.

This, it is true, is now the usual Signification of (...): and commonly an
Excommunicate is not termed Bound, but Separated or Devoted, [ (...) or (...)].
But the Word still continues most properly to signify Bound, and stands for
Illicitum, as it is quid Inhibitum: just as the Arabic (...) is put for
Vetitum, under the Notion of Prohibitum. And besides it frequently in the Old
Testament stands for something bound upon another: as our Savior speaks of
those that did (...) [ Matthew. 23.4.]; and as a Condemned Person may be said to
be Bound by a Sentence. And whatever the Reason was, why the Word (...) was not
commonly used to signify One Excommunicate; it was not, because the Notion of
Binding did not agree to that Sentence. For that of Absolving still remains,
when the Excommunication is withdrawn; and the Ordinary Expression for that Act
is (...) and (...), to Loose and Set at Liberty. Nay, contrary to the Learned
Author's Negative Observation, the very Word (...) is used for Excommunication
in one Passage of the Gemara, cited by himself (the seventh Chapter of the same
Book); where one Rabbi Samuel is brought in speaking of the Sound of the Horn,
with which the Sentence was Pronounced and Revoked, (...).

I therefore may more reasonably suppose, That the Word (...) was not so
frequently used for Excommunication, not because it more properly signified to
Declare Unlawful, (for Words of Loosing, though signifying to declare Lawful,
continued also to signify the Absolution of an Excommunicate); but because it
bore another Sense of being Tied and Bound up together, (as (...) and (...) are
Fasciculus, Manipulus,) a Sense opposite to Separation and Distance, which
Excommunication implies. This also is one of its Arabic Significations where
both (...) in it self and Derivatives, imports besides the Sense of Binding,
that of Proximity of Kindred: and (...), besides that of inclusit, Coercuit,
and Peccatum, and Onus, has in it also that of Cognatio, Affinitas; and the
more general Signification of Propinquus; and thence Vicinus fuit, Tentorium
fixit Proxime a Tentorio alterius. And this last Acception (if the Excursion is
pardonable) the like Word (...) apparently requires, in that known Phrase [1
Kings 14.10.] (...), which is commonly rendered Shut up and Left, but seems
rather to mean, Those who live together in neighboring Tents, and those who
live alone, and at a Distance, with their Cattle in the Field; (for so (...)
and (...) have in them the Significations of Long a Mansione and seorsim
abesse, sub dio versari, cum pecoribus suis procul ab hominibus pastum
recedere:) these Two Sorts of People, with those that lived in Walled Houses,
making up the whole Number of the Children of Israel.

CHAP. VI.
. I. Circumstances ralating to Baptism, under Five Heads; practiced in the
Church of Christ in the Second Century.

. II. These all agreeable to Jewish Custom: and First, in General; as to the
Persons baptized and Baptizing, and the Solemn Time of Baptism:

. III. In Particular; Secondly, as to the Distinction and Instruction of its
Candidates;

. IV. Thirdly, As to the Action of Baptism;

. V. Fourthly, Its Confirmation;

. VI. And Lastly, the Sequel and Close of the whole Ceremony.

. I. HOW much the Ordinances of Christianity, Recorded in the Scripture, agree
with those of the Jewish Church, we have seen. Now several Circumstantials of
those Ordinances are remembered to have been practiced in the next Age; as well
as several other Usages, of which the Scripture is silent: and whether they
were not derived from the Jews also, we now come to consider.

I begin with the Rituals and Circumstances of Baptism, many of which were
undoubtedly practiced very early in the second Age, being mentioned by
Tertullian at the latter end of it, as used then by the Church time out of Mind.

Now this Author, in his Treatise which he writ expressly of Baptism, and
besides scatteringly in other places, has happily informed us, both in
general, concerning the Persons capable of Receiving this Sacrament, Those Able
to give it, and the Common Time of Administering it: and also, particularly,
concerning the Administration of it, letting us know some Circumstantials of
the Preparation to the Action, of the Action it self, of the Seal or
Confirmation of it, and of the Solemnity that afterward attended it.

First, What I have added in this Column for Explication, is taken out of other
Authors, not later than the IVth. Century.
The Church at that time Baptized Children, their Godfathers undertaking for
'em (a); as well as Grown Persons: and the Solemn Time for the Administration
of that Sacrament was (b) the Paschal Season [ Saturday in the Evening before
Easter Day, Cyril. Cat. Mist. 1. Ambr. de Sacram. 1.1.]
. The High Priest, who is the Bishop, had the Right of conferring it; and the
Presbyters and Deacons by his Authority: though the Laymen, in Case of
Necessity, had Right to give it also (c).

Secondly, The Church then made a Distinction (d) between the common Gentile or
Jew, and one of them in some measure persuaded to Christianity, called a
Hearer, or one under Instruction; who professed Repentance for his past Life;
as well as between the last sort, and a perfect Christian [Those of the Middle
Kind, and not yet Christians, were also (at least afterward) subdistinguished.
The Hearers were such as had been informed of some general and Preliminary
Points of the True Religion (e), and were half come over: if Heathens, having
renounced their Idolatry and gross Immorality; and if Jews, acknowledging the
True Messia; but not yet entirely satisfied in all Points necessary: suffered
therefore to hear the Scriptures and Sermons for their further Conversion. The
Catechumens, or those under Instruction, were willing to become Christians, and
resolved it; but either did not esteem themselves worthy as yet, or were not
fully approved by the Church: and these had their particular Instruction, from
whence they were called; and professing Repentance for the Sins of their
Unconverted State, had the Privilege to stay after Sermon, and to have the
Prayers of the Congregation for them, and to be dismissed with a Blessing. And
lastly, when they were admitted to stand for Baptism, they then entered into a
stricter Course of Repentance, and had the peculiar Articles of the Faith more
plainly inculcated, called now the Enlightened; and after frequent Examination
and Scrutiny, were at last Received into the Body of the Faithful (f)].
. And those were not promiscuously admitted in its Assemblies; but had their
distinct places assigned 'em [The Places of Assembly, or Churches, had commonly
an Area, or Court before them, Cloistered on either Hand ( Fig. 2. aa); beyond
the Court, to the East generally, was the Building, which we may conceive, at
present, to have been in Three Divisions, whether they were separated or not
within by any Raised Partitions, or distinguished without by any Difference of
Structure. The Lowermost next the Outer Doors, we may call the Ante-Church (
Fig. 2. AB), the Next was the Church CD, and the Last the Apartment of the
Altar, or Sanctuary (OF). Now the Ante-Church was also subdivided into Two
Parts: and in the Lowermost Part, or Portico (A), and next to the Court, was
the Place of the Hearers properly so called: The Catechumens Station (B), was
above them, next to the Church: And in the Head of them the Enlightened or
Immediate Candidates were, I suppose, posted; being those who were in a little
while to proceed further, and to be taken into the Church it self, the Place of
the Faithful. And so the Faithful themselves were orderly disposed, according
to the Difference of their Sex and Age: and the Church was likewise in Two
distinct Parts; having the Desk or Pulpit (S), in the Middle: that Below the
Desk answering near to the Body of our Collegiate Churches (C), belonging to
the Women chiefly, who were seated in the Sides of it beneath, and in Galleries
above (cc): and the Upper Part (D), belonging to the Men; the Whole, or the
greater Portion of which, is now taken up by our Choir (g).
.

Thirdly, The Person to be Baptized protested first, [among other things,]
before the Congregation, That he Renounced the Devil, his Pomp, and Angels (h).
Thence he went to the Water, and made the same Renunciation again [For being
come to the Porch of the Baptistery, he turned to the West, and stretching out
his Hands, spoke to Satan as if present; I renounce thee, Satan, etc. Cyr. Cat.
Mist. and then turning to the East, he said the Creed; and going into the
Baptistery, he was stripped, ibid.]
: and then he dipped thrice, with solemn Responses (h) [For being asked,
whether he believed in God the Father, etc. he answered, I believe, and was
dipped: and so at the second and third Questions concerning the other two
Persons of the Trinity. Cyrill. Cat. M. 2. Ambr. de Sacr. 3.2.]
.

Fourthly, When he came out of the Water, he both tasted (h) of a mixture of
Milk and Honey; and was anointed (i) with the Blessed Ointment, [the Chrism] as
heretofore the Sons of Aaron had been anointed to the Priesthood.

He was also signed (k) or sealed with the Sign of the Cross on the Forehead [
Some Difference of Practice there was here between the Latin and Greek Church.
In the Greek the Chrism was given by the Person that officiated, on the
Forehead as well as on the other Parts of the Body: [ Cyril. C. M. 3.] as now
their Priest Anoints the Baptized, signing them with the Cross, in the
Forehead, and Eyes, and Nostrils, and Ears, and upon the Breast, and on their
Hands and Feet; and leaves only Impositio of Hands to be conferred by the
Bishop at any time afterward; the Practice, as I conceive, of our Church (l).
Whereas in the Latin Church the Priest anointed the other Parts, pouring the
Chrism upon the Head: but it was reserved to the Bishop's confirmation, to sign
the Forehead with the Chrism at the same time he laid on his Hands [Innoc. ad
Decent.]. And this signing they called the Spiritual Seal, [ Ambros. de Sacram.
3, 2.] the Holy Ghost being supposed to be given by that and the Imposition of
Hands. And this Confirmation the Bishop, when present at the Baptism,
administered to the Baptized when he had put on the white Garments after his
first Anointing. [ Ambros. de ^is qui Mist. Init. c. 7.]
. And lastly, Hands were laid upon him with a Blessing, calling and inviting
down the Holy Ghost (m); and, as the same Author expresses it, he was
overshadowed by the Imposition of Hands (n).

Fifthly, The next Morning (if not immediately) on Easter Day, they proceeded
to the Eucharist (k) [In the Greek Church, even the Infants receiving it.]
: and wore their white Garments all the next Week; not allowing themselves the
Use of Bathing for that time (h) [When also they had more perfectly expounded
to them the Nature of those two great Mysteries, the Sacraments of Baptism and
the Eucharist, to which they had been lately admitted: (as we see in the
Mystagogick* Discourses of Cyril of Jerusalem, made for that purpose.)
.

II. WITH so many Circumstances was the Initiation into the Church begun, and
perfected, in those early days of Christianity: neither is it to be imagined
that all these Rituals were the pure Invention of such Simple Plain men, as the
first Christians appear to have been; much less can it be thought that they
were borrowed, by those pious men, from the Heathen Idolatry. Whence therefore
should most of these Circumstantials be derived, but from the same Religion,
from which the Sacrament it self was taken? And whence else should They derive
them, who had been originally of that Religion, or Well-willers to it, as most
of the first Christians were?

This conjectural Conclusion the account given above of Jewish Baptism Chapter I.
2, 3.
, which we suppose the Reader to remember, will confirm: and it may be so far,
as to make us willing to suppose, that a more exact Correspondence would have
appeared, if the Information from the Jews had been less defective.

For First, That the Jews proselyted Children by Baptism we have there seen:
and also that they required Sureties for them; which we shall the less doubt,
when we know that they do not Circumcise a Natural Jew, without a Godfather and
Godmother Buxt. Syn. Jud. ^.4.
. The Passover also was their chief Festival; and their Converts in probability
capacited themselves by Baptism, then particularly, for its celebration:
neither could the natural Jews themselves Maim. de Sacrific. Tract. 1. cap. 9.
9.
partake of it, if they had any Servant of their House Uncircumsised; and, as I
suppose consequently, Unbaptiz'd. These sorts of men therefore I presume were
amongst those who purified themselves before the Feast, and added to the
Solemnity of the Week or Fortnight before Part 1. chapter 5. 3.
. And lastly, though any Three would serve to confer it, yet regularly it was to
be done by commission from the Consistory, and I presume by the Appointment of
the Father or President of it, to whom we suppose the Bishop to answer Chapter 4. 5.
.

. III. Secondly, There was likewise a great Distinction of Persons made by the
Jews. There was a Common Gentile: and there was one who believed the Unity of
God, and took upon him to observe the Precepts to be kept by all the
Descendants of Noah Maim. Tract. de Regibus, cap. 8. 11.
, though he did not oblige himself further yet; and this was a degree of approach
into which he was solemnly admitted, being called a Proselyte of their Gate, as
one permitted to live amongst them in the Holy Land. Further, there were those
who professed their desire to become Jews Ibid. 10.
: and this Profession we find was solemn, and they reputed by it of another
rank; for if they did not proceed to make it good within a Twelvemonth, they
were degraded, we are told, and to be esteemed as a mere Heathen. There was too
yet, as it should seem, a further Class, of such Stranger Servants as were
Circumcised and Baptized in the Quality of Servants Maim. Tract. de Proh
Congressu, cap. 13. 11.
, but wanted still a further Baptism to complete them Jews: as there were
others, who were Circumcised and Baptized into perfect Judaism, but not yet
Sanctified by a Sacrifice Above Chapter 2.. 2.
. The Proselytes of the Jews were distinguished by these Advances: and it is
plain, that their Proselyte of the First kind, the Proselyte of the Gate, was
of the same rank with a Hearer; and also that he who undertook to become a Jew,
was in the nature of a Christian Catechumen; as he who was in immediate
Preparation to be Circumcised, or was Circumcised, but waiting to be Baptized,
was in a like Class to that of the Immediate Candidates and Probationers for
our Baptism; and he too who was actually Baptized into Judaism, but not yet
Expiated by Sacrifice, was in the Condition of one Baptized a Christian, but
yet Vnconfirm'd, and not admitted to full Communion. So were the Steps made by
a Convert of the Jews, agreeable to those of a Proselyte to Christianity. The
Instruction also by which he was gradually brought on The same.
was much alike to that recommended in the Apostolical Constitutions See Note
(e) of the former.
, proceeding gently and by easy ascents. Neither is it to be doubted, but that
the Jews were severe enough in their Scrutiny of him, since they were so shy of
Proselytes The Section above cited of the Second Chapter.
, and that a solemn Profession of Repentance for his former Heathenism was
required of him.

Now it is probable likewise, that these different sorts of Persons with the
Jews, had their different Places and liberties of Access. For the Apostolic
Constitutions themselves suppose the placing of the Faithful in the Assembly
according to their Sex and Age, to be after the pattern of the Temple (h). And
as a Christian Church has been described to be separated in two Partitions,
whereof the Upper part [D Fig. 2] belongs to Men, or the Chief of them, and
such as peculiarly attend on the Sacred Offices; and the Lower part [C] to
Women, who are disposed of on either side of it, leaving the middle for a
Passage, and to be taken up by Ordinary men, or such who are not provided to go
higher: so we see Chapter 5.. 3.
that in the Temple the Jews were likewise ordered in two Courts; whereof the
Lower [C Fig. 1] called that of the Women, had Galleries for them on either
hand [cc], and in the middle those Men stayed, who came only to Worship, and
had no Offering to make Light-foot Temple-Serv. chapter 18.
; whereas the further Court of the Israelites [D] was the proper place of those
private Persons who brought their Oblations, and of those Stationary men, whose
Office it was to attend upon the Daily Service.

And as the two Courts of the Temple belonging to the Israelites, Men and
Women, correspond with the places of the Faithful in our Churches; so will the
Stations of the Aspirers toward Judaism be found answerable to those of the
Advancers toward Christianity. The Second Court, or rather Alley [ B Fig. 1.]
next the Court of the Women, where those stood who were Circumcised into
Judaism, but not Baptized, is represented by the Inner Portico, or Narthex, [ B
Fig. 2.] of an old Christian Church, where the immediate Candidates were
placed, and to whom all the Catechumeni were properly enough added. And so the
First Court, that of the Gentiles [A Fig. 1.] is manifestly parallel with the
outward Portico [A Fig. 2.] of the Christian Hearers: as the space without the
Temple, within Jerusalem, [a Fig. 1.] answers to the Cloistered Area [a Fig.
2.] before a Church.

This Resemblance the four first Partitions of a Church bear to the four first
Courts of the Temple: and the same Correspondence was, I suppose, formerly
observable in a Jewish Synagogue. For this sort of Aedifice is described by
Maimonides Tract. de Precibus, cap. 11 sect. 2, 3, 4.
, with a Desk [S Fig. 3.] in the middle, from which the Law is read, and
Sermons are made; and by which it was of old divided in Two Parts. In the
Highest, at the upper end looking toward the Holy Land, the Law is placed in
the Wall (m), in an Ark [P Fig. 3.]; and on each side the Elders are seated in
a Semicircle, their Faces toward the Desk and the People, none else being
suffered regularly to sit there ( m 2). And in the Lower the People were
orderly disposed of, the Women being in Galleries on the sides. So do these two
Divisions of the Synagogue answer to the two Temple-Courts of the Men and
Women: and though they now have no Provision for New-comers, because they expect
not Proselytes (g); yet it cannot be doubted but that heretofore the Pious
Heathens had their places; and those who desired to be made Jews, theirs; the
Heathens, I suppose, in an outward Porch [A Fig. 3.]; and the designed Converts
in an inner [B Fig. 3.], the place next within the Door, and beyond which those
who come to Pray are now directed to go Main, Tract. de Precibus, cap. 8. sect.
2.
.

. IV. Thirdly, AS the Christian Proselyte, so the Jewish, no doubt, made his
first Renunciation in a Congregation; for if he was a Male, he was not to be
circumcised, but in the Presence of Ten Persons Buxt. Syn. c. 4.
. And, I suppose, as he was not admitted without the Approbation of the
Consistory, so not without the Privity of the Synagogue, that any person might
have the opportunity and liberty to object in the case of a new Member, as they
had in case of an Officer (b).

When too this Proselyte of the Jews came to the Baptistery, or place of Water,
he had the Interrogatories put to him again, as we are told expressly; and upon
that was dipped, etc. and here the Parallel is very clear, as we have seen
before Chapter 2. sect. 2.
.

Further, I would with the Reader's leave offer a guess, that the Renunciation
was made too by the Jew, toward One Point of the Compass; and that he after
turned to the contrary, and so entered the Water. For it is certain, when he
was once from under the Water, and was become a Jew, he had then for ever
afterward a new Point of Direction impressed, and in all his Devotions was to
turn his Face toward the Holy Temple Maim. Tract. de Precibus, cap. 5. sect. 3.
. Nor is it unlikely therefore that he put himself in that Position, when he
entered upon that Sacred Action; and that taking his leave of the opposite part
of the World, he took care to rise up with that Prospect before him: after the
manner of the Jews their Predecessors, when they were baptized again in Jordan,
and passed through it to the Holy Land.

In like manner I am apt to think, that the proselyted Jew tasted of Milk and
Honey; both as it was the first Food of a Newborn Infant, and the Product of
the Land into which he was now naturalized. Neither let it be thought that such
Conjectures beg the Question; and that where I should prove a Parallel, I only
fancy it. For as soon as we know that this Ceremony, for Example, was in use so
early in the World; we cannot but observe, that it was very proper for the
Jews, more proper for them than for Christians: and that therefore in all
likelihood it was rather invented by them, from whom the Christians confessedly
borrowed many other remarkable Circumstances of the same Action, and with whom
such Ceremonies as these abounded. And no question, as the Rabbis inform us of
many a Rite, of which the old Testament speaks not a little; so there were many
more, which they have passed by, and left in Oblivion, even in Subjects of
which they expressly treat; and much more in this of Proselytism, on which the
Talmudical Treatise is missing, as Mr. Seldom informs me De jure Not. and Gent.
Sec. Hebr. lib. 2. cap. 5 sub finem.
. But of this particular Rite we shall much less wonder, that the Use of it
with the Jews is forgot; when we consider, that were it not for some few
Writers, there would have been no footstep of its Practice left amongst us
Christians.

. V. Fourthly, I proceed to the Seal of this Baptismal Action, its
Confirmation; and shall again offer to the Reader the probability of its
correspondence with the Jewish Rites on the same occasion.

It will be easily imagined, that this New Convert, who was now become an
Israelite, and had the Title to all the Honors and Privileges of it, would
make haste to be put into possession of the Greatest, the Admission into the
Holy Temple, and to the Solemn Worship of God: Neither will the Reader think,
after so much Ceremony used upon this Proselyte before, that this last Act of
introducing him into the House of God, was without its share of Formality.

And that there was to be a Confirmation of the Jewish Baptism, we know already
in gross: and also in particular, that it was performed by a Burnt-Offering,
joined most ordinarily with a Peace Offering, the Proselyte sprinkled with the
Blood Chapter 2. sect. 2. as before.
: but other Circumstances of that Action I do not find; and beg the Reader's
leave again to conjecture at them from other similary cases.

For, first, a Proselyte new baptized, and purged from all his former Sin, and
admitted to the number of Believers, but not yet received into their Station in
God's House, was very like to a Leper, recovered from the Plague of his
Leprosy, (which with the Jews resembles a Sinful Life) whose Flesh was as that
of a Child; and who, being now purged and washed, and restored thereby to the
Society of his Brethren, was at the distance of seven days to be readmitted
into his former place in the Temple. And that Solemnity was performed in the
following manner, as we know both from the Scripture and Maimonides Lib. de
Sacr. Iract. 5. Cap. 4.
. The clean Leper being again washed in the Court of the Women, and come up to
the Door of the next Court, the Court of the Israelites, offered there a Sin,
and a Trespass, and a Burnt-Offering; and was then anointed with the Blood of
the Sin-Offering on the tip of his Ear, on the Thumb and great Toe of his right
side. Afterward, (for this might be done Ibid. cap. 5. sect. 4. de Cult.
Divin. Tract. 7. Cap. 18. Sect. 8.
many days after the other) he was anointed with Oil on the same parts out of
the Priest's hand; and what remained was poured on his Head.

And further, the Purification of a Proselyte to come near to God into that
Court, was something of the same nature with the Consecrution of a Priest,
which was nothing else but his Purification to come nearer yet, and to pass
into another Court: and how that was done we learn from Leviticus Lev. 8.
. There was first a Bullock offered for their Sins, and a Burnt-Offering; and
then after a Peace Offering, with the Blood of which Aaron and his Sons were
anointed, in the same parts in which the Lepers were. After this, with a
mixture of that Blood and the Holy Ointment, they and their Clothes were
sprinkled. And besides, on Aaron's Head (if not on his Son's too) the Holy
Ointment was poured; and on his Forehead (as the Rabbis Maim. de Cult. Div.
Tract. 2. Cap. 1. Sect. 9. Seld. de Success. in Pont. lib. 2. cap. 9.
tell us) Moses the Consecrator made with part of it the Sign of a Cross, like
a Greek X (they say) or what we call St. Andrew's Cross. For though the Forehead
be not mentioned in the Text to be so marked, yet it was the place on which the
Plate of Gold was wore by Aaron, that had on it the Inscription of the Name of
God, graven in it like the graving of a Signet Exodus 28.36.
. There too one of the two Phylacteries (or, as the Jews style them,
Praying-Dresses) are now always placed, hanging down from the top of the
Forehead between the Eyes, and having on it a Name of God Buxt. Syn. Jud. cap.
9.
. And there those were marked with a Mark Ezekiel. 9.4.
in Ezekiel, who were to be spared by the Destroyers: and marked they were, as
some of the Rabbis understand Ki^chi in locum.
, with the Hebrew Letter Ta^, which St. Jerome tells us was like a Cross in the
old Samaritan Alphabet; like to which is the last Coptick Letter of the same
sound; and as probably the old Greek T might be first made when it came from
Phaenice, the downright Stroke beginning a little higher above the transverse.
Answerable to this Mark of Ezekiel is that made for the same purpose in the
Revelations Rev. 7.2. -- 13.16.
, by the Seal of the Living God upon the Forehead of the Elect: as there were
others who had the Mark of the Beast on their Hands, or on their Foreheads,
(the two places where the two Phylacteries of the Jews are fastened;) and as it
was the Custom of the Eastern Idolaters to be marked with the peculiar Mark of
their supposed Deity, and particularly on the Forehead.

Thus was the Consecration of Aaron and his Sons performed: and though the
succeeding Highpriests were for some time Anointed; yet, as the Rabbis say,
they ceased to be so inaugurated before the first Captivity. And as for the
ordinary Priests that followed, they were never admitted to their Office by a
new Unction: but their Consecration was, in this like the Baptism of a
Proselyte, not to be reiterated, and supposed to descend down upon them from
their first Progenitors. The Kings also of the Jews, we are to remember, were
anointed with an Ointment, but not of the Holy Composition; and those only,
according to their Tradition, who were the First of their Race, or under a
questioned Title Seldom. ut Supra litera e.


Now then, as the Leper and Priest were Purified much after the same fashion,
and as the Case of a Proselyre agrees with either of them, so I am willing to
suppose that his Purification was performed in a mixed manner, betwixt those
used to the other two.

The Offerings for Sin used to both of them, a newborn Proselyte did not want;
and he therefore might be purified by Ointment, as both of them were, either
alone, or mixed with the Blood of the Burnt-Offering; which Ointment might
neither be simple Oil, nor was it to be of the Holy Sort, but of another kind,
as that for Royal Inaugurations was. The Ointment was poured on the Heads of
the Leper and High Priest, and also of their Kings: and so, I suppose, it was
upon the Head of the Proselyte, after some parts of him had likewise been
anointed with it before. For, as he was clean from the sinful Leprosy of his
former state, so he was now admitted to be one of that Holy Nation a Royal
Priesthood, or Kingdom of Priests: and therefore, I presume, the Ointment on
his Head was accordingly on his Forehead drawn in some such Figure as might
mark him to be Holy to God. And after all, it cannot be doubted but that the
Priest laid his Hands upon him, and blessed him; that God might list up the
Light of his Countenance, and his Holy Spirit might rest upon him. And if this
was performed upon a Proselyte, probably it was not all to be done by an
ordinary Priest; but the Proselytism was confirmed by the leave and direction
of the High Priest, or his Vicegerent, and the Blessing at least received from
a superior Hand.

I again confess, that this Rubric of Jewish Confirmation is drawn from
Conjecture: but we are sure of our Ground, having their Authority, that there
was actually such a Confirmation of a Jewish Proselyte: and we had reason, from
the Agreement in other parts of this great Ceremony, to presume it here. We
know too, that Things and Persons were Consecruted by Ointment, as well as by
Blood; that the Ointment was used alone to the Priest, and apart to the Leper;
and that the Forehead was the place with them for a Mark of the Name of God,
which all the Faithful were supposed to wear.

Though therefore we have no express account left us of this Proceeding, yet we
have reason to surmise it; and not only from the Practice I have given of the
Jews in similary cases, but from frequent Allusions to such Particulars as
these made in the New Testament. And, to mention but one, though I do not at all
think with some, that St. Paul refers to Christian Practice, yet I do not know
but he may to Jewish, and give us the Process of their Confirmation, when he
says, Now he who establishes [confirmeth] us with you in Christ, and has
anointed us in God; who has also Sealed us, and given the Earnest of the
Spirit in our Hearts (l).

VI. Fifthly, And lastly, what followed after the Christian Baptism so
confirmed is consonant likewise to Jewish Practice. For as the Christians new
Baptized omitted not to partake of the Eucharist the next morning; so the
Jewish Proselytes added ordinarily to their Holocaust a Peace Offering Chapter 2..
2.
, on which they also might feast before the Lord: neither can it be doubted but
that their Infants, if proselyted with them, did partake of the same Sacrifice.

And as to the White Garments, and the following Weekly Solemnities, though we
know not certainly whether they were used by the Jewish Proselytes, or no; yet
this we know, that they were at other times used by the Jews, and on like
occasions. A Jewish Baptism, with the subsequent Confirmation, was, as we have
observed, a kind of Consecration of the Proselyte: And as to the consecrated
Priest, his Habit was White Linen; that he put on at his entrance into his
Office, and in that he is said to have appeared, when upon any Question
concerning his Sacerdotal Pedigree, the Sentence was given for him, and he was
declared to be of that Order Maim. de Cult. Div. Tract. 3. cap. 6. sest. 11.
. When too the Priests received their first Consecration, the Holy Action, we
know Levit. 8.33.
, continued for a Week, to exercise and perfect them in their Office; and all
that while they were to attend incessantly in the Tabernacle, for the anointing
Oil of the Lord was upon them 8.7.
. And for the last reason, I suppose, they washed not all that while, no more
than the Stationary Men, who were not to wash, as we are expressly told Maim. de
Cult. Div. Tract. 2. cap. 6. sect. 11.
in their Weekly Wait.

I. (a) Tertull. de Baptisino, cap. 18. Itaque pro cujusque personae condition
at Dispositione, etiam Aetate, cunctatio Baptismi utilior est: praecipue tamen
circa Parvulos. Quid enim necesse est Sponsores etiam periculo^^ingeri; qui and
ipsi per mortalitatem destituere Promissiones suas possunt, and proventu malae
Indolis falli?

(b) Ibid. cap. 19. Diem Baptismo Solenniorem Pascha praestat.

(c) Ibid. cap. 17. Dandi jus habet Summus sacerdos, qui est Episcopus; dehine
Presbyteri, and Diaconi; non tamen sine Episcopi autoritate, propter Eccles^ae
honorem, quo salvo salva pax est. Alioquin etiam Laicis jus est.

(d) That there was in general such a distinction as follows of Persons and
Places, appears from this single Passage of Tertull. De Prefer. Haeret. cap.
41. Non omittam ipsius etiam Conversationis Haereti^oe descriptionem. Inprimis
quis Catechumenus, quis Fidelis, incertum est: pariter Adeunt, pariter Audiunt,
pariter Orant. Etiam 'Etknici si supervenerint; sanctum canibus, and Porcis
Margaritas licet non veras, jactabunt. And as the word Catechumenus is used
here, so in his Book De Poenit. cap. 6. Auditores and Audientes are opposed to
Intincti; and they are there spoken of as Novitioli, Qui incipiuut Divinis
Sermonibus aures rigare, -- and dicunt Tristinis Renunciare, and Poenitentiant
assumunt.

(e) In the Apostolic Constitutions, lib. 7. (...) (...) is directed to be
first taught, (...) etc.

(f) This Subdistinction is evident from the (...) IVth Century, and
particularly from St. Cyril of Jeru^^^^^ (...)

(g) Such an ancient distinction of Places in general (...) ^^ted already from
Tertullian (Note d), and denied by none (...) such a particular form of an
Ancient Church; as I have (...) given ( Fig. 2.) is the same with that
represented by Gear it. (...) Euchologium.

Neither do I choose Goar's Model, because it will ^^st suit w^^n the comparison
I am going to make; but because it se^^ more agreeable to the Truth, and has
less of Confusion in it, th^n that which Leo Allatius (De Temp. Gracorum) has
fig^^^d out, and which others have chose to follow. And for this I have the
Authority not only of Morinus, who had confider'd the matter, and wrote a
Treatise about it (as he tells us, De Paenit. lib. 6. cap. c.. 8.); but also of
Du Fresne more lately, who in his Description of Sancta Sophia has given the
Controversy on Goar's side.

For they both rightly judge, that the Name of Narthex, which is now given, and
has been so a long while to the Nave [C] of a Grecian Church, did not anciently
nor properly belong to it, but to the Portico's before it: Morin^s discerning [
Ibid. cap. 3. sect. 2.], and Du Fresne further demonstrating [ Constantinop.
Christ. lib. 3. cap. 18.], That (...) signifies a Narrow Oblong, (...). They
think therefore that the Audientes and Catechumeni were there at first in their
proper places, though upon extraordinary occasions they might come into the lower
part of the Church, (as Gentiles also might crowd in with them); and that
afterward, when they began to go m^re ordinarily into the Body of the Church,
(either they taking more liberty, or the Churches wanting such Porches), they
then brought in with them the Names of those Places, and the Nave was called
Narthex from their assembling in it; the upper part [D], or the Quire, being
thenceforth called the Church, and the names also or the Doors transferred
[Mor. Ibid. c. 1. sect. 12. Du Fresne, cap. 25.]. Upon that occasion the Desk
too, we may suppose, was removed from its former place [S], to an higher in the
Quire, either in the middle it [S], or on the sides; as there was also another
left in the Nave. [Of this Desk or Ambo, Morinus may be consulted in the 6th
Chapter of the abovementioned Book; and Du Fresne, in the 74th and 75th
Chapters of his above cited Book; besides what Goar has said]. But, to show the
ancient place of the Ambo; still, as I am told, in some Churches the Lessons
are read from the Lost over the Quire Door. And so from the modern place of the
Font in a Greek Church, which was used anciently to be in a House apart, but is
now commonly in the inner Narthex [B], we are left to judge, where of old the
place of the Catechumeni was.

(h) This, together with what follows on this and the other Articles, is thus
expressed by Tertullian, De Coron. cap. 3. Aquam adituri ibidem, sed and
aliquanto prius in Ecclesia, sub Antistitis manu contestamur nos Renuntiare
Diabolo, and Pompae, and Angelis ejus. Debinc ter Mergitamur, amplius aliquid
Respondentes quam Dominus in Evangelis determinavit. Inde suscepti, Lactis and
Mellis concordiam praegustamus: ex eaque die Lavacro quotidiano per totam
hebdomadem abstinemus.

(i) Tertull. de Baptismo, cap. 7. Exinde egressi de Lavacro perungimur
benedicta Unction; de pristina Disciplina, qua Vngi Oleo de cornu in
Sacerdotium solebant. This Unction is expressed antecedently to the Milk and
Honey in the Enumeration the same Author makes, lib. 1. advers. Marc. cap. 14.
Nec aquam reprobavit Creatoris, qua suos abluit; nec Olenm, quo suos ungit; nec
Mellis and Lactis societatem, qua suos Infamat; nec Panem, qno ipsum Corpus
suum repraesentat.

(k) Tertull. de Resurr. Carnis, cap. 8. Scilicet Caro eluitur, ut Anima
emaculetur. Caro ungitur, ut Anima consecretur. Caro Signatur, ut and Anima
muniatur. Caro manus impositione adumbratur, ut and Anima Spiritu illuminetur.
Caro corpore and sanguine Christi vescitur, ut and Anima de Deo saginetur. And,
that this Sign was made on the Forehead, he elsewhere tells in the comparison
he makes, De Praeser. Haer. cap. 40. Mithra signat illic in Front Milites suos.

(l) When the Priest, in our Office of Baptism, signing the Child with the Sign
of the Cross on the Forehead, receives it into the Congregation of Christ's
Church: for that Sign might also have been made in the Ancient Church, with
Water only; according ording to that of the 22d Chapter of the 7th Book of the
Apost. Constit. (...).

(m) De Baptism. cap. 8. Dehinc manus imponitur, per Benedictionem advocans and
invitans Spiritum Sanctum.

III. (b) Constit. Apost. lib. 2. cap. 57. (...).

(m) This place in the Wall, and as it were beyond the Floor of the Synagogue,
seems to be, at least, as the Gate [p] entering into the Court of the Priests,
from whence the Law is supposed to be fetched; if it be not as a Desk or Ducan
of that Court, (of which see Lightf. Temple-S. cap. 23.) by which name, if I
mistake not, the Jews now call the space railed in before their Ark or Heical.

( m 2) This last Particular is implied by Maimonidess in the place last cited,
and affirmed by Buxtorf, in his Syn. Jud. cap. 10. (an Author very exact, and
so esteemed by the ablest Judges): however the Jews may have given themselves
the liberty to vary from it, as they do also in other disposals of the
Synagogue, which Maimonides gives us, and the Author of Ceseph Misna would
reconcile.

. IV. (b) Lampridius de Alex. Severo. Vbi aliquos voluisset vel Rectores
Provinciis dare, vel Praepositos facere, vel Procuratores ordinare, Nomina
eorum proponebat hortans populum ut siquis quid haberet criminis probaret:
dicebatque grave esse, cum id Christiani and Judaei facerent in Praedicandis
Sacerdotibus qui ordinandi sunt, non fieri in Provinciarum Rectoribue, quibue
and Fortun^ hominum committerentur and Capita.

CHAP. VII.
. I. Several Particulars practiced in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, by
the Primitive Christians, which varied from those of the Paschal Supper.

. II. These speak Our Lord's Supper to have succeeded the Paschal in its
general nature, as a Memorial of Thanks.

. III. The Description of a Jewish Offering of Praise and Thanks, with the
Feasting upon it.

. IV. The Christian Eucharist answered to it: and in what manner.

. V. A Tradition of the Jews, That in the days of the Messiah, only the
Eucharistical Sacrifice should remain.

. I. THE Sacrament of the Lord's Supper has plainly appeared Chapter 3.
to be raised by our Savior from a Paschal Supper; and from that Original it
might have been expected, that it should have been afterward celebrated at
that time of the year only, and in a Night-meal, and with Vnleaven'd Bread: and
if the First Christians shall be found to have varied in these particulars, it
may perhaps seem a harder task to reconcile such a different practice with the
Usage of the Jews.

Now such a Difference there was in the Practice of the succeeding Christians.

In the Scripture it self Act. 2.42.
the Breaking of Bread in the Apostle's Fellowship, and with Prayers, daily
repeated, is supposed to be done as an Office of that Sacramental Communion.
Neither is it necessary that I should bring any Proofs from the next (...), for
such a frequent celebration of it.

And that it was not administered with Vnleaven'd Bread, would (...) from its
continual administration ou^ (...) the Paschal Season, and through ^^^rest of
the year: But it is beside^ known, that the Greek Church has always used
Leavened Bread on that occasion: and the Latins too are confessed, by the
ingenious Jesuit Sirmondus (...) Az^^^ (...) Op^^^^.
, to have so done in the beginning; though their Variation since to the contrary
Usage has much contributed to the widening of the Schism between those two
Churches.

This Sacrament of our Lord's Supper was known too in a little time by another
Name, and was styled the Eucharist. That is the common Name of it in Tertullian
(d): so it is called by Irenaeus (e): and before him, about the year 140,
Justin Martyr speaking of the Sacramental Bread and Wine, says (f), And this
Food is called by us the Eucharist: and in the same fence is the Word
frequently used by Ignatius (g), in the very beginning of this Age.

And as it had this Name very early, so it also changed the Hour of its
Celebration very early, as I presume. Tertullian remarks the Change in these
words; The Sacrament, says he (d), of the Eucharist, which our Lord ordered at
the time of Meals, and to all Persons indifferently, we receive even in our
Assemblies before Day, and from the hands of none but the Presidents. Likewise
in Justin Martyr's Description, (in the place above cited,) this Sacrament
appears to have been then celebrated at Morning Prayer.

And then, when the Sacramental part of the Lord's Supper was taken in the
Morning, it was divided from the other Refectory part; for the same Disorders,
I suppose, which the Apostle St. Paul had blamed in the Corinthians 1 Cor.
11.20.
: and this remained in its place, and continued to be a Supper, at which the
Assembly met again, and feasted together with great sobriety, as before God.
These Suppers, where all Christians, the Poor as well as the Rich, were
admitted and entertained, were called Love Feasts. They are expressly owned in
Tertullian's Apology (i); are distinctly mentioned in Ignatius (k); and
probably so to be understood in St. Jude Jude 12. verse.
. And these for some time continued in the Church; but were afterward not so
frequent; and at last, for the Disorders before spoke of, were not only
disused, but forbid.

The Sacramental Action, as has been said, was celebrated after the Morning
Prayer, beginning with the Oblation of Bread and Wine: (and the Wine, we may
observe by the by, was ordinarily mixed with Water). For those Creatures they
blessed God the Father through Jesus Christ; and then, after some Prayers and
Hymns, He is invoked to send down his Holy Spirit on the offered Bread and
Wine, to sanctify it, and that it may become to the Worthy Receivers the Body
and Blood of his Son (m): after which it was distributed by the Deacons to the
People, and sent also to the Absent (f).

. II. This was the Christian Practice undoubtedly in the Primitive Church: nor
does it want a Jewish Pattern.

Our Savior, as it has been premised (...)
, took occasion from the Paschal Memorial of the Redemption of Israel out of
their Egyptian Slavery, to institute a commemoration of a new and far greater
Deliverance of all Mankind from the enteral Bondage of Satan and ^lell.

And whereas it has been observed (...)
that the first Paschal Lamb of the (...) was a Sacrifice of a mixed
extra^^dinary nature, being in part Propi^^^tory, in part Federal, and partly
^^charistical: It is likewise manifest, that the Sacrifice of our Savior was
also of an eminent extraordinary kind. It was a Sacrifice for Sin, taken in the
most strict acception, being perfectly Expiatory: It was also Federal, for in
that Blood the New Testament or Covenant was made; and in that same respect it
was in some sort an Offering of Peace; obtaining not only Pardon, but Favor
for Men.

And further, as the succeeding Paschal Sacrifices, though commemoratory of the
First, yet varied something from it; being chiefly of an Eucharistical nature,
and not performed with the same Ceremony; (for neither was the Blood sprinkled
upon the Doors of the Offerers; neither was the Lamb eaten with their Staves in
their Hand, and in a traveling posture Maim. de Sacrif. Pasch. cap. and sect.
ult.
:) so it is not to be wondered if the succeeding Commemorations of our Lord's
Sacrifice, though it was chiefly Expiatory, were Eucharistical, and differing
also from the manner in which the first was celebrated by our Lord himself.

Now such a Change in the nature of the Commemoration, from that of the
Original Sacrifice, though not expressed in the words of the Institution, may yet
be the better admitted, if we find cause to suppose it; because our Savior,
instituting the Memorial of the Action, before it was done by himself, or so
much as understood by the Apostles, may therefore be presumed, neither to have
held his Supper exactly and altogether in the same manner in which that
Sacrament was afterward to be, nor clearly to have expressed its Nature; but
to have left the more particular Directions for it, and Explanation of it, to
the supervening Instructions of the Holy Spirit.

Though therefore the Lord's Supper was erected out of a Paschal Supper; yet the
Apostles, as it has appeared, did not understand it to be confined to that time
of the year only, or to the use of Unleavened Bread; neither did they think
their Duty discharged by an Annual Celebration of it. And so, in the judgment
of their Disciples, the Christians of the next Generation, it is still more
manifest, that the one Supper succeeded the other, not in its strict, but in
its general nature, and as it was of the Eucharistical kind; a solemn Festival
kept in Thanks for a great Deliverance, and for a most beneficial and gracious
Covenant: that as our Deliverance was not Temporary, belonging to the present
Age only, and from an Enemy once slain, but was to extend to each Person of all
Generations to come, and to be perpetually afforded against our continual
spiritual Enemies; so neither should its Recognition be restrained to one
Season, but offered unto our God throughout the whole Year, as the Sacrifices
of Praise and Thanks were used to be offered by the Jews with very frequent and
solemn Devotion.

This therefore seems to have been the Construction of the Primitive
Christians, That the Sacrament of our Lord's Body and Blood answered to the
Jewish Sacrifices of Thanks: and that this Correspondence may the better
appear, we shall do well to recollect a little the nature and manner of such
Oblations.

. III. THE nature of a Peace Offering in general is well known. It was the
Oblation of a Sacrifice, some certain parts of which were burnt on the Altar,
others belonged to the Priests, and the rest was returned to be eaten by the
Offerer. To this Sacrifice a Meat Offering and Drink Offering were joined: and
by it the Offerer prayed for future Prosperity, or thanked for that he enjoyed
Abarban. Exordium Com in Levit. Edente de Viel. p. 330 332.
. In the more solemn kind of Peace Offerings, that of Thanks, the Bread of the
Meat Offering is expressly required and particularized Lev. 7.13. Maim. de Cult.
Div. Tr. 5. cap. 9.. 17, 18.
; and it consisted half of Unleavened and half of Leavened Bread; (though Leaven
Lev. 2.11. Maim. de Cult. Div. 4.5.1.
was not so grateful to the Altar, as ever to be offered for a Meat Offering
upon it). The Unleavened half was made into thirty Cakes, each ten dressed a
several way, and the Leavened half into ten: The tenth of all, that is, four
Cakes of the several sorts, together with the Breast and Shoulder and Inwards,
were waved by the Priest in the Hands of the Offerer before the Lord. Of that
Bread so waved some was burnt on the Altar with the Inwards; and the rest, with
the Breast and Shoulder, (all which together was called Muram the Separated or
Elevated Maim. ut supra. 12. Rab. Sal. in Exodus 29.27.
Portion) remained to be eat by the Priest, and his Domestics, who joined his
Thanks to God with the Offerers; while He likewise and his Family, and Friends,
feasted before God on the other Nine parts with the Flesh of the Sacrifice
remaining to him; Portions of which he sent too abroad, to his Acquaintance,
and to the Poor.

Now, this Bread so offered being very singular for a Sacrifice, by reason part
of it was Leavened, was particularly called the Bread of Thanksgiving (d), and
in one case, recorded in Scripture (e), the Bread is supposed by the Jews to
have stood for the Living Sacrifice, and to have supplied its place. And
besides, it is there conceived, that Leavened Bread alone was used, as being
the principal part of the Eucharistical Offering, and fittest to represent the
whole.

Now the great Entertainments, as was now said, of the Jews were made of their
Peace Offerings: on those they feasted together with their Friends at home, and
of those they made Presents to the absent. The Invitation the False Woman makes
to the Young Man in the Proverbs Prove. 7.14.
is, That she has a Peace Offering at home. And with his Sacrifice Jethro
entertained Aaron and the Elders of Israel, who eat Bread with him before God
R. S^^. and Aben Ezra, ^n Ex. 28.^^.
. And so Solomon, at the dedication of the Temple, feasted the whole People
with those many thousands of Sheep and Oxen which he offered to the Lord 1 Kin.
8.63.
.

These Feasts, after the building of the Temple, were necessarily held at
Jerusalem, and not elsewhere. But it may be rationally supposed, and I propose
it conjecturally (as I before have offered a like guess concerning the Passover
Chapter 3.. 1.
), that the Jews of remote dispersions, standing the Temple, (for under its
destruction they are not to rejoice) did heretofore, upon glad occasions, though
they would not pretend to the formality of an Eucharistical Supper, yet
make-some such Festival Entertainments, to which they called their Friends, to
rejoice with them before God; giving him Thanks, not only for what they then
eat and drank, but mentioning at the same time his other gracious Favors,
which had been the cause of their present meeting, and which they recognis'd in
proper Benedictions and Hymns over the Bread and Wine. And Bread and Wine I
therefore suppose to have been used in this Case, for the expression of their
Thanks, not only because we find that the Leavened Eucharistical Bread did in
the above-alledg'd case stand for the whole Sacrifice, or that some part of the
Unleavened Paschal Bread does now represent the Flesh of the Lamb (k), or that
in Jethro's Sacrificial Feast the eating of Bread is particularly mentioned, or
lastly, that Bread and Wine were given in the High Priest Melchisedeck's
entertainment of Abraham, which in probability was Eucharistical for his
Victory; but because those Creatures of God are still taken by the Jews in all
their Repasts for a special occasion of his Honor and Worship, as we might
have observed before, and shall straight see further.

Such Entertainments of which we have been speaking, especially those of
Jerusalem, were, we doubt not, very solemn, being dedicated to the honor of
God: and though the particular Ceremonies are not told us, yet how those Feasts
were kept we may well enough conjecture, from the description we have already
The same. as before.
given of a Paschal, compared with this that follows of an Ordinary Supper.

At an ordinary Meal, where there are more than three, the Priest, or Rabbin,
or Chief Person, takes the Bread, half cuts it, and blesses it, lifting it up
at the Name of God; then eats a piece of it himself, giving likewise to the
rest who eat also. After he takes the Cup, and the rest having their Cups
likewise, he elevating the Wine, says the Benediction over it, and they all
drink: And so, when he has said the 23d Psalm, they proceed to eat and drink as
they please. And when they have done, the principal person, and the others,
take again their Cups in their Hands; and after he has given Thanks and prayed,
they all drink and conclude Buxt. Syn. Jud. ^^p. 12.
. The Jews have too a more solemn Meal, the Supper of the Sabbath Eve, but
little differing from the other; only here, because they then begin the
Sabbath; and such separations of Initiatory Dedications, as well as
Conclusional Separations, are made with Wine; they therefore invert the Order,
and the Master or Rabbin first takes the Cup, repeating the first Verses of the
second Chapter of Genesis, and saying over it a Benediction Proper for the
Sabbath, which then begins; and after that uncovering the Bread, (which was
covered as if it had not been there when the Cup was taken first, and which
consists of two Loaves) he blesses it in the ordinary form, etc. Ibid. cap. 15.
.

Now hence, as we may by comparing discover what the additional Ceremonies were
in the Paschal Supper, above those of any more ordinary Meal; so something
between those we may judge to have been used in the other Peace Offering
Feasts, and particularly the Eucharistical. As for instance we may presume,
that the Bread and Wine of a Thanksgiving were taken and elevated by the
Priest, or Rabbin if present, or by the Master of the Family, with some
peculiar Benediction; to which might be subjoined a proper Hymn: that when they
eat, they both began the Meal with the Flesh and Bread of the Sacrifice; or at
other times with a piece of the Bread, representing the Sacrifice; and also
ended it: and that then, with some of that Wine, they gave Thanks, recontinuing
their Eucharistical Hymn, and so concluding.

At such Feasts some particular Ceremony they certainly had, and something like
this in probability it was. It appears also, by the Divine Worship they pay at
their less-solemn Repasts, that at these extraordinary ones their Devotion to
God must have been as great as their Hospitality to Men. And if their common
Tables are always esteemed by them as Altars, particularly when after Meals
they return Thanks, for then they remove their Knives from off them on that
Consideration Buxt. Syn. Jud. c. 12.
; we cannot think but that those Tables, then when they were furnished from the
Altar, or imitated one so furnished, were judged more especially to represent
it.

. IV. SUCH were the Sacrifices and Feasts of Thanksgiving: and to these I
suppose our Savior had respect in the institution of his Feast, and was so
understood by the Apostles, and by the Christians that immediately succeeded
them. That it was so understood, and How, I am now going further to explain.

And first, That the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper came into the place of a
Sacrifice of Thanks; this may seem probable from several Considerations, to be
suggested from what has been premised.

For, 1st, the Name which the Ancients gave this Sacrament seems to speak them
of the same opinion. For they not only speak of it as of a Sacrifice and
Oblation, at large; but call it determinately and expressly the Eucharist, that
is, the Thanks or Praise-offeri^g, as by its proper Name: the Sacram^ntal Bread
and Wine, being as much known by that style with Christians, as the Bread of
the Eucharist or Praise was with the Jews (...)
.

2dly, The Leavened Bread they always chose to use, as it evidently declares,
that there was no further regard to the Paschal Sacrifice; so it seems to
import a just correspondence with those of the Eucharistical kind, in which
Leavened Bread was singularly required.

And lastly, the Bread, which was to represent, and in some manner to become,
the Body of our Lord, did not unfitly succeed in the place of that Bread of
Thanks which had been made use of before to stand for the Flesh of an
Eucharistical Sacrifice, and to make up the whole, even in Jerusalem it self;
if it did not sometimes, in places more remote, according to the Conjecture now
mentioned.

Now, as this Feast of our Lord was Eucharistical, so we suppose it was
celebrated in a suitable manner.

The Bread and Wine chiefly designed for the Holy Entertainment, being fitly
provided and brought on the Table, some part of the Bread (and so of the Wine)
was, I suppose, taken up by the President, or Chief of the company, (were he
Apostle, Bishop, or Presbyter) and blessed in an extraordinary form, expressing
the reason of the Thanks then offered, together with a Prayer, that the Holy
Ghost would sanctify the Offering, (as Gifts brought to the Altar were
esteemed to be;) and sanctify it particularly to that purpose for which it was
prepared, that the Bread might effectually represent the Flesh, or Body, for
which it stood. This Bread and Wine, so offered and blessed by the officiating
President, (as if it had been waved at the Altar) was the more Holy and
Sacramental Part, of which they communicated, as of the Body and Blood of the
Lord; while the rest of the Oblation, which was less holy, as being consecrated
only by virtue of the other, (like the remaining nine parts of the Bread of a
Thanks-Offering) served, together with other Provisions, for the furnishing of
the Supper at which they then fed.

And so, when afterward the Sacrament and Supper were divided, (about the
time, I presume, when the Legal Sacrifices were going to cease) the Christian
Eucharistical Oblation, as the Primitive Church speaks, began then more
distinctly to appear, and was made after Morning-Prayer, just as extraordinary
Sacrifices with the Jews were offered after the Morning daily Sacrifice. And
then, as under the Law, what of the Eucharistical Sacrifice was offered at the
Altar, the Muram, belonged to the Priest: so that part which had been offered
by the Christian Priest, being more especially sacred, and his Portion, was
eaten in the Morning Sacramentally from his Hands; the Congregation being, as
it were, his Family; while the other Residual Part was kept for the provision
of the Love-Feast, to be held in the Evening, its accustomed time.

Now as these solemn Suppers, called by the name of Love or Charity, were in
imitation of those Sacrificial Feasts held by the Jews, so were they of a like
Name. For, if those of the Jews were not styled Love Feasts, as possibly they
might be, yet they were plainly Peace-Feasts, being made of Peace Offerings of
the most perfect kind, and being Symbols and Pledges of Peace, both in Heaven
and Earth; the Offerer and his Guests partaking in some degree of the Table of
God, and rejoicing together in mutual Good Will and Amity.

So did the Present partake of both parts of the Oblation in the Ancient
Church, agreeably to the practice of the Jews. And when they sent Portions to
the Absent, they acted likewise according to their Custom. We know that the
Lay-Jews sent of their part Neh. 8.10.
; and I know not whether the Priests might not so do of their share; neither is
it much material. For, though the Christian's Eucharist was an imitation of the
Jewish, yet it was not necessary that it should be bound to the niceness of all
the Mosaic Rules.

Though therefore a Sacrifice, by Moses's Law, was not to be offered by night, as
all legal Acts were to be done by the Jews in the day; and so the general
practice of Christians was to celebrate the Eucharist in it: yet they might
think themselves at liberty to solemnize it before day, whenever any
particular reason should require them so to do; for to their Lord the Day and
Night were both alike.

Likewise though the Eucharistical Bread was no more to be kept till next day,
than the Flesh, by the Jewish Rituals, as being not to be niggardly saved, but
all of it spent that night in a cheerful liberality; and in this it was like
their Manna: yet the Christians might not think it unlawful in some cases to
suffer some part of their Eucharist to be left unto another day. For they had
already invited all to their Feast who were capable of it; and they had not
been sparing in their distribution, as far as was meet. However, even in this
particular, they observed something of the Levitical Precept; burning still,
what should remain at last unspent. And those of Jerusalem, if we understand
their Hesychius Comm. in Levit. 8.3.
with some, kept very precisely to the Eucharistical Ordinance, burning all
that was left of each day's Communion: as it is too ordered by our Church, to
be immediately divided among the Communicants; a Rubric intended to prevent
the Papal Superstition, but answerable withal to the nature of the Sacrament.

Now to all this I have nothing to add, but only to take notice, that the
mixture of Water with the Sacramental Wine, of which the Ancients speak, was
done too after the manner of the Jews; and, in their opinion, did not make it
less proper for a Cup of Thanksgiving. For they likewise do not think Maim. de
Solenn. Pasch. c. 7. 9.
they celebrate their Paschal Supper duly with pure Wine, but mix it with
Water; that they may the more freely drink the four Cups, and also for the
better Taste, and their greater Pleasure.

V. IT sufficiently appears, I presume, that the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of our Lord was understood by the ancient Christians to be in the nature
of an Eucharistical (not of a Propitiatory) Sacrifice with the Jews. But
further, That this kind of Sacrifice only should remain, when all the rest
should cease; this also is consonant to the Tradition of the Jews, as Kimchi
tells us. For, upon this Saying of the Prophet Jer. 33.11.
, That there should be heard again in Jerusalem the Voice of Joy, and the Voice
of Gladness, the Voice of the Bridegroom, and the Voice of the Bride, the Voice
of them that shall say, Praise the Lord of Hosts, for the Lord is good, and his
Mercy endures for ever, [and] of them that shall bring [the Sacrifice of]
Praise [or Thanks] into the House of the Lord: he comments on the last words in
this manner; The Prophet says not that they shall bring Sin Offerings, or
Trespass-Offerings; because in that day there would be no Wicked nor Sinners
among them: for (as he before (b) told them) they should all know the Lord.
Jer. 31.34.
And so have our Masters of blessed memory told us, That in the time to come
all Sacrifices should cease, except the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving.

This Saying of the Masters of Israel is a great Truth, and better understood
by Christians, who know the Lord and themselves so well, as to know, that the
Sacrifices for Sin are not ceased by the ceasing of Sin, but superseded by the
Sacrifice made for them by their Lord and High Priest; and that the Sacrifice
of Thanksgiving they are thenceforth to make, is the Commemoration their Lord
has instituted, for that their most gracious Redemption. This is the Sacrifice
of that New Covenant of which the Prophet there speaks, and which the Author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews from him alleges Hebr. 8.8.
. And to this Sacrifice the same Author, I suppose, refers; when he says Hebr.
13.10, 11, etc.
, We have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat, who serve the
Tabernacle; for they eat not of the Oblation made for their Sins, as we do of
our Blessed Savior; by whom [by whose Body, and in whose Name] we offer the
Sacrifice of Praise [Thanksgiving] to God continually, that is the Fruit [or
Oblation] of our Lips [or which our Lips have Vowed to return, as well as what
we do return with our Li] ceasing not to do Good, and to Distribute [both out
of our Oblations, and the rest of our Substance,] for with such Sacrifices
[such Offerings of our Praise and Goods in the general, and at the Eucharist in
particular,] God is well pleased.

. I. (d) Of this I needed not have given an Instance; but there is one that
will likewise serve to another purpose; De Coron. Cap. 3. Eucharistiae
Sacramentum, and in tempore Victus, and Omnibus, mandatum a Domino, etiam
Antelucanis coetibus, nec de aliorum manu quam Praesidentium, sumimus.

(e) The word is often used even in one Chapter, the 34th of his Fourth Book
Adversus Haeres. and I shall give but one Instance in that famed Passage: (...)

(f) Just. Mart. Apol. secunda (uti vulgo numeratur) prope finem. (...). Where
(...) signifies the Oblation ( (...)): as (...) and (...) likewise do.

(g) Examples will appeat in those Passages to be produced in the next Chap*. 2.

(i) Tertullian Apolog. Cap. 39. Coena nostra de nomine rationem sui oftendit.
Id vocatur quod Dilectio penes Graecos.

(k) Epist. ad Smyrnaeos. After a general prohibition against the doing any
thing in the Church without the Bishop, and after a particular mention of the
Eucharist; there follows further, (...).

(m) This Order of Oblation, and Invocation, is not only to be seen in the
Ancient Liturgies; but is plainly expressed by that Ancient and Venerable
Author Irenaeus, in the Chapter above cited (e).

. III. (d) (...). Maim. de Cult. Divino Tract. 5.9.5.

(e) Nehem. 12.31. Then I brought up the Princes of Judah upon the Wall, and
appointed two great [Companies of them that gave] Thanks, [Whereof one] went
upon the right hand of the Wall, etc. By this Procession the Jews suppose the
Bounds of the Holy City to have been determined; and that the Bread of
Thanksgiving, which was not to be carried out of Jerusalem, was therefore
carried about now to mark its utmost Limits. And accordingly by two great
Thanks, as it is in the Text, [ (...)] they understand two great oblations of
Bread of Thanks: making the word (...), which signifies the whole Sacrifice of
Thanks, to stand here for the Bread only, and that only the Leavened. So Rabbi
Salom on the place: And Maim. in the Book above mentioned. Tract. 1. Cap. 6..
12.

. IV. (a) I confess that (...) in it is Case, where we translate it a Sacrifice
of Thanksgiving, is rendered most commonly in the Greek, of the Septuagint so
called, by (...), and never by (...). But it is notorious that the sense is the
same. Neither do they always interpret that word by (...), but on the fame
subject they once put (...) [ Levit. 22.29.] and in another place we shall meet
in the next Section, [ Jerem. 33.11.] (...), a Name by which our Christian
Sacrament is also known. The truth is, the word (...) is found in the
Septuagint in no sense: but it is frequent in the Apocrypha and in the New
Testament; and Aquila in his Translation [of Amos 4.5.] uses it for this very
matter.

CHAP. VIII.
. I. The Distinction of Clergy and Laiety, specified by Tertullian: That of
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, by Him, (Irenaeus also being his Leader, for the
Apostolical Authority of Bishops;)

. II. And by Ignatius; as the other at least, of the Laiety and Clergy, by St.
Clemens of Rome.

. III. The First Distinction, derived from the Language of the Old Testament:
The Offices of the Second, from those of the Jewish Sanhedrim, and likewise of
the Temple; the Upper parts of our Churches, being also supposed to answer the
Temple Courts, of the Priests, and the Altar.

. I. WE come next to the Officers of the Christian Church, expressed in the
Scripture under general Names, and which answered sufficiently to those used by
the Jews; but whose signification was not in some Cases so well distinguished,
as to make out the Parallel exactly.

Now the Writings of the Primitive Christians speak on these occasions more
expressly, and clear up the Confusion caused by ambiguous words, determining
their sense by such a distinction of Offices, as had all along obtained from
the days of the Apostles.

Certain it is from what we have already seen of Tertullian, that in his time,
at the end of the Second Century, the Offices of Bishop and Presbyter, and
Deacon, were the principal Offices of the Church, and notoriously Distinct. The
Power, says he Chapter 6.. 1. (c)
, of Conferring Baptism the High Priest has, who is the Bishop; then the
Priests, and Deacons, but not without the Authority of the Bishop, to keep up
the Honor of the Church, without which Peace cannot be preserved: otherwise
even the Laiety have a power to do it. Now, whatever becomes of the controversy
of Baptism by Lay hands, it is manifest from our Author, that there was a
Distinction of the Laiety, and the Clergy (b); and among the Clergy, between
the Bishop, and the Priests, and Deacons; and that the Bishop had a singular
supereminent Authority over the Presbyters, as well as the Deacons. And that he
understood this separate Authority to have been derived from the hands of the
Apostles, is as plain from his Treatise of Prescribing against Heretics De
Praeser. ^. 32.
. There, to Bar some Heresies which were as old as the Apostles, from pleading
that they were taught by the Apostles; he bids them, Show the Origin of their
Churches, and deduce a series of their Bishops, with such a continued
Succession from the beginning, as that the first Bishop of them may have some
Apostle, or Apostolical Man who continued in the Communion of the Apostles, to
vouch for his Author and Predecessor. For so the Apostolical Churches bring
down their Pedigree: as the Church of Smyrna reckons Polycarp, placed there by
St. John, and the Church of Rome, Clemens ordained by St. Peter; and as other
Churches name those, who were made Bishops by the Apostles, and to whom the
Seed of the Apostolical Doctrine was transmitted.

This is Tertullian's Opinion: and, as it appears from his manner of delivering
it, was the general acknowledged Opinion of that Time. But on the same Argument
Irenaeus had before said the same thing Iren. Lib. 3. Cap. 3.
; where he names the Succession of the Bishops of Rome, down to Eleutherius of
his own time, the twelfth from the Apostles; presupposing the same succession
of such single Persons, in all the Apostolic Churches; and giving it as a
Truth in matter of Fact, on which he might found the Truth of the Catholic
Doctrine, and which the Heretics themselves could not gainsay. This plain
Testimony, of so Learned and Venerable a Person, at no longer a distance from
the Apostles, seems unexceptionable: but for the Church of Smyrna it is
absolutely Unquestionable. For there he speaks almost, from his own personal
Knowledge; having himself been acquainted with Polycarp, who was immediately
ordained by the Apostles. And as sure as this Polycarp was Bishop of Smyrna, so
plain it is there that Anicetus was of Rome in his time: and from their very
Conference together, reported by this Irenaeus, (as we have seen Part 1. Chapter
1.. 4.
it also evidently appears, that such Bishops had been always there presiding;
of whom, we know, as many are mentioned in that place, on occasion of the
Paschal Dispute, as reached up to the very beginning of the Second Century.
Neither need I dissemble, that those Bishops are styled Presbyters in the place
last mentioned; since they are known to be Presbyters of the more eminent
Degree, and to be the same single Persons, with the same superior Character,
the same distinction still remaining between them and the inferior Presbyters.

. II. I might well be content with the Evidence Tertullian and Irenaeus give
for the Apostolical Distinction between the Bishop and the other Presbyters;
and may therefore presume, that what I have further to say of the same nature
from Ignatius, will not fail to be credited. For how unreasonable it is to
suspect his Writings, for the peculiar Dignity he attributes to Bishops, (and
that is the greatest Argument of Suspicion they have;) has already appeared
from the little I have produced: as the Reader may find both that and all the
lesser Cavils at large, and unanswerably refuted by our Bishop Pearson Vind.
Ignat.
.

This Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch, being in his Journey through Asia the less
to his Martyrdom at Rome, (about the year 116 at farthest Dodw. Diss. in Ir. 1.
sect. 17.
), wrote several Letters to the adjacent Cities, thanking the Churches there
for their Christian Courtesy to him, which they had showed by their
Messengers, and expressed by other Tokens of Fraternal Love; and taking at the
same time occasion to make them some effectual return, and confirm them in the
Faith and Discipline of Christ. These Letters (as all others, even the
Apostolical) would be much better understood by us, if we distinctly knew the
particular Circumstances of those Churches; to which, no doubt, he speaks very
properly, though we now, out of the same words, can make but a general, and
sometimes a very ordinary sense. But however something of the Circumstances of
those Times, and of his Intention in those Letters, appears through them. And as
his Design seems to be to fortify them against the Fears of the present
Persecution, and to warn them of the dangerous Heresies sprung from Simon
Magus, and then prevailing; so he manifests a particular care against Schism,
and for the preserving the Government of the Church. Before this time, the
Divisions of the Church of Corinth about their Governors, had occasioned a
Letter from the Church of Rome, by Clemens's Hand: and now in Asia, when St.
John himself, the surviving Apostle, was dead, and the supreme controuling
Authority was extinct; it is very likely that the Orders before established
were in some danger of being subverted, by the Ambition and Unruliness of such,
whom the Spirit by St. Paul had expressly foretold to Timothy the Bishop of
their capital City 1 Timothy 4.1.
. Now, that such Attempts were then made upon the Authority of Church Officers,
and to the confusion of their Distinction, may be gathered from this Ignatius:
as it also appears from his manner of Expression, that such a Distinction was
no novel thing, and of modern erection; nor was it of slight concern.

In this view (as we may suppose) he tells the Ephesians, That they ought to
glorify Jesus Christ, who had glorified them; to be of one mind, and to say
the same thing; and to be subject to the Bishop and to the Presbytery, that
they may be wholly sanctified. You ought, says he, to concur with your Bishop;
as you do; for your Presbytery is as consonant to him, as strings to an
Instrument. And let no Man be deceived: he that is not within the Altar, falls
short of the Bread of God: and he that does not come to the Assembly, is Proud;
and it is written, God resists the Proud (d): Let us not then resist the
Bishop, that we may be subject to God. And the more modest [and condescending]
your Bishop is, the more he is to be reverenced: for he is to be looked on, as
the Lord himself. And lastly he speaks of their Concurrence with Christ; that
they may obey the Bishop, and the Presbytery, with an undistracted Mind;
breaking [that] one Bread, which is the Medicine for Immortality, the Antidote
against Death.

This, it seems, was necessary to be said on this subject to the Ephesians:
amongst whom, as amongst the other Asiatick Churches to whom he writes, the
Peace of the Church, which St. John's presence had hitherto secured, began to
be disturbed. Whereas therefore, in his letter to the Roman Church, whose zeal
in this case was so well known, he makes no mention of their obedience to
spiritual Governors: in all his other letters to the Asiaticks, he enlarges
much on the same Topic; and was, it seems, obliged to press that Duty even
upon the Smyrneans, where Polycarp himself was Bishop. He does it after this
manner. Fly Divisions, as the beginning [or cause] of Evils. All of you, follow
the Bishop; as Christ Jesus, the Father: and follow the Presbytery, as the
Apostles; and reverence the Deacons, as the Commandment [or Mandatories (e)] of
God. Let no one do any thing appertaining to the Church, without the Bishop.
Let that be esteemed a good Eucharist, which is under the Administration of the
Bishop, or such as He shall appoint. Where the Bishop appears, there let the
People be: as where Jesus Christ is, there is the Catholic Church. It is not
lawful without the Bishop, neither to Baptize, nor keep the Love-Feast; but
what He approves, that is it which is acceptable to God. So to the
Philadelphians, after Exhortation to Unity under the Bishop, he adds: Take care
therefore to use one Eucharist. For there is one Flesh of our Lord Jesus
Christ, one Cup wherein his Blood is united, one Altar: as there is one Bishop,
with the Presbytery, and my Fellow Servants the Deacons. As also in that to the
Magnesians he directs: Endeavor to do all things in the Unanimity of God; the
Bishop Presiding in the place of God, and the Presbyters in the place of the
Consistory [Synedrium] of the Apostles, and the Deacons being entrusted with
the Ministry of Jesus Christ. And speaking of Deacons to the Trallians, he says
expressly, they are not Ministers of Meats and Drinks; but Servants of the
Church of God.

I know well that these now Unusual expressions, and High Comparisons, have
been construed into a prejudice against the Authority of these Letters. But it
is not reasonable, to judge either Ancient Practice, or Phrase, by the Modern:
for possibly those Primitive Christians would be at as great a loss to
understand some later Divinity. The Passage that may appear the most strange,
is that to the Smyrneans: Follow your Bishop, as Christ Jesus [followed] the
Father. But we are to remember that the Heretics, whom he warns them to avoid,
were those who denied the reality of our Savior's Flesh, saying, that He
Suffered, and Rose again in Appearance only; themselves also dispensing with
the Reality of their Duty, as he tells them, and being Christians only in
Appearance, High-minded and puffed up. These he Commands them to avoid: and,
for the same intent, he cautions them to shun Divisions among themselves, as
the beginning of those and most other evils; and to Follow the Bishop
(Polycarp, a Faithful Servant of Christ, Approved and entrusted with the Charge
of them by the Blessed St. John); adding, as Christ Jesus, the Father; a
comparison that no more equals the Bishop to the Father, than it does the other
Christians of that Church to Jesus Christ. It imported only, that they should
not be high-minded and conceited, but should be subject to their Bishop; for
Christ also himself was in reality found in the form of a Servant, and obedient
unto the Father even unto the Death of the Cross: and that they should receive
the Commandments from Polycarp; and act, as they saw him to act; for (as St.
John lately departed from them had informed them) Christ also did or spoke
8.28.12.49.
nothing from himself, and he both Taught and kept the Commandments of the
Father 15.10.
. This seems to be the occasional Analogy of that Expression. And as for the
others, that the Bishop presides in the place of God, or is to be looked on as
our Lord; these speak him only as a Substitute and lower Representative of God
and Christ, invested with some degree of Authority from them; as when St. Paul
Commands Christian Servants to obey even Heathen Masters as Christ Ephesians. 6.5.
: neither were the Presbyters to be followed as the Apostles, for the Parity
they held, but for the similitude they bore, being Assistants to the Bishop, as
the Apostles were to our Savior. For so was Moses heretofore put in the place
of God Exodus 7.1.
: and as in Ignatius the Presbyters are said to preside in the place of the
Consistory, or Sanhedrim of the Apostles; so the Apostles themselves may be
supposed to succeed in the place of the Twelve Princes, the Chief Assistants to
Moses. Neither has this Language of Ignatius to Christians any other meaning,
than it might have had, if a Jew should have admonished his Brethren Jews, to
have obeyed their Nasi or Patriarch as God (for so they were to have obeyed
Moses their first Nasi;) and his Assessors, as they would have done the
Assessors of Moses, (for to those in some manner they succeeded.)

Thus Ignatius concerning Church Officers. And to go higher yet, up into the
first Age; (for then St. Clemens of Rome undoubtedly wrote his Epistle, if not
before the Destruction of the Temple (h);) there, if we have not an Authority
for the Distinction of them by proper names one from another; yet we have a
certain instance of the use of the word Lay before mentioned, whereby they were
discriminated from the rest of the Congregation. The place, whether speaking of
the Jewish, or of the Christian Church, (and of the Christian in likelihood it
does) runs thus (i). To the High Priest, proper Offices are given; and to the
Priests, a proper Place is appointed; and on the Levites, proper Ministries are
incumbent: The Layman, is bound to Lay Duty. Let every one of you, Brethren, in
his own Station, give Thanks [or celebrate the Euchari to God, having a Good
Conscience, and not transgressing the Rule of his own Office, [as he ought to
do] in Holy Decency.

. III. This was the certain Distinction in the Ancient Church, betwixt the
Laiety, and the Clergy; and among the Clergy, betwixt the Bishops, Priests and
Deacons: and that it was derived from the Language and Polity of the Jews, we
may have already discerned in part from the account above given Chapter 4.
.

As to the Denomination of Laiety, as distinct from the Tribe of Levi, it must
be directly understood to have been in use with the Jews, by those who will
understand the passage from St. Clemens last cited, concerning the Jewish
Priesthood. And those too who will have it taken of the Christian Priesthood
must conclude, from the ordinary and current manner of using this Phrase in the
beginning of Christianity, that it had been received before, and was as well
known, as that of Priest and Levite.

But besides, the Ground also of this Appellation is from the Old Testament.
For there, as the Nation of the Israelites is contradistinguish'd to other
Nations, and is separated for the Peculiar Propriety Ex. 19.5. Deuteronomy. 14.2.
, and Inheritance, Deuteronomy. 4.20.
, of God; (the signification of the Greek word Clerus;) and they might all
therefore have been properly styled the Clergy of God, in respect of other
People; (the meaning of the word Lay;) for in that regard they all are called
Priests Exodus 19.6.
So in this Holy Nation, one Tribe of it was more particularly Chosen, and Holy
and separated from the rest; (God not only claiming them to be his Own yet more
Peculiarly, and in the place of the First Born Numb. 3.45.
, but declaring Himself also to be their Peculiar and Inheritance Number. 18.20.
;) and might well therefore have been appropriately styled the Clergy, even in
respect of the rest of the Holy People, who were then, for distinction to be
called the People. Neither was this term, the People, at all dishonorable to
the other Tribes; for it appears; by the Phrase of St. Luke Acts 26.17, 2^.
, to have been the name whereby they chose to distinguish themselves from the
Gentiles, [or Nations]: and the disparaging acception which the Pharisaical
Rabbis give it, when they oppose it to the Disciples of the Learned, and make
it to signify the Illiterate and Rude; seems to be raised by them for their own
honor, since they have come in to the room of the Priests, and usurped their
Privilege See Chapter 4.. 4.
.

Next I am come to compare the several Officers of the Christian Church, so
distinguished as above, with the several Officers of the Jewish. But in this,
as for the Synagogue-Discipline, and Worship, of the Jews, I am prevented by
what has been said before: and the Parallel must have manifestly appeared
betwixt the Bishop, Priest, and Deacon; and between the Chief of the Sanhedrim
or Synagogue, the Elders, and their Ministerial Officers.

For as every City had its Consistory in that manner Officer'd, with the Jews,
so had it with the Christians; though with no Subordination to any other higher
Court, as at Jerusalem; in as much as that Local Dependence was now abolished.

The Chief of the Consistory with the Jews, was either the Prince; or his
Deputy, the Father of the Assembly. Now the Title of Prince was, I suppose, in
the Christian Church, every where appropriated to Christ: and the Bishop was as
the Father, in whom the Principal Directive Power was lodged. The other Elders
were his Counselors and Assistants, in the Governing and Teaching of the
Assembly; and the Deacons had the management of Affairs, Execution of Orders,
and Distribution of Alms, belonging to their part; as is notoriously known.

Thus was a Christian Church governed conformably to the Synagogue, as a
Society; it was likewise, as a Congregation. The Instruction and Exhortation
belonged to the Bishop; or else, by his leave, to the Presbyters: or it was
performed by such other proper Person, as the Bishop should appoint. Likewise
Prayers were said, either by the Bishop, or Presbyters; or else by the Deacons.
For these last, answering the Jewish Chazans, directed the People in their
Devotions; either repeating the Prayers before them, or calling upon them to
hearken to those repeated by others: and also either Read the holy Scriptures,
or assisted those who were to Read them.

Neither do the Elders of a Christian and a Jewish Church agree, only so far,
but farther yet. For as the Jewish Elders, since the Destruction of Jerusalem,
have thought fit to assume to themselves much of the Sacerdotal Honor and
Privilege: so have the Christian succeeded into the like Dignity, nay are
called by the same Name; as we have seen in Tertullian's expression, See Chapter
6.. 1.
The High Priest who is the Bishop; and as he phrases it, discoursing about
those Heretics, who making little distinction between the People and the
Church Officers, committed Sacerdotal Offices to the Laiety (i); and as we may
in general have collected, even from the discretive Appellatives themselves of
Laiety, and Clergy.

But the Elders of the Christian Church derive not those their style and
Privileges from the Calamities of Jerusalem, and the Usurpation of the Rabbis:
nor are they esteemed Priests, in virtue of their Presbytery; though the
English word Priest happens to come, by the French Prestre, from the Latin
Presbyter. On the contrary, by Original appointment, a Christian Priest
corresponds as directly to a Priest of the Jews, as a Presbyter does to their
Elder: or rather, to speak more generally, the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
of the Gospel, answer not more to the Officers of the Sanhedrim, or Synagogue;
than they do to those of the Temple, to the High Priest, or (as we conceive)
his Great Vicar, to the Priests, and to the Levites.

For this is not only intimated by the Sacerdotal Titles the Governors of the
Church immemorially had, as we learned from Tertullian; but plainly declared by
their Office, and all along allowed and owned by more Ancient Authors: They
having, as has appeared, an Eucharistical Sacrifice still remaining to be
celebrated by them; a Pure Offering, to be offered in every place; and every
where Holy Tables, or Altars, erected for that Service. And this is what St.
Jerome has said, much to our purpose, in that Letter of his, which has been
often miscited to the Prejudice of Episcopacy Ad E^^g^.
. And, says he, that you may understand the Ecclesiastical Traditions to be
derived from the Old Testament; we are to know, what Aaron, and his Sons, were
in the Temple, that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are to challenge to
themselves in the Church.

This Remembrance of St. Jerome was, we see, well founded: and is, if I mistake
not, attested by the structure of an Ancient Christian Church, such of which we
have been speaking before Chapter 6.. 1, 3.
. For, whereas the first four Partitions of it, wherein the Laiety were
disposed; have been seen to answer to the four first Courts of the Temple,
beyond which none but those of the Tribe of Levi ordinarily could go: there yet
remain two other Partitions, the places heretofore of our Clergy; to answer to
the two remaining Courts, of the Priests, and of the Altar.

For so that part [E Fig. 2.] of a Christian Church, which is next beyond the
Upper Place of the Faithful (now called the Quire) [D], and reaches to the
Rails of the Altar space, styled by the Western Church Presbyterium, and by the
Greek Solea (m) where the Readers are said to have had a place (n); corresponds
aptly enough with the Court of the Temple, where the Priests stood who were not
actually on Duty, and where the [Doukans] Desks of the Singers were likewise
placed Lightf. T. Service Chapter 23.
.

And then the Higher space [F Fig. 2.] enclosed with Rails or Lattice, where
the Lord's Table, or Christian Altar [G] stands; apparently agrees to the Court
of the Altar in the Temple [F. Fig. 1.], which was fenced in like manner. And
possibly the raised Seat [T] behind the Altar, (as the Archiepiscopal Chair at
Canterbury now is,) where the Bishop sat, with the Chief of the Clergy on
either side; answer, not only to the Seats of the Elders in a Synagogue Chapter 6..
3.
, but to the Place, where the High Priest stood, compassed with his Brethren
round about, as a young Cedar in Libanus by the Palm Trees Eccles. 50.12.
either at the Altar it self; [G Fig. 1.] or in the Porch [H], which was as
high, and from whence, after the Burning of the Incense, the Blessing was
pronounced I^^juf. Ib Chapter 36. Maim. de Cult. Di^^ Tract. 6. C^p. 6.. 4.
.

And this, concerning the Agreement of the upper part of a Church, with the
upper Courts of the Temple, I have added on this Argument; not so much to
confirm the Sacerdotal Title of Christian Priests, (for that seems to be
otherwise sufficiently secured,) as to complete the Parallel, already begun in
the sixth Chapter, and by which a new account is offered of the Modelling of
these Christian Aedifices.

I know, Architects derive the Design of our Churches from the Fabrics of the
Heathen Basilicae, or Public Halls Pallad. lib. 4. c. 5. lib. 3. c. 19.
: the upper end of which was raised, and had a Semicircle, in which Governors
and Judges sat for Audience, having before them a Table, as we may presume, and
a space separated and Raild in; and beyond that, without the Bar, a place
something lower, where those stood who attended the Court: the remaining and
lowest part of the Hall, being open to All; as there was commonly before it, a
Portico, and a Piazza. Such Rooms as these Private Men also built in Great
Houses; and being Christians, might lend to the use of Christian Assemblies:
whence (as they say) it afterward came that Churches were built in the same
fashion, retaining also the Name [Basilicae]. Now that those Halls might have
sometimes, and somewhere, served to that use; and were very convenient for it;
may be granted: but as one cannot think that the Form of such a Hall, gave
occasion to the several Ranks and Offices of Christians; so neither to the
Building, which was to be suited to them. I should rather suppose, that the
Congruity of those two sorts of Aedifices was accidental, and that the name
came from the similitude. (t)

There are indeed others who take the Modules of our Churches from the Jews;
but either from their Synagogues; or from the Temple- House, consisting of the
[H Fig. 1.] Porch, the Holy [I], and the Holy of Holies [K]. Whereas the
Synagogue goes but half way, and neither now has, nor ever pretended to, an
Altar: and the Altar of Incense, and Table of Shewbread, which were in the
House, were we know in the Outer Part, and not in the inmost, the Holy of
Holies.

It appears therefore, that the Temple, as it consisted of its several Courts,
was rather the Pattern which the Christians followed for the Place of their
Worship. For as for the House; as it might before have been an Imitation of the
Heavens, the Holy of Holies, representing the Third Heaven: so now it might be
supposed to be no longer on Earth, but changed into that not made with Hands,
into which the High Priest was now entered with his own Blood, as the Author to
the Hebrews observes Hebr. 9.11, 12, 24.
; We all in the mean time waiting without, in expectation of his Return; and,
until that his coming again, by his particular Command, continuing to celebrate
the Joyful Memorial of that Sacrifice, with which he Appears now in the
presence of God for us.

But (to return to my Argument) whatever may become of the Conjecture
concerning the Figure of our Churches, this is certain, by the express
Declaration of the Scripture See Repart. 2. Chapter 2.. 2.
, that our Savior Christ is the High Priest of our Profession: and in the
Opinion of the Primitive Church, all the several Bishops seem to have been as
so many Sagans, or Vicars of that High Priest, officiating at their several
Altars with equal, and among themselves independent, Authority (y). Under His
Direction, the Presbyters, are as Priests, assisting that their Vice High
Priest in their several Stations: and the Deacons as Levites, attend and
administer unto them.

So are our Bishops Representatives of our Savior, either as he is our Prince,
or our Priest; his Deputies, both in the Synagogue, and in the Temple. And thus
as the Fathers of the Consistories with the Jews, the Presidents under the
Princes, might have been properly enough styled by the Title signifying a
Bishop or Superintendent: So we actually know, that the Vice High Priest, whom
now the Jews call Sagan, was heretofore in the Old Testament expressed by that
very name See Chap. 4.. 3.
.

. 1. (b) One Part of the Distinction the Laici, are specified in the place last
cited: and the other the Clerus, containing the Ordines Ecclesiastici, i^ as
expressly and familiarly mentioned in his Book de Monog. cap. 12. occurring very
often in the compass of a few lines.

. 2. (d) St. Peter argues in the same manner 1. 5. 5.

(e) (...), Mandatum, it may be, in the sense of the Civil Law; and the Deacons
here to be understood, as Mandataries, or Agents: for such they were to the
Bishops, ( Constable. Apost. 2.28.); and such Proctors the High Priest had, whom
the Jews call Entelers, or Antalars, from the Greek, as may be seen at large in
Seld. de Synedr. 2.10.7.

(h) According to Mr. Dodwell, Dissert. 2. Cap. 6.. 24. Libr. Posth. Cestriens.
Episc. Pearsonii.

(i) Clem. Romans Ep. ad Cor.. 40, 41. (...).

. 3. (i) Tertull. De Praeser. Haer. Cap. 41. -- hodie Presbyter, qui cras
Laicus: nam and Laicis munera Sacerdotalia injungunt.

(m) The (...), or (...), etc. was the Place where the Communion was
distributed to the Laiety; and from the Lord's Body being there on that
occasion, Goar would have it called Solium; as others, from the Seat of the
Emperor: but Du Fresne seems to have given a more probable Original of the
word, Constant. Chr. libr. 3. cap. 73. Solea, says he, a Solo, Pavimento
Editiori: quippe apud Italos quicquid supra Pavimentum tantisper eminet, Soglia
dicitur, uti apud Francos Seuil. But Solea it self, in Latin, may possibly
answer the signification; and that place, which is a little higher than the
Quire, may be reputed the Basis of the Bema, its Solea or Crepida; as (...), is
expounded by (...); and Solea in Festus, by Materia Roborea, supra quam Paries
Cratitius extruitur: not to mention, that this place might be called Solea; as
that in the Amphitheaters, next the Arena, was called Podium.

(n) This Solea is said, by Sim. Thessal. to be called (...), Goar, Euch. page
18.

(t) The word (...) Tribunal, by which the Altar-space is called; and the
Cancelli, and Vails or Curtains, by which it was separated from the rest of the
Church; and also the Candles, and Book upon the Table; may indeed concur, to
strengthen the Opinion I have opposed. But it may be considered, that (...) it
self in that fence, may well come from the Hebrew (...); and that therefore the
Jews may be supposed to have used their (...) more willingly, and that the
Christians took it from them. And so we know that, though the Cancelli and
Veiles were used to enclose the Apartment of Secular Governors; yet Veils were
used in the House of God, and that these Cancelli divided the Court of the
Altar from that of the Priests. And lastly, whereas it is true, that the
Furniture of the Table of the Praefecti Praetorio was a Book of his Office,
standing up between Candles on each side, (as it is designed in the Notitia
Imp. of Pancirollus): it is also to be observed, that this Civil State was
derived from sacred Eastern Usage; that Candles were burnt before God in one
part of the House, and the Law lodged in the other; and accordingly in the
Jewish Synagogues their Repository of the Law has those Can^les before it, and
when the Law is brought out to be read, it is placed on a Table, that has a
Cloth over it ( Buxt. Syn. Cap. 14.); and that therefore our Christian Altar,
instead of Fire which it needed not, might have those Lights continually
burning; and might withal be the sacred Table, on which the Word of God should
be placed, that Lamp unto our Feet and Light unto our Paths.

(y) The Excellently Learned Mr. Dodwell (in his Book of One Priest and One
Altar) differs not from what is here said. He puts indeed our Bishops in the
place of the Jewish High Priests ( Chapter 9.) but then he supposes those High
Priests to have been the Representatives of the (...), the High-High Priest (
Chapter 8.) As therefore Bishops now are the Substitutes of our Lord; so they
answer the old High Priest are such in some sense High Priests themselves: but
as He has now been pleased openly to own, and to Execute, that Office; so they
are thenceforth, in propriety of Speech, to forbear that title, and to own
themselves for his Vicegerents and Sagans.

CHAP. IX.
. I. The Sentence and Effects of Excommunication with Christians, as with Jews:
and the Relaxation of it alike.

. II. Their Agreement, in the estimate of the Guilt of Sins; and the
appointments of Penance.

. I. EXcommunication, as we have seen Chapter 5.
, was with the Jews a Punishment with which their Presbyterial Authority was
armed; and which besides, if it was not also decreed, was certainly Executed,
by the Sacerdotal: and that Sentence, we must think, was then most valid and
most effectual, when it was passed by both those Powers. Such an
Excommunication we have seen too Directed, in the New Testament, and Executed,
and afterward Released. And the same Jurisdiction, how it continued to be
Exercised in the Church, we are now to consider.

This Discipline then is well known to have been Executed in the Primitive
Church, by the Bishops and Priests, with great severity; and to have been much
dreaded by the Guilty. And the account of it we may take from Tertullian, as he
describes it in his Apology Chapter 39.
. Being to justify the Christian Assemblies from the Imputation, put upon them,
by the Imperial Officers, and common Opinion, of their being Unlawful
Associations, and dangerous Conventicles, He says: We are indeed a Corporation,
embodied by our Agreement in the same Religion, and Obedience to the same
Discipline; and are Confederate, by the same Hope. We Meet together; but it is
before God. Him we surround with our Prayers, and as it were with our Numbers
Force; but this is such a violence, as is acceptable unto Him. And then our
Prayers are, for our Emperors, for their Officers, and such as are put in
Authority. We meet; but it is to refresh our memory by Reading the Word of God
-- There too (c) is the place for Exhortation, and for Reproof; and there our
Manners are Inspected and Censured, as it were by God himself. For Causes are
there judged with great deliberation; as it is fit to be done by those who
know, that they Judge in the Presence and sight of God: and if any one shall be
found so Criminal, as to be Excluded from the Communion of our Prayers and
Assemblies, and from the rest of our Holy Commerce; this Judgment so passed
upon him, is taken for the Highest Presumption, that can be, of a like Judgment
to come. Elders [or Governours] the best approved, Preside over us; such as
have purchased the Honor, not by Money, but by their Deserts: for nothing
belonging to God, is to be bought with Money.

By those who Preside over us, we are chiefly to understand the Bishop, and
then the Presbyters, who are said above Chapter 8.. 2.
in the language of Ignatius (to the Magnesians) to preside also. And likewise
it appears manifestly, that the Authority by which they act, is not looked on
as founded, upon any voluntary agreement of the Fraternity, but upon the Law of
God. Neither is it necessary that I should trouble the Reader with any further
Proof from the Ancients, either for the Immemorial Practice of Excommunication,
or for the constant Presumption of its Authority from God.

Now a Person so ejected out of the Church, was either cast off Finally,
without any hopes of Return; or he FIG. I. The Temple of Jerusalem.
U The Space without the Precinct of the Temple. AA The 1st Court, or Court of
the Gentiles. BB The 2d Court, or Alley. CC The 3d Court, of the Women. cc
Their Galleries in that Court. c Their Galleries in that Court. cc Their
Galleries in that Court. DD The 4th Court, of the Israelites. EE The 5th of the
Priests. FF The 6th of the Altar. G The Altar. H The Porch. of the House. I The
Holy Place. of the House. K The Holy of Holies. of the House. l m n o p The
several Gates, or Entrances.
FIG. II. A Christian [Greek] Church.
aa The Area before it, commonly Cloistered about. AA The First Porch, or
Narthex. BB The Inner Narthex: in it, r The Font. CC The Body of the Church: in
it, c c Galleries for Women. c Galleries for Women. c c Galleries for Women. S
The old place of the Ambo; the Pulpit, or Desk. DD The Quire. S The Ambo now:
if not supplied by Analogia, or Reading Desks, on either side. EE The
Presbyterium, or Solea. FF The Space of the Altar. G The Altar, or Holy Table.
T The Bishops Throne; with the adjoining Seats, for Bishops, or Presbyters. l m
n o p The Entrances.
FIG. III. A Synagogue.
AA A, supposed, Outer Porch. BB A, supposed, Inner Partition. CC The Body of
the Synagogue; with cc Apartments for Women, on either hand. S The Bema, or
Pulpit. DD The Space between the Pulpit, or Desk; and P The Repository of the
Law. tt The [Antient] Semicircle for the Presbyters. m The Entrance.
Fig. I.
Fig. II.
Fig. III.
place this after P^.

was in a Possibility of it: and of these some were not to be readmitted until
they were in evident danger of Death, and after the Penance of their whole
Lives; while others might have the favor of an earlier Reconciliation, who
upon their earnest Intercession were restored, after some time of Penitence
imposed, and commonly by degrees. And for those degrees, I need not use any
other Authority, than that we have already produced from the Synod of Ancyra
Part 1. Chapter 6.. 2.
. For thence we have perceived, that the Readmission into the Church was
usually performed by the same steps, by which the first Admission was made: and
that one Ejected out of the Church, was first kept at the distance of a
Heathen; then admitted, to be as an Auditor; afterward as a Catechumen, or a
nearer Candidate of Christianity; next as one Baptized, and who was allowed to
pray with them, but had not yet received the other Sacrament; until at last he
was restored into Full and Entire Communion.

And, agreeably to this, we have already seen, that Excommunication with the
Jews was Lighter, or Heavier, and differently Aggravated, as the Cause deserved
Chapter 5.. 1.
. It has likewise appeared probable, that the several Excommunicates may have
lain under several Prohibitions, as to their Approach in the Synagogues or
Temple Sect. 3.
. And since it has been shown, that the Jewish Proselytes entered into their
Religion by the same Degrees, by which the Christians did Chapter 6.
: we cannot doubt, but those of them who had been solemnly excluded the Temple,
ordinarily Re-enter'd it after the same manner, advancing successively thorough
the several Courts, (as those did who had been under corporal Pollution,)
according to the measure of their supposed Purification.

We have yet spoken only of the spiritual effect of Excommunication, and
Tertullian mentions the Exclusion from all Sacred Commerce only: and this, no
doubt, is the proper jurisdiction of that Presbyterial Authority, which
pretends not to govern the Commerce or Negotiations of this World. But there
can be no question, but that the Faithful always avoided any great Familiarity,
or intimate Conversation, with the Excommunicates; other than to Reform and
Reconvert them. And this the Scripture it self seems to direct 1 Cor. 5.11.
: and necessary it was, to the Humiliation and Mortification of the Criminal,
and for the danger of others being corrupted by him: though the other common
Intercourse, the Christians were to have with their Neighbors of all sorts,
was to be regulated by the Policy of that Temporal Government, to which they
belonged. But, when the Government became Christian, as it thought fit to
enlarge the proper Presbyterial Power with some new Jurisdiction, in things
confining upon that Office; as in Causes Testamentary and Matrimonial: so it
backed their Excommunication, with civil Restraints and Penalties. And thence
those who were under the Greater Excommunication, have been forbid all common
Conversation, renderd incapable of several Legal Benefits, and sometimes
Imprisoned, or otherwise punished in Body or Estate: in all which proceedings
the Patterns of the Jews, as is evident, has been much followed; as it seems to
be, in the Three Admonitions before the Sentence, the consideration of the
contempt of the Court on which it is founded, the pronouncing it by Bell and
Candle, and Executing it even upon the Dead See Chapter 5.. 1.
.

. II. AND thus much may suffice at present for the correspondence of the
Sentence and Effect of Excommunication. with the Jews; and with the Christians;
but they also agree further, about the Crimes that are to be the Cause of it,
and about the means of its Absolution.

The most Grievous Crimes in the judgment of the Ancient Church, were Idolatry,
Adultery, and Murder; as Morinus has demonstrated Mor. de Poen. lib. 5. cap. 1.
. And that they are so estimated by the Jews, he has also sufficiently proved
Ibid Cap. 3.
.

And concerning Repentance and Expiation, or Abolition, of Sins; this is the
Doctrine of the Rabbis, according to Maimonides. The Guilt of the
Transgression of an Affirmative Precept, or of a Sin of Omission, if it does
not deserve Excommunication by their Law, (for Death it never does;) is
Expiated by Repentance alone. The Guilt of the Transgression of a Negative
Precept, or of a sin of Commission, if it deserves neither Death, nor
Excommunication; is suspended by Repentance at present, and Expiated by the Day
of Propitiation. And the Guilt of a Sin of Commission, to which Death or
Excommunication is due, is suspended by Repentance, and by the Day of
Expiation; and not Expiated, but by Afflictions. But the Guilt of the
Profanation of the Name of God, is suspended by Repentance, the Day of
Expiation, and Afflictions; and Expiated only by Death Ma^m. de Poenit. Cap.
1.. 7, 8, 9.
. Now Repentance is described to consist of these Acts: (1.) Forsaking the Sin
in Deed, and in Thought; and Resolving within our selves, never again to commit
it: (2.) Grieving for it: (3.) Vowing to God against it: and ( 4thly) the
Profession of all this with our Mouths; Cap. 2.. 3.
with Confession, of sins against Men, before Men, satisfaction being made also
Sect. 11.
; and of Sins done in private against God, before God alone Sect. 7.
. And therefore, as he adds Sect. 5.
, a Penitent is to cry day and night before God; to strive with Him, by Tears
and Supplications; to Give Alms; to Avoid the Occasions or Opportunities of
Sin; to change his Name, and his whole course of Life, and to go into Voluntary
Banishment. And further he tells us Sect. 8.
, that that all times are fit for Repentance, and Crying to God; but the most
proper and acceptable Season, is the Propitiation Day, with the nine days
before it.

This we have in general out of Maimonides. In the Penitential Exscripts at the
end of Morinus de Poenit. Page 151.
there are further Directions for particular Cases; and some things thence it
may be for our Use to observe.

A Murderer, is to go into Banishment, or on Pilgrimage for three Years; to
bear Forty stripes save one in every City to which he comes, and to say I am a
Murderer: neither to eat Flesh, nor to drink Wine, except on Sabbaths and
Holy Days: Not to shave his Head, or Beard; or to wash his Cloths, or Body; nor
so much as to comb his Hair above once a Month, or twice at most: To ty the
Hand and Arm that did the Murder, in an Iron Chain to his Neck; and to go
barefoot, and mourning for the Fact; if any one Reproaches him, to be silent;
and those three Years, not to walk for Pleasure, nor to use any Recreation; and
during his Pilgrimage to lay himself at the door of the Synagogue, that they
who go in and out may pass over him; (but they are not to tread upon him).

The Adulterer is to undergo Afflictions, as bitter as Death; (for he is, by
the Law, Guilty of Death): for a Year not to eat Flesh, nor drink Wine, except,
etc. every day, in the Winter, to sit in Snow or Ice for an hour, and in the
Summer amidst Bees or Wasps; or (as it is in the other Penitential Page 157.
) every day, that he suffers not from the Cold or Heat, to Fast, and to take
nothing but Bread and Water in the Evening: every day to confess his Sins with
Tears and Sighs; and to be beat with the 39 stripes; and to ly upon the Ground,
or a Plank without straw, etc. except on Holy Days; to wear Sackcloth also,
and to lead a mournful Life, and to keep from all Conversation with Women. He
also that is guilty of some other sorts of Uncleanness, is to Fast Forty Days
continued (l); in them to use neither Flesh nor Wine, nor to take any thing
warm, except on, Sabbaths, etc.

An Idolater, as soon as he Returns and Repents, is to wash himself, and to
endure Afflictions and Tribulations, in proportion to his Crime. He is to put
on Mourning; to weep and to afflict himself all the Days of his Life, making
his Confession thrice every day; not to wash, etc. or to eat Flesh, etc. to be
present at no Feast.

These are the most Criminal Cases: and I shall only observe, of the other
there mentioned, what we saw in one instance above, that Forty Days are
commonly specified for a more solemn Penitence, and enjoined in almost all of
them; as also in general, that the Penitent is supposed to be as a Mourner.

Now no one that reads these Penitential Injunctions, and knows any thing of
the Practice of the Ancient Church, but will easily discern the Correspondence.
He will presently call to mind the severity of old, that was used especially to
Adulterers, Murderers, and Relapsed Idolaters; the Difficulty they found to be
Restored, and the Long and Rigorous Penances they underwent: How they Lamented,
and Mourned, and Prostrated themselves before the Doors of the Churches, at the
feet of the Brethren; some of them not readmitted till after many years;
others not Reconciled till the Point of Death; and some not at all, though left
to the Mercy of God; passing their time in Fasting, and other Hardships, for
the Humiliation of their Body and Spirit, and a testification of their sorrow
both before God and Men. So like in very many points, was the behavior of
Penitents, both in the Synagogue, and in the Church: not to mention Change, of
Name, or course of Life; Pilgrimaging, Voluntary Banishment or Abjuration,
especially of Murderers; The tying up of their Arms in an Iron Chain; and such
kind of Practices, which were frequent in after Ages, and might have been
sometimes used before, though not then recorded.

But, for a general view of this Correspondence of Practice in the Primitive
Church, we need only to compare Tertullian's Tract of Penitence; or but only to
look back upon those two Passages, already cited thence in the second Chapter
of the First Part. And, as for the Virtue assigned to all kind of Afflictions,
we may find a suitable Opinion of them in Hermas the Ancient Christian Writer.
He is told by the Angel, that he is Afflicted, to the end his Family may suffer
and Repent: and when he answers, that behold they already Repent from the
bottom of their Hearts; the Angel replies, I know they do. But do thou think
(m) that the Sins of those who Repent, are presently blotted out? No not so
quickly. But he that is a Penitent, must Afflict his Soul; and behave himself
Humbly, in all he has to do; and endure many, and grievous Vexations; and when
he has suffered much, then God may have mercy on him.

. I. (c) Ibidem etiam Exhortationes, Castigationes, and Censura Divina. Nam and
Judicatur magno cum Pondere, ut apud certos de Dei conspectu; summumque Futuri
Judicii Praejudicium est, siquis ita deliquerit, ut a Communicatione Orationis,
and Conventus, and omnis Sancti Commercii, relegetur. Praesident probati quique
Seniores, Honorem istum non Pretio, sed Testimonio adepti; neque enim pretio
ulla res Dei constar.

. II. (l) Morinus his Translation agrees with the Printed Text, and makes the
Forty Days to be discontinued. But it should seem, that they were intended to
be continued, by the Prohibition that follows of not washing the while above
Twice or Thrice; and that for (...) should be read (...). However there is no
need of this place, for an instance of such a Fast of Forty Days together; such
a Penance being afterward thrice enjoined, in the same short Paragraph.

(m) Herm. Part. lib. 3. Sim. 7. Numquid ergo, ait, protinus putas aboleri
delicta illorum^ qui agunt Poenitentiam? Nou proinde continuo. Sed oporter eum
qui agit Poenitentiam, Affligere animam suam, and Humilem animo se proestare in
omni negotio, and Vexationes multas variasque perferre. Cumque perpessus fuerit
omnia quae illi instituta sunt; tunc forsitan, qui eum creavit, and qui
formavit Vniversa, commovebitur erga eum clementia sua.

CHAP. X.
. I. A. Parallel of Christian Rites mentioned by Tertullian: and

. II. Of those Vsages mentioned by Origin, particularly about Prayer: (1.)
Disposition of Mind. (2.) Posture of Body. (3.) Direction of the Face.

. III. (4.) Times of Daily Prayer.

. IV. (5.) Matter and Method.

. V. The Ancient Order of Christian Prayer,

. VI. And the Order of the Jewish,

. VII. Compared.

. VIII. A. Parallel of some few other Vsages.

THE many Christian Ordinances which have already appeared to be derived from
the Jews, may be more than were necessary to prepare the Reader for a like
account of Lent. I shall therefore take leave to add only so much, as may be
comp^ehended in this one Chapter more.

. I. It is known from Ter^ullian, that the Ancient Christians made frequent use
of the sign of the Cross: His words (a) are these: When ever we Move and set
forward on any action; when we Come in, and when we Go out; when we put on our
Shoes, or Wash, or are at Table; when Candles are lighted; when we lie down,
when we sit; whatsoever it be that we are doing; we still, as it were, wear
away our Forehead by signing it with the Cross. And we have already seen Chapter
6.. 5.
, that when this sign of the Cross was first made on the Forehead of a
Christian Confirmed, it might be well taken from a like Practice used in all
Probability at the Confirmation of a Proselyte Jew, when the Priest marked him
on the Forehead to God, and first put on that Frontlet [or Tephillim] between
his Eyes; a Sacred dress, memorial to himself, and distinctive to others; which
he was after to wear (when free from Impurity) before God, and Men; he being
supposed by it to own God and his Law, and to be Armed and Warned against all
Sin Buxt. Syn. 9.
. Now the Christians, though they did not dress themselves with their badge of
the Cross, yet upon all proper occasions, they repeated the Sign of it, for a
Profession of their Faith and Remembrance of their Duty; a Sign which they
continued perpetually to make and write on themselves, when they sat in the
house, and when they walked by the way, when they lay down, and when they rose
up Deuteronomy. 6, 7, 8, 9.
. This too they might use more particularly at those Actions Tertullian
mentions: they being such as are always begun by the Jews with their Proper
Benedictions Buxt. S. Jud. Cap. 10.
; and were not, I suppose, undertook by those Primitive Christians without
their peculiar Blessings; in a literal and explicit conformity to that
reinforcement of the Jewish Usage by St. Paul 1 Cor. 10.31.
, whether ye Eat or Drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. And
when such Acts of Devotion attended those ordinary actions, they did not only,
in common form (of the Jews), require a Sign to accompany them; but they wanted
the Christian Sign more especially, to show in whose name they were offered;
that another Direction Col. 3.17.
of the same Apostle might also be formally observed, whatever ye do in Word or
in Deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving Thanks to God, and the
Father; by Him; as has been long ago remarked on another occasion.

2. The same Tertullian reckous up ( g 2) another celebrated Christian Rite,
for a Practice immemorial in his time; that they thought it a Fault to Fast, or
to pray Kneeling on any Sunday, or on the Fifty days between Easter and
Whitsuntide, all of them formerly Festival, as sacred to the Resurrection of
our Lord, and the Promise of the Holy Ghost.

Now as the Sabbath of the Jews is changed into our Lord's Day, so was this
Observation of it transferred too; for they think it by no means lawful to Fast
on their Seventh Day; as it is absurd to Fast upon any Festival. For the same
reason they kneel not neither at their Prayers on Sabbaths, and Holydays Maim.
Libello de Prec. Cap. 5.. 15.
: standing with Them being the proper Posture of ordinary Prayers; and Kneeling
or Falling down, of Afflictive Humiliation.

3. Whereas too the same Author mentions there (i) an Observation then Ancient,
concerning the Bread and Wine of their Ordinary Food; that they were very
careful, that none of it should fall upon the Ground: this has also been
formerly suggested to be Jewish, for the Bread at least. For though the Jews,
when they conclude the Sabbath, and separate it from the following Week, pour
some of their Wine upon the Ground: yet to their Bread they preserve always a
particular Respect; supposing an Angel deputed to watch the Negligence of those
that let it fall to the ground, and foreboding Poverty to themselves from such
an unhappy Accident Buxt. S. Jud. (...). 16.
.

4. Our Author in another place, in his Treatise of Prayer Cap. 11.
, makes mention of some Customs then observed at that Duty, which were
apparently from the Jews. It was the usage of some he tells us, though he
disapproves it, ((...)) to wash their hands before Prayer: and so, it is known,
the Jews are required to do Maim. Ibid. Cap. 4.. 2, 3.
. 5. Others were used, when they had done Prayers, to sit down for a while (n):
and for this they cited Hermes his Pastor, where he is said Hermae Past. Lib.
2. in Proem.
, when he Prayed, to have sat down on the Bed. The Argument Tertullian derides,
and the Practice he takes to be Ethnic; but it seems rather to come from the
Jews. For they are directed to sit a while after Prayers in Meditation and
Devotion: and the Godly Men of old are rememberd to have passed one hour before
Prayers, and another after, in that Posture Maim. ut supra. Cap. 4.. 16.
. 6. So the custom, he taxes (q), of publishing their Fasting by their
declining the fraternal Kiss, seems to speak them to have thought the time of
Fasting to be a time of Mourning, and in which they were not to salute nor be
saluted. 7. But where he finds fault with those that prayed too loud, and
advises to use a low Voice (r), he agrees with the Masters of the Jews; who
order the Prayers to be said by each, but with a Voice audible only to his own
Ears Maim. Ibid. Cap. 5.. 9.
. 8. And when, speaking of the Christian manner of Lifting up their Hands at
Prayer, he reproaches the Jews with the contrary Posture; as not daring to lift
them up, imbrewed as they were with the blood of our Lord (t); he truly reports
the present Jewish Custom, used (I suppose) since the Desolation of their Holy
City, of holding their Hands down as well as their Eyes, and crossing them over
their Breast Maim. Cap. codem. 3.
: but it still remains undeny'd, that their Gesture was different before, and
the same which the first Christians continued.

9. Lastly, What Tertullian in another place informs concerning the Devotion of
Wednesdays and Fridays, we have already seen Part. I. Chapter 4.. 3.
that it succeeded that of Mundays and Thursdays. 10. But what he intimates of
Praying toward the East (y), we are now going to consider; as it is, with
other Rites, more expressly delivered in Origin.

. II. This most Learned Christian Writer Origin, as he was very knowing in the
Affairs of the Jews, to which others were great Strangers; so he seems to have
some Respect to their Practice, though he would not vouch it for Authority,
when he discourses in his Treatise of Prayer, concerning that Christian Office.
There he proposes Orig. (...) Oxon. page 127.
to speak of the Requisites to it; the due Disposition of Mind, and Posture of
Body, the Place, the Direction of the Face, and the Time; to which he
afterward adds the Method and Parts of it: such things as are used all of them
to be considered on the same subject by the Masters of the Jews.

And first for their solemn Prayer, they strictly require a right Preparation
and Disposition of Mind; that their Heart be free from the Thoughts and Cares
of the World; and wholly Directed toward God: to which end they are ordered to
sit some time before, (as has been now remarked). And Buxtorf adds Syn. Jud.
Cap. 10.
, that they are to enter into the Synagogue with Fear and Reverence, which they
express in some words of the Psalms: and when they rise from their Seats, they
Bowing toward the Ark, reinforce their Attention with a preparatory Prayer,
and then begin.

Secondly, As to the ordinary Figure and Posture of the Body, the Jews now also
prescribe standing Maim; de Prec. 5.2.
; and heretofore used (what Origin commends) the Erection of their Hands and
Eyes, as we have now observed upon Tertullian.

Thirdly, As Origin advises (d) that, even in a Private House, the Room chose
for that Duty, should be none of those that serve for the less Honorable uses
of the Family; such a Caution do the Jews likewise observe Maim. Ibid. ^.9.
.

Fourthly, When He directs Orig. ut supra, p. 133.
the Face, of the Person that Prays, toward the East, even though there should
be no Window in the Room on that side; according to the ancient Custom
mentioned before him by his Master Clemens Alexandrinus Clem. Strom. 7. Edit.
Paris. p. 724.
, and by Tertullian, and which had obtained I presume from the Beginning of
Christianity; being in their judgment countenanced by those Expressions of
Scripture, that our Savior was the East, (for so they understood what we
render the Branch (g)); that He was the Dayspring from on high that visited us
Luke 1.78.
; and that hereafter he shall come as the Lightning from the East Matthew. 24.27.
: in this also the Christians will be found to correspond with their
Predecessors the Jews.

For that they turned themselves to some one certain Point, was according to
the Custom of the Jews: who are supposed Maim. de Prec. 1.12.
, ever since the Erection of the Sanctuary by Moses, to have turned themselves
toward it at their Prayers; and ever since the Building of the Temple at
Jerusalem, have been obliged both to look toward that place, and if they are
within Walls to open a Window on that side Maim. Ibid. Cap. 5.. 3, 6.
.

The Line too in which the Christians placed themselves, that between the East
and the West, though it continued not to be the standing line of Direction to
the Jews in their Devotion, yet however it has been always esteemed Sacred with
them, and in that Position some things therefore are not to be done by them
Maim. de Cult. Div. Tract. 1. Cap. 7.. 9. Buxt. S. Jud. Cap. 8.
: a Respect they give, as they say, by reason of the like situation of the
Temple; if it was not rather for a much more ancient reason.

Now in that Line it is not to be wondered, if we consider not the worship of
the Sun, that the place of his Rising was always held the chiefest Point; and
should in the Primitive Languages be styled the Part of the World before us, as
most regarded; and that the Northern should thence be called the Left, and the
Southward the Right (n). But besides this Natural consideration, there seems
also to have been some ancient Religious Respect had to that Point, and that
afterward the Face of the Temple was therefore turned that way. For the Jews
themselves suppose, by Tradition, that Adam was formed by his Creator in that
situation; and that his Eyes were first opened toward the East (o). And as to
the Temple, although the Worshippers, who stood before it, looked toward the
West, as those who yet were to see the Dayspring from on High by Reflection
only from that Building; yet the Temple it self faced the East; as directly
looking for Him, who was to come thence: and that way therefore might the
Christians turn, as being themselves Temples of God 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.
, and professing immediately to expect his Second Coming.

. III. Fifthly, The Times of Daily Prayer our Author had determined, in the
former part of his Treatise Page 36.
, to be the Morning and Evening; and between them, Midday, and Midnight. In the
Morning also the (so called) Apostolical Constitutions direct to assemble in
the Church, before they go about any Business; and likewise to return in the
Evening Lib. 2. Cap. 36, 59, 62.
.

Now the Jews also have their Daily Prayers, in the Place of their Daily
Sacrifices Maim de Pr. 1, 5, 6, 7.
. Their Morning Prayers take place from the time when the Sun is going to Rise,
(for then they began their Morning Sacrifice M. De Cult. Dio. Tract. 6. c. 1..
2.
), to Ten of the Clock De Prec. 3.1.
: and at those they all assist in the Synagogue, if they are not
extraordinarily hindered, before they do any other Business. Their Evening
Prayer may be said any time from half an hour past one; but ordinarily from
half an hour past Three till Sunset Ibid.. 2, 3, 4.
: in any of which hours the Daily Evening Sacrifice might have been offered
Cult. 6.1.3.
. Besides these two Daily Duties of Prayer Commanded them, they have taken upon
themselves to perform another in the Night, and in any hour of it Prec. 3.6, 7.
; after the example of those Parts of the Sacrifices which were usually then
Burning. And possibly because those Parts were not to be put on the Altar after
Midnight C. Div. 6.1.5.
though they might continue afterward to Burn, it might thence seem most fit,
in strictness, at least to begin the Night Prayers at that time; as it was also
the fittest hour, being at equal distance from the Last of the Evening Office,
and First of the Morning; an hour too the far greater part of the Christian
World would therefore also be more likely to observe, because it had been with
them the Beginning of their Sacred and Civil Day, as we have learned heretofore
from Pliny See Part 1. Chapter 2. lit. k.
. Such are the constant Prayers of the whole People of Israel Thrice every day.
On their Sabbaths and other Holy Days, as they had Additional Sacrifices to be
offered between those of the Morning and the Evening, so in their place there
are Additional Prayers to be said, after the Morning, and before the Evening
Prayer; but regularly not after One in the Afternoon Maim. de Prec. 3.5.
. Now this Duty, though it obliged the Generality only on those Peculiar Days,
yet it was every day repeated by the Representatives of the whole People the
Stationary See Part 1. Chapter 2. lit. g.
Men, both in the Temple, and Distant Synagogues; and was attended with a
solemn Blessing Maim. de Cultu Div. 2.6.4.
. And if we suppose it to be done by them at a Fixed time, no hour could be more
proper for it than that of the Midday; a Cardinal time and equidistant from
those two of the Sunrising and Sunset, about which times the same Blessing
was likewise pronounced Maim. de Prec. 14.1.
. And lastly to all this, said on the occasion of Origen's assignation of time,
I may add in reference to the Ancient Christian Prayers, made when they began
to Light Candles, and called thence Lucernary; that there was such an office
with the Jews likewise, called the Close, from the shutting up of the Day and
its Service; a kind of Completory, used by all of them on their Propitiation
Day, and by the Stationary Men on every day (but the Sabbath Eve), at what time
the Priests gave the Blessing also, as has been but now observed.

. IV. The Matter, and Method, of Prayer is the Last thing this Ancient Writer
considers: and he directs it, to consist first of Doxology, or Giving Glory and
Praise; Secondly, Of Returning Thanks; Thirdly, Of Confession of Sins, with
Supplication for Grace and Pardon; Fourthly, Of Intercession for greater
Favors: and lastly to conclude with a Doxology again Orig. (...) page 134.
. It is too observable that, where St. Paul exhorts that Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and Thanksgiving, be made for all men 1 Timothy 2.1.
; our Author distinguishes the three first sorts of Prayers in this manner: a
Supplication he understands to be an Humbler Petition, begging the Relief of
our Necessities; Prayer, strictly so called to be an Address to God, speaking
his Glory, and without Dejection of Mind, Desiring his Favor; and Intercession
to be that, which is made with yet a greater Degree of Assurance and Holy
Confidence (c). Now, as this latter Explication may interpret what he means in
the third and fourth Member of the matter of Prayer: so it gives a sense to the
Apostles words, which may make those four sorts of Prayer, made for our selves
and others, to agree with the four sorts of Sacrifices, used to be offered for
that purpose. For so Supplication answers a Sacrifice for Sins or Trespasses,
by the Remission of which Relief was to be procured: Prayer, the
Burnt-Offerings, which were chiefly meant to God's Honor, and also besought
his Favor: Intercession, the Peace Offerings, which were joined with Requests,
put up with some kind of Communication and Familiarity: and lastly,
Thanksgivings agree plainly with the Sacrifices of that Name.

The Constituent Parts of Prayer are no doubt very rightly assigned by Origin:
but as for the Order and Method of them, it seems, by his expression, to be
rather what he thought fit for private Composure; than what was observed in the
service of the Church, or even in our Lord's Prayer, upon which he there
Comments. For our surer information therefore on this subject, it may be best
to have recourse to other Authors.

. V. NOW the Offices of Public Devotion for the Lord's Day Morning, are
summarily represented by Justin Martyr (a), as performed in this Order: that
first they Read [the Scriptures of both Testaments] the Writings of the
Apostles and Prophets; that then there was an Exhortation made; that after they
Rose up and Prayed; and lastly, that they made the Oblation, and Received the
Eucharist. This is that Apologists short account to the Emperor, that the
Heathens might know in general how Innocently the Christian Assemblies were
employed. Tertullian (b) from another Occasion accidentally falls upon a very
cursory mention of the former of the same Offices, interposing another:
remembering the Reading of the Scriptures, the Singing of Psalms, the making of
a Discourse, and the Putting up of Prayers. And this Office of Psalmody, though
for brevity omitted by Justin, yet questionless was as ancient as the other:
and is too recounted by the Author of the Apostolic Constitutions, in the same
method, after the Lections, and before the Sermon Lib. 2. Cap. 54.
. He also in a following Chapter Cap. 57.
gives a larger description of the whole Service, after this manner. A Reader
first is directed, standing in the Ambo, or Desk, to read some Lessons out of
the Old Testament: Another then chants the Psalms of David, the People also
chanting in their Turns: after Lessons follow, out of the Acts, and Epistles:
then the Gospel is read by a Priest or a Deacon, all standing: and afterward
the Exhortation is made by the Priests and the Bishop. This being done, and the
Catechumens, etc. dismissed, the Faithful turning toward the East, join in
Prayer: and then, after that, the Oblation began, and other Prayers were made;
and lastly, the Eucharist was celebrated. So do these Constitutions, giving a
true account of Ancient Practice, though under supposed names, represent the
Psalmody to be performed most of it together; as it stood, until in the Fourth
Century it was ordered by the Council of Laodicea Can. 17.
to be more intermixed with Lessons, that the Attention of the Congregation
might be the better refreshed and secured by that variety.

This was the Primitive Order of the Christian Liturgy, according to the
General Descriptions we have of it: for as to the lesser particulars, many, no
doubt, there were; and some of them, such as we find in the Liturgies, going
under the names of St. James, St. Chrysostom, etc.

. VI. NOW the Jews have their Liturgy too: and their Morning Devotions consist
of several Offices Maim. De Prec. Cap. 7. -- 17.
. And here first I may mention those occasional Benedictions they are supposed
to have made daily upon their Waking, Hearing the Cock Crow, Putting on their
Cloths, etc. such as we intimated above, and three and twenty of which they are
directed to pronounce constantly every day, and which run in this form; Blessed
art [or be] thou, O Lord our God; the King of the World, who clothest the
naked, if they are putting on their Cloths; or if they are covering their
Heads, who crownest Israel with Honor; or if they are tying their Girdle, who
Girdest Israel with Strength. But besides these Benediction, which are to be
said apart, and on their proper occasions only Ibid.. 7.
, though some Synagogues are used to repeat them together as an Office; the
next stated Duty is that of Reading some part of the Law, Written or Oral, to
which every one is every day obliged: and this Duty, as all others, is still to
be prefaced and concluded with its proper Prayers or Benedictions; of which
Prefatory Benedictions the first for Example is this, Blessed is the Lord, etc.
who has sanctified us with his Precepts, and has commanded us to study the
Law. This office is not only Private, but publicly also discharged in the
Synagogue, and read there. Next to it is the Duty of Repeating the Psalms:
which has to it Benedictions, with which it begins and ends. And this Duty is
so acceptable, that the Practice of some is recommended, who have daily
repeated the whole Book: however the Synagogue every day say over some Psalms,
and especially on their Sabbaths and other Great Days, to which also they
generally add some Verses of the Bible, that are chiefly Laudatory; as in some
places the custom is to conclude with the Song at the Red Sea, or with that of
the 32d Chapter of Deuteronomy Sect. 12, 13.
. For it is in general to be noted, that in several places the usages are
various, as to the choice of the Sections, and Psalms, and Hymns. After this
Duty there follows another, of Repeating the Verses of the Law, they call Shema
from the first word of the first of them, which is as it were their Creed, and
begins thus, Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one God. This Repetition they
are obliged to every Morning and Night, wherever they are: and it has too its
proper Benedictions before and after, and makes up also an Office in the
Synagogue.

These forementioned Offices may be differently performed in different
Countries, according to their particular Customs; but that which follows, and
to which the others are but Introductory, is constant and stated, and uniformly
observed by all the People of Israel; being a Formulary of short Prayers, now
19 in Number, 18 of which were dictated by Esra, as they say: These Collects
are regularly to be said by each of them, at home, or in Public, thrice every
day: and this Office in the Synagogue is always to be said, for the Greater
Solemnity, by the Precentor, or Deputy of the Congregation, himself; whereas
the Foregoing might have been read by a Private Person. Of those Prayers, or
Collects, the Three First, and Three Last are most remarkable; those speaking
the Glory of God, and these returning Thanks Maim. de Prec. Cap. 1.. 4.
; the other Intermediate ones being Petitionary, for Understanding, Repentance,
Pardon, Relief from their Distresses, Healing their Infirmities, Giving of
seasonable Plenty, Return from their Captivity, Restoration of their
Government, Protection of Good Men, Reinhabiting of Jerusalem, the Coming of
the Messiah, etc. the Requests gradually rising up, according to Origens
abovementioned distinction of Supplications, Prayers, and Intercessions. It is
also further to be remarked, that though the three first Collects are noted to
be wholly Doxological, yet the rest are not to be thought to want that Duty;
all of them beginning, or ending, with a Benediction of God; and the whole
Formulary being accordingly called the 18 (or 19) Benedictions; as it is also
prefaced with this Versicle, Lord open thou our Lips, and our Mouth shall show
forth thy Praise. But the Third of those Prayers is more signally
Glorificatory: when it is said in Private, referring to the Hymn of the
Cherubins, Is. 6. Ezekiel. 3.12.
Holy, Holy, Holy, etc.; and when in Public, expressing it. And there is also
a solemn Hymn of Glory, which they call the Kadish, pronounced particularly by
the Deputy of the Assembly, before and after every Service Ord. Precum
Subjunct. Libr. 2^o Libri Jad. Chaz. Titulo de Benedictionum Formulis.
.

Thus far goes an Ordinary Morning Service. But on Mundays, and Thursdays,
there still follows a Litany: and such Prayers are particularly ordered to be
pronounced from a Low Place Buxt. Syn. J. c. 10.
.

After the Litany on Those Days Buxt. Ibid. c. 14.
, or after the Offices before described when there is no Litany, as on the
Sabbath C. 16.
; the Law is brought from the Ark to the Desk in great Pomp, and peculiar
Portions of it are read there by several, with Praevious and subsequent
Benediction of God: and then in the same manner it is carried back: the People
all the while Standing; and, as the Book comes and goes, Chaunting out some
Versicles, and pressing to Kiss it.

Lastly on Sabbaths, and other Great Days, there follows Another Office, the
Additional Service, peculiar to the Festival; consisting now chiefly of the
Commemoration of the Peculiar Sacrifices, on that day heretofore offered. And
this Service of Prayers, though having some the same, is separate and distinct
from that of the Daily Morning Prayers: as the Daily and the Additional
Sacrifices, however some things in both might be of the same nature, were never
intermixed and dispatched together for greater speed and convenience; but always
separately offered, and each Office kept entire to it self Maim. de Cult. Div.
Tract. 6. Cap. 7.
.

. VII. NOW to this last described Jewish Order of Morning Prayers, so far did
the Ancient Christian agree, as to begin likewise with Lections and Psalmody:
and from the Jewish Custom of sitting at the Repeating of those Psalms it is,
that such Portions of the Psaltery as are now read by the Greeks, without any
interposition, are called by them sittings (a): as also the Laudatory Hymns in
the Greek Church, used at Morning Prayer, which is thence called the Lauds by
the Latin, seem to have been placed there after the same Example. As to the
Lections, the Christians have the variety of the Jews: for as these read in the
Morning out of their Misna, and Doctors, and the Prophets, and the Law; so had
we our Lessons also out of Unscriptural Authors, and the Old Testament, and the
Epistles, and the Gospells. And herein the Gospel with us, answered plainly to
their Law. For though we read the Gospel before the solemn Prayers, and they
the Law after, (and in this order only we differ,) yet the Lection was made
with us in the like Solemnity; the People standing up, and before and after
Blessing, and Praising God; as the Book is also in the Greek Church, even at
Morning Prayer, carried about with great Solemnity, and Kissed by the People.
After this Lection and Psalmody (or Psalmody and Lection, for they were always
somewhat intermixed,) with the Exhortation, if any was made; and after the
Hearers and Catechumens were dismissed by the Christians; (and at the same
time, I suppose, they were dismissed by the Jews, when they had any;) our
Creed, and their Shema, come together: and then, in either Church, the Prayers
properly so called. And lastly these, on certain days of the Week, are closed
with the Litany, by both.

Thus the ordinary Morning Services answer one another: and so also does our
Communion Service, strictly taken, answer their Additional; coming at the end
of all, in a distinct Office. For in a Greek Liturgy (for Example) both the
Psalmody, and Lections, and Creed, and the first Prayers, are known to be
nothing else but an abbreviated repetition of the Morning Office; (as the Jews
too shorten theirs on their Festivals:) and then after that, (as with us of
England after the Prayer for Christ's Church) the Office of the Eucharist
begins, the Celebration of the Additional Christian Sacrifice.

. VIII. THUS much concerning the Agreement, in the Method and Order of Prayers:
other particular correspondences may be observed, of which I shall note but a
few, leaving such as are more obvious to the Readers own reflections. And first
it may be remarked in the Greek Liturgy, that when any new Action is entered
upon in any part of the Service; it is begun with a Benediction of God (a): in
like manner as the Jews use to do. And secondly, in the preparation to the more
solemn Prayers, at the putting on of the Habits in which the Priest is to
Officiate, appropriate Benedictions are said; and one of them, as at the
putting on of the Girdle, much the same with that the Jews use (b). Thirdly, As
our Collects conclude generally with the Laud and Honor of God, so do Theirs.
Fourthly, The Triumphal Hymn, as it is called in the Greek Church (c), Holy,
Holy, Holy, Lord God, etc.; is always solemnly said by their Chazan, with the
third Collect of their Daily Prayers. Fifthly, And whereas, when those words
are pronounced, the Jews, with an Exulting Gesture, are used to Lift up, not
their Eyes only, but their whole Bodies; and to Leap up thrice B. Syn. Jud. 10.
at that Trine Hallowing, for so they call it, of God; the same Custom appears
to have obtained among the Primitive Christians at a like Prayer: at the latter
end of which they are all reported (e) to have joined in with their Voices,
lifting up their Heads and Hands to Heaven, and together raising their Feet; as
if they would have followed their Prayers toward the Spiritual Essence, and
ascended up in Body as well as in Mind. Sixthly, Further, that ancient form of
our Thanksgiving (which follows these words in the Communion Service, Let us
give thanks to our Lord God) with its special Causes sometimes assigned; seems
to be conceived after the Pattern of the Jews Eucharistical Collect, the First
of the last three. Seventhly and lastly, Their Kadish, or larger Hymn of Glory,
may answer to our Angelic one, at the end of our English Communion; Glory to be
to God on High, on Earth, etc.

Many such Correspondencies may be found between the solemn Devotions of the
Synagogue, and of the Church of Christ: and had we any sufficient account of
the Prayers, that were daily said in the Temple, by the Priests and Levites;
(as we have now notice of little more than what is performed in the Synagogue,
by the People, and one of them their Deputy;) I question not, but that our
Ancient Liturgies would be found to come much nearer to their Rites. IT is
known, that the Orarium Gear ad Chrysostom. Missam numero 9 no.
of the Deacons in the Ancient Church, was but the same with the Sudarium, with
which the Sign was given in the Temple Maim. de Cult. Div. Tract* 6. Cap. 6.. 7.
and it may be observed that, as a Priest in the Greek Church begins many
Actions from the Admonition of the Deacon (b); so did the Priests heretofore
from the like Remembrances of some lower Assistant (i). In the Temple also only
it was that the Proper name of God, Jehova, might be pronounced Maim. de Prec.
14.10.
: and when they tell us, that it was ten times pronounced by the High Priest on
the Day of Expiation; they let us also know Maim. De Cult. Div. 8.2.7.
, that the Priests and People in their several Courts, every time they heard it
spoke out, fell down upon their knees with their Faces to the ground, and cried
out, Blessed be the Name of the Glory of his Kingdom for Ever and Ever. And
from that Custom the Reverence used to the name of Jesus may have come: it
being the Appropriate name of our Blessed Lord; a Name, as the Apostle says
Phil. 2.9, 10.
above every Name, even above the name Jehova so much glorified under the Old
Covenant, and by which the Father would be hereafter Honored. So the
Christians might bow at the mention of that Name, in imitation of the like
practice of the Jews: and to that Practice the Apostle may be well thought to
allude, when he says, that at the Name of Jesus every knee, of every Place,
henceforth should bow; every Tongue also Confessing, (for in the Obeisance of
the Temple the Tongue also had its part;) that Jesus is the Lord, and King; and
all this still to the Glory of God the Father.

And thus have I at last concluded this incidental Discourse, concerning the
Derivation of Christian Ordinances from the Jews; much indeed too prolix, in
regard to my first design; though possibly not too long, in respect to the
importance of the subject it self; and which might easily have been enlarged
yet further. But although the Answer to one Objection has increased so
enormously, yet the other Two may have a quicker Dispatch, and shall take up
only one Chapter more.

I. (a) Tert. de Coron. Cap. 3. Ad omnem Progressum atque Promotum, ad omnem
Aditum atque Exitum, ad Calceatum, ad Lavacra, ad Mensas, ad Lumina, ad
Cubilia, ad Sedilia, quaecunque nos Conversatio exercet, Frontem Crucis
signaculo terimus.

(g 2) Ibid. Die Dominico Jejuni^m nefas ducimus, vel de Geniculis adorare.
Eadem immunitate a aie Paschae in Pentecosten usque gaudemus.

(i) Ibid. Calicis aut Panis etiam nostri aliquid decuti in terram, anxie
patimur.

(n) Tert. de Orat. Cap. 12. Quod assignata Oratione Assidendi mos est
quibusdam, rationem non video: nisi si Hermas ille --

(q) Ibid. Cap. 14. Alia jam Consuetudo invaluit. Jejunantes, ^abita Oratione
cum Fratribus, subtrabunt Osculum Pacis. -- Jam enim de Abstinentia Osculi,
etc. Vide literam (s) ad operis hujus Partis prioris Cap. 4.

(r) Cap. 13. Sonos etiam vecis subjectos esse oportet: aut quantis arteriis
opus est, si pro sono audiamur?

(t) Cap. II. Certe [Israelis] manus semper immundae, sanguine Prophetarum and
ipsius Domini cruentatae in aeternum. Et ideo conscientid Patrum haereditarii
Rei nec attollere eas, ad Dominum audent -- Nos vero non attollimus tantum, sed
etiam expandimus --

(y) Tertull. Apolog. Cap. 16. Alii -- Solemn credunt Deum nostrum. -- Denique
inde suspicio, quod innotuerit nos ad Orient^^ regionem precari.

. II. (d) Orig. (...) Edit. Oxon. p. 130. (...) --. (...).

(g) See Gregory 's Works: Chapter 18. on Zach 3.8. and 6.12.

(n) This, in part, is exemplified by Mr. Gregory.

(o) This too is mentioned by Mr. Greogory in the same place: and by Mr.
Seldom, De Syned. 3.16.2.

. IV. (c) Orig. Ibid. page 44. (...) --.

. V. (a) Justin. Apol. 2. sub siuem. (...) -- (...), -- (...) --.

(b) Tertull de Anima Cap. 9. Est hodie soror apud nos: Revelationum charismata
sortita, quas in Ecclesia inter Dominica solennia per E^stasin in spiritu
patitur --. Jam vero prout Scripturae leguntur, aut Psalmi cant^^tur, aut
Adlocutiones proferuntur, aut Petitiones del^gantur, i^^ inde materiae
Visionibus subministrantur.

. VII. (a) (...).

. VII. It is thus: (...), When the Priest pronounces this, he is said (...), or
(...): and it is a (...), or an (...). Vide Goar. ad Euchol. Grac. page 56.

(b) (...), etc. Vide Chrysostom. Liturgiam.

(c) (...) de quo consuli poterit Goar, ad Christ. Liturgiam, Observatione 125.

(e) Clem. Alexandr. Strom. lib. 7 mo Edit. Paris. page 722. (...), --.

(b) Such Admonitions as these: (...). Vide Liturg. Chryf. (i) An Instance may
be seen in the Admonitions given to the High Priest, by those next him, at the
putting on of the Two Lots on the Two Goats; Domine Pontifex toll Manum
Dextram, or Toll manum sinistram. Maim. de Cult. Div. 8.3.3.

CHAP. XI.
. I. The Second Prejudice against a Jewish Origination of Lent, from want of
Authority in the Talmudical Writings;

. II. Answered: by showing (1.) That those Traditional Accounts were not
without some Ancient Foundation of their own;

. III. (Secondly,) That they are Confirmed in many points by Collateral
Evidence;

. IV. And (Thirdly), That they were not borrowed by the Jews from Foreign
Authors.

. V. The Third Prejudice against such an Origination, from the Novelty of it;
Answered.

. I. THE Second Objection against the Jewish Original of Lent, as we
apprehended Part 2. Chap. 1.
, might be this; that the Traditional Writings we have of the Jews, were not
sufficient Authority for the Knowledge of their Ancient Customs: and this is a
Prejudice, that has been entertained by many very learned Men, and has been
much confirmed by Morinus his Exercitations.

Neither is it to be denied, but that the Jews have deserved this Disgrace:
having brought their Traditions under a suspicion, by the foolish way they took
to advance the Credit of them. For they thought it not enough, to have their
Customs very Ancient, and some of them as Old as Moses: but he must also have
learned them in Mount Sina, from the Mouth of God himself. Neither was it
sufficient, to have had them preserved by Writing, if the people had so thought
fit: but they must be necessarily transmitted by the sole force of Oral
Tradition. And when they come at last to be reduced into Writing, by their
Rabbi Judah, about the Year of our Lord 209; his Collection must be immediately
as Authentic, as if wrote by Moses, or by the Finger of God. And then the
Commentaries on this Book, the two Talmuds, the First of them they will needs
have compiled in our Fourth Century; and the Last, the Babylonian, to have been
completed in the Beginning of the Sixth Vide Po^ock Portam Mosis Morin-Exerc.
6. Li^ 2 di.
.

We shall not therefore wonder, if such confident Pretenses, as these, have
provoked the World to inquire, and examine; and, as is usual, extremely to
Under value and Depress, what others have more unreasonably enhanc'd. And thus
both that Famed Book, and its Commentaries, are bid to go down three or four
hundred years lower, than they were placed by their too Devoted Admirers Morin.
Exerc. modo dicta.
: the Text it self, is esteemed an uncertain Rhapsody; and the Expository
Additions to it, a Heap of Impertinencies and Idle Tales. And if there are any
Ancient Facts or Customs, agreeable to what we know by better hands; the notice
of them is supposed, not to have come originally from their Own Memoirs, but to
have been borrowed afterward from our Greek or Latin Authors.

Now as to my own part, my acquaintance with these Jews has not been so great,
as that I should think my self bound to engage in their Quarrel, and to justify
the pretended Age and Authority of their Writings. That their Accounts were
more Full in many material Cases, I have often had occasion to wish: and that
they are certainly true, I must confess I am never entirely satisfied, until I
find them confirmed by the Concurrence of some better Testimony; such a
prejudice has that pretense of Oral Tradition given me. I shall not therefore
undertake to offer more in their favor, than these two Considerations: First,
that such Traditional Memoirs are no Novel things; but that such Misnaioths
were certainly very old, more early and better Recorded, even than the Rabbis
give out: and Secondly, that it is not likely, that their Accounts of their
Customs were suggested by our Writers, or formed from the Observation of
Christian Practice.

. II. AND first as for what concerns the Misnaioth, or Digest of Traditions,
composed by their Great Rabbi, and who is now their Oracle; it is allowed by
Morinus himself Ex^^^. 6. Cap. --
to have been Read in their Synagogues in Justinian's time, together with the
Law and the Prophets; and to be meant by him in his Edict (b) dated in the year
of our Lord 548. And if it had then that Authority with the Jews, it must be
supposed, to have risen up to it after some considerable Tract of Time, and not
to have been compiled in the Memory of Man; unless we too will fall into the
Rabbinical Fable, and make it to have been held so highly Sacred at its first
appearance. It might therefore well have seen the Light an hundred or two
hundred years before; and yet not have been particularly mentioned, either by
Epiphanius, or St. Jerome; as not being of that singular Repute in their time,
above other Collections of the same Nature. For, that this was the First Book
of the Kind that was ever written, the Jews indeed tell us: but this Tale, we
may easily ghess, was devised only to do it greater Honor; and He that
Believes them not in all, will have no Reason to believe them in This. The word
Tradition is known to signify only the Delivery of a Doctrine or Ordinance; as
Misnah is a Secundary Law; neither of them excluding the help of Writing.
Neither is Tradition or Secondary Law, if styled Oral, therefore to be
accounted absolutely Unwritten, but only Originally; not as if it were never
after to be reduced into Writing, but as not given out in it at the first
delivery. And although St. Augustine Contra Advers. Leg. and Proph. 2.1.
says, that the Jews of that time had not their Traditions in Writing, but
retained them by Memory, and delivered them Orally: yet we may well suppose the
Good Father to be deceived in this by the Jews; who were shy, it may be, of
publishing the Books of this nature to the Knowledge of Christians; and because
they were wont in their Schools to deliver their Lessons to their Scholars
without Writing (as many other Professors in many places still do) might
therefore pretend they never used any. For that such Traditions had been
written long before, even in the Apostolic Times, we are competently assured,
from the Epistle attributed to Barnabas: where some of the Customs, which Rabbi
Juda's Misnah gives, are expressly mentioned; and as delivered in Writing (d).

From this Testimony of St. Barnabas it seems to be plain against the Assertion
of St. August in, and the Modern Opinion of the Jews, that there was some kind
of written Misnah, in the first Age of Christianity: as it is very probable
also, that this present Misnah of Rabbi Jehudah's might be extant at the latter
end of the Fourth Age, the time of that now mentioned Father, and of Epiphanius
and St. Jerome. But besides, though these two last Authors do not mention this
very Book; yet, as they both understood the Jewish Learning well, so they let
us understand that this Traditional Part of it was then in high Esteem with
them, cited for Unquestionable Authority, and reputed of very great Antiquity.
St. Jerome, speaking of Jewish Traditions in St. Paul's time, says (e) that a
great number of such they continued to have in his, (He for his part supposing
them to be the same,) under the name of Secondary (f) Ordinances: and adds,
that if they were asked, for Example, how they came to take the Liberty of a
Sabbath Journey, when their Law commanded them to sit in their House; they were
ready to justify themselves by that other, their Traditional, Authority, and to
answer that Rab Akiba, and Simeon and Hillel (Names famous in the Present (g)
Collection) had allowed them to walk Two Thousand Feet on that Day (two
thousand Cubits says (h) the Talmud). Such Traditions as these, he says, their
Doctors read of, certain days of the Week; and the Phrase for it was, The
Wisemen (i) read the Secondary Law. So much does St. Jerome bear Witness of some
Misnaical Memoirs, then held very Sacred; and of their Doctors Commenting upon
them. Epiphanius is more particular concerning the Age of those Traditions:
and, to refute Marcion, who supposed the Old Testament it self, to be the
Traditions the Pharisees retained, while they passed by Mercy and Judgment; He
(k) bids him inquire whence they came, and he shall find, that they were
otherwise descended; from David, or Adda, after the Return from Babylon; and
from Akiba, who lived before that Captivity; as well as from the Sons of
Asamoneus, who were 190. years before our Savior. Writing also against Ptolomy
the Valentinian, who supposes the same Traditions our Savior reproves (that
particularly whereby a Parent was unreliev'd under the pretense of a Corban) to
be found in the five Books of Moses; and affirms the Pentateuch to consist of
the Law of God, the Ordinances of Moses, and the Traditions of the Elders: he
tells him, that for what relates to the Elders, he is not able to justify it by
the Scripture (for the Traditions of the Elders are no where extant in the
Law); and that this his strange conceit proceeds from his Ignorance in those
matters. For, says he, the Traditions of the Elders, are by the Jews called
Secondary Instructions; and they are four: the First, bears the Name of Moses;
(as some of their Traditions do now); the Second is of Rabbi Akiba, as they
call him; the third, of Adda, or Juda; and the fourth, of the Sons of
Asamoneus. But where in the five Books of the Pentateuch is that of the Corban,
mentioned by our Savior, to be found? you cannot show it. Your Assertion
therefore falls to the ground: that saying of the Corban, no where appearing in
the Pentateuch. Now hence we see first, that the Traditions, which the Jews had
in Epiphanius his time, were the same, in his Judgment, which were in our
Savior's time: Secondly, that those Traditions in probability were not then
kept unwritten: for otherwise our. Author would have taken another course with
Ptolomy's Ignorance; and have told him, that those Traditions were so far from
being writ down in the Pentateuch, that they were not yet written at all. And
thirdly we may conjecture from his manner of Expression, that the Jews had four
Misnah's distinct then; and that the Compilation, or Digest, of them, and of
some later added, is the Misnaioth we now have.

Such an Account do these Fathers give us of the reputed Authority of the
Jewish Traditions, about the year of our Lord 400. But further, that some of
them were not unwritten in the Apostolical Age, we have before seen from
Barnabas his Epistle: and that they were in great vogue in our Savior's time,
is apparent from the Gospels; as also from Josephus (m), that there were such
Customs which had obtained a long while in Johannes Hyrcanus his Days, above a
100. Years before our Savior, and which they of that time had received from
their Fathers, not written in the Laws of Moses; (for neither does he say, that
they were no where written).

It is manifest therefore, from what has been premised; That such like
Traditions, as the Jews now give us, pretended even in our Savior's time to
great Antiquity, and were then much Celebrated and Regarded, and some of them
in that Age reduced into Writing; That those Traditions, whatever they were,
were supposed by St. Jerome, and Epiphanius, to have been carefully transmitted
by the Jews, down to their days; and that therefore the Author of the present
Misna, if he were indeed as late as those two Christian Doctors, must however
be allowed to have had the opportunity of those Memorials, for the Basis of his
Collection; and must be also judged to have used that opportunity, if only by
the credit his Work obtained with those of his own Nation. So that if we do not
receive the Jewish Traditions, with the same implicit Faith the Jews do; yet
neither should we peremptorily reject them, as Arbitrary, and Groundless, and
of Modern Invention; but rather give them such a fair equitable Entertainment,
as to think, that though something of them may be false, yet much also may be
true; being ready to admit them to be true, upon the concurrence of any New
unsuspected Testimony, the only favor that I have to desire in their behalf.

III. SUCH a mean degree of Credibility the Talmudical Accounts might
reasonably demand of us, in their own right; had they not yet been able to
produce to us any particular Specimens of their Veracity: but many such there
are to be collected for them, out of Authors of other Languages. We have seen
that what the Present Traditions say of the Expiation Goats; that both of them
were to be like in shape, and stature, and price Misn. Titulo Joma Cap. 6.. 1.
; that a piece of Scarlet was to be put on the Horns of the one, and part of it
to be taken off when he was brought into the Wilderness. 6.
; and that he was contumeliously used in the way. 4.
: is much the same with that which is related in Barnabas his Epistle See the
last Section.
, and from him, as is ghessed, expressed by Tertullian (e). And so the Sabbath
day Journey of 200 paces, mentioned by St. Jerome, has appeared to be the same
space which the Jews now assign: as their other Traditional Observations, he
occasionally reports, are not found to differ from those the Modern Rabbis
give us. But for such an Attestation, we need go no further than to the New
Testament; many of whose Passages, and sayings, are found to agree so well with
some of the Jewish Records, as to borrow thence their best and clearest light:
as manifestly appears from those Commentators, and others, of this and the
former Age, who have not neglected to consult the Talmudical Learning. Thence
it is manifest, that the Masters of the Jews have been brought to contribute
very much to the Explication of the Gospel: neither could they have been denied
this Certificate, but because it was thought, to be too great an honor for
them, by such, who seem resolved to be as obstinate against them, as they are
against the Faith.

. IV. From no better a reason, when such a consent between the New Testament
and the Jewish Traditions appears, is that other surmise thrown in; that this
Agreement is by fraud, and that the Later Rabbis transcribed their Customs out
of our sacred Writings: a surmise absolutely as ground-less, as any Jewish
Tradition can be; and no less Improbable.

For first, when we certainly know, that the Jews of old had such Traditional
Memoirs of their own current amongst them; it cannot but seem much more
reasonable and natural, to suppose their Present Traditions derived thence,
than from our Testament: especially since we find, that this conceit it self is
Novel, and that the Elder Christians Jerome, and Epiphanius, who knew the Jews
and their Learning best, never entered into it, but presumed the contrary.

Neither is it at all likely, that the Talmudists ever increased the knowledge
of their Customs by the help of our Writings: not only because that Nation has
all along affected to be strangers to our Learning, partly out of Superstition,
and partly out of Contempt: but because it actually appears, by their Gross
mistakes in many points of History, (mistakes with which they are much
reproached by those Mor. lib. 2. Exer^. 5.
whom we have now opposed) that they never indeed looked into our Authors; no
not so much as into their own Josephus, from whom they might have had much
better information, if they would have vouchsafed to have been instructed in
any other Language than their own.

But we need not go so far about, to refute this suspicion of Jewish Forgery:
it being evident only from the ba^e view of such Traditional Particulars, and
of the Texts of the Gospel, to which they relate. For whereas many
Circumstances of those Traditions give so natural, and apposite, and full, a
sense to their several Texts, that they justify at the same time their own
Truth: they are also, we see, so obscurely expressed, and covertly hinted in
those Texts; that they themselves could never have been suggested, and raised
thence. This evidently appears, to give no other Examples, in the Parallels of
Baptism, or of the Lord's Supper Chapter 2, and 3. of this Repart.
: in either of which, the Jewish Customs afford a clear Explanation to many a
Passage of our Scripture; but receive none. And that they could not be raised,
and explained thence; is very plain in fact. For these Traditions, which as
soon as we have learned them from the Jews, every one in these latter Ages,
easily and immediately applies to the Exposition of the Holy Text; were never
in the least thought of by those many Ancient Commentators of ours, who wanted
indeed the help of the Jewish Learning, but wanted not the Application nor
Discernment, which the best Jewish Master could be supposed to bring.

. V. The Third and last Prejudice, we feared might be raised against a Jewish
Derivation of Lent, was from its Novelty; that it cannot be true, because not
mentioned by any Authors before.

But this is an Objection, which may have been already removed, by the
appearing Probability of some like Originations, which we have now offered at,
if the Reader has been so favorable as to admit them. However, as he cannot, I
presume, reject those very many Explications of the Text of the New Testament,
which Modern Commentators have given us from the Accounts of Jewish Customs; so
he will reflect, that most of them were lately very New, and such as are not at
all remembered by the Ancient Expositors.

Neither is it to be wondered at, that the Ancients left many such Derivations
and Allusions unmention'd; or any Imputation upon them, if they are supposed to
have been more ignorant of the Jewish Customs, than we now are.

It is well known, that in the Beginning there was very frequent Communication
betwixt the Jews, and the Christians; and that most of the first Converts to
our Church came from the Synagogue. Yet in a little time there grew, we know,
not only a strangeness between those of the two Religions; but, on the Jews
part, a great and a fierce Hatred: then when the Proselytes from the Gentiles
had filled our Churches, and most of the Bishops and Doctors began to be of
that Number. Of that rank were the greatest Men, remembered to us, of the
second Century: and among them are those eminent Writers, still preserved,
Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Tertullian; Men admirably
skilled in the Heathen Learning, but in the Jewish no further, than the
Scriptures had informed them, and that too by a Greek Translation. And
although, amongst those who followed them in the next Ages, some one or two, as
Origin in the third, and Jerome in the fourth, were better seen in that
Knowledge: yet they chose to use it, rather to compare and rectify the
Translations, then extant, of the Old Testament, by the help of the Language;
than to bring any Traditional Rites, or Phrase, thence, for a Correspondence
with the Doctrines, and Usages, of the New. Whether it was then thought, in the
height of that Animosity, that such a comparison would do the Jews too much
honor: or whether it happened by the Allegorical humor, which Origin
affected, and the other imitated; they endeavoring so much to spiritualize the
plain Facts and Ordinances of the Hebrew Text, that much litteral account of
Unscriptural Ordinances could not be expected from them.

From what therefore concerns the Exposition of the New Testament in general;
there being but little use made of the Jewish Learning, by those few that
chanced to know it; the other Commentators as (for example) S. Ambrose, St.
Augustine, Chrysostom, and Theodoret, bestowed their pains in the use of what
helps they had: and they gathered thence a Plain, and True, and Useful, sense
of the Text; though, in some places, not so Elegant, and Full, as that the
words would have expressed. Neither is it any disreputation to their Comments,
that they reached not the Height of the Original; no more than it is, to the
best Translations. Neither were they under a much greater Disadvantage, in not
understanding here and there a Criticism, understood now by us; than we now
are, if any thing of that kind, unobserved by us, shall happen to be remarked
by those that come after. In all Ages of Christianity, there has still been
more of the Holy Scriptures understood, than was necessary for their great
design, the Salvation of Believers: and possibly the Providence of God has so
ordered the Dispensations of Knowledge, that there might be some equality
between us, and those nearer the Apostles; and that, in recompense of those
many advantages we have lost, this new Information should be given.

And in particular as for Rites and Usages, this may be remembered; that as we
have, in the few Writings of the first Ages that remain, but an occasional
accidental mention of such Usages; (for such things were then too well known,
to be studiously and circumstantially described;) so we have less notice of
their Original, to expect. For that likewise was in the very beginning, too
obvious to be discoursed of; and after, when it came to be less understood, was
not much inquired into: those primitive Christians wanting no originary
Derivations, to reconcile them to such Customs, as they knew practiced by the
Apostles, and Apostolical Men; and not being so curious about the Reason, as
observant of the Example. This seems to be the case of the Christians of
Tertullian's time: for neither does he himself appear to have been very curious
in that matter. Sec Ch^ 10.. 1^


Thus have I endeavored, though too operosely, to give some fatisfaction to
the General Prejudices against a Jewish Derivation of Christian Rites. And thus
much I may have gained, that the Reader will be hence induced to give a fair
hearing, to such a Derivation of Lent; (the Argument to which I am at length
returning;) if I am not to hope, that he may be brought so far over, as now to
be prepossest in its favor.

. II. (b) (...) --: (...) Novel. 146.

(d) Barn. Epis. Cap. 7. de Capro Emissario. (...) --. (...) -- (...);

Hieron. Ep. ad Algas. Quaest. 10. Quantae Traditiones Pharisaeorum sint, quas
body vocant (...) (f), and quam Aniles Fabulae, evo^vere nequeo. -- Praeteret,
quia Jussum est, ut diebus Sabbatorum sedeat unusquisque in Demosu^, and uon
egrediatur, neque ambulet de loco in quo habitat: siquando eos ju^^ ^s literam
coeperimus artare, ut non jaceant, non ambulent, non stent, se^ ^^^tum sedeant,
si Praecept^ velint servare: Solent respondere and dicere, Rab Akiba, and
Simeon, and Hillel (g), Magistri nostri, tradiderunt nobis ut bis Mill Pedes
am^ulen^^ in Sabbato (h): and coetera istiusmodi, Doctrinas hominum
p^aes^rentes Doctrinae Dei. -- Videntur igitur Observationes Judaicae apud
imperitos, and vilem Plebeculam, imaginem habere rationis, humanaeque
sapientiae. Vnde and Doctores eorum (...), hoc est sapientes (i) vocantur. Et
si quando certis diebus Traditiones suas expon^^^ Discipulis suis, solent
dicere, (...); id est, sapientes docent Traditiones.

(f) (...).

(g) Vide Maimonidis Praefatationem in Seder Zeraim, edita^^^ Pocockio nostro,
sub finem.

(h) Videri poterit hac de re Maim. Tractat. de Sabbato, Cap. 27, quique ad eum
e margin commentatur.

(i) (...).

(k) Epiph. Haer. 42. Refut. 26. (...) --. (...) --, (...).

(l) Haer. 33.. 9. (...).

(m) Joseph. Archaiol. 13.18. (...). Haec a^tem Johannes ille Hyr^anus
obseroari amplius vetuerat, sadduceorum in gratiam.

. III. (e) Tert. advers. Judaeos, cap. 14. Sic enim and duorum Hircorum, qui
Jejunio offerebantur, faciam interpretationem. Nonne and Illi utrumque ordinem
nominis Christi, qui jam venit, oftendunt? Pares quidem atque Consimiles,
propter eundem Domini conspectum, qui non alid venturus est forma, ut qui
agnosci habet a quibus and laesus est. Vnus a^tem eorum circundatus Coccino,
Maledictus, and Consputatus, and Convulsus, and Compunctus, a populo extra
Civitatem abjiciebatur in Perditionem: manifestis notatus Insignibus Christi
Passionis; qui coccinea circundatus vest, and consputatus, and omnibus
contumeliis afftictus, extra Civitatem Crucifixu^ est.

PART II. REPART. II. A Conjecture concerning the Original of Lent.

PART II. REPART. II. A Conjecture concerning the Original of Lent.
CHAP. I.
. I. Our Easter, kept for some time with the Jewish Passover.

. II. The Notification of Easter by Paschal Letters, agrees with the Practice
of the Jews.

. III. The Ante-Paschal Preparation of Christians, answers to a like
Preparation of the Jews before their Day of Expiation.

. I. THE Festival which puts an end to Lent, the Solemnity of Easter, is known
by all to be an Imitation of the Jewish Passover; and the Resurrection-Sunday,
to have come in the place of that Great Day on which the Children of Israel
were released from their Egyptian Bondage. And it is known likewise Vide
Bucher. de Pasch. Jud. Cyclo. Cap. 1.
that, in the appointing of this Paschal season, the Christians followed for
some time the Designation of the Jews; and that afterward, when they found
reason to regulate this matter by themselves, they still kept to the same
Mosaic Rule.

. II. Now when the Christians began to use a common Calculation of their own,
it was generally the work of the Bishop of Alexandria, (a place famed for
Astronomical Learning) to consider aforehand on what day of the common Solar
year, the first month of the Lunar year, would happen to be the next Spring;
and accordingly to ascertain the Easter Sunday, which was to be the First
Sunday after the fourteenth day of that First month. This the Great Bishops of
several parts learnt usually from him of Alexandria; and timely notified to
those of their Provinces, that they might know when to begin their preparatory
Devotions, which attended that moveable Festival.

And this also was done, as I conceive, after the Example of the Jews. For,
though when they were in their own Country, the Lunar year was with them of
common use; yet they were still to learn, when it should begin: for the first
New Moon was to be so placed in the Spring season, that on the sixteenth day of
it a Sheaf of the First Fruits of the Harvest might be presented before the
Lord Levit. 23.10.
etc. Maim. de Conse^r. Calend. Cap. 4. Seld. de An. Civ. Vet. Jud. Cap. 5.
Such things therefore the Priests, (as in other Nations); or the Sanhedrim,
(as the Talmudists will have it;) were to consider: and if the ordinary year of
twelve Lunar Periods fell short, they were to lengthen it out with the Addition
of a thirteenth: and whether they would make such an Intercalation or no, it
was fit they should signify to the People Maim. Ibid. Seld. Libriejnsd. Cap. 9.
some convenient time before; that a suitable Preparation might be made against
that solemn Feast, to which every Israelite was bound to repair.

Notice the Jews wanted, that lived at any distance from Jerusalem, to order
their affairs so, that their absence for some Weeks at that time from home,
might be less incommodious: however to make ready any residue of Holy things,
that might be in their hands, and were to be spent at Jerusalem; to take care
to have all their Family circumcised; to Purify themselves, if not to take up
the Lamb; to discharge the Vow of a Nazarite, if they had any such upon them;
to provide, and to offer, any Eucharistical Sacrifice, that might be due. And
for some of these reasons, they commonly came up to the Temple before the
Feast; and the precedent Week had its peculiar Celebrity: and probably all the
fourteen days of that First Month were half Festival, as has been intimated
above Part 1. Chapter 5.. 3.
.

Now such a notice was likewise necessary for the Ante-Paschal Preparation, the
Christians used, though in a contrary manner. For they, as we have seen Part 1.
Chapter 3.
, spent some time before in Fasting; all of them, both the Asiaticks, and those
who differed from them: and though some fasted only one day, yet others fasted
two, others more, says Irenaeus; and of them, some Forty. This indeed is the
account Irenaeus gives of his own, and Victor's side: but, in all probability,
the Asiatick manner of Fasting, differed not from theirs in length of time. For
from that Apostolical Constitution, cited by the Audaeans, in Epiphanius, it
has appeared not unlikely (e), that those also of the Asiatick manner, opposing
their Fasts to the Festivity of the Jews, began therefore their Fasting at
least a Week, if not a Fortnight before the 14th day: as the same Opposition
might have directed them, to have kept the 50 days after with great Joy.

. III. But in this contrary manner of observing the Antepaschal Season,
Opposition to the Jews was not primarily designed: neither was it further
prosecuted by the Christians, than they were lead to it by contrary Causes. For
what ever reason the Jews might have for their Pentecostal Sadness, the
Resurrection of Christ gave his Followers a greater, for Joy: and if the Jews
did exult in the Death of their Messiah, the Christians were certainly to
lament it. This Lamentation also of our Savior's Death, as it was not made in
consideration of any loss by them sustained; so neither did it arise out of
Indignation, against his Mortal Persecutors.

On his Passion-Day they Fasted, and Grieved for the Sin of the Jews, by which
he was put to Death: but they bemoaned also their other Sins, and the Sins of
the whole World, and more especially their own; those for which he suffered,
and which were all the more guilty, and more hateful causes of his Crucifixion.
In this Abhorrence of all Sin, and Penitential Grief, they spent the day of
their Lord's Death: and for the better performing this Duty then, they prepared
themselves, by the Abstinence and Devotions of the Season before.

This was the Intention, as well as Practice, of the whole Church; and this was
their Antepaschal Preparation, concurring at least in time with that of the
Jews. But the Christians, agreed yet nearer with the Jews in this whole Action;
passing their time, not indeed as the Jews then did in that very Season, but as
they did in another as solemn, and in an occasion wholly alike to the present
circumstances of the Christians: that is the Church of Christ kept the Day of
the Passion, as the Jews did the Day of Expiation; and prepared for the one,
just after the same manner as They did for the other.

For this is the Conjecture I now offer, that as many Jewish Ordinancies were
patterns to the Christians, and as their Sabbath, and Monday, and Thursday,
were removed to our Sunday, and Wednesday, and Friday; so their Expiation Day,
was transferred to our Passion Day; accompanied, as it used to be attended, with
all its Praevious Offices. And this Parallel, Tertullian, we may remember, in
the name of the Catholics, has already suggested to us Part 1. Chapter 4. 2.
, though he did not speak it out, when he tells us; that the Fast of the tenth
day of the Seventh Month is abolisht; and at the same time, that the Days on
which our Savior was taken away, were now determined to that Duty.

This Conjecture I shall endeavor to approve; by showing, first the
Correspondence between the Expiation ^^^y of the Jews, and that of our Lord's
P^^sion; and Secondly between the Seasons that Precede, both the one, and the
other, of those Radical Fasts.

CHAP. II.
. I. The Sacrificial Performance on the Jewish Expiation Day,

. II. Compared with that of our Savior on His Passion Day.

. I. THE Day of Expiation, or Atonement, is with the Jews a very Great Day;
enjoined by God under a very severe Sanction, and observed by them always with
a suitable Care. It was appointed on the Tenth Day of their Seventh Month; just
six Months after the day of the Caption of the Paschal Lamb, or Kid of the
Goats: and the Duties of it were Peculiar, partly Sacrificial, to be performed
by the High Priest; partly Devotional, incumbent on the People.

The Sacrificial Office proper to the Day, was proper to the High Priest For
this and the whole Section, see Levit. 16.
: and he only, and on that day only, was allowed to enter within the Vail into
the Holy of Holies. Besides the Propitiation he was then to make for himself,
and his House; He was to make an atonement for the People of the Congregation:
and that was done by two Kids of the Goats, for a Sin-Offering. These two
Goats, were to be alike; according to the Tradition, both by the Jews Maim. de
Cult. Div. Tract. 8. Cap. 5.. 14.
and by Barnabas For this, and what follows from Barnabas, see Repart. 1. Chapter
11.. 2. lit. d.
: and to be presented before the Lord, at the Door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation. There the High Priest cast Lots upon them: one Lot for the Lord,
and the other Lot for the Escape Goat, [for Azazel, supposed by some to be Satan
(d)]: and the heads of both of them he bound about with two narrow pieces of
Scarlet Maim. Ibid. 8.3.4.
. With the blood of that which was offered to the Lord, he entered into the
House, and within the Vail; to sprinkle it before the Mercy Seat: and while he
was in the House, no one else was to be there; [no not in the space between the
Altar, and the House; as the Rabbis say Maim. Ibid. 6.3.3.
]. On the other Goat, he laid both his hands; and confessed over him all the
Iniquities of the Children of Israel, and all their Transgressions in all their
Sins; [in a Form, the Misnah pretends to give Codex Joma Sheringhami, c. 6.2.
;] putting them on the Head of the Goat: and then he delivered him, bearing all
those Iniquities, and Accursed, as the Traditions of Barnabas call him, into
the hand of a Fit Man; [Ready and Bold, I suppose (h); or an Executioner; who
was to be a Stranger, not an Israelite, says Maimonides (...) p. 8^.7.
;] to be carried into the Wilderness: [The People therefore spitting upon him,
and Goading him on, as Barnabas tells us they were bid to do; and the Misnah
says Joma 6.4.
, there were those who were ready to pluck him by the hair and cry Away, be
gone; though they were kept off from so doing by the contrivance of a narrow
passage.] In this manner he was lead into the land not inhabited, [to a Rock
called Zuk (l); where his Leader they say (i) dividing the Piece of Scarlet,
put half of it on some point of the Rock; [on a Thorn (m), says Barnabas,] and
tied again the other half between the Horns of the Goat, and so pushed him down
headlong, to be broke to pieces by the Fall.]

. II. Such an Annual Expiation Day was appointed for the Jews: and its
Sacrifice, whereby the Atonement was made for the Sins of that Year, was so
Performed. There was in like manner a certain Day appointed, to come in its due
time, when an Atonement should be made for the Sins of the whole World; not of
one Nation only, or of one Year, or Age; by a Priest, supereminently High; and
with a Sacrifice, truly singular and extraordinary, and of it self deserving to
be accepted.

The Day of our Saviors Passion, every good Christian believes to have been
the Day of the Expiation of Mankind. And that he in that Sacrificial Action,
was both the Priest, and the Sacrifice, the whole Tenor of the Epistle to the
Hebrews positively avows. He is there said to be a merciful and faithful High
Priest, making Reconciliation for the Sins of the People Hebr. 2.17.
: the High Priest of our Profession 3.1.
: our Great High Priest, who is passed into the Heavens 4.14.
: Called of God as was Aaron: after the Order of Melchisedech 5.4, 10.
: invested with an Unchangeable Priesthood 7.24.
: a High Priest, who is set on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty, in
the Heavens 8.1.
.

And this High Priest was of necessity to have something to offer, says the
Apostle 8.3.
. He therefore entered once into the Holy Place, not by the Blood of Goats, and
of Calves, but by his own Blood, having obtained eternal Redemption for us 12.
: -- and thorough the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God 14.
. For Christ is not entered into the Holy Places made with hands, which are the
Figures of the True; but into Heaven it self; now to appear in the Presence of
God for us. Nor yet was He to offer himself often; as the High Priest enters
into the Holy Place every year, with the blood of others --: but now, once in
the end of the World, has he appeared to put away Sin, by the Sacrifice of
Himself --: being once offered, to bear the Sins of many 9.24.
. So are we sanctified, thorough the Offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once
for all 10.10.
: -- who after he had once offered one Sacrifice for Sins, for ever sat down on
the right hand of God 12.
--. For by one Offering He has perfected for ever them that are Sanctified 14.
.

Thus exactly adequate is the Correspondence between the Propitiations of the
Old and New Covenant, as it stands proposed to us by the Divine Writer to the
Hebrews. Our Savior is asserted to have been the High Priest, and on his
Passion Day to have officiated for us; to have offered the Sacrifice of
Himself; to have bore our Sins in his own Body; and with his own Blood to have
entered into the Holy Place, not made with hands; and to have appeared, (as
before the Mercy Seat,) in the Presence of God. Thus much of the Analogy the
Apostle has expressly laid down: and it may very naturally be carried further.
The Author therefore of the Epistle ascribed to Barnabas Barn. Ep. Cap. 7.
, and Tertullian after him See Repartit. 1. Chap. 11.. 3. lit. e.
, have both took notice, that the two Kids of the Goats were chosen alike, in
as much as both of them were equal representatives of our Blessed Lord: and
that he was as that clean unspotted one, which was offered to God, and whose
Blood was carried into the Holy Place; and also as that other, laden with the
Sins of the People, and so sent away; that he likewise wore the Scarlet; he
was, as it were, Accursed; was reviled, spit upon, and buffeted; gave his Back
to the Smiters, and his Cheek to them that pulled off the Hair. And to this,
after their Example, I may add from the same Traditions, that He was sent away,
by the hands of a Fit Man, Pontius Pilate a Stranger; Goaded to his Execution;
lead to Mount Calvary, the Place Abrupt and Cut off; Himself there cut off from
the Land of the Living, and as it were delivered up to the Prince of this World
(who came though he had Joh. 14.30.
nothing in Him) and into the seeming Power of the Devil, to suffer Death in
appearance, but indeed to destroy him who had the Power of Death Hebr. 21.4.
.

Thus did our Faithful and Merciful High Priest both Act, and Suffer, for us,
in that Great Day of Atonement; answerably to the Sacrificial Part of a like
Days office with the Jews: it remains that we now see what was the Devotional
part, to be performed by the People.

(d) (...) is taken by the Scholiasts, Solomon, and Abenezra, to be a Hill; so
called from its Hard Ground: and to be compounded of (...), [in Arabic (...),
Terra Dura]; and of (...), in the Auxctick sense.

Some of the Greek Interpreters, whom our Translation has followed, have
included the Goat in the signification of the Word; and have rendered it by
(...), and (...): in which case it is presumed to be compounded of (...) Caper;
(for this word by the Septuagint is sometimes taken Masculinely;) and of (...)
abiit, or (...) remotus est.

Both those ways are disliked by Bochart, who therefore supposes the word to
signify (...), or (...): taking it to be (...), from the root just now cited:
and understanding the Text concerning the Lots in this manner, that One was for
the Lord, [or his Altar]; and the other for the Separation, or Removing away;
and in this manner the Septuagints (...)) may be taken.

But still it seems to others more proper to understand some Person for the
other Lot, and who may be opposed to the Lord. And so Origin takes the (...) of
the Septuagint, to be Satan: not as if he were like one of the Dii Averruncii,
(which is indeed the signification of (...), a word though, it may be, regarded
here by those Translators; who content themselves often with any signification
of the Original, be it suitable to the place or no;) but that he was
Averruncandus, and Depellendus, whose place therefore is in the Wilderness. And
Azazel in this sense, may also be dervi^d from (...) Removere, Abdicare.

And it may be observed that, though the Jewish Scholiasts take no notice here
of any Evil Spirit, yet their Traditions mention one Samael, particularly for
the Expiation Day; [ Buxtorf. Syn. Jud. Cap. 26.] to whom a Present, they say,
was then to be given, that he might not hinder their Reconciliation. This
Samael they take to be the chief of the Evil Spirits; and the Prince of this
World [ Lightf. in Joh. 12.31.] that is Satan himself, [ Maimon. More N.
2.30.]: And so the Egyptian Typhon, who was (...), and (...); was called Seth,
and Bebon, and also Smu [Plut. de Isid. and Os.] Thus the Jews seem to have
retained a Memory of something done to the Devil on that Day; though they
conceive it under a false Notion: and still, when the Service of the Day is
over, they sound their Horn; for joy, they tell us, of the Victory they have
then obtained over Satan [Buxt. Syn. Jud. Cap. eod.]

Dr. Spencer therefore understands Satan here; but make; the name to be (...)
Fortis Abiens, or Fugiens; (...): [if the abovementioned (...) would not have
served better, one of whose significations is Descivit.] And the Goat, which he
says was used for the Depelling of Evil, as the other was for procuring Favor,
he supposes to be sent to Satan: not for an Offering to him; but to show the
Merit, and End of Sin; to reproach him of his own Wickedness, by what was so
sent to him; and to make it appear, that not he, but God to whom the other Lot
fell, was the Averter of Evil.

This account has been suspected by some, and much opposed: but still the same
Evil Spirit may be allowed to be meant; in another more convenient, and very
safe, sense. For, as Wicked Men, are said sometimes to be delivered to Satan;
so might that Goat also, in the place of those Men, whose Sins be bore: and by
that delivery the Accuser, and Tormentor, might be made to know, that God's
People were now discharged of their Transgressions; and that only that Beast,
on whom they were all laid, was to answer his Accusations, and to be exposed to
his Vengeance. This reason of the Action seems to be agreeable to the
Circumstances of it, reported both by the Scripture and the Talmudists; and may
stand with any of the forementioned Derivations: though it may too have one of
its own. For from the Arabic (...), which signifies Reprehendit, Culpavit,
Azazel may be likewise sorm'd; either by doubling the second Radical, or by
Preposing (...); and signify, one who finds fault much and vehemently, (...).

(h) (...) is re^der'd Fi^, in a large sense. But it may I suppose, mean one
that was more particularly fit for that business; and would not spare to strike
in the way, or to kill in the end; from (...), and (...), Ic^us inslixit, Noxam
intulit.

(l) (...) is M^ns altus and praruptus: and so is (...), and (...), in Arabic;
from the Fissures of it, I conceive. And (...) may also signify a piece of
Ground, so Broken and Cut, (for so R. Salom. seems to understand it;) as well
as Land separated, and otherwise cut of, an Island, or a Desert.

(m) (...) in signifies not only Spin^, (as Barnabas understands 'it, c^jus
(...) Edules) but also R^pes excurrens in mare, Mons, littus, and Recessus
Maris: and therefore appears to answer to (...), and to express all the
significations of the words of that Family; in which (...) is Mons, and
Difficillimus and Al^issimus in ^olocus; (...) the same, as also Ripa, L^tus
stuminis; and lastly, (...) is Spina. And it may likewise be observed, of the
words relating to the abovementioned (...), that (...) has under it the
signification not only of Insula, but also of Recessus, seu Decrementum, aquae,
vel Maris: and that (...), as well as (...), signifies a Hedge now, and might
the Thorns heretofore; and withal expresses the (...), or Buds, which are
mentioned by Barnabas.

CHAP. III.
. I. The Devotional Duty of the Jews an their Expiation Day,

. II. Practiced by Christians, on the Passion Day.

. III. Some Circumstances of the Eves of those Days, compared.

WHile this Reconciliation was making in the Temple at Jerusalem; the People,
even those who were not present at it, had their parts to perform; and were to
join with it, wheresoever they resided; Fasting that whole Day, and afflicting
their Souls from Evening to Evening Lev. 23.32.
. For whatsoever Soul it was, that was not afflicted in that same Day, he
should be cut off from among his People 29.
.

Now that they might be sure not to be defective in so necessary a Duty; they
took care to begin the Office of that Day, earlier than the Sunset of the first
Evening; and to conclude it later than that of the second. The Affliction also
of their Souls they showed, not by Fasting only; but by all other
Demonstrations of Penitence, and Grief for Sin.

And therefore for the better performing that Duty; as they prepare themselves
some considerable time before, (of which we are to speak in the following
Chapter;) so more particularly on the Ninth Day, the day immediately preceding.
For then, they repair to their Synagogues before day, and continue long at
their Devotion there, going afterward to their Burying places, for their
greater Humiliation: and in the Afternoon they wash themselves, Confessing
their Sins; make ready their Candles, which they are presently to use; and
particularly take care, to Ask Pardon of those they have injured, and to make
satisfaction. Then in the Synagogue, with other Prayers, they make a solemn
Confession of their Sins; and sometimes receive from one another their Forty
stripes save one: and afterward they return home, and eat a Formal Supper,
thereby to distinguish that day from the following, in which they are neither
to Eat nor Drink For this and what follows see Buxt. Syn. Jud. c. 25.
.

And now before the Night, beginning that Great Day, is come; they return to
the Synagogue; set up and light their Candles, for each one; (and sometimes
two, as both for their Soul and their Body:) and after Proclamation is made of
leave for the Excommunicate to join with them, they begin their solemn Prayers
of the Day, which they continue toward Midnight; some spending the whole
Night, and repeating the whole Psalter. However before Sunrising they come
thither again, and stay there all the rest of the Day; Reading out of the
Scriptures, and Praying: in which Prayers they take care that their second
Service, the Sacrificial Service for the Day, be said before Noon. After Noon
they begin the Service of the Evening, continuing their Devotions till the Sun
is ready to set; when they subjoin another Office, for the Close of the Day,
and peculiar to that day: and then when the Night of the next day is come; they
have the solemn Blessing pronounced by the Priests that are present, and so are
dismissed:

After this manner, while the Temple stood, the Jews heretofore are presumed to
have employed the Day of Expiation; and not otherwise to have expected any
benefit from the Sacrifice, which was then offered, and by which all their Sins
were to be entirely Remitted.

And since the Destruction of their Temple, and ceasing of their Sacrifices,
this their own Office the Jews still continue; and impute so much to their due
performance of it, as to think Rep. 1. Chapter 9.. 2.
, that the Punishment of many offenses is entirely Forgiven, and of the rest at
least suspended, by that alone, and without the help of the Expiatory Goats
which are now wanting.

. II. NOW as it is certain, what was laid down in the Chapter foregoing, that
the Day of our Saviors Passion, was the Great and Last Day of Expiation; when
that one Propitiatory Sacrifice was made for the Sins of the whole World, and
of all Ages, by that our Great and Catholic High Priest Tert. adv. Marc. 49.
: so is it not to be questioned, but that the whole World, had it then known
what Propitiation our Blessed Lord was making for them, would have joined the
Affliction of their own Souls, with that his bitter Passion; and would, in
their several Habitations, have accompanied his Oblation for their Sins, with
their own Confession of them; with bitter grief for their Commission, and
strong and earnest Supplication for their Pardon.

This All Mankind could not have failed to have done on that Day; had they but
known, what our Savior was then doing for them. But that then was hid, from
the Eyes of the Apostles themselves.

When therefore the Mystery of his Death came to be revealed, and the
Propitiation of that day was made known; if his Disciples thought fit to keep
an annual Memorial of it, (and that duty the Paschal Season of the Jews, so
solemnly kept, could not but suggest to Christians;) they could not neither
fail of Solemnizing the return of that Day, with that Profound Veneration of
our Suffering Lord, and that Penitential Supplicatory Devotion to the Father,
which the Original Day it self would have required from them.

Now that such a Day was kept yearly, in memory of the Passion of our Lord, in
the first and Apostolical Age; is a truth, which the former Part of this
Discourse may have cleared to us Part 1. Chap. 3.
: and that it was all along observed, with as great a strictness of Fasting and
Humiliation, as the Jews themselves used on their day of Propitiation; is
likewise manifest: as it is also most certain, that the Grief, and Affliction,
they then were under, was not for the Death and Loss of their Lord, and Master;
but for the Guilt of their Sins, and the Sins of the World, for which their
Lord and Master had that day suffered. So much correspondence there was, most
evidently, between the Practice of the Jews, and of the Christians, on their
two Great Fast Days.

Thus should our Savior's Expiatory Sacrifice, which completed and superseded
the Jewish, have been attended answerably: and thus actually was the Annually
Memory of it, afterward celebrated with a suitable Devotion. And this, though
not done by the Primitive Church, in virtue of any such strict Injunction, as
that under the Old Covenant; might yet be well taken up, upon the cogent reason
of so just a Congruity. And as the Jews continue their Devotional Office, now
when by the Judgment of God an end is put to the Sacrificial: so might the
Christians think fit to keep up a yearly memory of that their Sacrifice, whose
offering was once made, and never to be reiterated, but its efficacy is to
endure for ever: they likewise observing this Solemnity, not with any Ritual
Form, but with such eternal Duties of Penitence and Supplication, as are always
incumbent upon us miserable Sinners, which the Justice of God will perpetually
require, and his Goodness in our Savior accept.

. III. THERE seems therefore to be reason enough, from the nature of the Thing:
from that Mysterious Suffering of our Lord, and the consequent Practice of his
Primitive Servants; to found the continued Solemnity of the Passion Day, upon
its correspondence with the Levitical Day of Propitiation. Neither is it to be
expected that I should justify the Parallel, by producing any like Opinion of
the first Christians, to that we have seen of the Jews, concerning the
Necessity and Merit of the Observation of the Day: when the one was observed
only as Proper, and Expedient, (though in the judgment probably of those who
had the Spirit of God); and the other as Positively commanded by God Himself.
And yet so far did the first Christians seem to regard the virtue of a Jewish
Expiation Day, in their Practice about their own, that they still determined
the ordinary stated Period of the Penances of ejected Brethren, with the
Penitence of Good Friday, and the following Saturday, (both which were the Days
of our Lord's Passion;) as if by that their Conversion was consummated, and the
Pardon of the Church entirely gained.

And when they readmitted Penitents on Maundy Thursday; as was the Ancient
Usage of the Church of Rome, and it may be of all others; they did not
therefore depart from this their Parallel with the Expiation Day, but rather
confirmed it. For the Jews, as we have seen Rep. 1. Chapter 5.. 3.
, on the Eve of their Expiation relax their Sentences of Excommunication, and
admit all to the Office of the next Day: and for the same reason the Christians
might admit their Excommunicates, to the Offices of both Passion Days; and even
those, whom they did not afterward suffer to continue in their Communion. The
office of the Passion Day, or Days, I mean; which consisted in Confession, and
Supplication: for it is very probable, that in the earlier times the Reconciled
Penitents were not admitted to the Sacrament of our Lord's Body and Blood,
until Easter Day.

The Supper likewise, which was used to be held solemnly on that Thursday,
though it is said to be in Imitation only of our Lord's Supper; yet it may also
have proceeded from the Practice of the Jews on their Expiation Eve, which we
mentioned above. For they, in the Conclusion of their Penitential Preparation
toward the Propitiation Day, do always make a Solemn Supper: and think it as
much their Duty to eat well on that Evening, as on the Sabbath: that being, in
their Opinion, a Duty of the Afternoon; as strict Fasting, is the Duty of the
following Day.

So agreeable was the Supper of Passion Thursday, to the Supper of the Jews on
the Eve of their Expiation: and more agreeable, than to the last Supper of our
Blessed Lord; which, (if we go by Jewish Custom,) was held after Night; and, in
their reckoning therefore, rather on the Friday, than on the Thursday:
Agreeable I say as to the time; for as to the Freedom of Eating, I suppose it
differed much from that Jewish Meal.

But those Asiaticks Part 1. Chapter 1.. 3.
, who differed from the other Churches; both in their observing the 14th day
with the Jews, whatever day of the Week it should be; and also in breaking off
their Fast that day; might possibly in this point have as much followed the
Custom of the Jews for one Season, as they did their Calculation for the other.
For those of Asia seem to be of the Opinion, of which their Followers in
Epiphanius Part 1. Chapter 5.. 3. lit. m.
certainly were, and which many other Churches have also embraced, that our
Savior suffered on the 15th day of Nisan: neither is it likely, that they did
not Fast on that day; notwithstanding they are said to have broke it off
before: for such a neglect, no doubt, could not have been passed over
unobserved by their Adversaries, and would have drawn upon them the censure of
Victor, more than either of the other differences; and besides, we know, their
now mentioned Followers did actually so fast (i). I suppose therefore that
their Breaking off the Fast, was not a Determination of it, but an Interruption
by such a Supper; and that this their Meal was Formal, and Full; and in the
nature of a Feast, and so reputed: whereas the Supper, if any, of the rest of
the Christians was a sparing refreshment; and such as, in comparison with the
other Meal, did not seem to Discontinue the Abstinence of the Season; as since
it has not been thought to do.

To these lesser particulars, by which some indications of a Propitiation Day
may appear; I shall lastly add another Custom, to be read in the Ordo Romanus;
their custom of striking of Fire, and lighting up their Candles very solemnly,
in the Evening of the same Passion Thursday. For, whatever other reason it may
have had for its institution, it does also very well correspond with the Usage
of the Jews; who take, as we have observed, very particular care to have their
Candles ready against their Propitiation Eve, with which that night their
Synagogues are more than ordinarily enlightened.

And thus I have offered to show the Resemblance, our Passion-Day bears to the
Jew's Expiation Day; both in it self, and some Rites of the Day immediately
preceding it. I am now to go higher, and to consider at large the whole
Previous Season, called commonly Lent; how well it agrees with the like
Preparatory Season of the Jews, before their Day of Expiation.

CHAP. IV.
. I. A Penitential Season with the Jews, Preparatory to their Expiation Day:
some certain Days next before it, kept Uniformly by All; More also, generally,
though in various numbers; and Forty, by many; but the First of the Forty,
Universally observed.

. II. Forty Days, a solemn space of Penitence in the Jewish Discipline.

. III. The Christian Lent, compared with the Jewish.

. I. THAT the Jews had an Antepaschal Season, if not of a Fortnight, yet of a
Week; and particularly, that the Sabbath of that Week, was called the Great
Sabbath; we have observed before P. 1. Chapter 5.. 3.
: whence appeared a Conformity between them, and the Christians, (those
especially who reckoned by the days of the Month, and not of the Week) in point
of Holy Time; though the Devotions of the one were generally Festival, and of
the others altogether Penitential. But when we once suppose the Day of our
Lord's Passion, to have been the Day of Expiation; and come to consider the
Preparatory time, that ushered in this solemn Day: we then begin to find a
fuller, and a higher, correspondence; not only in a Weekly, but in a Forty
Season; and that likewise of Penitential Duty.

For first, the Jews prepare themselves for the Day of Propitiation, more
particularly the Week before it. They rise before Light, assist at Public
Prayers, confess their Sins thrice every day, Fast, and give Alms ^or this
whole Section, See Buxt. S. J. Cap. 26.
. And as the People fit themselves in a more especial manner, by the Devotions
of those seven days, for the solemn Act of Humiliation commanded them by Moses:
so, they tell us, the High Priest heretofore employed the same Week, in a
continual Exercise of his Office; that he might be the better able to discharge
the Difficult Duty of the Great Day Jom^ Cap. 1.
The Sabbath also of that Week, they distinguish by a peculiar Title; and call
it the Sabbath of Repentance.

Thus the Jews pass the seven preceding days: and so Leo de Modena C^r. des
Juif. P. 3. C. 6.
distinguishes them from the rest. For though all the ten of that seventh
Month, are called the Ten Days of Repentance, reckoning the Day of Expiation
for one: yet the two first are in some manner Festival, being the first of
their Political Year, and on them they abstain not from Dinner and Supper; for
which reason they may not be esteemed as Penitential, as the seven that follow.

These Ten Days are constantly so observed by all Jews: the last, the Tenth, by
Scriptural Precept; and the others, by Universal Custom. And further, to these
are added, out of the foregoing Month, ordinarily a Week at least, says Leo de
Modena. For even the German Jews begin their Humiliation as early; according to
a particular Rule they have Morin. de Poen. 10.34.3.
But other Nations generally take more time to that solemn Office: and
frequently Devout Persons begin from the First Day, even of this preceding
Month, to Fast, to make Prayers and Confessions, to repeat the Penitential
Psalms, and to Give Alms; continuing so to do the whole Forty days. However all
Jews begin their Penitential Devotion, the First day of that Month, the
Fortieth day before the Expiation; though they may afterward discontinue, in
the intermediate time. On that day also they begin to blow the Horn in their
Synagogues, which they do every day that Month: for an Alarm, they say; that
they may Repent, and be ready to meet the Judgment of God; who, according to
their Tradition, sits in Judgment the Ten days of the Next Month.

. II. I have mentioned their Opinion, of God's Judging the World, in the
Beginning of their Seventh Month: and it may seem thence, that their Custom of
giving notice by the sound of the Horn, may rather respect the Beginning of the
Month Tisri, than the Tenth Day of it; and be rather the Warning of Thirty,
than of Forty days. But this suspicion, if it should arise, will receive easy
satisfaction, from another concurrent Tradition of the Jews, universally
received by them; that Moses went up upon the Mount, the Last time, on the
First day of their Sixth Month, and returned again to them, with the second
Copy of the Law, on the Fortieth after, the Tenth of the Seventh, their
Expiation day Rab. Salom. in Locum Deuter. proxime ^itand.
. Now when he went up, he commanded a Horn, as they say, to be sounded thorough
the Camp; to give notice to the People, on what Errand he was going; that they
might not again commit the like Abominations; in memory of which, they now
still sound it: and we besides know, from better Authority Deuteronomy. 9.18.
that Moses spent these forty days, and forty nights, in Fasting, and
Supplication, for the Sins of the Children of Israel. So that we are rather to
think, that they have since in some measure followed his pious Example; and
that on the day of his Ascent, they begin to prepare for that of his Descent:
which in their Opinion is the tenth of Tisri; and on which they have been since
commanded, always to Afflict themselves before the Lord, at least, one Day and
Night.

The Forty days therefore here, are not to be looked upon as an accidental
number, and the bare Aggregate of Thirty, and Ten: but as they make up directly
a full Penitential Season. And indeed that Number, seems to have been very
anciently, appropriated to Penance, and Humiliation. For, not to reckon up the
Forty Days, by which God drowned the World Genesis 7.4.
; or the Forty Years, in which the Children of Israel did Penance in the
Wilderness Numb. 14.34.
; or the Forty Stripes Deuteronomy. 25.3.
, by which Malefactors were to be corrected; though these Instances may concur
to strengthen the Opinion: whoever considers, that Moses did, not once only,
fast this Number of Days Deuteronomy. 9.9, 18, 25.
; that Elias Fasted also in that Wilderness, by the same space King 1.19.8.
; that the Ninevites had precisely as many Days, allowed for their Repentance
Jon. 3.4.
; and that lastly our Blessed Savior, when he was pleased to Fast, observed
the same Length of time Matthew. 4.2.
; whoever, I say, considers these Facts, cannot but think, that this number of
Days was used by them all, as the common solemn number, belonging to
Extraordinary Humiliation; and that those were accustomed to afflict themselves
Forty days, who would deprecate any great and heavy judgment; though the
Scripture does not specify the number: as those, we know (p) who had a
Nazaritical Vow upon them, were used to observe thirty days, though the
Scripture had not neither determined that space.

And this is no more, than what St. Jerome, a Father much versed in the Jewish
Knowledge, has expressly averred, in his Comment on Jonas; where he says, that
Forty, is the number proper for Penitents, and Fasting, and Prayer, etc.; and
that for this reason, Moses fasted forty days; and so Elias; and likewise our
blessed Lord, etc. as may be seen at large, in the Passage already exscrib'd
above Part 1. Chapter 8.. 2.
. This is there positively, and in good earnest, said by St. Jerome; as the
Reason of those Examples: though Mr. Daille puts it off (r), as if the Good
Father had Played upon them; while H^ himself rather plays with the Father.

And, according to this, the Penance of Forty days is very frequent in the
Modern Penitentials of the Jews; as we have also seen before Rep. 1. Chapter 9.. 2.
; being there generally enjoined, upon any of the Greater Transgressions.

And, to go yet a little further in this matter; I cannot tell, whether the
Forty Days, which our Blessed Savior himself fasted in the Wilderness, were
not so passed by him in the nature of a Penitential Fast. For the Baptism of
John, is known to be a Baptism of Repentance Acts 19.4.
, preparing for the Messiah to come: and it may not be unreasonable to suppose,
that by it the Baptized were, upon the Confession of their Sins, admitted and
obliged to a course of Repentance for them; as now the Jews very carefully Wash
and Baptize themselves, on the Eve of their Propitiation Day. And thus our
Savior, as he fulfilled all Righteousness, in submitting to that Baptism; so
he might likewise, in complying with the Ceremony consequent to it, and
undertaking the Form of Humiliation for Sin: He entering upon a solemn Fast, as
the Rest were to do; though performing it in an extraordinary manner.

But, to return to my subject; whatever the fortune of this last Conjecture may
be; the Reader, I hope, will not be unwilling to allow, that Forty days might
have been always with the Jews a Penitential space of time; that it is so
looked upon by them now, and has been time out of Mind; and that the Forty
Days, ending in the Day of Expiation, are of the same nature.

. III. AND now I come to trace the Parallel: which yet the Reader must have
been drawing to himself before. For if we do but consider their Propitiation
Day, as the Great commanded Fast, determined by Moses; and the Seven, or nine
before it, as days sometime after generally agreed on, to prepare and
predispose for That; and also some other Days, afterward added to those, for
the same purpose, by the Devotion of succeeding times, but in a various number,
at the Discretion of several Persons and Places; and all these severally added
out of the Forty, which are to be reckoned backwards from the Radical Fast, and
which comprehended a solemn space of Penitential Time; This, I say, if we do
but recollect; we cannot at the same time but think, that we have here an exact
Pattern of our Christian Lent.

For when the Passion Day was once put for our Expiation Day; as indeed such it
was, and I presume in the beginning was so esteemed universally; some Few days
before it were then judged fit to be taken in for a Preparation Part 1. Chapter 3.
: and those were most naturally taken, which make up the Holy Week, and which
also in a little while absolutely Obtained -- Chapter 5.
. At the same time, to these Others were also added, but discretionally, as
several Persons thought fit, and several Churches directed; and so many added
by some, as to make up the number Forty: a number of Days, that was always
looked upon as the most solemn for a Fast; which those therefore reckoned, who
did not altogether keep them; and which gave Denomination consequently, even to
the Lesser Spaces, that were fasted within them -- Chapter 10.
.

That is, I suppose the Holy Week, as soon as it came to be observed
Universally, to have answered the Seven, or Ten Days of the Jews. For it was
not necessary, that the Days should be precisely of the same Number, though
they were of the same Nature: for that the Particular considerations of
Christianity might otherwise determine; as when they resolved to keep the
Passion Day, not upon the day of the Month, but of the Week. That Passion Week
therefore was kept with more than ordinary strictness of Penitential Devotion:
and if the Sunday of it was exempted from Fasting, it was because it had with
us the privilege of a Sabbath; for the Jews fast not their Sabbath of
Penitence. As there was too another apparent Conformity between the Jews, and
Eastern Christians, in the observation of the Holy Saturday: for whereas those
Christians never fasted on any Saturday or Sabbath, no more than the Jews; yet
on the Passion Saturday they always fasted; as the Jews do likewise on that
single Sabbath, upon which their Expiation Day may fall.

Now this Holy Week, which, with the following Festival one, was a time of
Vacation in Courts of Justice, by the Imperial Law Part 1. Chapter 5.. 3.
, under the Christian Emperors; and might have had the same immunity before,
by Private Custom of the Church; was in this too not unlike to that Penitential
time of the Jews, in which they Hear no Causes, nor administer any Oaths Buxt.
S. J. Cap. 25.
. And it is observable that when a Larger Lent came to be formally kept; as
that of Forty days was; at least, after the Council of Nice, either by the
Determination or Agreement of the Catholic Church: that then in a little time
the same Vacation was enlarged too; and it became unlawful to give any Oaths,
during the whole Quadragesimal Season; A Privilege that was after extended to
other times of Public Fasting, as also of Festivity.

Such is the Correspondence between the Antepaschal Fast of the Christians, and
the Ante Propitiation Fast of the Jews: and by that, if I mistake not, a good
and rational Account is given of the Practice of the Ancient Church: why they
first chose to keep such a Fast in general, and yet notwithstanding differed in
the Particular of its length; every Church, if not Person, being left to their
liberty therein: why one Portion of its time, the Passion Week, came in a
little while to be commonly observed, and reputed more Holy: as also, why all
the while there was such a Regard to Forty Days; as that some fasted them in
the Beginning; others afterward used their Name; and all in some time
endeavored to come as near the Number on either hand, as the repetition of
Weekly Periods would allow them.

(p) No one can be a Nazarite for less than Thirty Days: and when a Jew makes
the Vow simply, and expresses not the Time; Thirty days are understood. So
Maimon. Tractat. de Nazeriatu Cap. 3.. 1 --. And this was the Rule anciently:
as appears by Josephus, speaking of Bernice; [ De Bello Judaic. lib. 2. cap.
26.] (...).

(r) Daill. de Quadrag. lib. 3. cap. 16. Hi Sacri Patrum Lus^.

CHAP. V.
. I. This Origination of Lent, very Probable: and its Observation, a Testimony
to our Lord's Expiatory Sacrifice. However,

. II. The Consideration of that Expiatory Sacrifice, is a good reason for our
observing the Passion Day; and likewise

. III. Some Preparatory time before it.

. I. A Very great Resemblance, if I mistake not, has appeared between the
Christian Fast of Good Friday, and the Jewish of their Propitiation Day; in the
Ground, and Reason, of the Observation; in the Manner of the Abstinence; and in
the other Penitential Duties. And likewise no less Similitude has been
discovered between the respective Preparatory Seasons; in their Reason also,
and Manner, and in the space of Time.

And this so near a Resemblance might of it self have persuaded us, that it
could not have arisen by chance; and that if both the Pieces were not Copies,
the one was Drawn by the other: and it would have been as plain also in
ordinary presumption, if one Observation must have been the Copy; that the
Jewish was the Original. But all this grows more undeniable, when we come to
reflect, that our Church it self was derived from Theirs; and most of its
Offices, Discipline, and Ceremonies, borrowed thence. For why should not their
Expiation Day, be imitated by our Passion Day; when our Sundays, and
Wednesdays, and Fridays, and the old Stationary Days, our Easter, and our
Pentecost, are all after the like Example? And if we have followed the Jews, in
their Methods of Humiliation, and ways of Abstinence, and Penance; why not in
the Solemnity of a Season for such Duties?

And now if this Derivation I have proposed, might be taken for granted; I
might then observe against the Followers of Socinus, that an Anniversary, and
very Remarkable Testimony has been all along given, by the whole Church of God,
to the Expiatory Sacrifice of our Blessed Lord: as possibly the Discontinuance
of that ancient and laudable Practice, may have given too much way to the late
Revival, and Modern Increase, of that Great Error in Belief. But I will not
offer to found a Truth so Sacred, and which is otherwise so well grounded, upon
any Conjecture, however Probable it may appear.

. II. But, though I do not after all affirm positively, that the first
Christians had this Correspondence in their View, at the Institution of that
Holy Time; for I shall leave it as Probable only, and to the Judgment of the
Reader^ yet this, I think I may securely assert; that such a Respect, if they
had it* was very Just, and Proper; and that the same Consideration is a very
good reason for the Continuance of the Observation by all True and Orthodox
Christians.

For our Savior's Passion, the Expiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole
World, and of all Ages; was indeed once offered in the fullness of time and by
Him never to be Repeated; but eternally therefore to be Commemorated; by the
Believing Redeemed part of Mankind, in all their Generations to come. And if
the Resurrection of our Lord, was always thought fit to be recognis'd with a
Weekly, and therefore certainly with an Annual Solemnity: his Death also, as
surely as it was fixed in Time, and known to have come to pass the Friday
before; so as necessarily did it demand its Anniversary also, if not Weekly,
Memorial. For, though his Resurrection, indeed, was exceedingly Glorious and
Triumphant; yet his Passion was, no doubt, much the more Mighty, and more
Remarkable, Work: in as much, as the Death of the Eternal Son of God, was far
more Wondrous than his Rising from it; and it was yet more Wonderful, that he
should submit to the Ineffable Condescension for our sakes. For the cause of
his Passion; it was, our Savior tells us, that he came into the World John
18.37.
: as if all the Discourses, remembered in the Gospel, were but as Prefaces to
it; and all the Miracles of his Life; served only to signalise it. In was ^he
Basi^ and Ground work of the Church, on which our Salvation stands; a mighty
Foundation, and deeply laid.

Had we therefore no constant Need of this Expiation of our Lord, for our
repeated continual Transgressions; and had we been absolutely Innocent, ever
since our first Regeneration by Baptism: yet the Death, in which we were
Baptized, and by which we had been once Redeemed, could not have failed of a
pious and grateful Commemoration, once at least in the Year; and this Day, if
any other, would have had its place in the Christian Calendar.

In that Case, indeed, the Day would have been kept E^charistically, and as the
Sacrament of our Lord's Death is now to be Celebrated; in a sad and astonishing
Remembrance of his bitter Passion, intermixed though and tempered with Joy and
thanks for the Propitiation it made. But though our Intervening Offenses have
necessarily changed the manner of the Celebration, and turned our Joy into
Mourning; yet the Commemoration it self is far from being superseded by them,
and is rather enforced by greater reason; for we are now to be called to the
Remembrance of our Sins, as well as of our Lord's Passion.

And if we now countercharge the Supposition; and as before we regarded only
the Death of our Lord, abstractly from our Sins after Baptism; so here we
regard those only, and take no notice of any Anniversary of the Passion: yet
even the separate consideration of those Sins, might well have challenged to
them some One Day in the Year; wherein, after an extraordinary manner, we
should confess and lament their guilt, humbly beseech their Pardon, and entreat
the Benefit of that Expiation for them. For, though the Sacrifices for Sin have
ceased, by that one Propitiation of Our Savior; yet by deplorable Experience
we know, that our Sins cease not: they are generally as numerous and frequent,
as they were before the Covenant; and much more heinous, having now become
exceeding Sinful, as committed against greater Light, and higher Obligations.
If therefore we will understand our selves aright, Confession of Sins, and
Supplication for Forgiveness, continue to be the daily Duty of Christians, as
well as of Jews; make a no less Proper, and Necessary, Part of our ordinary
Public Devotions; and are still as fit to be the express Business, and
peculiar Office, of some Extraordinary Time. And if such an Appointment should
be made, by the Governors of the Church, that we should meet together for this
Purpose annually on a solemn Day, to take the more public Shame to our selves,
and to give the greater Glory to God; no Good Christian, sure, would refuse to
concur in so common, and necessary, a Work: but as he is ready to meet and
celebrate any other Fast, indicted on the occasion of Temporary Calamities; so
he would never decline to join in a Humiliation, assigned for much more weighty
spiritual reasons, for the saving of Immortal Souls, and averting of Eternal
Vengeance. He only that is without Sin, might seem unconcerned in such an
Order: but he then would not not be without Charity; and would be, in this
also; like our Savior, that he would condescend to humble himself for the Sins
of his Brethren.

And were there now such a General, and Solemn, Christian Fast to be appointed;
and were we to find it a proper Season: it could not undoubtedly be more
congruously placed in the whole Circle of the Year, than on the Day of our
Lord's Passion; were there any such day already observed. For, as all the
Refuge of our Supplications, must be in that Expiation; and by it only, God can
be entreated: so a lively Remembrance of that Death, would best give us the due
sense of the Guilt and Demerit of all Sins; but most bitterly reproach us with
our own, those Bold and Ungrateful Transgressions of a most Gracious Covenant,
that was sealed in such Precious Blood.

So fitly, and naturally, do both those Duties, of Celebrating the Memory of
our Lord's Death, and Mourning for our own Sins, concur on the same Day: the
Recognition of that our Expiation, and the Affliction of our Souls, being as
closely joined together by Eternal Reason; as ever they were by the Law of
Moses: the Duties also heightning each other; our Humiliation increased, by the
consideration of our Savior's; and the Mercy of his Expiation more sensibly
Adored, in the consideration of those Sins, whose Pardon we implore.

For that Double Reason, and with this Double Duty, has Good Friday been always
observed: Nor will the Devout Practice be blamed by any Regular Church, or
Christian. Regular, I say; not speaking of those, who will not keep the Day,
because the Papists do; for by the same reason they may refuse to keep Sunday:
or because it is enjoined, to the Prejudice, they say, of their Christian
Liberty; for so they may refuse to yield to an Argument, because it convinces
them.

. III. NOW these two Great Duties, when they are once fixed upon their proper
Day, which they will fully employ; will also require, that we should come in
some measure Fit for so weighty an Office; and should be Prepared, in a more
than Ordinary manner, for the Extraordinary Performance.

For, (according to the Supposition I now used) were we to celebrate the
Anniversary of our Lord's Passion only, and with no respect to our Sins since
our Baptism: yet we should come upon the solemn Day too Rashly, and Unworthily,
if we did not appoint some others to go before it, and usher it in; and should
seem to have too low thoughts of the sacred Mystery, if we did not take care to
rise up to the high Consideration, by the steps and ascents of some previous
Meditations. To the keeping of the Great Memorial rightly, such Preparatory
Remembrances would be wanting: that we may bring to it a fuller, and livelier
Perception of the Mercies of God in Christ; may the better comprehend, with all
Saints, the Dimensions of that surpassing, inestimable Love; may more
profoundly Adore, more gratefully Thank, and more zealously Devote our selves
and our Service; having beforehand endeavored to Confirm and Actuate our
Faith, to Raise and Quicken our Hope, and to Oblige and Inflame our Charity.

But such a Preparatory Season is still more needful for the other, the
Penitential, part: that we should before begin, to Recollect our past
Transgressions, to Reflect upon their Guilt, and to dispose our Minds to an
Abhorrence of them; that we should beseech God humbly for his Grace, to promote
this Holy Work; should review our Baptismal Covenant, bewail its Breaches, and
Repair them, by Confession to God, and Restitution to Men; Renewing our Vows,
and Mortifying our Lusts, and recovering and improving our virtuous Habits;
against that Friday, when we are solemnly to appear in the Divine Presence,
Contrite and truly sorrowful for our Sins, steadfastly resolved to Forsake them,
and, as much as in us lies, Qualified for their Pardon.

Thus would a Preparation have been Necessary, to either of those Two Offices
Apart: but much more justly will they expect it, when joined together; when we
are to be Provided, both fitly to Contemplate the Mystery, and effectually to
be Benefited by its Expiation.

For these Holy, and Important, purposes Lent is instituted: a solemn, and
large, space of time; to be Religiously employed by each private Christian, at
his Discretion; as the condition of his Soul shall require, and the
circumstances of his Worldly Affairs permit. Accordingly the First Day of it
gives Warning of the, then distant, Propitiation Day; and calls us early to our
Duty: actually entering us on the Godly Work, by Reflection on our Sins, and
Acknowledgment of Divine Justice; by Fasting, and Prayer: and engaging us to go
on, and to make use of the following Intermediate Season; for the perfecting
our Repentance; and for our Increase in the Knowledge of the Cross of Christ,
that Wisdom and Power of God. A notice very necessary, to those who want a
solemn Monitor; and which, by the Grace of God, may some time or other serve to
Awaken, and Reclaim them: but always Acceptable, and Welcome, to the Good
Christian; who, the more sensible he is of his own Offenses, and of the Mercy
of God in Christ, the more ready he will be to comply with the Advice, and the
more glad of the occasion. Some days therefore, of those many that follow, are
presumed to be set apart for such Preparatory Thoughts, and Actions; Wednesdays
we may suppose, and Fridays, those Weekly Passion Days: when also,
Opportunities of Public Devotion are every where presented; and, in our Great
City, Exhortations likewise and Instructions are administered, by the Wife and
Pious Order of the present Diocesan. But the last Week, is more particularly
Dedicated to this Office: and then the Church expects its devout Members daily
to appear before God together; to meditate on the Passion of their Lord, and
with Penitent Hearts, and earnest Resolutions of Dying likewise unto Sin, to
Attend thenceforth upon him to his Cross, and wait till his Resurrection: and
also Directs us, to pass the time, not in such Rigorous Austerities, as
unprofitably afflict the Body; but in such an Abstinence from divertive
Pleasures, and even from common Liberties of Food, and Pursuits of Business, as
may speak our Thoughts and Affections to be otherwise employed, and, freeing
them from Avocation and Distraction, may Cherish and Improve them.

By this Orderly and Natural Method, we are designed to be brought at last to
the Memorial of our Expiation, with such a sense of our Sins, and of the Mercy
of our Suffering Savior; as may procure from God the Pardon of what is Past,
and his Grace and Assistance for the Future: that the following, Years may have
reason to bless those Forty Days: and still successively advancing, may every
Lent find Fewer, and Lighter Sins to Confess; and be still more ready to Lament
them.

This is the Innocent, and Godly, Intention of that Time; which those of us who
Understand, will certainly Commend; and those who Commend, should take care to
Pursue.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
1. INstitutiones Grammaticae Anglo-Saxonica, and Meso-Gothicae. A^ctore
Georgio Hicksio, Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbytero, 4 to. 2. Christ. Wasit
Senarius, five de Legibus and. Litentia veterum Poetarum, 4 to. 3. Misna, Pars
Ordims primi Jeraim titul. Septem. Latin vertit and Commentario illustravit
Gulielmus Guist^^s: Accedit Mosis Maimonidis Praesatio, Edvardo Pocockio
Interpret, 4 to. 4. Joannis Antiocheni Cognomento Mallalae Hist. Chronica, e
M.S. Bibliothecae Bodleianae. Praemittitur Dissertatio de Authore. Per Humph.
Hodium, D. D. 8 vo. 5. Bishop Overal's Convocation-Book 1606. concerning the
Government of God's Catholic Church, and the Kingdoms of the whole World, 4
to. 6. True Conduct of Persons of Quality. Translated out of French. 8 vo. 7. A
Treatise relating to the Worship of God, divided into Six Sections: Concerning,
First, The Nature of Divine Worship. Secondly, The peculiar Object of Worship.
Thirdly, The true Worshippers of God. Fourthly, Assistance requisite to
Worship. Fifthly, The Place of Worship. Sixthly, The solemn. Time of Worship.
By John Templer, D. D. 8 vo. 8. A Defense of revealed Religion, in six Sermons,
upon Romans 1.16. wherein it is clearly and plainly shown, That no Man can
possibly have any real Ground or Reason to be ashamed of Christianity, By Henry
Halliwell, M.A. and Vicar of Cowfold in Sussex, 8 vo. 9. Miscellanies, in five
Essays; 1. Upon the Office of a Chaplain. 2. Upon, P^^de. 3. Upon Clothes. 4.
Upon Dealing. 5. Upon General Kindness.
The four last by way of Dialogue, By Jeremy Collier, A. M. 8 vo. 10. Mysteries
in Religion vindicated: Or, the Filiation, Duty and Satisfaction of our Savior
asserted, against So^ini^ns and others: With occasional Reflections on several
late Pamphlets. By Luke Milbourn, a Presbyter of the Church of England, 8 vo.
11. A Discourse concerning the Nature of Man, both in his natural and political
Capacity, both as he is a rational Creature and Member of a Civil Society: With
an Examination of some of Mr. Hobb's Opinions relating thereunto. By James
^owde, Rector of Settrington in Yorkshire, sometime Fellow of Clare-Hall in
Cambridge, 8 vo. 12. Apparatus ad Theologiam in us^^^ Acad^mi^^^^ 1. Generalis.
2. Specialie. Auctor^ Stephano Penton, Rectorie de Glympton, Oxen, 8 vo. 13.
Guardians Instruction. Or, the Gentleman's Romance. Written for the Diversion
and Service of the Centry. 120. 14. New Instructions to the Guardian: Showing
that the last Remedy to prevent the Ruin, advance the Interest, and recover
the Honor of this Nation, is, 1. A more serious and strict Education of the
Nobility and Gentry. 2. To breed up all their younger Sons to some Calling and
Employment. 3. More of them to Holy Orders: With a Method of Institution, from
three Years of Age to twenty-one. 120.
15. The Doctrine of the Glorious Trinity, not explained, but asserted by
several Texts, as they are expounded by the ancient Fathers and later Divines.
For the Satisfaction of such as doubt, the Conviction of such as deny, and the
Confirmation of such as believe this Mysterious Article of the Christian Faith.
By Francis Gregory, D. D. and Rector of Hambleden in the County of Bucks. 8 vo.
16. An Essay to revive the Necessity of the Ancient Charity and Piety. Wherein
God's Right in our Estates, and our Obligations to maintain his Service,
Religion, and Charity, is demonstrated and defended, against the Pretenses of
Covetousness and Appropriation. In Two Discourses. Written to a Person of
Honor and Virtue. By George Burghope. Rector of Little Gaddesdon, Com.
Hertford, and Chaplain to the Right Honorable John Earl of Bridg^ater. 17. An
Impartial Account of Mr. John Mason of Water-Stratford, and his Sentiments. By
H. Maurice, Rector of Tyrringham, in the County of Bucks. 18. Miscellanies upon
Moral Subjects. By Jer^^y Collter A. M. 19. The Principles of the Cyprian^ Age,
with regard to Episcopal Power and Jurisdiction; Asserted and recommended from
the Genuine Writings of St. Cyprian himself and his Contemporaries, by which it
is made evident, that the Vindicator of the Kirk of Scotland, is obliged by his
own Concessions to acknowledge that he and his Associates, are Schismatics. In
a Letter to a Friend. By J. S. 20. A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the
Reverend Dr. John Scot. By Z. Ish^^n, Rector of St. Botolph's Bishop's-Gate, 4
to. 21. Two Assize Sermons Preached at the Assizes at Winchester. By E. Young,
Fellow of Winchester College, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty. 22.
Piety's Address to the Magistrate. Delivered (...) a Sermon at the Assizes at
Winchester, July 11. 1695. By E. Young, Fellow of Winchester College, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty. 23. Six Sermons Preached before the late
incomparable Princess Queen Mary, at Whitehall, with several Additions and
large A^^otations to the Discourse of (...) by Faith: By George Bright, D. D.
(...) of St. As^ph, and Chaplain in Ordinary (...) his Majesty.
The end of (...)

