GOLDEN REMAINS of the ever Memorable Mr John Hales of Eton College and LONDON
Printed for R. Pawlet at the Bible in Chancery Lane

CONTROVERSERS of the Times Like Spirits in the Mineralls with all their labor
nothing is don Page: 34



Golden Remains, OF THE EVER MEMORABLE^ Mr. John Hales, OF EATON-COLLEDGE, etc.

The Second Impression.

With Additions from the Authors own Copy, Viz. SERMONS and MISCELLANIES.

ALSO LETTERS and EXPRESSES Concerning the Synod of Dort, (not before Printed,)
From an Authentic Hand.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for Robert Pawlet, at the Sign of the Bible
in Chancery Lane. 1673.

To the Reader.
IF that Reverend and Worthy Person, Mr. Farindon, had not died before the
Impression of this Book, you had received from that excellent hand an exact
account of the Author's Life, which he had begun, and resolved to perfect, and
prefix to this Edition. And as the loss of him is great in many particulars, so
especially in this; because there was none to whom Mr. Hales was so thoroughly
known as unto him, nor was there any so able to declare his worth, partly by
reason of his own abilities eminently known, principally because he learned his
Author from an intimate converse, who was a man never to be truly expressed
but by himself.

I am therefore to entreat thee, Reader, being deprived of the proper Plutarch,
not to expect any such thing as a Life from me, but to accept so much only as
is here intended. If Mr. Hales were unknown unto thee, be pleased to believe
what I know and affirm to be true of him; if he were known, then only be
satisfied, that what is published in his Name, did really proceed from him: and
more then this needs not to be spoken in reference to the advancement of this
Work; because he which knew or beleiveth what an excellent person Mr. Hales
was, and shall be also persuaded that he was the Author of this Book, cannot
choose but infinitely desire to see and read him in it.

In order to the first of these, I shall speak no more then my own long
experience, intimate acquaintance, and high veneration grounded upon both,
shall freely and sincerely prompt me to. Mr. John Hales, sometime Greek
Professor of the University of Oxford, long Fellow of Eaton College, and at
last also Prebendary of Windsore, was a man, I think, of as great a sharpness,
quickness, and subtilty of Wit, as ever this, or, perhaps, any Nation bred. His
industry did strive, if it were possible, to equal the largeness of his
capacity, whereby he became as great a Master of Polite, Various, and Universal
Learning, as ever yet conversed with Books. Proportionate to his Reading was
his Meditation, which furnished him with a Judgment beyond the vulgar reach of
man, built upon unordinary Notions, raised out of strange observations, and
comprehensive thoughts within himself. So that he really was a most prodigious
Example of an acute and peircing Wit, of a vast and illimited Knowledge, of a
severe and profound Judgment.

Although this may seem, as in it self it truly is, a grand Elogium; yet I
cannot esteem him less in any thing which belongs to a good man, then in those
Intellectual perfections: and had he never understood a Letter, he had other
Ornaments sufficient to indear him. For he was of a Nature (as we ordinarily
speak) so kind, so sweet, so courting all mankind, of an affability so prompt,
so ready to receive all conditions of men, that I conceive it near as easy a
task for any one to become so Knowing, as so Obligeing.

As a Christian, none more ever acquainted with the nature of the Gospel,
because none more studious of the knowledge of it, or more curious in the
search, which being strengthened by those great advantages before mentioned,
could not prove otherwise then highly effectual. He took indeed to himself a
liberty of judgeing, not of others, but for himself: and if ever any man might
be allowed in these matters to judge, it was he who had so long, so much, so
advantagiously considered, and which is more, never could be said to have had
the least worldly design in his determinations. He was not only most truly and
strictly Just in his Secular Transactions, most exemplary Meek and Humble
notwithstanding his perfections, but beyond all example Charitable, giving unto
all, preserving nothing but his Books, to continue his Learning and himself:
which when he had before digested, he was forced at last to feed upon, at the
same time the happiest and most unfortunate helluo of Books, the grand Example
of Learning, and of the envy and contempt which follows it.

This testimony may be truly given of his Person, and nothing in it liable to
the least exception, but this alone, that it comes far short of him. Which
intimation I conceive more necessary for such as knew him not, then all which
has been said.

In reference to the second part of my Design, I confess, while he lived none
was ever more solicited and urged to write, and thereby truly to teach the
world, then he; none ever so resolved (pardon the expression, so obstinate)
against it. His facile and courteous Nature learnt only to yield to that
solicitation. And therefore the World must be content to suffer the loss of
all his learning with the deprivation of himself: and yet he cannot be accused
for hiding of his Talent, being so communicative, that his Chamber was a
Church, and his Chain a Pulpit.

Only that there might be some taste continue of him, Here are some of his
Remains recollected; such as he could not but write, and such as when written
were out of his power to destroy. These consist of Sermons, Miscellanies, and
Letters, and each of them proceeded from him upon respective obligations: This
Impression is further augmented with the Addition of some Authentic Letters,
relating to the same Transaction. His Letters, though written by himself, yet
were wholly in the power of that Honorable Person to whom they were sent, and
by that means they were preserved. The Sermons preached on several eminent
occasions were snatched from him by his friends, and in their hands the Copies
were continued, or by transcription dispersed. Of all which now published for
His, there is need to say no more then this, That you may be confident they are
His.

This, Reader, is all the trouble thought fit to be given thee,

By JOHN PEARSON.

If any Person has any more of the Writings of this Author, he is desired
that he would be pleased to communicate them to the Bookseller, Robert Pawlet,
for whom this Book is Printed, upon Promise, or other Engagement, that he will
take care to Print them by themselves.

Mr. Garthwait,
I Am very glad you chose so judicious an Overseer of those SERMONS of Mr.
HALES, as Mr. Gunning, whom I always have had in high esteem, both for his
Learning and Piety; and I am of his Opinion, that they may pass for
extraordinary. That Sermon of, Wresting hard places of Scripture, may well
begin your Collection. The other on Romans xiv. 1. Him that is weak in the faith,
receive, etc. was preached at St. Paul's Cross, and I moved him to Print it.
That of, My Kingdom is not of this world, I once saw, and returned to Mr.
Hales, with four more, which I saw him put into Mr. Chillingworth's hands: That
of Dixi Custodiam, I have heard him often speak of it with a kind of
complacency. That of, He spoke a Parable, that men ought always to pray, I
believe is his, by the passage of the Sponge and the Knife, which I have heard
from his mouth. The Sermon which you had from D. Hammond upon, Son, remember,
etc. was preached at Eaton College. The other of Duels was either one or two,
and preached at the Hague to Sir D. Carlton and his company. That you call a
Letter on, I can do all things, is a Sermon. The Sermon of, Peter went out and
wept, etc. -- is under his own hand.

One caution I should put in, that you print nothing which is not written with
his own hand, or be very careful in compareing them; for not long since one
showed me a Sermon, which he said was his, which I am confident could not be;
for I saw nothing in it which was not Vulgaris moan tae, of a vulgar stamp,
common, and flat, and low. There be some Sermons, that I much doubt of, for
there is little of his spirit and Genius in them, and some that are imperfect:
That of Genes. xvii. 1. Walk before me, etc. is most imperfect, as appears by
the Autog^aphum which I saw at Eaton a fortnight since.

For his LETTERS, he had much trouble in that kind from several friends, and I
heard him speak of that friends Letter you mention, pleasantly, Mr. -- He sets
up Tops, and I must whip them for him. But I am very glad to hear you have
gained those Letters into your hands, written from the Synod of Dort. You may
please to take notice, that in his younger days he was a Calvinist, and even
then when he was employed at that Synod, and at the well pressing S Ioh. iij.
16. by Episcopius -- There, I bid John Calvin goodnight, as he has often told
me. I believe they will be as acceptable, or, in your phrase, as saleable, as
his Sermons. I would not have you to venture those Papers out of your hands to
me, for they may miscarry, and I fear it would be very difficult to find
another Copy. Peradventure I may shortly see you, at the Term I hope I shall;
and then I shall advise you further the best I can about those other Sermons
you have.

I see you will be troubled yet a while to put things in a right way. I have
drawn in my mind the Model of his Life, but I am like Mr. HALES in this, which
was one of his defects, not to pen any thing, till I must needs.

God prosper you in your work, and business you have in hand, that neither the
Church, nor the Author suffer.

September. 17. 16^7. Your assured Friend to his power, Anthony Farindon.

2 Pet. III. 16. Which the Unlearned and Unstable Wrest, as they do the other
Scriptures, unto their own Destruction.
THE love and favor which it pleased God to bear our Fathers before the Law,
so far prevailed with him, as that without any Books and Writings, by familiar
and friendly conversing with them, and communicating himself unto them, he made
them receive and understand his Laws: their inward conceits and Intellectuals
being after a wonderful manner, as it were, Figured and Charactered, In Psalm.
28.
(as St. Basil expresses it) by his Spirit, so that they could not but see and
consent unto, and confess the truth of them. Which way of manifesting his will,
unto many other gracious privileges which it had, above that which in after
ages came in place of it, had this added, that it brought with it unto the man,
to whom it was made, a preservation against all doubt and hesitancy, a full
assurance both who the Author was, and how far his intent and meaning reached.
We that are their offspring ought, as St. Chrysostom tell us, Hom. 1. in Mat.
so to have demeaned our selves, that it might have been with us as it was with
them, that we might have had no need of writing, no other teacher but the
Spirit, no other books but our hearts, no other means to have been taught the
things of God. Nisi inspirationis divinae internam suavioremque doctrinam, ubi
sine sonis sermonum etc five elementis literarum, to dulcius quo secretius
veritas loquitur; L. 3 Epist. 106.
as says Fulgentius. (...), says Isidorus Pelusiot^: for it is a greater
argument of our shame and imperfection, that the holy things are written in
books. For as God in anger tells the Jews, that he himself would not go before
them as hitherto he had done, to conduct them into the promised land, but would
leave his Angel with them as his deputy: so has he dealt with us, the unhappy
posterity, degenerated from the ancient purity of our forefathers. When himself
refused to speak unto our hearts, because of the hardness of them, he then
began to put his Laws in writing. Which thing for a long time amongst his own
people seems not to have brought with it any sensible inconvenience. For
amongst all those acts of the Jews, which God in his book has registered for
our instruction, there is not one concerning any pretended ambiguity or
obscurity of the Text^ and Letter of their Law, which might draw them into
faction and schism; the Devil belike having other sufficient advantages on
which he wrought. But ever since the Gospel was committed to writing, what age,
what monument of the Churches Acts is not full of debate and strife, concerning
the force and meaning of those writings, which the holy Ghost has left us to
be the law and rule of faith? St. Paul, one of the first Penmen of the holy
Ghost, who in Paradise heard words which it was not lawful for man to utter,
has left us words in writing, which it is not safe for any man to be too busy
to interpret. No sooner had he laid down his pen, almost ere the ink was dry,
were there found Syllabarum aucupes, such as St. Ambrose spoke of, qui nescire
aliquid erubescunt, and per occasionem obscuritatis tendunt laqueos
deceptionis, who thought there could be no greater disparagement unto them,
then to seem to be ignorant of any thing, and under pretense of interpreting
obscure places, laid gins to entrap the uncautelous: who taking advantage of
the obscurity of St. Paul's text, made the Letter of the Gospel of life and
peace, the most forcible instrument of mortal quarrel and contention. The
growth of which, the holy Ghost, by the ministry of St. Peter, has
endeavored to cut up in the bud, and to strangle in the womb, in this short
admonition which but now has sounded in your ears, Which the unlearned, etc.
In which words, for our more orderly proceeding, we will consider, First, the
sin it self that is here reprehended, Wresting of Scripture: where we will
briefly consider what it is, and what causes and motioners it finds in our
corrupt understandings. Secondly, the persons guilty of this offense,
discipher'd unto us in two Epithets, unlearned, unstable. Last of all, the
danger, in the last words, unto their own damnation. And first, of the sin it
self, together with some of the special causes of it.

(...), They wrest. They deal with Scripture as Chimicks deal with natural
bodies, torturing them to extract that out of them, which God and Nature never
put in them. Scripture is a rule which will not fit it self to the obliquity of
our conceits, but our perverse and crooked discourse, must fit it self to the
straightness of that rule. A learned Writer in the age of our fathers,
commenting upon Scripture, spoke most truly, when he said, Fa^er.
That his Comments gave no light unto the Text, the Text gave light unto his
Comments. Other Expositions may give rules and directions for understanding
their Authors, but Scripture gives rules to Exposition it self, and interprets
the Interpreter. Wherefore when we made in Scripture, non pro sententia
divinarum Scripturarum, as St. Austine speaks, sed pro nostra itae dimicantes
ut tam velimus Scripturarum esse quae nostra est: When we strive to give unto
it, and not to receive from it the sense: when we factiously contend to fasten
our conceits upon God; and, like the Harlot in the Book of Kings, take our dead
and putrified fancies, and lay them in the bosom of Scripture, as of a mother;
then are we guilty of this great sin of wresting of Scripture. The nature of
which will the better appear, if we consider a little, some of those motioners
which drive us upon it. One very potent and strong mean, is the exceeding
affection and love unto our own opinions and conceits. For grown we are unto
extremities on both hands: we cannot with patience either admit of other men's
opinions, or endure that our own should be withstood. As it was in the
Lacedaemonian army, almost all were Captains: so in these disputes, all will be
leaders: Schol. in Thucyd.
and we take our selves to be much discountenanced, if others think not as we
do. So that the complaint which one makes, concerning the dissension of
Physicians about the diseases of our bodies, is true likewise in these disputes
which concern the cure of our souls, Hinc illae circa aegros miserae
sententiarum concertationes, nullo idem censente, ne videatur accessio
alterius. Plin.
From hence have sprung those miserable contentions about the distemper of our
souls, singularity alone, and that we will not seem to stand as ciphers to make
up the sum of other men's opinions, being cause enough to make us disagree. A
fault anciently amongst the Christians so apparent, that it needed not an
Apostolical spirit to discover it, the very heathen themselves, to our shame
and confusion, have justly, judiciously, and sharply taxt us for it. Ammianus
Marcellinus passing his censure upon Constantius the Emperor: Christianam
religionem absolutam and simplicem (says he: and they are words very well
worth your marking) Christianam religionem absolutam and simplicem anili
superstitione confudit. In qua scrutanda perplexius quam componenda gratius,
excitavit dissidia plurima, quae progressa fusius aluit concertatione verborum,
dum ritum omnem ad suum trahere conatur arbitrium. The Christian Religion, a
Religion of great simplicity and perfection, he troubled with dotage and
superstition. For going about rather perplexedly to search the controversies,
then gravely to compose them, he raised great stirs, and by disputing spread
them far and wide, whilst he went about to make himselfsole Lord and Commander
of the whole Profession. Now (that it may appear wherefore I have noted this)
it is no hard thing for a man that has wit, and is strongly possessed of an
opinion, and resolute to maintain it, to find some places of Scripture, which
by good handling will be woed to cast a favorable countenance upon it.
Pythagoras's Scholars having been bred up in the doctrine of Numbers, when
afterward they diverted upon the studies of Nature, fancied unto themselves
somewhat in natural bodies like unto Numbers, and thereupon fell into a
conceit, that Numbers were the principles of them. So fares it with him, that
to the reading of Scripture comes fore-possest with some opinion. As Antipheron
Orietes in Aristotle thought, that every where he saw his own shape and picture
going before him: so in diverse parts of Scripture where these men walk, they
will easily persuade themselves, that they see the image of their own conceits.
It was, and is to this day, a fashion in the hotter Countries, at noon, when
the Sun is in his strength, to retire themselves to their closets or beds if
they were at home, to cool and shady places if they were abroad, to avoid the
inconvenience of the heat of it. To this the Spouse in the Canticles alluding,
calls after her Beloved as after a shepherd, Show me, O thou whom my soul
loves, where thou feedest thy flock where thou do rest at noon. The
Donatists conceiting unto themselves, that the Church was shut up in them
alone, being urged by the Fathers to show how the Church, being universal, came
on a sudden thus to be confined to Africa: they had presently their Scripture
for it, for so they found it written in the Canticles, Indica, quem diligit
anima mea, ubi pascas, ubi cubes in meridie. In which Text, meridies doubtless,
as they thought, was their Southern Country of Africa, where the Shepherd of
Israel was, and no where else, to feed his flocks. I may not trouble you with
instances in this kind: little observation is able to furnish the man of
slenderest reading with abundance. The Texts of Scripture which are especially
subject to this abuse, are those that are of ambiguous and doubtful meaning.
For as Thucydides observes of the fat and fertile places of Greece, that they
were evermore the occasions of stirs and seditions^ the neighboring Nations
every one striving to make it self Lord of them: so is it with these places
that are so fertile, as it were, of interpretation, and yield a multiplicity of
sense: they are the Palaestra for good wits to prove masteries in, where every
one desires to be Lord and Absolute.

A second thing occasioning us to transgress against Scripture, and the
discreet and sober handling of it, is our too quick and speedy entrance upon
the practice of interpreting it, in our young and green years, before that time
and experience have ripened us, and settled our conceits. For that which in all
other business, and here likewise does most especially commend us, is our
caute^ous and wary handling it. But this is a flower seldom seen in youths
garden. Aristotle differencing age and youth, makes it a property of youth,
(...), to suppose they know all things, and to be bold in affirming: and the
Heathen Rhetorician could tell us, that by this so speedy entering upon action,
and so timely venting our crude and unconcocted studies, quod est ubique
perniciosissimum, praevenit vires fiducia, a thing which in all cases is most
pernicious. Presumption is greater then strength, after the manner of those,
who are lately recovered out of some great sickness, in whom appetite is
stronger then digestion. These are they who take the greatest mysteries of
Christian Religion, to be the fittest arguments to spend themselves upon. So
E^kins in his Chry^opassus, a work of his so termed, wherein he discusses the
question of predestination, in the very entrance of his work tells us, That he
therefore enterpris'd to handle this argument, because forsooth he thought it
to be the fittest question in which he might Iuveniles calores exercere. The
ancient Masters of Fence amongst the Romans, were wont to set up a Post, and
cause their young Scholars to practice upon it, and to foin and fight with it,
as with an adversary. Instead of a Post, this young Fencer has set himself up
one of the deepest Mysteries of our profession, to practice his freshmanship
upon. Which quality, when once it finds Scripture for its object, how great
inconvenience it brings with it, needs no large discourse to prove. St. Jerome,
a man not too easily brought on to acknowledge the errors of his writings,
among those few things which he does retract, censures nothing so sharply as
the mistake of his youth in this kind: In adolescentia provocatus ardore and
studio Scripturarum, allegorice interpretatus sum Abdiam Prophetam, cujus
historiam nesciebam. He thought it one of the greatest sins of his youth, that
being carried away through an inconsiderate heat in his studies of Scripture,
he adventured to interpret Abdias the Prophet allegorically, when as yet he
knew not the Historical meaning. Old men, says our best natural Master, by
reason of the experience of their often mistakes, are hardly brought constantly
to affirm any thing, (...), they will always cautelously interline their
speeches with it may bees, and peradventures, and other such particles of
wariness and circumspection. This old men's modesty, of all other things, best
fits us in perusing those hard and obscure Texts of holy Scripture. Out of
which conceit it is, that we see St. Austine in his books, de Genesi ad
literam, to have written only by way of questions and interrogations, after
the manner of Aristotle in his Problemes, That he might not (for so he gives
his reason) by being ever positive prejudice others, and peradventure truer
interpretations: that every one might choose according to his liking, and ubi
quid intelligere non potest, Scripturae Dei det honorem, sibi timorem: and
where his understanding cannot attain unto the sense of it, let him give that
honor and reverence which is due unto the Scripture, and carry himself with
that aw and respect which befits him. Wherefore not without especial providence
it is, that the holy Ghost by St. Paul, giving precepts to Timothy, concerning
the quality of those who were to be admitted to the distributing of Gods holy
word, expressly prescribes against a young Scholar, lest, says he, he be puffed
up. For as it has been noted of men, who are lately grown rich, that they
differ from other rich men only in this, Arist. Rhet. 2.
(...), that commonly they have all the faults that rich men have, and many
more: so is it as true in those who have lately attained to some degree and
mediocrity of knowledge. Look what infirmities learned men have, the same have
they in greater degree, and many more besides. Wherefore if Hippocrates in his
Physician required these two things, (...), great industry, and long
experience; the one as tillage to sow the seed, the other as time and season of
the year to bring it to maturity: then certainly by so much the more are these
two required in the spiritual Physician, by how much he is the Physician to a
more excellent part.

I will add yet one third motioner to this abuse of Scriptures and that is,
The too great presumption upon the strength and subtilty of our own wits. That
which the Roman Priest sometimes told an over-pleasant and witty Vestal Virgin,
Coli Deos sancte magis quam site, has in this great work of exposition of
Scripture an especial place. The holy things of God must be handled sancta,
magis quam site; with fear and reverence, not with wit and dalliance. The
dangerous effects of this have appeared, not in the green tree only, in young
heads, but in men of constant age, and great place in the Church. For this was
that which undid Origin, a man of as great learning and industry, as ever the
Church had any; whilst in sublimity of his wit, in his Comments on Scripture,
conceiving Meteors and airy speculations, he brought forth those dangerous
errors, which drew upon his person the Churches heaviest censure, and upon
posterity the loss of his works. Subtle witted men in nothing so much miscarry
as in the too much pleasing themselves in the goodness of their own conceits;
where the like sometimes befalls them which befell Zeuxi^ the Painter, who
having to the life pictured an old woman so pleased himself with the conceit of
his work, that he died with laughing at it. Heliodor Bishop of Tricca in
Thessaly, the Author of the Ethiopick Story, a polite and elegant, I confess,
Nicephorus.
but a loose and wanton work, being summoned by a Provincial Synod, was told,
that which was true, That his work did rather endanger the manners, then profit
the wits of his Reader, as nourishing loose and wanton conceits in the heads of
youth: and having his choice given him, either to abolish his work, or to leave
his Bishopric; not willing to lose the reputation of wit, chose rather to
resign his place in the Church, and as I verily think, his part in heaven. And
not in private persons alone, but even in whole Nations, shall we find
remarkable examples of miscarriage in this kind. The Grecians, till barbarism
began to steal in upon them, were men of wondrous subtlety of wit, and
naturally over indulgent unto themselves in this quality. Those deep and subtle
Heresies concerning the Trinity, the Divinity of Christ, and of the holy Ghost,
the Union and Division of the Divine Substance and Persons, were all of them
begotten in the heat of their wits; yea, by the strength of them were they
conceived, and born, and brought to that growth, that if it had been possible
for the gates of hell to prevail against the Church, they would have prevailed
this way. Wherefore as God dealt with his own land, which being sometimes the
mirror of the world for fertility and abundance of all things, now lies
subject to many curses, and especially to that of barrenness: so at this day is
it with Greece, where sometimes was the flow and luxury of wit, now is there
nothing but extreme barbarism and stupidity. It is in this respect so
degenerated, that it scarcely for some hundred of years has brought forth a
child that carries any show of his fathers countenance: God as it were
purposely plaguing their miserable posterity with extreme want of that, the
abundance of which their fathers did so wantonly abuse. The reason of all, that
hitherto I have in this point delivered, is this, Sharpness of wit has
commonly with it two ill companions, Pride, and Levity. By the first it comes
to pass, that men know not how to yield to another man's reasonable positions;
by the second, they know not how to keep themselves constant to their own. It
was an excellent observation of the wise Grecian, Thucyd.
(...), etc. Sad and dull spirited men usually manage matters of State, better
then quick and nimble wits. For such for the most part have not learnt that
Lesson, the meaning of that voice that came to the Pythagorean, that was
desirous to remove the ashes of his dead friend out of his grave, (...), Things
lawfully settled and composed must not be moved. (...), says Julian, Men over
busy are by nature unfit to govern: for they move all things, and leave
nothing without question and innovation: (...), as Nazianzen speaks, Out of
desire to amend what is already well. And therefore we see that for the most
part such, if they be in place of Authority, by unseasonable and unnecessary
tampering, put all things into tumult and combustion. Not the Commonwealth
alone, but the Church likewise has received the like blow from these kind of
men. Nazianzen in his six and twentieth Oration, discoursing concerning the
disorders committed in the handling of Controversies, speaks it plainly, (...),
etc. Great wits, hot and fiery dispositions have raised these tumults. From
these it is (says he) that Christians are so divided. We are no longer a Tribe
and a Tribe, Israel and Judah, two parts of a small Nation: but we are divided
kindred against kindred, family against family, yea, a man against himself. But
I must hasten to my second general part, The persons here accounted guilty of
abuse of Scripture.

The persons are noted unto us in two Ephitets, Unlearned, Unstable. First,
Unlearned. It was St. Ierom's complaint, that practitioners of other Arts could
contain themselves within the bounds of their own Profession, Sola Scripturarum
ars est, quam sibi omnes passim vendicant; Hanc garrula anus, hanc delirus
senex, hanc sophista verbosus, hanc universi praesumunt, lacerant, docent
antequam discant: every one presumes much upon his skill, and therefore to be a
teacher of Scripture: (...) (so Nazianzen speaks) as if this great mystery of
Christianity were but some one of the common, base, inferior, and contemptible
trades. I speak not this as if I envied, that all, even the meanest of the
Lords people should prophecy: but only that all kind of men may know their
bounds, that no unlearned beast touch the hill, lest he be thrust through with
a dart. It is true which we have heard, Surgunt indocti and rapiunt Regnum
coelorum: they arise indeed, but it is as St. Paul speaks of the resurrection,
every man in his own order. Scripture is given to all, to learn: but to teach,
and to interpret, only to a few. This bold intrusion therefore of the
unlearned into the chair of the Teacher, is that which here with our blessed
Apostle I am to reprehend. Learning in general is nothing else, but the
competent skill of any man in whatsoever he professes. Usually we call by this
name only our polite and Academical Studies; but indeed it is common to every
one, that is well skilled, well practiced in his own mystery. The unlearned
therefore, whom here our Apostle rebukes, is not he that has not read a
multiplicity of Authors, or that is not as Moses was, skilful in all the
learning of the Egyptians: but he that taking upon him to divide the word of
God, is yet but raw and unexperienced; or if he have had experience, wants
judgment to make use of it. Scripture is never so unhappy, as when it falls
into these men's fingers. That which old Cato said of the Grecian Physicians,
Quandocunque ista gens literas suos dabit, omnia corrumpet, is most true of
these men; whenever they shall begin to tamper with Scripture, and vent in
writing their raw conceits, they will corrupt and defile all they touch Quid
enim molestiae tristitiaeque temerarii isti praesumptores, etc. De Genesi ad
literam.
as S. Austin complains: for what trouble and anguish these rash presumers
(says he) bring unto the discreeter sort of the brethren, cannot sufficiently
be expressed, when being convinced of their rotten and ungrounded opinions; for
the maintaining of that which with great levity and open falsehood they have
averred, they pretend the authority of these sacred Books, and repeat much of
them even by heart, as bearing witness to what they hold: whereas indeed they
do but pronounce the words; but understand not either what they speak, or of
what things they do affirm. Belike as he that bought Orpheus Harp, thought it
would of it self make admirable melody, how unskilfully soever he touched it:
so these men suppose, that Scripture will sound wonderful musically, if they do
but strike it, with how great infelicity or incongruity soever it be. The
reason of these men's offense against Scripture, is the same with the cause of
their miscarriage in civil actions: (...), says Thucydides, (...). Rude men,
men of little experience, are commonly most peremptory: but men experienced,
and such as have waded in Business, are slow of determination. Quintilian
making a question, why unlearned men seem many times to be more copious then
the learned (for commonly such men never want matter of discourse) answers,
That it is, because whatsoever conceit comes into their heads, without care or
choice they broach it, cum doctis sit electio and modus: whereas learned men
are choice in their invention, and lay by much of that which offers it self.
Wise hearted men, in whom the Lord has put wisdom and understanding, to know
how to work all manner of work for the service of the sanctuary, like Bezaleel
and Aholiab, refuse much of the stuff which is presented them. But this kind of
men whom here our Apostle notes, are naturally men of bold and daring spirits,
Quicquid dixerint hoc legem Dei putant, as St. Jerome speaks; whatsoever
conceit is begotten in their heads, the Spirit of God is presently the father
of it: Nec scire dignantur quid Prophet^, quid Apostoli senserint, sed ad suum
sensum incongrua aptant testimonia. But to leave these men, and to speak a
little more home unto mine own Auditory: Let us a little consider, not the
weakness of these men, but the greatness of the business, the manage of which
they undertake. So great a thing as the skill of Exposition of the Word and
Gospel is, so fraught with multiplicity of Authors, so full of variety of
opinion, must needs be confessed to be a matter of great learning, and that it
cannot, especially in our days, in short time, with a mediocrity of industry be
attained. For if in the Apostles times, when as yet much of Scripture was
scarcely written, when God wrought with men miraculously, to inform their
understanding, and supplied by revelation what man's industry could not yield;
if, I say, in these times St. Paul required diligent reading, and expressly
forbad greenness of Scholarship: much more then are these conditions required
in our times, wherein God does not supply by miracle our natural defects, and
yet the burden of our profession is infinitely increast. All that was necessary
in the Apostles times, is now necessary, and much more. For if we add unto the
growth of Christian learning, as it was in the Apostles times, but this one
circumstance (to say nothing of all the rest) which naturally befalls our
times, and could not be required at the hands of those who guided the first
ages of the Church: that is, the knowledge of the state and succession of
doctrine in the Church from time to time; a thing very necessary for the
determining the controversies of these our days: how great a portion of our
labor and industry would this alone require? Wherefore if Quintilian thought
it necessary to admonish young men, that they should not presume themselves
satis instructos, si quent ex iis, qui breves circumferuntur, artis libellum
edidicerint, and velut decretis technicorum tutos putent: if he thought fit
thus to do in an Art of so inferior and narrow a sphere, much more is it
behoveful, that young Students in so high, so spacious, so large a profession,
be advised not to think themselves sufficiently provided, upon their
acquaintance with some Notitia, or Systeme of some technical divine. Look upon
those sons of Anak, those Giant-like, voluminous Writers of Rome, in regard of
whom, our little Tractates, and pocket Volumes in this kind, what are they but
as Grasshoppers? I speak not this like some seditious or factious spy, to bring
weakness of hands, or melting of heart upon any of Gods people: but (...), to
stir up and kindle in you the spirit of industry, to enlarge your conceits, and
not to suffer your labors to be copst and mued up within the poverty of some
pretended method. I will speak as Joshua did to his people, Let us not fear the
people of that land, they are as meat unto us, their shadow is departed from
them: the Lord is with us, fear them not. Only let us not think, sedendo and
votis debellari posse, that the conquest will be gotten by sitting still and
wishing all were well: Livie.
or that the walls of these strong Cities will fall down, if we only walk
about them, and blow rams horns. But as the voice of Gods people sometime was,
by the sword of God and of Gideon, so that which here gives the victory must be
the grace of God and our industry. For by this circumcised, narrow, and
penurious form of study, we shall be no more able to keep pace with them, then
a child can with Hercules. But I forbear, and pass away unto the second
Epithet, by which these rackers of Scriptures are by St. Peter styled Unstable.

IN the learning which the world teaches, it were almost a miracle to find a
man constant to his own tenets. For not to doubt in things in which we are
conversant, is either by reason of exellency and serenity of understanding,
thoroughly apprehending the main principles on which all things are grounded,
together with the descrying of the several passages from them unto particular
conclusions, and the diverticles and blind bypath which Sophistry and deceit
are wont to tread; and such a man can nature never yield: or else it is through
a senseless stupidity, like unto that in the common sort of men, who conversing
among the creatures, and beholding the course of heaven, and the heavenly host,
yet never attend them, neither ever sinks it into their heads to marvel, or
question these things so full of doubt and difficulty. Even such a one is he,
that learns Theology in the School of Nature, if he seem to participate of any
setledness or composedness of conscience. Either it never comes into his head
to doubt of any of those things, with which the world has inured him: or if it
does, it is to no great purpose, he may smother and strangle, he can never
resolve his doubt. The reason of which is this, It lies not in the worlds power
to give in this case a text of sufficient authority to compose and fix the
thoughts of a soul, that is disposed to doubt. But this great inconvenience,
which held the world in uncertainty, by the providence of God is prevented in
the Church. For unto it is left a certain, undoubted, and sufficient authority,
able to exalt every valley, and lay low every hill, to smooth all rubs, and
make our way so open and passable, that little enquiry serves. So that as it
were a wonder in the School of Nature, to find one settled and resolved; so
might it seem a marvel that in the Church any man is unstable, unresolved. Yet
notwithstanding, even here is the unstable man found too, and to his charge the
Apostle lays this sin of Wresting of Scripture. For since that it is confessed at
all hands, that the sense and meaning of Scripture is the rule and ground of
our Christian tenets, whenever we alter them, we must needs give a new sense
unto the word of God. So that the man that is unstable in his Religion, can
never be free from violating of Scripture. The especial cause of this levity
and flitting disposition in the common and ordinary sort of men, is their
disability to discern of the strength of such reasons, as may be framed against
them. For which cause they usually start, and many times fall away, upon every
objection that is made. In which too sudden entertainment of objections, they
resemble the state of those, Seneca.
who are lately recovered out of some long sickness, qui and si reliquias
e^^ugerint, suspicionibus tamen inqui^tantur, and omnem calorem corporis sui
calumniantur: Who never more wrong themselves, then by suspecting every
alteration of their temper, and being affrighted at every little passion of
heat, as if it were an ague-fit. To bring these men therefore unto an (...),
and to purchase them a setledness of mind; that temper that St. Austine does
require in him that reads his Book, tales meorum Scriptorum velim judices, qui
responsionem non semper des^derent, quum his quae le guntur audierint aliquid
contradici: The same temper must be found in every Reader of Scripture, he must
not be at a stand, and require an answer to every objection that is made
against them. For as the Philosopher tells us, that mad and fantastical men,
are very apprehensive of all outward accidents, because their soul is inwardly
empty and unfurnished of any thing of worth which might hold the inward
attention of their minds: so when we are so easily dor'd and amated with every
Sophism, it is a certain argument of great defect of inward furniture and
worth, which should as it were balance the mind, and keep it upright against
all outward occurrents whatsoever. And be it that many times, the means to open
such doubts be not at hand, yet, as St. Austin sometime spoke unto his Scholar
Licentius, concerning such advice and counsel as he had given him, Nolo te
cansas rationesque rimari, quae etiamsi reddi possint, fidei tamen, qua mihi
credis non cas debeo: so much more must we thus resolve of those lessons which
God teaches us; the reasons and grounds of them, though they might be given,
yet it fits not that credit and trust which we owe him, once to search into, or
call in question. And so I come to the third general part, the Danger of
Wresting of Scripture, in the last words, unto their own Damnation.

The reward of every sin is Death. As the worm eats out the heart of the plant
that bred it, so whatsoever is done amiss naturally, works no other end but
destruction of him that does it. As this is true in general, so is it as true,
that when the Scripture does precisely note out unto us some sin, and threatens
Death unto it, it is commonly an argument, that there is more then ordinary,
that there is some especial sin, which shall draw with it some especial
punishment. This sin of Wresting of Scripture in the eye of some of the
Ancients, seemed so ugly, that they have ranged it in the same rank with the
sin against the holy Ghost. And therefore have they pronounced it a sin, (...),
greater then can be pardoned. Isidorus Pelusiota.
For the most part of others sins, are sins of infirmity or simplicity, but
this is a sin of wit and strength: the man that does it, does it with a high
hand; he knows, and sees, and resolves upon it. Again, Scripture is the voice
of God: and it is confessed by all, that the sense is Scripture, rather then the
words. It cannot therefore be avoided, but he that wilfully strives to fasten
some sense of his own upon it, other then the very nature of the place will
bear, must needs take upon him the Person of God, and become a new inditer of
Scripture: and all that applaud and give consent unto any such, in effect cry
the same that the people did to Herod, The voice of God, and not of man. If he
then that abases the Princes Coin deserves to die, what is his desert, that
instead of the tried silver of Gods word, stamps the Name and Character of God
upon Nehushtan, 2 Pet 1. 20.
upon base brazen stuff of his own? Thirdly, No Scripture is of private
interpretation, says the Apostle. There can therefore be but two certain and
infallible interpreters of Scripture; either it self, or the holy Ghost the
Author of it. It self does then expound it self, when the words and
circumstances do sound unto us the prime, and natural, and principal sense. But
when the place is obscure, involved, and intricate; or when there is contained
some secret and hidden mystery, beyond the prime sense; infallibly to show us
this, there can be no Interpreter but the holy Ghost that gave it. Besides
these two, all other Interpretation is private. Wherefore as the Lords of the
Philistines sometimes said of the kine that drew the Ark unto Bethshemesh, If
they go of themselves then is this from God; but if they go another way, then
is it not from God, it is some chance that has happened unto us: so may it be
said of all pretended sense of Scripture. If Scripture come unto it of it self,
then is it of God: but if it go another way, or if it be violently urged and
goaded on, then is it but a matter of chance, of man's wit and invention. As for
those mavelous discourses of some, framed upon presumption of the Spirits
help in private, in judging or interpreting of difficult places of Scripture, I
must needs confess, I have often wondered at the boldness of them. The Spirit is
a thing of dark and secret operation, the manner of it none can descry. As
underminers are never seen till they have wrought their purpose so the Spirit
is never perceived but by its effects. The effects of the Spirit (as far as
they concern knowledge and instruction) are not particular information for
resolution in any doubtful case (for this were plainly revelation) but, as the
Angel which was sent unto Cornelius informs him not, but sends him to Peter to
school: so the Spirit teaches not, but stirs up in us a desire to learn; desire
to learn makes us thirst after the means: and pious sedulity and carefulness
makes us watchful in the choice, and diligent in the use of our means. The
promise to the Apostles of the Spirit which should lead them into all truth,
was made good unto them by private and secret informing their understandings,
with the knowledge of high and heavenly mysteries, which as yet had never
entered into the conceit of any man. The same promise is made to us, but
fulfilled after another manner. For what was written by revelation in their
hearts, for our instruction have they written in their books. To us for
information, otherwise then out of these books, the Spirit speaks not. When the
Spirit regenerates a man, it infuses no knowledge of any point of faith, but
sends him to the Church, and to the Scriptures. When it stirs him up to newness
of life, it exhibits not unto him an inventory of his sins, as hitherto
unknown; but either supposes them known in the Law of Nature, of which no man
can be ignorant; or sends him to learn them from the mouth of his teachers.
More then this in the ordinary proceeding of the holy Spirit, in matter of
instruction, I yet could never descry. So that to speak of the help of the
Spirit in private, either in dijudicating, or in interpreting of Scripture, is
to speak they know not what. Which I do the rather note, first, because by
experience we have learnt, how apt men are to call their private conceits the
Spirit: and again, because it is the especial error, with which S. Austine
long ago charged this kind of men: Tanto sunt ad seditionem faciliores, quanto
sibi videntur spiritu excellere: by so much the more prone are they to kindle
Schism and contention in the Church, by how much they seem to themselves to be
endued with a more eminent measure of Spirit then their brethren; whilst (...),
(as St. Basil speaks) under pretense of interpretation they violently broach
their own conceits. Great then is the danger in which they wade, which take
upon them this business of interpretation. Temevitas asserendae incertae
dubiaeque opinionis, says St. Austine, difficile sacrilegii crimen evitat: the
rashness of those that aver uncertain and doubtful interpretations, for
Catholic and Absolute, can hardly escape the sin of sacrilege.

But whereas our Apostle says, their own destruction, is the destruction only
their own? this were well if it stretched no farther. The ancients much
complain of this offense, as an hinderer of the salvation of others. There were
in the days of Isidorus Pelusiota some that gave out, that all in the Old
Testament was spoken of Christ: belike out of extreme opposition to the
Manichees, who on the other side taught, that no Text in the Old Testament did
foretell of Christ. That Father therefore dealing with some of that opinion,
tells them how great the danger of their tenet is: (...); for if, says he, we
strive with violence to draw and apply those Texts to Christ, which apparently
pertain not to him, we shall gain nothing but this, to make all the places that
are spoken of him suspected; and so discredit the strength of other
testimonies, which the Church usually urges for the refutation of the Jews. For
in these cases, a wrested proof is like unto a suborned witness; it never does
help so much whilst it is presumed to be strong, as it does hurt when it is
discovered to be weak. St. Austin in his Books, de Genesi ad literam, sharply
reproves some Christians, who out of some places of Scripture misunderstood,
framed unto themselves a kind of knowledge in Astronomy and Physiology, quite
contrary unto some part of heathen Learning in this kind, which were true and
evident unto sense. A man would think that this were but a small error, and
yet he doubts not to call it, turpe nimis, and perniciosum and maxim cavendum.
His reason warrants the roundness of his reproof; for he charges such to have
been a scandal unto the Word, and hinderers of the conversion of some heathen
men that were Scholars: For how, says he, shall they believe our books of
Scripture, persuading the resurrection of the dead, the kingdom of heaven, and
the rest of the mysteries of our profession, if they find them faulty in these
things, of which themselves have undeniable demonstration? Yea, though the
cause we maintain be never so good, yet the issue of diseased and crazie proofs
brought to maintain it, must needs be the same. For unto all causes, be they
never so good, weakness of proof, when it is discovered, brings great
prejudice, but unto the cause of Religion most of all. St. Austine observed,
that there were some, qui cum de aliquibus, qui sanctum nomen profitentur
aliquid criminis vel falsi sonuerit, vel very patuerit, instant, satagunt,
ambiunt ut de omnibus hoc credatur. It fares no otherwise with Religion it
self, then it does with the professors of it. Diverse malignants there are, who
lie in wait to epsy where our reasons on which we build are weak, and having
deprehended it in some, will earnestly solicit the world to believe that all
are so, if means were made to bring it to light: (...), as Nazianzen speaks:
using for advantage against us no strength of their own, but the vice and
imbecility of our defense. The book of the revelation is a book full of wonder
and mystery: the Ancients seem to have made a Religion to meddle with it, and
thought it much better to admire with silence, then to adventure to expound it:
and therefore amongst their labors in exposition of Scripture, scarcely is
there any one found that has touched it. But our Age has taken better heart.
And scarcely any one is there, who has entertained a good conceit of his own
abilities, but he has taken that Book as a fit argument to spend his pains on.
That the Church of Rome has great cause to suspect her self, to fear lest she
have a great part in the Prophesies in that book, I think the most partial will
not deny. Yet unto the Expositours of it, I will give this advice, that they
look that that befall not them, which Thuoidides observes to befall the common
sort of men: who though they have good means to acquit themselves like men, yet
when they think their best hopes fail them, and begin to despair of their
strength, comfort themselves with interpretations of certain dark and obscure
prophesies. Many plain texts of Scripture are very pregnant, and of sufficient
strength to overthrow the points maintained by that Church againts us. If we
leave these, and ground our selves upon our private expositions of this Book,
we shall justly seem in the poverty of better proofs, to rest our selves upon
those prophesies; which, though in themselves they are most certain, yet our
expositions of them must (except God give yet further light unto his Church)
necessarily be mixed with much incertainty, as being at the best but unprobable
conjectures of our own. Scarcely can there be found a thing more harmful to
Religion, then to vent thus our own conceits, and obtrude them upon the world
for necessary and absolute. The Physicians skill, as I conceive of it, stands
as much in opinion, as any that I know whatsoever; yet their greatest Master
Hippocrates tells them directly, (...), etc. Then the Physicians presumption
upon opinion, there is not one thing that brings either more blame to himself,
or danger to his patient. If it be thus in an art, which opinion taken away,
must needs fall; how little room then must opinion have in that knowledge,
where nothing can have place but what is of eternal truth, where if once admit
of opinion, all is overthrown? But I conclude this point, adding only this
general admonition, That we be not too peremptory in our positions, where
express text of Scripture fails us; that we lay not our own collections and
conclusions with too much precipitancy. For experience has showed us, that the
error and weakness of them being afterward discovered, brings great
disadvantage to Christianity, and trouble to the Church. The Eastern Church
before St. Basils time, had entertained generally a conceit, that those Greek
particles, (...), and the rest, were so divided among the Trinity, that each of
the Persons had his Particle, which was no way appliable to the rest. St. Basil
having discovered this to be but a niceness and needless curiosity, beginning
to teach so, raised in the Church such a tumult, that he brought upon himself a
great labor of writing many tracts in apology for himself, with much ado, ere
matters could again be settled. The fault of this was not in Basil, who
religiously fearing what by way of consequence might ensue upon an error,
taught a truth; but in the Church, who formerly had with too much facility
admitted a conclusion so justly subject to exception. And let this suffice for
our third part.

Now because it is apparent, that the end of this our Apostles admonition is to
give the Church a Caveat how she behave her self in handling of Scripture, give
me leave a little, in stead of the use of such doctrines as I have formerly
laid down, to show you, as far as my conceit can stretch, what course any man
may take to save himself from offering violence unto Scripture, and reasonably
settle himself, any pretended obscurity of the text whatsoever notwithstanding.
For which purpose, the diligent observing of two rules shall be thoroughly
available: First, The litteral, plain, and uncontroversable meaning of
Scripture, without any addition or supply by way of interpretation, is that
alone which for ground of faith we are necessarily bound to accept, except it
be there where the holy Ghost himself treads us out another way. I take not
this to be any peculiar conceit of mine, but that unto which our Church stands
necessarily bound. When we receded from the Church of Rome, one motive was,
because she added unto Scripture her glosses as Canonical, to supply what the
plain text of Scripture could not yield. If in place of hers, we set up our own
glosses, thus to do, were nothing else but to pull down Baal, and set up an
ephod; to run round, and meet the Church of Rome again in the same point, in
which at first we left her. But the plain, evident, and demonstrative ground of
this rule, is this: That authority which does warrant our faith unto us, must
every way be free from all possibility of error. For let us but once admit of
this, that there is any possibility that any one point of faith should not be
true; if it be once granted that I may be deceived in what I have believed, how
can I be assured that in the end I shall not be deceived? If the Author of
faith may alter, or if the evidence and assurance that he has left us be not
pregnant, and impossible to be defeated, there is necessarily opened an inlet
to doubtfulness and wavering, which the nature of faith excludes. That faith
therefore may stand unshaken, two things are of necessity to concur. First,
That the Author of it be such a one, as can by no means be deceived, and this
can be none but God. Secondly, That the words and text of this Author upon whom
we ground, must admit of no ambiguity, no uncertainty of interpretation. If the
trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall provide himself to battle. If the
words admit a double sense, and I follow one, who can assure me that that which
I follow is the truth? For infallibility either in judgment, or interpretation,
or whatsoever, is annexed neither to the Sea of any Bishop, nor to the Fathers,
nor to the Councels, nor to the Church, nor to any created power whatsoever.
This doctrine of the literal sense was never grievous or prejudicial to any,
but only to those who were inwardly conscious, that their positions were not
sufficiently grounded. When Cardinal Cajetan, in the days of our grandfathers,
had forsaken that vein of postilling and allegorising on Scripture, which for a
long time had prevailed in the Church, and betaken himself unto the literal
sense; it was a thing so distasteful unto the Church of Rome, that he was
forced to find out many shifts, and make many apologies for himself. The truth
is, (as it will appear to him that reads his writings) this sticking close to
the literal sense was that alone, which made him to shake many of those tenets,
upon which the Church of Rome and the Reformed Churches differ. But when the
importunity of the Reformers, and the great credit of Calvin's writings in that
kind, had forced the Divines of Rome to level their interpretations by the same
line: when they saw that no pains, no subtlety of wit was strong enough to
defeat the literal evidence of Scripture, it drove them on those desperate
shelves, on which at this day they stick, to call in question, as far as they
durst, the credit of the Hebrew text, and countenance against it a corrupt
translation; to add Traditions unto Scripture, and to make the Churches
interpretation, so pretended, to be above exception. As for that restriction
which is usually added to this Rule, that the literal sense is to be taken, if
no absurdity follow, though I acknowledge it to be sound and good, yet my
advise is that we entertain it warily. St. Basil thought the precept of Christ
to the rich man in the Gospel, Go sell all that thou have, and give unto the
poor, to be spoken as a command universally and eternally binding all
Christians without exception. And making this objection, how possibly such a
life could be amongst Christians, since where all are sellers, none could be
buyers: (...) (says he) (...), etc. Ask not me the sense of my Lords commands.
He that gave the Law, can provide to give it possibility of being kept, without
any absurdity at all. Which speech howsoever we may suppose the occasion of it
to be mistaken, yet it is of excellent use to repress our boldness, whereby
many times, under pretense of some inconvenience, we hinder Scripture from that
latitude of sense, of which it is naturally capable. You know the story of the
Roman Captain in Gellius, and what he told the Ship-wright, that chose rather
to interpret, then to execute his Lords command; Corrumpi atque dissolvi omne
imperantis officium, si quis ad id quod facere jussus est non obsequio debito,
sed consilio non desiderato respondeat. It will certainly in the end prove
safer for us to entertain Gods commandments, obsequio debito, then to interpret
them acumine non desiderato. Those other ways of interpretation, whether it be
by allegorising, or allusion, or whatsoever, the best that can be said of them,
is that which S. Basil has pronounced, (...): We acount of them as of trim
elegant and witty speeches, but we refuse to accept of them, as of undoubted
truths. And though of some part of these, that may be said which one said of
his own work, Aus^nius in monosyl.
Quod ad usum lusi, quod ad molestiam laboravi, in respect of any profit comes
by them, they are but sport, but in respect of the pains taken in making of
them, they are labor and travel: yet much of them is of excellent use in
private, either to raise our affections, or to spend our meditations, or (so it
be with modesty) to practice our gifts of wit to the honor of him that gave
them. For if we absolutely condemn these interpretations, then must we condemn
a great part of antiquity, who are very much conversant in this kind of
interpreting. For the most partial for antiquity cannot choose but see and
confess thus much, that for the literal sense the Interpreters of our own
times, because of their skill in the Original Languages, their care of pressing
the circumstances and coherence of the Text; of comparing like places of
Scripture with like, have generally surpast the best of the Ancients. Which I
speak not to discountenance Antiquity, but that all ages, all persons may have
their due. And let this suffice for our first rule.

The Jewish Rabbis on their Comments on Scripture, so often as they met with
hard and intricate texts, out of which they could not wrest themselves, were
wont to shut up their discourse with this, Elias cum venerit, solvet dubia,
Elias shall answer this doubt when he comes. Not the Jews only, but the
learned Christians of all ages have found many things in Scripture, which yet
expect Elias. For besides those texts of Scriptures, which by reason of the
hidden treasures of wisdom, and depth of sense and mystery laid up in them, are
not yet conceived, there are in Scripture of things that are (...) seemingly
confused, (...), carrying semblance of contrariety, Anachronisms,
Metachronisms, and the like, which brings infinite obscurity to the text: there
are, I say, in Scripture more of them, then in any writing that I know, Secular
or Divine. If we mean not to settle our selves till all these things are
answered, let us us take heed lest the like be said to us, which St. Austin
said to some of the Gentiles, who refused to believe till all objections were
satisfied, sunt enim innumerabiles quae non sunt finiendae ante sidem, ne vita
finiatur sine fide. The Arcopagites in Athens, when they were troubled in a
doubtful case, in which they durst not proceed to sentence, were wont causam in
diem longissimam differ, to put it off till a day of hearing for some hundred
years after, avoiding by this means the further being importuned with the Suit.
To quiet ourselves in these doubts, it will be our best way, in diem
longissimam differ, to put them to some day of hearing afar off, even till
that great day, till Christ our true Elias shall come, who at his coming shall
answer all our doubts, and settle all our waverings. Mean while, till our Elias
come, let us make use of this second rule, In places of ambiguous and doubtful,
or dark and intricate meaning, it is sufficient if we religiously admire and
acknowledge and confess: using that moderation of S. Austin, Neutram partem
affirmantes sive destruentes, sed tantuminodo ab audaci affirmandi
praesumptione revocantes. Qui credit, says one, satis est illi quod Christus
intelligat. To understand belongs to Christ, the Author of our Faith to us is
sufficient the glory of Beleiving. Wherefore we are to advise, not so much how
to attain unto the understanding of the mysteries of Scripture, as how it best
fits us to carry our selves, when either the difficulty of the text, or variety
of opinions shall distract us. In the sixth General Council, Honorius Bishop of
Rome is condemned for a Monothelite. Two Epistles there are of his, which are
produced to give evidence against him. For the first, I have nothing to say.
For the second, (I speak with submission to better judgments) notwithstanding
the sharp proceeding of the Council against him, I verily suppose that he gives
unto the Church the best counsel, that ever yet was given for the settling of
doubts, and final decision of controversy. For that which he teaches in that
Epistle, at least in those parts of it, which there are brought, sounds to no
other purpose but this, That whereas there was lately raised in the Church a
controversy concerning the Duality or unity of wills in Christ; since that
hitherto nothing in the Church concerning either part has been expressly
taught, his counsel was, That men would rather cease to doubt, then to be
curious to search for any solution of their doubtings; and so abstain from
teaching doctrinally either part, and content themselves with that express
measure of faith, with which the Church has hitherto rest satisfied. This, to
my conceit is the drift of his Epistle. How this advise of the Bishops was
appliable, or how it fitted the question then in controversy; or what reason
moved the Council to think, that it was absolutely necessary for them, to give
an express decision, and determine for the one part, belongs not to me to
discuss. But I verily persuade my self, that if it had pleased those, who in
all ages have been set to govern the Church of God, betimes to have made use of
this advice, to have taught men rather not to have doubted, then to have
expected still solution of their doubtings: to have stopped and damm'd up the
originals and springs of controversies, rather then by determining for the one
part, to give them as it were a pipe and conduit to conveigh them to posterity,
I persuade my self, the Church had not suffered that inundation of opinions,
with which at this day it is overrun. Is it not St. Paul's own practice, when
having brought in a question concerning Gods justice in Predestination, he
gives no other answer but this, O man, who art thou that disputest with God? Is
it not his plain purpose to advise the disputer, rather not to make the
question, then to require a determination of it at his hands? How many of the
questions even of our own times, even of those that are at home amongst us,
might by this way long since have been determined? I have, I confess, the same
disease that my first Parents in Paradise had, a desire to know more then I
need. But I always thought it a very judicious commendation, which is given to
Julius Agricola, that he knew how to bridle his desire in pursuit of knowledge,
retinuitque, quod est dif^icillimum, ex scientia modum. Mallem quidem (as St.
Austine says) ^orum quae a me quaesivisti habere scientiam, quam ignorantiam;
sed quia id nondum potui, magis eligo cautam ignorantiam confiteri, quam falsam
scientiam profiteri. It shall well befit our Christian modesty to (...) till
the (...)^ and remainder of our knowledge go be supplied by Christ: In quem si
^redinius, ut si aliqua nobis non aperiat ^tia^^ puisantibus, nullo modo
adversus eum murmurare debeamus. To conclude, St. Austine in his eightieth
Epistle, discoursing of the speedy or slow coming of our Savior to judgment,
to show that it is the safest way to teach neither, but to suspend our belief,
and confess our ignorance, ranging himself with men of this temper, Obsecro te
(says he to Hesychius, to whom he writes that Epistle) obsecro te ut me talem
non spernas. So give me leave to commence the same suit to you: Obsecro vos ut
me talem non spernatis. Let me request you bear with me, if I be such a one as
I have St. Austine for example. For it is not depth of knowledge, nor knowledge
of antiquity, or sharpness of wit, nor authority of Councels, nor the name of
the Church, can settle the restless conceits, that possess the minds of many
doubtful Christians: only to ground for faith on the plain uncontroversable
Text of Scripture, and for the rest, to expect and pray for the coming of our
Elias, this shall compose our waverings, and give final rest unto our souls.

Thus instead of a discourse which was due unto this time, concerning the
glorious Resurrection of our blessed Savior, and the benefits that come unto
us by it, I have diverted my self upon another Theme, more necessary, as I
thought, for this Auditory, though less agreeable with this solemnity. Those
who have gone before me in that argument have made so copious a harvest, that
the issue of my gatherings must needs have been but small, except I had with
Ruth gleaned out of their sheaves, or strained my industry which is but small,
and my wits which are none, to have held your attentiveness with new and quaint
conceits. In the mean time, whether it be I or they, or whatsoever has been
delivered out of this place, God grant that it may be for his honor, and for
the Churches good, to whom both it and we are dedicate. To God the Father, etc.

Romans XIV. I. Him that is weak in the faith receive, but not to doubtful
disputations.
MIght it so have pleased God, that I had in my power the choice of my ways,
and the free management of my own actions, I had not this day been seen, ( for
so I think I may better speak: seen may I be of many, but to be heard with any
latitude and compass, my natural imperfection does quite cut off:) I had not I
say in St. Paul's Cross.
this place this day been seen; Ambition of great and famous Auditories I leave
to those whose better gifts and inward endowments are Admonitioners unto them
of the great good they can do, or otherwise thirst after popular applause. Unto
my self have I evermore applied that of St. Hierom, Mihi sufficit cum auditore
and Lectore pauperculo in Angulo Monasterii susurrare, A small, a private, a
retired Auditory, better accords both with my will and my abilities. Those unto
whose discretion the furniture of this place is committed, ought especially to
be careful, since you come hither to hear, to provide you those who can be
heard; for the neglect of this one circumstance, how poor soever it may seem to
be, is no less then to offend against that Faith which comes by hearing; and
to frustrate as much as in them is, that end for which alone these meetings
were ordained. We that come to this place, as God came to Elias in the mount,
in a soft and still voice, to those which are near us, are that which the grace
of God does make us, unto the rest we are but Statues: such therefore as my
Imperfection in this kind shall offend, such as this day are my spectatours
only, know, I trust whom they are to blame. At my hands is only required
truth in sincerely discharging a common care, at others, care of profitably
delivering a common truth. As for me, the end of whose coming is to exhort you
to a gracious intepreting of each others imperfections, having first premised
this Apology for my self, it is now time to descend to the exposition of that
Scripture, which I have proposed, I^firmum in Fide recipite, etc. Him that is
weak in the Faith receive, etc.

GOodness, of all the attributes, by which a man may be styled, has chief
place and sovereignty; Goodness, I say, not that Metaphysical conceit which we
dispute of in our Schools, and is nothing else but that perfection which is
inwardly due unto the Being of every creature, and without which, either it is
not at all, or but in part, that whose name it bears: but that which the common
sort of men do usually understand, when they call a man Good; by which is meant
nothing else, but (...), a soft, and sweet, and flexible disposition. For all
other Excellencies and Eminent qualities which raise in the minds of men some
opinion and conceit of us, may occasion peradventure some strong respect in
another kind; but impression of love and true respect, nothing can give but
this: Greatness of place and authority may make us feared, Depth of Learning
admired, Abundance of Wealth may make men outwardly obsequious unto us; but
that which makes one man a God unto another, that which does tie the Souls of
men unto us, that which like the Eye of the Bridegroom, in the Book of
Canticles, ravishes the heart of him that looks upon it, is Goodness: Without
this, Mankind were but (as one speaks) Commissiones merae, and arena sine
calce, stones heapt together without mortar, or pieces of boards without any
cement to combine and tie them together: For this it has singular in it, above
all other properties, of which our nature is capable, that it is the most
available to Humane Society, incorporating, and as it were kneading us together
by softness of disposition, by being compassionate, by gladly communicating to
the necessity of others, by transfusing our selves into others, and receiving
from others into our selves. All other Qualities, how excellent soever they
are, seem to be somewhat of a melancholic and solitary disposition; They shine
then brightest, when they are in some one alone, or attained unto by few; once
make them common, and they lose their luster: But Goodness is more sociable;
and rejoices in equalling others unto it self, and loses its nature, when it
ceases to be communicable. The Heathen speaking of God, usually style him by
two Attributes, Optimus and Maximus, the one importing his Goodness, the other
his Power. In the first place they called him Optimus a name signifying his
Goodness, giving the precedence unto it; and in the second place Maximus, a
name betokening his Power: yea, Goodness is that, wherein God himself does most
delight himself; and therefore all the Acts of our Savior, while he conversed
on earth among men, were purely the issues of his tenderness, without any
aspersion of severity, two only excepted: I mean his chasing the Prophaners
out of the Temple, and the Curse laid upon the innocent Fig Tree: and yet in
both these, mercy rejoiced against judgment, and his goodness had the
pre-eminence. For the first brought some smart with it indeed, but no harm at
all, as Fathers use to chastise their Children by means that fear them, more
then hurt them. The second of it self was nothing, as being practiced on a
creature dull and senseless of all smart and punishment; but was merely
exemplary for us, sterilitas nostra in ficu vapulat. Christ whips our
fruitlesness in the innocent Fig Tree; like as the manner was among the
Persians, when their great men had offended, to take their Garments and beat
them. Now that gracious way of goodness, which it pleased our Savior thus to
tread himself before us, the same has he left behind him to be gone by us, and
has ordained us a course of Religious and Christian service unto him, known by
nothing more then goodness and compassion. The very Heathen themselves though
utter enemies unto it, have heartily afforded us this Testimony. Ammianus
Marcellinus taxing Georgius, a factious and proud Bishop of Alexandria, for
abusing the weakness of Constantius the Emperor, by base tale-bearing, and
privy informations, notes precisely that he did it, Oblitus professionis suae,
quae nil nisi justum suadet and lene; quite besides the meaning of his
profession, whose especial notes were Gentleness and Equity. And Tertullian
tells us, that anciently among the Heathen, the Professors of Christianity were
called, not Christiani, but Chrestiani, from a word signifying Benignity and
sweetness of disposition. The Learned of our times, who for our instruction
have written de Notis Ecclesiae, by what Notes and Signs we may know the
Church of Christ, may seem to have but ill forgotten this, which the Heathen
man had so clearly discovered. For what reason is there, why that should not be
one of the chiefest notes of the Church of Christ, which did so especially
Characterise a Christian man, except it were the decay of it at this day in the
Church: of this thing therefore, so excellent in it self, so useful, so
principally commended by the precept and example of our blessed Savior, one
especial part is, if not the whole, which here by our Apostle is commended unto
us, when he speaks unto us of kindly entreating, and making much of such, who
are, as he calls them, weak in faith.

Him that is weak in faith, etc. To know the natural ground and occasion of
which words, it shall be very pertinent to note unto you, that with the Church
of Christ, as it signifies a Company of men on earth, it fares no otherwise,
then it does with other Societies, and Civil Corporations. One thing there is
unavoidable, and natural to all Societies, which is the greatest occasioner,
yea; the very ground of disunion and dissent; I mean, Inequality of Persons and
Degrees. All are not of the same worth, and therefore all cannot carry the same
esteem and countenance: yet all, even the meanest, are alike impatient of
discountenance and contempt, be the Persons never so great from whence it
proceeds. Wherefore we find that in States governed by the People, nothing did
more exasperate the common sort, then the conceit of being contemned by men of
greater place. For the taking away therefore of tumult and combustion,, which
through this Inequality might arise, it was anciently counted an excellent
policy in the Roman State, that men of greater account and place, did, as it
were, share the Inferior sort amongst themselves, and every one according to
his ability entertained some part of them as Clients, to whom they yielded all
lawful favor and protection. Even thus it fares with the Church of God, it
cannot be, that all in it should be of equal worth, it is likewise
distinguished into Plebem and Optimates. Some there are, and those that either
through abundance of Spiritual graces, or else of natural gifts, do far
outstrip a great part of other Christians; these are the Optimates, the Nobles
of the Church, whom our Apostle somewhere calls Strong men in Christ. Others
there are, and those most in number, who either because God has not so
liberally blessed them with gifts of understanding and capacity, or by reason of
some other imperfections, are either not so deeply skilled in the mysteries of
Christ, and of Godliness, or otherwise weak in manners and behavior; and these
are the Plebs, the Many of the Church, whom our Apostle sometimes calls,
Brethren of low degree, sometimes Babes in Christ, and here in my Text the weak
and sick in faith. Men, by nature querulous, and apt to take exception, (...),
says Electra in the Tragedy; A sick man is a pettish and wayward creature,
hard to be pleased; as therefore with the sick, so are we now to deal with a
Neighbor, weak and sick of his spiritual constitution, and much we are to bear
with his frowardness, where we cannot remedy it. For as Varro sometimes spoke
of the Laws of Wedlock, Vxoris vitium aut tollendum est, aut ferendum, Either a
man must amend, or endure the faults of his wife; he that amends them makes his
Wife the better, but he that patiently endures them makes himself the better:
so is it much more true in dealing with our weak Brethren, if we can by our
behavior remedy their imbecillities, we make them the better; if not, by
enduring them we shall make our selves the better; for so shall we increase the
virtue of our patience, and purchase to our selves at Gods hand a more abundant
reward. A great part of the luster of a Christian man's virtue were utterly
obscure, should it want this mean of showing it self. For were all men strong,
were all of sufficient discretion, to see and judge of Convenience, where were
the glory of our forbearance? As well therefore to increase the reward of the
strong man in Christ, as to stop the whining and murmuring of the weaker sort,
and to give content at all hands, our Apostle like a good Tribune in this Text
gives a Rule of Christian popularity, advising the man of worthier parts, to
avoid all sleighting behavior, to open the arms of tenderness and compassion,
and to demerit by all courtesy the men of meaner rank, so to prevent all
inconvenience, that might arise out of disdainful and respectless carriage; for
God is not like unto mortal Princes, jealous of the man whom the people love.
In the world, nothing is more dangerous for great men, then the extraordinary
favor and applause of the people; many excellent men have miscarried by it.
For Princes stand much in fear, when any of their Subjects has the heart of
the people. It is one of the commonest grounds upon which Treason is raised;
Absalom had the Art of it, who by being plausible, by commiserating the peoples
wrongs, and wishing the redress; O that I were a Judge to do this people good!
by putting out his hand, and embracing, and kissing every one that came nigh
him; so stole away the hearts of the people, that he had well-nigh put his
Father besides his Kingdom. But what alters and undoes the Kingdoms of this
world, that strengthens and increases the Kingdom of God; Absalom the popular
Christian, that has the Art of winning men's souls and making himself beloved
of the people, is the best subject in the Kingdom of Grace, for this is that
which our Apostle expresses in the phrase of Receiving the weak.

Now it falls out oftentimes, that men offend through intempestive compassion
and tenderness, as much as by over much rigidness and severity; as much by
familiarity, as by superciliousness and contempt: Wherefore even our love and
courtesy must be managed by discretion. St. Paul saw this well, and therefore
he prescribes limits to our affections; and having in the former part of my
Text counseled us, as Christ did S. Peter, to let loose our nets to make a
draught; to do as Joseph did in Egypt, open our garners and storehouses, that
all may come to buy, to admit of all, to exclude none, from our indulgence and
courtesy: in this second part, But not to doubtful disputations; he sets the
bounds how far our love must reach. As Moses in the 19. of Exodus, sets bounds
about Mount Sinai, forbidding the people, that they go not up to the Hill, or
come within the borders of it; so has the Apostle appointed certain limits to
our love and favor, within which it shall not be lawful for the people to
come. Enlarge we the Phylacteries of our goodness as broad as we list, give we
all countenance unto the meaner sort, admit we them into all inwardness and
familiarity; yet unto Disputations and Controversies, concerning profounder
points of Faith and Religious Mysteries, the meaner sort may be by no means
admitted. For give me leave now to take this for the meaning of the words; I
know they are very capable of another sense: as if the Apostles counsel had
been unto us, to entertain with all courtesy our weaker brethren, and not
over-busily to enquire into, or censure their secret thoughts and doubtings,
but here to leave them to themselves, and to God who is the Judge of thoughts:
For many there are, otherwise right good men, yet weak in judgment, who have
fallen upon sundry private conceits, such as are unnecessary Differencing of
Meats and Drinks, distinction of Days, or (to exemplify my self in some
conceit of our Times) some singular opinions concerning the state of Souls
departed, private interpretations of obscure Texts of Scripture, and others of
the same nature: Of these or the like thoughts, which have taken root in the
hearts of men of shallow capacity, those who are more surely grounded, may not
presume themselves to be judges; many of these things of themselves are
harmless and indifferent, only to him that has some prejudicate opinion of
them, they are not so; and of these things, they who are thus or thus
conceited, shall be accomptable to God, and not to man, to him alone shall they
stand or fall; Wherefore, bear (says the Apostle) with these infirmities, and
take not on you to be Lords of their thoughts, but gently tolerate these their
unnecessary conceits and scrupulosities. This though I take to be the more
natural meaning of the words, (for indeed it is the main drift of our Apostles
discourse in this Chapter) yet choose I rather to follow the former
interpretation. First, because of the Authority of sundry learned Interpreters,
and because it is very requisite that our age should have something said unto
it concerning this over-bold intrusion of all sorts of men into the discussing
of doubtful Disputations. For Disputation, though it be an excellent help to
bring the truth to light, yet many times by too much troubling the waters, it
suffers it to slip away unseen, especially with the meaner sort, who cannot so
easily espy when it is mixed with sophistry and deceit. Infirmum autem in fide
recipite, but not to doubtful disputations.

This my Text therefore is a Spiritual Regimen and Diet for these who are of a
weak and sickly constitution of mind, and it contains a Recipe for a man of
crazie and diseased faith. In which by that which I have delivered, you may
plainly see there are two general parts. First, An Admonition of courteous
entertainment to be given to the weaker sort, in the first words, Him that is
weak in the Faith, receive, etc. Secondly, The restraint and bound of this
Admonition, how far it is to extend, even unto all Christian Offices, excepting
only the hearing of doubtful disputations. In the first part we will consider;
First, who these weak ones are of whom the Apostle speaks, and how many kinds
of them there be, and how each of them may be the subject of a Christian man's
goodness and courtesy. Secondly, Who these persons are, to whom this precept
of entertaining is given, and they are two; either the Private man, or the
Public Magistrate. In the second general part we will see what reasons we may
frame to our selves, why these weak ones should not be admitted to questions
and doubtful disputations. Which points severally, and by themselves, we will
not handle, but we will so order them, that still as we shall have in order
discovered some kind of weak man, whom our Apostle would have received, we will
immediately seek how far forth he has a right to be an hearer of Sacred
Disputation, and this as far only as it concerns a private man: And for an
upshot in the end, we will briefly consider by it self, whether, and how far
this precept of bearing with the weak pertains to the man of Public place,
whether in the Church, or in the Commonwealth. And first concerning the weak,
as he may be a subject of Christian courtesy in private. And here, because
that in comparison of him that is strong in Christ, every man of what estate
soever, may be said to be weak, that strong man only excepted, we will in the
number of the weak contain all persons whatsoever. For I confess, because I
wish well to all, I am willing that all should reap some benefit by my Text. As
therefore the Woman in the Gospel, who in touching only the Hem of Christ's
garment, did receive virtue to cure her disease; so all weak persons
whatsoever, though they seem to come behind, and only touch the hem of my
Text, may peradventure receive some virtue from it to redress their weakness;
nay, as the King in the Gospel, that made a Feast, and willed his servants to
go out to the highways side, to the blind, and the lame, and force them in,
that his house might be full: so what lame or weak person soever he be, if I
find him not in my Text, I will go out and force him in, that the Doctrine of
my Text may be full, and that the goodness of a Christian man may be like the
Widows Oil, in the Book of Kings, that never ceased running so long as there
was a vessel to receive it. Wherefore to speak in general, there is no kind of
man, of what life, of what profession, of what estate and calling soever,
though he be an Heathen, and Idolater, unto whom the skirts of Christian
compassion do not reach. St. Paul is my Author, Now whilst you have time
(says he) do good unto all men, but especially to the household of faith. The
household of faith indeed has the pre-eminence; it must be chiefly, but not
alone respected. The distinction that is to be made, is not by excluding any,
but not participating alike unto all. God did sometimes indeed tie his love to
the Jewish Nation only, and gave his Laws to them alone: but afterward he
enlarged himself, and instituted an Order of serving him promiscuously, capable
of all the world. As therefore our Religion is, so must our compassion be,
Catholic. To tie it either to Persons, or to Place, is but a kind of moral
Judaism. Did not St. Paul teach us thus much, common reason would. There must
of necessity be some free intercourse with all men, otherwise the passages of
public Commerce were quite cut off, and the Common Law of Nations must needs
fall. In some things we agree, as we are men, and thus far the ^y Heathen
themselves are to be received. For the goodness of a man, which in Solomon's
judgment, extends even to a beast, much more must stretch it self to a man of
the same nature with him, be his condition what it will. St. Paul loved the
Jews, because they were his brethren according to the flesh; We that are of the
Heathen by the same Analogy, ought to be as tenderly affected to the rest of
our brethren, who though they be not as we are now, yet now are that which we
sometimes were. Facile est atque proclive, says S. Austin, malis odisse quia
mali sunt; rarum autem and pium eosdem ipsos diligere, quia homines sunt: It is
an easy thing to hate evil men, because they are evil; but to love them as
they are men, this is a rare and a pious thing. The offices of common
hospitality, of helping distressed persons, feeding the hungry, and the like,
are due not only betwixt Christian and Christian, but between a Christian and
all the world. Lot, when the Angels came to Sodom, and sat in the streets;
Abraham, when he saw three men coming toward him, stood not to enquire who they
were, but out of the sense of common humanity, ran forth and met them, and
gladly entertained them, not knowing whom they should receive. St. Chrysostom
considering the circumstances of Abraham's fact, that he sat at his tent door,
and that in the heat of the day, that he came to meet them, thinks, he
therefore sat in public, and endured the inconvenience of the heat, even for
this purpose, that he might not let slip any occasion of being hospital. The
writings of the Fathers, run much in commendation of the ancient Moncks, and
were they such as they report, well did they deserve to be commended; for their
manner was to sit in the feilds, and by the highway sides, for this end, that
they might direct wandering passengers into the way, that they might relieve all
that were distressed by want, or bruising or breaking of any member, and carry
them home into their Cells, and perform unto them all Duties of Humanity. This
serves well to tax us, who affect a kind of intempestive prudence, and
unseasonable discretion in performing that little good we do, from whom so
hardly after long enquiry and entreaty drops some small benevolence, like the
Sun in Winter, long ere it rise, and quickly gone. How many occasions of
Christian charity do we let slip, when we refuse to give our alms, unless we
first cast doubts, and examine the persons, their lives, their necessities,
though it be only to reach out some small thing, which is due unto him,
whatsoever it be. It was anciently a complaint against the Church, that the
liberality of the Christians made many idle persons. Be it that it was so, yet
no other thing befell them, then what befalls their Lord, who knows and sees
that his Sunshine and his Rain is every day abused, and yet the Sun becomes
not like a Sack, nor the Heavens as Brass; unto him must we, by his own
command, be like: and whom then can we exclude, that have a pattern of such
courtesy proposed to us to follow? we read in our books of a nice Athenian
being entertained in a place by one given to Hospitality, finding anon that
another was received with the like courtesy, and then a third, growing very
angry, I thought, said he, that I had found here (...) but I have found (...);
I looked for a friends house, but I am fallen into an Inn to entertain all
Comers, rather then a Lodging for some private and especial friends. Let it not
offend any that I have made Christianity rather an Inn to receive all, then a
private house to receive some few. For so both the precepts and examples I have
brought, teach us, Beneficia praestare non homini, sed humano generi, to extend
our good, not to this or that man, but to mankind; like the Sun that arises
not on this or that Nation, but on the whole world. Julian observes of the
Fig Tree, that above all Trees it is most capable of Grafts and Siens of other
kinds, so far, as that all variety will be brought to take nourishment from one
Stock: Beloved, a Christian must be like unto Iulian's Fig Tree, so universally
compassionate, that so all sorts of Grafts, by a kind of Christian Inoculation,
may be brought to draw life and nourishment from his root.

But I am all this while in a generality only, and I must not forget, that I
have many particular sick Patients, in my Text, of whom every one must have his
Recipe, and I must visit them all ere I go. But withal, I must remember my
Method, which was, still as I spoke of Receiving the weak, to speak likewise of
excluding them from Disputation. So must I needs, ere I pass away, tax this our
age, for giving so general permission unto all, to busy themselves in doubtful
cases of Religion. For nothing is there that has more prejudiced the cause of
Religion, then this promiscuous and careless admission of all sorts to the
hearing and handling of Controversies, whether we consider the private case of
every man, or the public state of the Church. I will touch but one
inconvenience which much annoys the Church, by opening this gate so wide to all
comers; for by the great preass of people that come, the work of the Lord is
much hindered. Not to speak of those, who out of weakness of understanding fall
into many errors, and by reason of liberty of bequeathing their errors to the
world by writing, easily find heirs for them. There is a sort that do harm by
being unnecessary, and though they sow not Tares in the field, yet fill the
Lords floor with chaff: For what need this great breed of Writers, with which
in this Age the world does swarm? how many of us might spare the pains in
committing our Meditations to writing, contenting our selves to teach the
people viva voce, and suffering our conceits quietly to die in their birth? The
teaching the people by voice is perpetually necessary, should all of us every
where speak but the same things. For all cannot use Books, and all that can,
have not the leisure. To remedy therefore the want of skill in the one, and of
time in the other, are we set in this Ministry of Preaching. Our voices are
confined to a certain compass, and tied to the Individuating properties of Hic
and Nunc: our Writings are unlimited. Necessity therefore requires a multitude
of Speakers, a multitude of Writers, not so. G. Agricola writing de Animantibus
subterraneis, reports of a certain kind of Spirits that converse in Minerals,
and much infest those that work in them; and the manner of them when they come,
is, To seem to busy themselves according to all the custom of workmen; they
will dig, and cleanse, and melt, and sever Metalls; yet when they are gone, the
workmen do not find that there is any thing done: So fares it with a great part
of the multitude, who thrust themselves into the Controversies of the Times;
they write Books, move Questions, frame Distinctions, give Solutions, and seem
sedulously to do whatsoever the nature of the business requires; yet if any
skilful workman in the Lords Mines shall come and examine their work, he shall
find them to be but Spirits in Minerals, and that with all this labor and stir
there is nothing done. I acknowledge it to be very true, which S. Austin spoke
in his first Book, de Trinitate; Vtile est plures libros a pluribus fieri
diverso stilo, sed non diversa fide, etiam de quaestionibus iisdem, ut ad
plurimos res ipsa perveniat ad alios sic, ad alios vero sic. It is a thing very
profitable, that diverse Tracts be written by diverse men, after diverse fashions,
but according to the same Analogy of Faith, even of the same questions, that
some might come into the hands of all, to some on this manner, to another after
that. For this may we think to have been the counsel of the holy Ghost himself,
who may seem even for this purpose, to have registered the self-same things of
Christ by three of the Evangelists with little difference. Yet notwithstanding,
if this speech of S. Austin admit of being qualified, then was there no time
which more then this Age required, should be moderated, which I note, because
of a noxious conceit spread in our Universities, to the great hindering of true
proficiency in Study, springing out from this Root. For many of the Learned
themselves are fallen upon this preposterous conceit, That Learning consists
rather in variety of turning and quoting of sundry Authors, then in soundly
discovering and laying down the truth of things. Out of which arises a greater
charge unto the poor Student, who now goes by number rather then weight, and
the Books of the Learned themselves, by ambitiously heaping up the conceits and
authorities of other men, increase much in the bulk, but do as much imbase in
true value. Wherefore as Gedeon's Army of two and thirty thousand, by prescript
from God, was brought unto three hundred; so this huge Army of Disputes might,
without any hazard of the Lords Battles, be well contracted into a smaller
number. Justinian the Emperor, when he found that the study of the Civil Law
was surcharged, and much confused, by reason of the great heaps of unnecessary
writings, he calls an Assembly of Learned men, caused them to search the Books,
to cut off what was superfluous, to gather into order and method the sum and
substance of the whole Law: Were it possible that some Religious Justinian
might after the same manner employ the wits of some of the best Learned in
Examining the Controversies, and selecting out of the best Writers what is
necessary, defaulting unnecessary and partial Discourses, and so digest into
order and method, and leave for the direction of Posterity, as it were,
Theological Pandects, infinite store of our Books might well lie by, and
peaceably be buried, and after Ages reap greater profit with smaller cost and
pains. But that which was possible in the World, united under Justinian, in
this great division of Kingdoms, is peradventure impossible. Wherefore having
contented my self to show what a great and irremediable inconvenience this
free, and uncontrollable venturing upon Theological Disputes has brought upon
us, I will leave this Project as a Speculation, and pass from this general
Doctrine unto some particulars. For this generality, and heap of sick persons,
I must divide into their kinds, and give every one his proper Recipe.

The first in this order of weak persons, so to be received and cherished by
us, is one of whom question may be made, whether he may be called weak or no;
he may seem to be rather dead: for no pulse of infused grace beats in him. I
mean, such a one who has but small, or peradventure no knowledge at all in the
mystery of Christ, yet is otherwise, a man of upright life and conversation,
such a one as we usually name A moral man. Account you of such a one as dead,
or how you please, yet methinks I find a Recipe for him in my Text. For this
man is even to be woed by us; as sometimes one Heathen man wished of another,
Talis cum sis utinam noster esses. This man may speak unto a Christian, as Ruth
does unto Boaz, Spread the skirt of thy garment over me, for thou art a near
kinsman. Two parts there are that do completely make up a Christian man, A true
Faith, and an honest Conversation. The first, though it seem the worthier, and
therefore gives unto us the name of Christians, yet the second in the end will
prove the surer. For true profession without honest conversation, not only
saves not, but increases our weight of punishment: but a good life without true
profession, though it brings us not to Heaven, yet it lessens the measure of
our judgment: so that A moral man so called, is a Christian by the surer side.
As our Savior says of one in the Gospel, that had wisely and discreetly
answered him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of heaven; so may we say of
these men, Suppose that as yet they be not of, yet certainly far from the
Kingdom of heaven they cannot be. Yea, this sincerity of life, though severed
from true profession, did seem such a jewel in the eyes of some of the Ancient
Fathers, that their opinion was, and so have they in their Writings
(erroneously doubtless) testified it, That God has in store for such men not
only this mitigating mercy, of which but now I spoke, but even saving grace,
so far forth as to make them possessors of his Kingdom. Let it not trouble you,
that I entitle them to some part of our Christian Faith, and therefore without
scruple to be received as weak, and not to be cast forth as dead. Salvianus
disputing what Faith is, Quid est igitur credulitas vel sides? says he, opinor
fideliter hominum Christo credere, id est, fidelem Deo esse, hoc est fideliter
Dei mandata servare. What might this faith be? (says he) I suppose it is
nothing else, but faithfully to believe Christ, and this is to be faithful unto
God, which is nothing else but faithfully to keep the commandments of God. Not
therefore only a bare belief, but the fidelity and trustiness of Gods
servants, faithfully accomplishing the will of our Master, is required as a
part of our Christian Faith. Now all those good things which moral men by the
light of Nature do, are a part of Gods will written in their hearts; wherefore
so far as they were conscientious in performing them (if Salvianus his reason
be good) so far have they title and interest in our Faith. And therefore
Regulus, that famous Roman, when he endured infinite torments, rather then he
would break his Oath, may thus far be counted a Martyr, and witness for the
truth. For the Crown of Martyrdom sits not only on the heads of those who have
lost their lives, rather then they would cease to profess the Name of Christ,
but on the head of every one that suffers for the testimony of a good
conscience, and for righteousness sake. And here I cannot pass by one very
general gross mistaking of our Age. For in our discourses concerning the Notes
of a Christian man, by what Signs we may know a man to be one of the visible
company of Christ, we have so tied our selves to this outward profession, that
if we know no other virtue in a man, but that he has Cond his Creed by heart,
let his life be never so profane, we think it argument enough for us to account
him within the Pale and Circuit of the Church: on the contrary side, let his
life be never so upright, if either he be little seen in, or peradventure quite
ignorant of the Mystery of Christ, we esteem of him but as dead; and those who
conceive well of those moral good things, as of some tokens giving hope of
life, we account but as a kind of Ma^ichecs, who thought the very Earth had
life in it. I must confess that I have not yet made that proficiency in the
Schools of our Age, as that I could see, why the Second Table, and the Acts of
it, are not as properly the parts of Religion and Christianity, as the Acts and
Observations of the first. If I mistake, then it is St. James that has abused
me; for he describing Religion by its proper Acts, tells us, that True
Religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is, To visit the fatherless
and the widow in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted of the world.
So that the thing which in an especial refine Dialect of the new Christian
Language signifies nothing but Morality and Civility that in the Language of
the Holy Ghost imports true Religion. Wherefore any difference that the holy
Ghost makes notwithstanding, the man of virtuous dispositions, though ignorant
of the Mystery of Christ, be it Fabricius, or Regulus, or any ancient Heathen
man, famous for sincerity and uprightness of carriage, has as sure a claim and
interest in the Church of Christ, as the man deepest skilled in, most certainly
believing, and openly professing all that is written in the holy Books of God,
if he endeavor not to show his faith by his works. The Ancients therefore,
where they found this kind of men, gladly received them, and converst
familiarly with them, as appears by the friendly intercourse of Epistles of S.
Basil with Libanius, of Nazianzen and Austin, with sundry others; and Antiquity
has either left us true, or forged us false Epistles betwixt S. Paul himself
and Seneca. Now as for the admitting of any of these men to the discussing of
the doubts in our Religions Mysteries, who either know not, or peradventure
contemn them, there needs not much be said: by a Canon of one of the Councels
of Carthage it appears, it had sometimes been the erroneous practice of some
Christians to Baptize the dead, and to put the Sacrament of Christ's Body into
their mouths. Since we have confessed these men to be in a sort dead, as having
no supernatural quickening grace from above, to put into their hands the
handling of the word of life at all, much more of discussing of the doubtful
things in it, were nothing else, but to Baptize a carcass, and put the
Communion bread into the mouth of the dead. Wherefore leaving this kind of weak
person to your courteous acceptance,

Let us consider of another, one quite contrary to the former; a true
Professor, but a man of profane and wicked life, one more dangerously ill then
the former: have we any Recipe for this man? May seem for him there is no Balm
in Gilead, he seems like unto the Leper in the Law, unto whom no man might draw
near. And by so much the more dangerous is his case, because the condition of
conversing with Heathen men, be they never so wicked, is permitted unto
Christians by our Apostle himself, whereas with this man, all commerce seems by
the same Apostle to be quite cut off. For in the 1 Cor. 6. St. Paul having
forbidden them formerly all manner of conversing with Fornicators, infamous
persons, and men subject to grievous crimes; and considering at length how
impossible this was, because of the Gentiles with whom they lived, and amongst
whom necessarily they were to converse and trade, he distinguishes between the
fornicators of this world, and the fornicators which were Brethren. I meant not
(says the blessed Apostle) expounding himself, that ye should not admit of the
fornicators of this world; that is, such as were Gentiles, for then must ye
have sought a new world. So great and general a liberty at that time had the
world assumed for the practice of that sin of Fornication, that strictly to
have forbidden them the company of fornicatours, had almost been to have
excluded them the society of mankind. But, says he, If a brother be a
fornicatour, or a thief, or a railer; with such a one partake not, no not so
much as to eat. Wherefore the case of this person seems to be desperate; for he
is not only mortally sick, but is bereft of all help of the Physician. Yet
notwithstanding all this, we may not give him over for gone; for when we have
well searched our boxes, we shall find a Recipe even for him too. Think we that
our Apostles meaning was, that we should acquaint our selves only with the
good, and not the bad; as Physicians in the time of Pestilence look only to
the sound, and shun the diseased? Our Savior Christ familiarly converst, eat,
and drank with Publicanes and sinners, and gives the reason of it, because he
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Is Christ contrary
to Paul? This reason of our Savior concerns every one on whom the duty of
saving of Souls does rest. It is the main drift of his message, and unavoidably
he is to converse, yea, eat and drink with all sorts of sinners, even because
he is to call, not the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Necessary it is
that some means be left to reclaim notorious offenders, let their disease be
never so dangerous. Nescio an in extremis aliquid tentare medicina sit, certe
nihil tentare perditio est; Who can tell whether in this extremity, were it at
the last cast, it may some way profit to receive him; but this we all know,
that altogether to cast him out of the society of good men, is to cut him off
from all outward means of health. The Leper in the Law, though he were excluded
the multitude, yet had he access unto the Priest. Beloved, the Priest in the
new Law has much greater privilege then the Ancient had; he was only a
Judge, and could not cure: But this is both a Judge and a Physician, and can
both discern and cure the Leprosy of our souls; wherefore he is not to be
excluded from the most desperately sick person. Neither does this duty concern
the Priest alone; for, as Tertullian sometimes spoke in another case, In
majestatis reos and publicos hosts omnis homo miles est, Against Traitors and
public enemies every man is a soldier; so is it true in this. Every one who
is of strength to pull a Soul out of the fire, is for this business, by
counsel, by advice, by rebuking a Priest, neither must he let him lie there to
expect better help. Again, no man so ill, but has some good thing in him,
though it breaks not out, as being clouded and darkened with much corruption.
We must take heed, that we do not pro solis comprehendere frequentissima,
mistake in thinking there is nothing else but evil, where we often see it. We
must therefore entertain even near friendship with such a one to discover him.
Nemo enim nisi per amicitiam cognoscitur, says St. Austin; No man is perfectly
discovered, but by his inward acquaintance. As therefore they who seek for
treasure, give not over by reason of clay and mire, so long as there is any
hope to speed; so may we not cast off our industry, though it labor in the
most polluted Soul, ut ad quaedam sana in quorum delectatione acquiescamus per
charitatis tolerantiam perducamur; that so at length, through charitable
patience and long-suffering we may discover in him some good things which may
content us for the present, and give hope of better things to come For as they
that work in Gold and costly matter, diligently save every little piece that
falls away; so goodness wheresoever it be, is a thing so precious, that every
little spark of it deserves our care in cherishing. Many miscarry through the
want of this patience in those who undertake them, whilst they despair of them
too soon: Dum ita objurgant quasi oderint, Whilst they rebuke us, as if they
hated, and upbraid rather then reprehend. Transit convitium and intemperantia
culpatur, uterque qui periere arguuntur. As unskilful Physicians, who suffer
their Patients to die under their hands, to hide their error, blame their
Patients intemperance: so let us take heed, lest it be not so much the strength
of the disease, as the want of skill in us which we strive to cover, and vail
over with the names of Contumacy, Intemperance, or the like. David received an
express message from the Prophet, that the Child conceived in adultery should
surely die; yet he ceast not his Prayers, and Tears, and Fasting, as long as
there was life in it. We receive no such certain message concerning any man's
miscarriage, and why then should we intermit any Office which Christian
patience can afford. Wherefore, what Maecenas sometime spoke loosely in another
sense, Debilem facito manu, debilene pede, coxa: lubricos quate dentes: vita
dum superest been est; that we may apply more properly to our purpose, Let our
weak person here be lame, hand and foot, hip and thigh, sick in head and heart;
yet so long as there is life in him, there is no cause we should despair. How
know thou how potent the Word of God may be through thy Ministry, out of
these stones to raise up children unto Abraham? I cannot therefore persuade my
self, that this prohibition of St. Paul, of which we but now spoke, so far
extended, as that it quite interdicted good men the company of the sinners, be
they never so gross. For when he delivered men unto Satan, (the greatest thing
that ever he did in this kind) it was ad interitum carnis, to the mortifying of
the flesh, that so the spirit might be safe in the day of the Lord. But this is
worse, for by this peremptory excluding the gross sinner from the good, a
greater gap is opened to the liberty of the flesh, and a more immediate way
could not be found to bring final destruction on him at that day. The extent
therefore of St. Paul's precept, though given in show to all, I take to reach
no farther then the weak, and such as are in danger of Infection; for the
weaker sort of men are always evermore the most, and a charge given unto the
most, is commonly given under the style of all. Our Apostle therefore jealous
of the tenderer sort, whom every unwholesome blast does easily taint, seems,
what he intended for the most, to make general to all. The reason which the
Apostle gives, does warrant this restraint; See ye not (says he) that a little
leven sowres the whole lump? If therefore there be any part of the lump, (...),
out of shot and danger of sowring and contagion, on it this precept can have no
extent: and surely some wrong it were to the Church of Christ, to suppose that
all were necessarily subject to sowring and infection, upon supposal of some
admission of leven. Evil indeed is infectious, but neither necessarily, nor yet
so, that it need fright us from those who are diseased with it. Contagious
diseases which seize on our bodies, infect by natural force and means, which we
cannot prevent: but no man drinks down this poison, whose Will is not the Hand
that takes the Cup: So that to converse with men of diseased minds, infects us
not except we will. Again, Aristotle in his Problems makes a question, Why
health does not infect as well as sickness. For we grow sick many times by
incautelously conversing with the diseased, but no man grows well by
accompanying the healthy. Thus indeed it is with the healthiness of the body;
it has no transient force on others. But the strength and healthiness of the
mind carries with it a gracious kind of infection: and common experience tells
us, That nothing profits evil men, more then the company of the good. So that
strength of mind, accompanied with the preservative of the grace of God, may
not only without fear of contagion, safely converse with ungracious sinners,
but by so doing, as it were infect them, and make them such as himself is. No
cause therefore hitherto, why the true Professors, though notorious sinners,
should not be partakers of our Christian Courtesies. And therefore as of the
former, so of this my conclusion is, We must receive him. Only let me add St.
Paul's words in another place, Ye that are strong, receive such a one.

HAving thus far spoken of his Admission, let us now a little consider of his
Restraint, and see whether he may have any part in hearing and handling
Religious Controversies; where plainly to speak my mind, as his admission
before was, so his exclusion here is much more necessary: the way to these
Schools should be open to none, but to men of upright life and conversation:
and that as well in regard of the profane and wicked men themselves, as of the
Cause which they presume to handle: for as for themselves, this is but the
Field, wherein they sow and reap their own infamy and disgrace. Our own
experience tells us, how hard a thing it is for men of behavior known to be
spotless, to avoid the lash of those men's tongues; who make it their chief
fence to disgrace the persons, when they cannot touch the cause. For what else
are the Writings of many men, but mutual Pasquils and Satyrs against each
others lives, wherein digladiating like Eschines and Demosthenes, they
reciprocally lay open each others filthiness to the view and scorn of the
world. The fear therefore of being stained, and publicly disgraced, might be
reason enough to keep them back from entering these contentions. And as for the
cause it self, into which this kind of men do put themselves, needs must it go
but ill with it: for is it possible that those respects, which sway and govern
their ordinary actions, should have no influence upon their pens? It cannot be,
that they who speak, and plot, and act wickedness, should ever write uprightly.
Nam ut in vita, ita and in causis quoque spes improbas habent: Doubtless, as in
their lives, so in the causes they undertake, they nourish hopes full of
improbity. Besides all this, the opinion of the common sort is not to be
contemned, whom no kind of reason so much abuses, and carries away, as when the
discredit of the person is retorted on the cause; which thing our adversaries
here at home amongst us know very well, a masterpiece of whose policy it is,
to put into the hands of the people such Pamphlets which hurt not our cause at
all, but only discredit our persons. St. Chrysostom observes out of the
ancient Customs of the Olympic Games, that whenever any man offered himself
to contend in them, he was not to be admitted till public Proclamation had
been made throughout the multitude to this purpose. Whether any man knew him to
be either a Servant, or a Thief, or otherwise of infamous life. And if any
imputation in this kind were proved against him, it was sufficient to keep him
back. Had the Heathen this care, that their vanities should not be discredited?
how great then must our care be, that they which enter into these Exercises, be
of pure and upright condition? Let men's skill and judgment therefore be never
so good, yet if their lives be notoriously subject to exception, let them know,
that there is no place for them in these Olympicks. Men indeed in civil
business have found out a distinction, between an Honest man, and a good
Common-wealths-man: And therefore Fabricius in the Roman Story is much
commended, for nominating to the Consulship, Ruffinus, a wicked man, and his
utter enemy, because he knew him to be serviceable to the Commonwealth, for
those Wars which were then depending. But in the business of the Lord, and
Commonwealth of God, we can admit of no such distinction. For God himself in
the Book of Psalms, staves them off with a, Quid tuae ut euarres mea? etc. What
have thou to do to take my words into thy mouth, since thou hate to be
reformed? The world for the managing of her matters, may employ such as her
self has fitted: But let every one who names the name of God, depart from
iniquity. For these reasons therefore it is very expedient, that none but right
good men should undertake the Lords quarrels, the rather, because there is some
truth in that which Quintilian spoke, Cogitare optima simul and deterrima, non
magis est unius animi, quam ejusdem hominis bonum esse ac malum. As impossible
it is that good and bad thoughts should harbor in the same heart, as it is for
the same man to be jointly good and bad. And so from the consideration of this
sick person, let us proceed to visit the next. The weak persons, I have
hitherto treated of, are the fewest, as consisting in a kind of extreme. For
the greatest sort of men are in a mediocrity of men, eminently Good, or
extremely ill, the number is smallest; but this rank of sick persons, that now
we are to view, is an whole army, and may be every one of us, if we do well
examine our selves, shall find our selves in it: For the weak, whom we now are
to speak of, is he that has not that degree and perfection of faith, and
strength of spiritual constitution that he ought to have. Wherefore our Recipe
here must be like the Tree of Life in the Book of the Revelation, it must be
Medicine to heal whole Nations. For who is he amongst men that can free himself
from this weakness? Yea, we our selves that are set over others for their cure,
may speak of our selves and our Charge, as Iolaus in Euripides does of himself
and Hercules children, (...), We take care of these, our selves standing in
need of others care for us. Hippocrates counsels his Physician, to look
especially, that himself be healthy to be (...), fair of color, and full of
flesh. For otherwise, says he, how can he give comfort and hope of success to
a sick patient, who by his ill color and meagreness, bewrays some imperfection
of his own. But what Physician of Soul and Manners is capable of this counsel?
or who is it, that, taking the cure of others, does not in most of his actions
bewray his own disease? Even thus has it pleased God to tie us together with a
mutual sense of each others weakness; and as our selves receive and bear with
others; so for our selves interchangeably must we request the same courtesy at
others hands. Notwithstanding, as it is with the health of our bodies, no man
at any time is perfectly well, only he goes for an healthy man, who is least
sick: so fares it with our souls. God has included all under the name of Weak
some perad venture are less weak then others, but no man is strong.
Infaelicissimum Consolationis genus est de miseriis hominum peccatorum capere
solatia. It is but a miserable comfort to judge our own perfections only by
others defects, yet this is all the comfort we have. Let us leave therefore
those, who by reason of being less crazie, pass for healthy, and consider of
those whom some sensible and eminent imperfection above others has ranked in
the number of the weak. And of those there are sundry kinds, especially two.
One is Weak, because he is not yet fully informed, not so sufficiently
Catechized in the Mysteries of Faith, whom farther Institution may bring to
better Maturity: The other peradventure is sufficiently Grounded for Principles
of Faith, yet is Weak, by reason either of some Passion, or of some irritatory
and troublesome Humor in his behavior. Nullum unquam ingenium placuit sine
venia; There is no man so perfect, but has somewhat in his behavior that
requires pardon. As for the imperfection of the former of these, It is the
weakness of infancy and childhood in Faith, rather then a disease: And with
this weak man we are especially to bear above all others. For as for him that
is Weak through gross and wilful ignorance, or contumacy, or the like, it is
pardonable, if sometimes we yield him not that measure of courtesy, which were
meet; but to be cruel against Infancy and Childhood were inhumanity. The manner
of our Recipe for these men, our Apostle somewhere expresses, where he tells us
of some that must be fed with milk, and not strong meat: Unto these we must
rather be as Nurses, then Physicians; Submittendo nos ad mensuram discentis,
and manum dando and gradum nostrum minuendo; by gently submitting our selves to
the capacity of the Learner, by lending our hand, by lessening our steps to
keep them in equipace with us till they come up to their full growth. As Christ
being God emptied himself, and became Man like to us, so must we lay down our
Gifts of Wit, in which we flatter our selves, and take our selves to be as
Gods, and in show and fashion become like one of them. Grave men have thought
it no disparagement, to have been seen with their little sons, Lud^re par
impar, equitare in arundi^e longa, toying and practicing with them their
childish sports: and if any take offense at it, they are such as know not what
it is to be Fathers. Those therefore who bear the office of Fathers amongst
other men, to bring up the Infancy of Babes in Christ, must not blush to
practice this part of a Father, and out of St. Paul's lesson of Becoming all to
all, learn to become a Child to Children; do it he may very well, without any
impeachment to himself. He that helps one up that is fallen, non se projicit,
ut ambo jaceant; sed incurvat tantum, ut jacentem erigat, throws not himself
down to lie by him, but gently stoops to lift him up again; but of this Weak
person, I have little need, I trust, to speak. For no man in these days can be
long Weak, but by his own default, so long and careful Teaching as has been
and every day is, must needs take from men all pretense of Weakness in this
kind: Nam quid alnid agimus docendo vos, quam ne semper docendi sitis: For what
is the end of all this labor and pains in Teaching, but that ye might at
length not need a Teacher. Wherefore from this I come unto that other Weak
person, strong in Faith, but Weak in Carriage and Behavior.

Having before proved, that Christian Courtesy spreads it self to all sorts of
men, to the Infidel, to the gross notorious sinner, then will it without any
straining at all come home to all the infirmities of our weaker Brethren: For
that which can endure so great a tempest, how can it be offended with some
small drops. Is Christian Patience like unto St. Peter's resolution, that durst
manfully encounter the High Preist's servant, yet was daunted at the voice of a
silly Maiden; whatsoever it is that is irksome unto us in the common Behavior
of our Brethren, it were strange we should not be able to brook. Epictetus
considering with himself, the weakness which is usual in men, still to make the
worst of what befalls us, wittily tells us, That every thing in the world has
two handles, one turned toward us, which we may easily take, the other turned
from us, harder to be laid hold of; the first makes all things easy, the
second not so; The instance that he brings is my very purpose; Be it, says he,
thy Brother has offended thee, here are two hand-fasts, one of the offense,
the other of thy Brother. If thou take hold of that of the offense, it will be
too hot for thee, thou will not easily endure the touch of it: but if thou lay
hold of that of thy Brother, this will make all Behavior tolerable. There is
no part of our Brother's carriage toward Us, but if we search it, we shall
find, some hand-fast, some circumstance, that will make it easy to be born. If
we can find no other, the circumstance of our Savior Christ's example will
never fail: An example which will not only make us to endure the importunity
of his ordinary Behavior, but all his outrageous dealing whatsoever. For,
says St. Chrysostom, Did thou know that thy Brother intended particular
mischief against thee, that he would embrue his hand in thy blood, (...), yet
kiss that hand; for thy Lord did not refuse to kiss that mouth that made the
bargain for his blood. It is storied of Protagoras, that being a poor youth,
and carrying a burden of sticks, he so piled them, and laid them together,
with such art and order, that he made them much more light and easy to be
borne. Beloved, there is an Art among Christians, like unto that of Protagoras,
of so making up and ordering our burdens, that they may lie with much less
weight upon our shoulders; this Art, if we could learn it, would make us take
all in good part at our Brother's hand, were he as bad as Nabal was, of whom
his own servant complained, that he was such a man of Belial, that no man could
speak unto him.

Wherefore leaving you to the study, and learning of this most Christian Art, I
will a little consider for what reasons we may not admit of these two sorts of
Weak men to Controversy. For as for the Unlearned, in private, nothing more
usual with them then to take offense at our dissentions, and to become more
uncertain and unjoynted upon the hearing of any question discust: It is their
usual voice and question to us, Is it possible that we should be at one in
these points in which your selves do disagree? thus cast they off on our backs
the burden of their backsliding and neutrality; wherefore to acquaint them
with Disputation in Religion, were as it were to blast them in their infancy,
and bring upon them some improsperous Disease to hinder their growth in Christ.
Secondly, What one said of other contentions, In bellis civilibus a^dacia etiam
valet singulorum, In civil wars no man is too weak to do a mischief, we have
found too true in these our Sacra Bella; no man is too weak (I say not) to do
mischief, but to be a principal Agent and Captain in them. Simple and unlearned
souls, trained up by men of contentious spirits, have had strength enough to be
Authors of dangerous Heresies; Priscilla and Maximilla, silly women laden with
iniquity, were the chief Ringleaders in the errors of the Monna^ists; and as
it is commonly said, Bellum inchoant inertes, fortes finiunt, Weaklings are
able to begin a quarrel, but the prosecution and finishing is a work for
stronger men; so has it fared here. For that quarrel which these poor souls
had raised, Tertullian, a man of great Wit and Learning, is drawn to undertake:
so that for a Barnabas to be drawn away to error, there needs not always the
example and authority of a Peter. A third reason is the mavelous violence of
the weaker sort in maintaining their conceits, if once they begin to be
Opinionative. For one thing there is that wonderfully prevails against the
reclaiming of them, and that is, The natural jealousy they have of all that is
said unto them by men of better wits, stand it with reason never so good, if it
sound not as they would have it. A jealousy founded in the sense of their
weakness, arising out of this, that they suspect all to be done for no other
end, but to circumvent and abuse them. And therefore when they see themselves
to be too weak in reasoning, they easily turn them to violence. The Monks of
Egypt, otherwise devout and religious men anciently, were for the most part
unlearned, and generally given over to the error of the Anthropomorphitae, who
held, that God had hands and feet, and all the parts that a man has, and was
in outward shape and proportion like to one of us. Theophilus, a learned Bishop
of Alexandria, having fallen into their hands, was so roughly used by them,
that ere he could get out of their fingers, he was fain to use his wits, and to
crave aid of his Equivocating Sophistry, and soothly to tell them, I have seen
your face as the face of God. Now when Christian and Religious doubts, must
thus be managed with wilfulness and violence, what mischief may come of it is
already so plain, that it needs not my finger to point it out. Wherefore let
every such Weak person say unto himself, as St. Austin does, Tu ratiocinare,
ego mirer; disputa tu, ego credam: Let others reason, I will marvel; let others
dispute, I will believe.

As for the man strong in passion, or rather weak, for the strength of passion
is the weakness of the passionate; great reason has the Church to except
against him. For first of all, from him it comes, that our Books are so stuffed
with contumelious meladiction, no Heathen Writers having left the like example
of choler and gross impatience. An hard thing I know it is, to write without
affection and passion in those things which we love, and therefore it is free
so to do, to those who are Lords over themselves. It seems our Savior gave
some way to it himself. For somewhat certainly his Kinsmen saw in his
behaviour^ when as St. Mark reports, they went forth to lay hold upon him,
thinking he was beside himself. But for those who have not the command of
themselves, better it were they laid it by; St. Chrysostom excellently
observes, that the Prophets of God, and Satan, were by this notoriously
differenced, that they which gave Oracles by motion from the Devil, did it with
much impatience and confusion, with a kind of fury and madness; but they which
gave Oracles from God by Divine Inspiration, gave them with all mildness and
temper; If it be the cause of God which we handle in our writings, then let us
handle it like the Prophets of God, with quietness and moderation, and not in
the violence of passion, as if we were possessed, rather then inspired. Again,
what equity or indifferencey can we look for in the carriage of that cause,
that falls into the handling of these men: Quis confer duces meminit qui
pendere causas? Qua stetit inde ^avet, What man overtaken with passion
remembers impartially to compare cause with cause, and right with right; Qua
stetit inde ^avet -- on what cause he happens, that is he resolute to maintain;
ut gladiator in arenam; as a Fencer to the Stage, so comes he to write, not
upon conscience of quarrel, but because he proposes to contend, yea, so
potently has this humor prevailed with men that have undertaken to maintain a
faction, that it has broken o^t to the tempting of God, and the dishonor of
Martyrdom. Two Friars in Florence, in the action of Savonoralla, voluntarily in
the open view of the City, offered to enter the fire: so to put an end to the
controversy, that he might be judged to have the right, who, like one of the
three children in Babylon, should pass untouched through the fire. But I hasten
to visit one weak person more, and so an end.

He whom we now are to visit, is a man Weak through Heretical and erring Faith;
now whether or no we have any Receipt for him, it may be doubtful: For St. Paul
advises us to avoid the man, that is a maker of Sects, knowing him to be
Damned. Yet, if as we spoke of not admitting to us the notorious sinner, no not
to eat, so we teach of this, that it is delivered respectively to the weaker
sort; as justly for the same reasons we may do: we shall have a Recipe here for
the man that errs in Faith, and rejoices in making of Sects: which we shall
the better do, if we can but gently draw him on to a moderation to think of his
conceits only as of opinions; for it is not the variety of opinions, but our
own perverse wills, who think it meet, that all should be conceited as our
selves are, which has so inconvenienced the Church, were we not so ready to
Anathematize each other, where we concur not in opinion, we might in hearts be
united, though in our tongues we were divided, and that with singular profit to
all sides. It is the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and not Identity
of conceit, which the Holy Ghost requires at the hands of Christians. I will
give you one instance, in which at this day our Churches are at variance; The
will of God, and his manner of proceeding in Predestination is undiscernable,
and shall so remain until that day, wherein all knowledge shall be made
perfect; yet some there are, who with probability of Scripture teach, that the
true cause of the final miscarriage of them that perish, is that original
corruption that befell them at the beginning, increased through the neglect or
refusal of grace offered. Others with no less favorable countenance of
Scripture, make the cause of Reprobation only the will of God, determining
freely of his own work, as himself pleases, without respect to any second cause
whatsoever. Were we not ambitiously minded, familiam ducere, every one to be
Lord of a Sect, each of these Tenets might be profitably taught and heard, and
matter of singular exhortation drawn from either; for on the one part,
doubtless it is a pious and religious intent, to endeavor to free God from all
imputation of unnecessary rigor, and his Justice from seeming Injustice and
Incongruity: and on the other side, it is a noble resolution, so to humble our
selves under the hand of Almighty God, as that we can with patience hear, yea,
think it an honor, that so base creatures as our selves should become the
instruments of the glory of so great a Majesty, whether it be by eternal life,
or by eternal death, though for no other reason, but for Gods good will and
pleasures sake. The Authors of these conceits might both freely (if peaceably)
speak their minds, and both singularly profit the Church: for since it is
impossible, where Scripture is ambiguous, that all conceits should run alike,
it remains, that we seek out a way, not so much to establish an unity of
opinion in the minds of all, which I take to be a thing likewise impossible, as
to provide, that multiplicity of conceit, trouble not the Churches peace. A
better way my conceit cannot reach unto, then that we would be willing to
think, that these things, which with some show of probability we deduce from
Scripture, are at the best but our Opinions: for this peremptory manner of
setting down our own conclusions, under this high commanding form of necessary
truths, is generally one of the greatest causes, which keeps the Churches this
day so far asunder; when as a gracious receiving of each other, by mutual
forbearance in this kind, might peradventure in time bring them nearer together.

This peradventure, may some man say, may content us in case of opinion
indifferent, out of which no great inconvenience by necessary and evident proof
is concluded: but what Recipe have we for him that is fallen into some known
and desperate Heresy? Even the same with the former. And therefore anciently,
Heretical and Orthodox Christians, many times even in public holy exercise
converst together without offense. It Is noted in the Ecclesiastic stories,
that the Arrians and Right Beleivers so communicated together in holy Prayers,
that you could not distinguish them till they came to the (...), the Gloria
Patri, which the Arrians used with some difference from other Christians. But
those were times quorum lectionem habemus, virtutem non habemus; we read of
them in our books, but we have lost the practice of their patience. Some
prejudice was done unto the Church by those, who first began to intermingle
with public Ecclesiastical duties, things respective unto private conceits.
For those Christian offices in the Church ought as much as possibly they may be
common unto all, and not to descend to the differences of particular opinions.
Severity against, and separation from Heretical companies, took its beginning
from the Heretics themselves: and if we search the stories, we shall find,
that the Church did not at their first arising thrust them from her, themselves
went out: and as for severity, that which the Donatists sometimes spoke in
their own defense, Illam esse veram Ecclesiam quae persecutionem patitur, non
quae facit; She was the true Church, not which raised, but which suffered
persecution, was de facto true for a great space. For when Heresies and Schisms
first arose in the Church, all kinds of violence were used by the erring
Factions; but the Church seemed not for a long time to have known any use of a
Sword, but only of a Buckler, and when she began to use the Sword, some of her
best and chiefest Captains much misliked it. The first Law in this kind that
ever was made, was Enacted by Theodosius against the Donatists, but with this
restraint, that it should extend against none, but only such as were
tumultuous, and till that time they were not so much as touched with any mulct,
though but pecuniary, till that shameful outrage committed against Bishop
Maximian, whom they beat down with bats and clubs, even as he stood at the
Altar: So that not so much the error of the Donatists, as their Riots and
Mutinies were by Imperial Laws restrained. That the Church had afterward good
reason to think, that she ought to be salubrior quam dulcior, that sometimes
there was more mercy in punishing, then forbearing, there can no doubt be made.
St. Austin (a man of as mild and gentle spirit as ever bare rule in the Church)
having, according to his natural sweetness of disposition, earnestly written
against violent and sharp dealing with Heretics, being taught by experience,
did afterward retract, and confess an excellent use of wholesome severity in
the Church. Yet could I wish that it might be said of the Church, which was
sometimes observed of Augustus, In nullius unquam suorum nccem duravit: He had
been angry with, and severely punished many of his kin, but he could never
endure to cut any of them off by death. But this I must request you to take
only as my private wish, and not as a censure, if any thing have been done to
the contrary. When Absalom was up in arms against his Father, it was necessary
for David to take order to curb him, and pull him on his knees; yet we see how
careful he was he should not die, and how lamentably he bewailed him in his
death: what cause was it that drove David into this extreme passion? Was it
doubt of Heir to the Kingdom? that could not be; for Solomon was now born, to
whom the promise of the Kingdom was made: Was it the strength of natural
affection? I somewhat doubt of it; three years together was Absalom in
banishment, and David did not very eagerly desire to see him: The Scripture
indeed notes, that the King longed for him; yet in this longing was there not
any such fierceness of passion, for Absalom saw not the Kings face for two
years more after his return from banishment to Jerusalem: What then might be
the cause of his strength of passion, and commiseration in the King? I persuade
my self it was the fear of his sons final miscarriage, and reprobation, which
made the King (secure of the mercies of God unto himself) to wish he had died
in his stead, that so he might have gained for his ungracious child some time
of repentance. The Church who is the common Mother of us all, when her
Absoloms, her unnatural sons, do lift up their hands and pens against her, must
so use means to repress them, that she forget not that they are the sons of her
womb, and be compassionate over them as David was over Absalom, loath to
unsheath either sword, but most of all the Temporal; for this were to send them
quick dispatch to Hell.

And here I may not pass by that singular moderation of this Church of ours,
which she has most Christianly expressed toward her adversaries of Rome, here
at home in her bosom above all the reformed Churches I have read of. For out of
desire to make the breach seem no greater, then indeed it is, and to hold
eommunion and Christian fellowship with her, so far as we possibly can; we have
done nothing to cut off the Favorers of that Church. The reasons of their love
and respect to the Church of Rome we wish, but we do not command them to lay
down: their Lay-brethren have all means of instruction offered them. Our Edicts
and Statutes made for their restraint, are such as serve only to awaken them,
and cause them to consider the innocence of that cause for refusal of
communion, in which they endure (as they suppose) so great losses. Those who
are sent over by them, either for the retaining of the already perverted, or
perverting others, are either returned by us back again to them, who dispatched
them to us, without any wrong unto their persons, or danger to their lives,
suffer an easy restraint, which only hinders them from dispersing the poison
they brought. And had they not been stickling in our state business, and
meddling with our Princes Crown, there had not a drop of their blood fallen to
the ground; unto our Sermons, in which the swarvings of that Church are
necessarily to be taxt by us, we do not bind their presence, only our desire
is, they would join with us in those Prayers and holy Ceremonies, which are
common to them and us. And so accordingly, by singular discretion was our
Service Book compiled by our forefathers, as containing nothing that might
offend them, as being almost merely a Compendium of their own Breviary and
Missal; so that they shall see nothing in our Meetings, but that they shall see
done in their own, though many things which are in theirs, here I grant they
shall not find. And here indeed is the great and main difference betwixt us. As
it is in the controversy concerning the Canonical Books of Scripture:
whatsoever we hold for Scripture, that even by that Church is maintained, only
she takes upon her to add much, which we cannot think safe to admit: so fares
it in other points of Faith and Ceremony; whatsoever it is we hold for Faith,
she holds it as far forth as we: our Ceremonies are taken from her; only she
over and above urges some things for Faith, which we take to be Error, or at
the best opinion; and for Ceremony which we think to be Superstition: So that
to participate with us, is, though not throughout, yet in some good measure to
participate with that Church; and certainly were that spirit of charity
stirring in them, which ought to be, they would love and honor us, even for
the resemblance of that Church, the beauty of which themselves so much admire.
The glory of these our proceedings, even our adversaries themselves do much
envy; So that from hence it is, that in their writings they traduce our
Judiciary proceedings against them, for sanguinary and violent, striving to
persuade other Nations, that such as have suffered by course of public Justice
for Religion only, and not for Treason have died, and pretend we what we list,
our actions are as bloody and cruel as their own: wherefore if a perfect
pattern of dealing with Erring Christians were to be sought, there were not any
like unto this of ours, In qua nec saeviendi, nec errandi pereundique licentia
permittitur, which as it takes not to it self liberty of cruelty, so it leaves
not unto any the liberty of destroying their own souls in the error of their
lives. And now that we may at once conclude this point concerning Heretics,
for prohibiting these men access to Religious Disputations, it is now too late
to dispute of that; for from this, that they have already unadvisedly entered
into these battles, are they become that which they are: Let us leave them
therefore as a sufficient example and instance of the danger of intempestive
and immodest meddling in Sacred Disputes.

I see it may be well expected, that I should according to my promise add
instruction for the public Magistrate, and show how far this precept in
receiving the weak concerns him.

I must confess I intended, and promised so to do, but I cannot conceive of it,
as a thing befitting me to step out of my Study, and give Rules for Government
to Commonwealths, a thing befitting men of greater experience to do. Wherefore
I hope you will pardon me if I keep not that promise, which I shall with less
offense break then observe: And this I rather do, because I suppose this
precept to concern us especially, if not only as private men, and that in case
of public proceeding, there is scarce room for it. Private men may pass over
offenses at their pleasure, and may be, in not doing it, they do worse: but
thus to do, lies not in the power of the Magistrate, who goes by Laws,
prescribing him what he is to do. Princes and men in Authority do many times
much abuse themselves, by affecting a reputation of Clemency, in pardoning
wrongs done to other men, and giving protection to sundry offenders, against
those who have just cause to proceed against them. It is mercy to pardon wrong
done against our selves, but to deny the course of Justice to him that calls
for it, and to protect offenders, may peradventure be some inconsiderare pity,
but mercy it cannot be. All therefore that I will presume to advise the
Magistrate, is, A general inclineableness to merciful proceedings.

And so I conclude, wishing unto them who plentifully sow mercy, plentifully
to reap it at the hand of God, with an hundred fold increase, and that blessing
from God the Father of mercies, may be upon them all, as on the sons of mercy,
as many as are the sands on the Seashore in multitude. The same God grant,
that the words which we have this day, etc.

A Sermon Preached on Easter day at Eaton College.
Luke XVI. 25. Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good
things.
I Have heard a Proverb to this sound, He that has a debt to pay at Easter,
thinks the Lent but short: How short this Lent has seemed to me, who stand
indebted to you for the remainder of my Meditations upon these words, is no
matter of consequence; to you peradventure it may have seemed so long, that
what you lately heard at Shrovetide, now at Easter you may with pardon have
forgotten. I will therefore recall into your memories so much of my former
Meditations, as may serve to open unto me a convenient way to pursue the rest
of those Lessons, which then, when I last spoke unto you, the time and your
patience would not permit me to finish. But ere I do this, I will take leave a
little to fit my Text unto this time of Solemnity.

This time, you know, calls for a Discourse concerning the Resurrection of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; of this you hear no sound in the words which I
have read, and therefore you conclude it a Text unbefitting the day. Indeed, if
you take the Resurrection for that glorious Act of his Omnipotency, by which,
through the power of his eternal Spirit, he redeems himself from the hand of
the grave, and triumphs over death and hell, you shall in these words find
nothing pertinent: But if you take this Resurrection for that act, by which,
through the power of saving grace, Christ the Sun of righteousness rises in our
hearts, and raises us from the death of sin, unto the life of righteousness,
here in these words you may perchance find a notable branch of it. For to raise
our thoughts from this earth, and clay, and from things beneath (and such are
those which here Abraham calls, The good things of our life) and to set them
above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, this is that practick
Resurrection, which above all concerns us; that other of Christ in Person, in
regard of us, is but a Resurrection in speculation; for to him that is dead in
sin and trespasses, and who places his good in the things of this life, Christ
is, as it were, not risen at all, to such a one he is still in the grave, and
under the bands of death: But to him that is risen with Christ and seeks that
good things that are above, to him alone is Christ risen: To know and believe
perfectly the whole story of Christ's Resurrection, what were it, if we did not
practice this Resurrection of our own? Cogita non exacturum a te Deum, quantum
cognov^ris, sed quantum vixeris; God will not reckon with thee, how much thou
know, but how well thou have lived. Epictetus, that great Philosopher, makes
this pretty Parable, Should a Shepherd, says he, call his sheep to account how
they had profited, would he like of that sheep, which brought before him his
hay, his grass, and fodder; or rather that sheep, which having well digested
all these, expressed himself in fat, in flesh, and wool? Beloved, you are the
flock of Christ, and the sheep of his hands; should the great Shepherd of the
flock call you before him, to see how you have profited, would he content
himself with this, that you had well Con'd your Catechism, that you had
diligently read the Gospel, and exactly knew the whole story of the
Resurrection? would it not give him better satisfaction to find Christ's
Resurrection expressed in yours, and as it were digested into flesh and wool?
(...). To have read Chrysippus his Book, this is not virtue: To have read the
Gospel, to have gathered all the circumstances of the Resurrection of Christ,
this is not Christianity: to have risen, as Christ has done, so to have
digested the Resurrection of Christ, as that we have made it our own, this is
rightly to understand the Doctrine of the Resurrection of Christ. For this
cause have I refused to treat this day of that Resurrection, in the Doctrine of
which I know you are perfect, and have reflected on that, in the knowledge of
which I fear you are imperfect: which that I might the better do, I have made
choice to prosecute my former Meditations, begun when I last spoke unto you in
this place; For so doing, I shall open unto you one of the hardest points of
your Spiritual Resurrection, even to raise your thoughts from the things of
this life, and seat them with Christ above.

To make my way more fair to this, I will take leave to put you in mind, in
short, how I proceeded in the opening of these words, when I last spoke unto
you out of this place: You may be pleased to remember, that after some
instruction drawn from the first word, Son, I proceeded to consider the ensuing
words, wherein having by an Alchimy, which then I used, changed the word [
Recordare] Remember, into [ Cave] Beware, and so read my Text thus, Beware thou
receive not thy good things in this life, I showed you, that we had never
greater cause to consult our best wits, what we are to do, and how we are to
carry our selves, then when the world, and outward blessings come upon us; Upon
this I moved this Question, Whether or no, if the things of this world should
by some providence of God knock and offer themselves to us, we are bound to
exclude them and refuse them? or, we might open and admit of them? I divided my
answer according to the diverse abilities and strengths of men: First, Qui
potest capere, capiat; he that has strength and spiritual wisdom to manage
them, let him receive them: But in the second place, he that is weak, let him
let strong diet alone, and feed on herbs, let him not entangle himself with
more then he can manage; Let him try, Quid far recusent, Quid valiant humeri
-- To the first the sum of what I spoke was this, Receive them we may, and that
without danger of a Recepisti; first, if we so received them, as if we received
them not; secondly, if we esteemed them not good; thirdly, if we did not esteem
them ours: And here the time cut me off, and suffered me not to descend unto
the second part, upon which now I am about to fall, Cave ne recipias, Take heed
thou receive not thy good things.

In this matter of Receiving and entertaining these outward and foreign good
things, there have been two ways commended to you, the one the more glorious,
to receive them; of this we have spoken. The other the more safe, not to
receive them; of this we are now to speak. These ways are trodden by two kinds
of persons; the one is the strong man, and more virtuous; the other is weaker,
but more cautelous; the one encounters temptation, the other avoids it: We may
compare them to the two great Captains, Hannibal and Fabius, the one ever
calling for the battle, the other evermore declining it. In one of these two
ranks must every good man be found; if we compare them together, we shall find,
that the one is far more excellent, the other far more in number: For to be
able to meet and check our enemy, to encounter occasions, to act our parts in
common life upon the common stage, and yet to keep our uprightness; this indeed
is truly to live, truly to serve God, and men, and therefore God the more,
because men. On the contrary to avoid occasions, to follow that other vincendi
genus, non pugnare, to overcome the world by contemning and avoiding it, this
argues a wise, indeed but a weak and fainting spirit: I have often wondered at
Antiquity, which doting extremely upon a sequestered, a solitary, retired, and
Monkish life, sticks not to give out, that all perfection is in it, whereas
indeed there is no greater argument of imperfection in good men, quam non posse
pati solemn, non multitudinem; not to be able without offense to walk the
public ways, to entertain the common occasions, but to live only to God and
to themselves: Vtilis ipse sibi fortassis, inutilis orbi; Men of no great
public use, but excellent for themselves; Saints indeed in private, but being
called forth into common life, are like Batts in the Sun, utterly ignorant of
public practice; like Scheubelius a great Mathematician, but by book only,
and not by practice, who being required sometime in an Army to make use of his
Quadrant, knew not the difference between umbra recta, and umbra versa: Yet,
Beloved, because this kind of good men is by far the greatest in number; and
secondly, because it is both an usual and a dangerous error of many men, to
pretend to strength, when they are but weak, and so forgetting their place,
range themselves among the first, whereas they ought to have kept station among
the second sort, I will take leave both to advise my self, and all that hear me
to like better of the safer, though the weaker side, and to avoid the
exprobration of a Recepisti here in my Text, simply non recipiendo, by not
receiving, not admitting at all of the outward, lower, and temporal good
things, rather then by an improvident fool-hardiness to thrust our selves upon
occasions which we are unable to manage without offense. This I am the more
willing to do, because there is not among men a greater error committed, and
more frequent, then in this kind; for in most things in the world, men that
have no skill in them, will be content to acknowledge their ignorance, and to
give place to better experience: should we put the discussion of some point of
Scholarship to the Plough-hind, or a Case in Law to the Physician, or a point
in Physic to the Lawyer, none of these will offer to interpose, but will
advise to consult with every one in his proper mystery; but let offer be made
of moneys, lands, places of honor, and preferment, and who will excuse
himself, who will acknowledge his ignorance, or weakness to manage them?
Whereas in all the Arts and Sciences there are not so many errors committed,
as in the unskilful use of these things, cum tamen nusquam periculosius
erretur, and yet our errors are no where so dangerous: It is therefore a thing
most necessary, that in this behalf we advise men, either to know their
weakness, or to suspect their strength. Malo cautior esse quam fortior; fortis
saepe captus est, cautus rarissime; better to be cautelous and wary, then
strong and hardy; the strong man has been often captivated, but the wary man
very seldom. We read in many places of Moses and Samuel of a race of men,
greater in bulk and stature, then the ordinary men, unto whom men of common
inches seemed but as Grasshoppers; such were the Anakims, the Enims, the Horims,
the Zamzummims, the Rephaims, and the like: but if you read the Scriptures, you
shall find it observed unto your hand, that the men of lesser bodies always
drove them out; if you demand the reason, experience will answer you, that the
one went upon the opinion of strength and hardiness, the other of wary wit and
policy: It fares no otherwise with these two orders of men, of which I have
spoken, there is the Anakim, the man that goes forth in the conceit of his
strength and valor; there is the man of mean stature, whose strength is his
wariness; were there a survey taken of both these, it would be found, that more
by far have perished by unadvised adventuring upon the things of this world,
then by discreet and sober retiring.

Wherefore, do thou find that thou come on, and thrivest in the world? that
the good things of this world woo thee, and cast themselves into thy lap? that
wealth, that honors, that abundance waits upon thee? take heed how thou
presume of thy strength to manage them, look well upon them, and see if there
be not written in the forehead of every one of them, Recepisti. But, Beloved,
I perceive I deceive my self, for these gay things of the world carry not their
Recepisti in their foreheads, as they come toward us, they are smooth and
fair: you can prognosticate nothing by their countenance, but serene and Summer
weather: Our great master Aristotle has told us, That if our pleasures did
look upon us when they come to us, as they do when they turn their back and
leave us, we would never entertain them; these goodly things have their
Recepisti written in their back, it is never discovered, till it be too late to
mend it, when death summons us, when the world, the flesh, the glory and pomp
of life turns its back and leaves us, then shall you read Recepisti. Cave
therefore, presume not, but be wary, and that thou may avoid a Recepisti,
cave nerecipias, be sure that thou receive not: How many of those, think you,
who out of their opinion of skill and strength, have given free entertainment
to the world, have made large use of the world, lived abundantly, fared costly,
dwelt sumptuously, clothed themselves richly, when their time and hour came,
would rather have gone out of some poor cottage, then out of a Princely Palace,
and lived with no noise in the world, that so they might have died in some
peace? See you not, what some great Persons in the Church of Rome have often
done? Charles 5, the Prince of Parma, sundry others, though they lived in all
pomp and state, yet at their death they desired to be buried in a poor
Capuchin's hood; miserable men! If to die in a state of perfect sequestration
from the world were so precious, so available a thing; how much more precious,
more available had it been to live in it? For thus to die, not having thus
lived, is nothing else, but to give sentence against their own life; for we
shall not appear before God as we died, but as we lived. To profess hate and
dissertion of the world at our death, as most do; to put on humiliation at our
death, that live at ease and in state all our life; this is but to be buried in
a Capuchin's hood: What is it, beloved, that thus reforms our judgment, and
clears our sight at that hour? Nothing but this, all our pleasures, all our
honors, all the May-games of our life, they now shall show themselves unto us,
and every one cry out unto us, Recepistt, Thou have received thy good things.

Now, Beloved, that I may a little the better strengthen with good reason this
my advice, de non recipiendo, of retiring from, and rejecting the goodly things
of the world, give me leave a little to consult with my Topics, and to try out
of what place I may draw some arguments, to bring you on the easier.

And first of all, were there no other reason to persuade you, yet the very
reading of this story, where I have taken my Text, would afford arguments
enough; for what meant Abraham, I beseech you, when he told the rich man, he
had received his good things? Did he use some obscure and unknown phrase, which
no circumstance of the story could open? It stands not with the goodness of the
Holy Ghost, to tell us of our danger in unknown Language; something therefore
certainly we shall find, to open the meaning: cast back your eye upon the
description of the person, whom Abraham charges with this error, and see if
you find not a paraphrase there; the man to whom this phrase is applied, is
described by the properties, of which I understand not that any one is a
virtue; first, it is said, he was Rich; secondly, he ware scarlet, and soft
linen; thirdly, he was (...), he was jovial, and feasted liberally every day:
does not this accurate description of the person show his error? For to what
other purpose else could this description serve? Either here is his error, or
this character is in vain; it seems therefore we must conclude, that to be
rich, to cloth our selves costly, to fare deliciously, thus to do, is to
receive the good things in our life, except some favorable interpretation do
help us out; but we must take heed how we do de scripturis interpretationibus
ludere, dally with, and elude Scripture by interpretations, (...). When St.
John describes the world, which he forbids us to follow, he makes three parts
of it, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life: Do
not all these three appear here in the character of our man? Where is the lust
of the eye, if it be not in gaudy apparel? Where is the lust of the flesh, at
least one great branch of it, if it be not in the use of dainty diet? Where is
the pride of life, if not in riches? And what reason have you now to doubt,
what should be the meaning of Recepisti, thou have Received thy good things? He
then that fears to hear a Recepisti, if he be rich, let him not forget to
distribute, and empty those bags which lie up by him; if he be costly clad, let
him turn his scarlet into sackcloth; if he feed deliciously, let him turn his
costly dishes into temperance and fasting: otherwise, what can we plead for our
selves, that we should not, as well as this man in my Text, when our time
comes, hear our Recepisti?

But I see what it is, peradventure, that troubles you, you will ask me,
Whether I will avouch it to be a sin to be Rich? I must walk warily, lest I lay
my self open to exception: Pelagius grounding himself upon that of our Savior,
[ It is impossible for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven] taught
that lesson indeed, as the words do lie, and would by no means grant, that a
rich man could be saved; but for this the Church noted him for an Heretic, for
among his Heresies this is scored up for one, together with that, that it is
not lawful to swear; but if Pelagius had never otherwise erred, the Church
might very well have pardoned him that Heresy. Many times it falls out, by the
reason of the hardness of our hearts, that there is more danger in pressing
some truths, then in maintaining some errors: that it is lawful sometime to
sport our selves, that it is lawful to feast at Christmas, that it is lawful to
swear, and many other things of the like nature, are all truths; yet there is
no necessity we should press them in our Sermons to the people, for there is no
fear the people will ever forget these, Cavendum est ne nimium meminerint,
better to labor that they do not too much remember them; he that will labor
in repressing the abuses, which people ground upon these truths, must remember
the old rule, Iniquum petendum est, ut aeqnum feras, he must go very near to
teach for truth the contrary falsehood. To return then from this digression to
our rich man; Pelagius, I grant, was deceived, when he shut all rich men out of
the Kingdom of Heaven: but suppose we that he had prevailed in this doctrine,
that he had wrought all the world to this bent, that the Church had received it
for Catholic doctrine, show me, he that can, what inconvenience would have
attended this error? If every rich man should suddenly become liberal, and
disburse his moneys where his charity directed him; if every painted Gallant
did turn his Peacocks feathers into sackcloth; if every glutton left his full
dishes, and betook himself to temperance and fasting, yea, and thought himself
in conscience bound so to do, out of fear, lest he might hear of Recepisti, I
persuade my self the state of Greece would never suffer the more for this but
the state of Christianity would have thrived the more. Well had it been for our
rich man here, if he had been a Pelagian; for this point of Pelagianism is the
surest remedy, that I know, against a Recepisti; whereas on the contrary side,
by reason of the truth, many rich and covetous persons flatter themselves in
their sin, whereof they die well conceited, from which they had been freed, had
it been their good fortune to have been thus far deceived, and been Pelagians.
Let men therefore either quite refuse riches, if they offer themselves, which
is the advice I give, or if they will give them acceptance, let them believe,
that if they be rich, they may be saved; but let them so live, as if they could
not; for the one shall keep them from error in their Faith, the other from sin
in their Actions.

A second reason, persuading us to the neglect of these so much admired things
of the world, is the consideration of certain abuses, which they put upon us,
certain fallacies, and false glosses, by which they delude us; for I know not
how, the world has cried them up, and has given them goodly titles, Vt vel
lactis gallinacei sperare possis hanstum, as Pliny speaks; men call them
blessings, and favors, and rewards, and think those men most blessed of God, who
enjoy most of them; these goodly titles serve for nothing, but to set men on
longing after them, and so fill those that have them with false persuasions,
and those that have them not with despair and discontents. Were they indeed
blessings, were they rewards, then were our case very ill, and we our selves in
greater danger of a Recepisti then before: for as Abraham here tells the man of
recepisti bona, thou have received thy good things, so our Savior tells more
then once of some qui habent mercedem, have their reward; if then we shall beg,
and receive these things at the hands of God, as a reward of our service, we
shall be no more able, when we come to appear before our God, to shelter our
selves from an habetis mercedem, you have your reward, then the rich man here
could defend himself from a Recepisti. They may indeed pass for rewards, and
blessings, and that truly too, but to a sad and disconsolate end; for there is
no man, though never so wicked, but that some way or other does some good, some
cup of cold water has been given, some small service enterprized even by the
worst of men: now God who leaves no service unrewarded, no good office
unrespected, therefore preserves these sublunary blessings of purpose, ut paria
faciat, to clear accounts with men here, who otherwise might seem to claim
something at his hand at that great day. It is the question Ahasuerus makes,
What honor and dignity has been done to Mordecai for this? God is more
careful of his honor then Ahasuerus was; none more careful then he to reward
every service with some honor: Nebuchadnezzar was no Saint, I trow, yet
because of his long-service in the subduing of Tire, God gives him Egypt for
his reward, they are the Prophet Ezechiel's words: when therefore thou see
God willing to bring the world upon thee, to enrich thee, to raise thee to
honors, suspectam habe hanc Domini indulgentiam, as Tertullian says, be
jealous of this courtesy of God; or rather cry out with St. Bernard,
Misericordiam hanc nolo Domine, O Lord, I will none of this kind of mercy: for
how know thou whether he reward not thee, as he did Nebuchadnezzar, only to
even accounts with thee, and show thee that he is not in thy debt, that thou
may hear at the last either a Recepisti, or an habes mercedem, thou have thy
reward? O quanta apud Deum merces, si in praesenti praemium non sperarent,
says St. Hierom, O how great a reward might many men receive at the hand of
God, if they did not anticipate their reward, and desire it in this life? Why
do we capitulate with him for our services? Why not rather out of pious
ambition desire to have God in our debt? He that does God the greatest service,
and receives here from him the least reward, is the happiest man in the world.
There goes a story of Aquinas, that praying once before the Crucifix, the
Crucifix miraculously speaks thus unto him, Eene de me scripsisti Thoma, quam
ergo mercedem accipies? Thou have written well of me, Thomas, what reward do
thou desire? To whom Aquinas is made to answer, Nullam, Domine, praeter
Teipsum; No reward, Lord, but thy self: It Is great pity this Tale is not true,
it does so excellently teach, what to ask of God for our reward in his service.
Let God but assure thee of this reward, caetera omnia vota Deo remittas, thou
may very well pardon him all the rest. Let us therefore amend our language,
and leave off these solecisms, and misapplied denominations of blessings, and
favors, and rewards, names too high for any thing under the Moon, and at our
leisure find out other names to express them; as for this great esteem which we
make of the things below, it comes but from this, that we know not the value of
things above; did we believe our selves to be the heirs, and the sons of God,
and knew the price of our inheritance in heaven, it could not be, that we
should harbor so high and honorable conceits of earthly things. It is a
famous speech of Martin Luther, Homo perfect credens se esse haeredem and
filium Dei, non diu superstes maneret, sed statim immodico gaudio absorbere^^r:
Did a man indeed believe that he is a son and heir unto God, it could not be,
that such a man should long live, but forthwith he would be swallowed up, and
die of immoderate joy. And certainly either our not beleiving, or not rightly
valuing the things of God, or howsoever, not knowing them, is the cause of this
our languishing, and impatient longing after earthly things. It is but a plain
comparison which I shall use, yet because it fits the person to whom I will
apply it, and because it is Theophylact's in his Comments on St. Luke's Gospel,
I will not be ashamed to make use of it; Swine, says he, have their eyes so
framed, that they cannot look up to Heaven; their Keepers therefore when they
find themselves troubled with their crying, are wont to cast them upon their
backs, (...), and so make them cease their crying; for that Beast being amazed
to see the frame and beauty of Heaven, which before he had never seen, (...),
being stricken with admiration, forgets his crying: The eyes of many men seem
to be framed like those of Swine; they are not able to cast them up to Heaven;
for would they but cast themselves upon their backs, turn their face from
earth, and veiw the beauty of things above, it could not be, but all this
claim, or rather clamor after earthly things should utterly cease.

Again, (yet the more to quicken one to the neglect of these things below)
among many other fallacies, by which they delude us, I have made choice of one
more: They present themselves unto us, sometimes as Necessaries, sometimes as
Ornaments unto us in our course of virtue and happiness; whereas they are but
mere impertinences, neither is it any way material whether we have them yea or
no: Virtus censum non requirit, nudo homine contenta est; Virtue and happiness
require nothing else but a man: Thus says the Ethnicks, and Christianity much
more: For it were a strange thing that we should think, that Christ came to
make Virtue more chargeable: In regard of Virtue and Piety, all estates, all
conditions, high and low, are alike. It is noted by Petronius for the vanity of
rich men, Qui solas divitias extruere curant, nihil voluntinter homines melius
credi, quam quod ipsi tenent; Those men whose minds are set upon wealth and
riches, would have all men believe that it is best so to do. But riches and
poverty make no difference, for we believe him that has told us, there is no
difference, Jew and Gentile, high and low, rich and poor, all are one in Christ
Jesus. Non naturae paupertas, sed opinionis est, says S. Ambrose, Poverty, as
men call it, is but a fancy, there is no such thing indeed, it is but a
figment, an Idol, men first framed, and set it up, and afterward feared it;
Oculi nostri tota haec lunuria est, as some Naturalists tell us, that the
Rainbow is oculi opus, a thing framed only by the eye; so this difference
betwixt rich and poor is but the creature of the eye, Smyndyrides the Sybarite
was grown so extremely dainty, that he would grow weary with the sight of
another man's labor, and therefore when sometime he saw a poor man digging, and
painfully laboring, he began to faint, and pant, and requires to be removed:
Beloved, when we are thus offended to see another man meanly clad, meanly
housed, meanly traded, all this is but out of a Sybaritish ridiculous
daintiness, for all this is but to grow weary at the sight of another man's
labor: Would we follow our Savior's precept, and put out this eye of ours,
the greatest part of all this vanity were quite extinguished; for what were all
outward state and pomp imaginable, were no eye to see or regard it?

Now, Beloved, yet to see this more plainly, what is the main end of our life?
what is it, at which with so much pain and labor we strive to arrive? It is,
or should be nothing else but Virtue and Happiness: now these are alike
purchasable in all estates; Poverty, disease, distress, contumely, contempt;
these are as well the object of Virtue as Wealth, liberty, honor, reputation,
and the rest of that forespoken rank: Happiness therefore may as well dwell
with the poor, miserable, and distressed persons, as with persons of better
fortune, since it is confessed by all, that happiness is nothing else but actio
secundum virtutem, a leading of our life according to virtue. As great art may
be expressed in the cutting of a Flint, as in the cutting of a Diamond, and so
the workman do well express his skill, no man will blame him for the baseness
of the matter, or think the worse of his work: Beloved, some man has a
Diamond, a fair and glittering fortune; some man has a Flint, a hard, harsh,
and despicable fortune; let him bestow the same skill and care in polishing and
cutting of the latter, as he would or could have done on the former, and be
confident it will be as highly valued (if not more highly rewarded) by God, who
is no accepter of persons, but accepts every man according to that he has,
and not according to that he has not; To him let us commit our selves: To him
be all honor and praise, now and for ever.

Amen.
Numb. XXXV. Verse 33. And the Land cannot be cleansed of blood that is shed in
it; but by the blood of him that shed it.
THese words are like unto a Scorpion: for as in that, so in these, the
self-same thing is both Poison and Remedy: Blood is the poison, Blood is the
remedy; he that is stricken with the Scorpion, must take the oil of the
Scorpion to cure him. He that has poisoned a Land with the sin of Blood, must
yield his own Blood for Antidote to cure it. It might seem strange, that I
should amongst Christians thus come and deliver a speech of Blood. For when I
read the notes and characters of a Christian in holy Scriptures, methinks it
should be almost a sin for such a one to name it. Possess your souls in
patience. By this shall men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one
another. Peace I leave with you. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace in
the Holy Ghost. Let your softness be known to all men. The wisdom that is from
above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of
mercy. It is reported by Avenzoar a great Physician, that he was so
tenderhearted, that he could not endure to see a man let-bloud: He that should
read these passages of Scripture, might think that Christians were like
Avenzoar, that the sight of blood should be enough to affright them. But is the
common Christian so soft, so tenderhearted? is he so peaceable, so tame and
tractable a creature? You shall not find two things of more different
countenance and complexion, then that Christianity which is commended unto us
in the writings of the Apostles, and Evangelists, and that which is current in
use and practice of the times. He that shall behold the true face of a
Christian, as it is deciphered and painted out unto us in the Books of the New
Testament, and unpartially compare it with that copy or counterfeit of it,
which is expressed in the life and demeanor of common Christians, would think
them no more like, then those sheilds of gold which Solomon made, were unto
those of brass which Reh^boam made in their stead: and might suppose that the
Writers of those Books had brought vota magis, quam praecepta, had rather
fancied to themselves some admirable pattern of a Christian, such as they could
wish, then delivered Rules and Laws, which seriously and indeed ought or could
be practiced in common life and conversation. St. James observes, that he which
beholds his natural face in a glass, goes his way, and immediately forgets what
manner of man he was. Beloved, how careful we are to look upon the Glass, the
Books of holy Scriptures, I cannot easily pronounce; But this I am sure of, we
go our ways, and quickly forget what manner of shape we saw there. As Jacob and
Esau had both one father, Isaac; both one mother, Rebecca; yet the one was
smooth and plain, the other rough and hairy, of harsh and hard countenance and
condition: so these two kinds of Christians, of which but now I spoke, though
both lay claim to one Father and Mother, both call themselves the sons of God,
and the sons of the Church, yet are they almost as unlike as Jacob and Esau;
the one smooth, gentle, and peacable, the other rough and harsh. The notes and
characters of Christians, as they are described in holy Scriptures, are
patience, easily putting up and digesting of wrongs; humility, preferring all
before our selves: And St. James tells us, that the wisdom that is from above,
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated. St. James indeed
has given the first place unto purity, and it were almost a sin to compare
Christian virtues together, and make them strive for precedence and place. For
what Solomon says upon another occasion, is here much more true, Say not, Why
is this thing better then that? for every thing in its time is seasonable. Yet
he that shall mark how every where the Scriptures commend unto us gentleness
and meekness, and that peace is it, quam nobis Apostoli totis viribus Spiritus
sancti commendant, as Tertullian speaks, which the Apostles endeavor with all
the strength and force of the holy Ghost to plant amongst us, might a little
invert the words of St. James, and read them thus, The wisdom that is from
above, is first peaceable, then pure. The Son of God, who is the Wisdom of the
Father, and who for us men came down from Heaven, first, and before all other
virtues commended this unto the world: For when he was born, the song of the
Angels was, Peace upon earth, and good will toward men. All his doctrine was
peace, his whole life was peaceable, and no man heard his voice in the streets;
His last legacy and bequest left unto his disciples was the same; Peace, says
he, I leave unto you, my peace I give unto you: As Christ, so Christians. In
the building of Solomon's Temple, there was no noise of any hammer, of any
instrument of Iron, so in the spiritual building and frame of a Christian,
there is no sound of Iron, no noise of any weapons, nothing but peace and
gentleness. Ex praecepto fidei non minus rea ira est sine ratione suscepta,
quam in operibus legis homicidium, says St. Austin, Unadvised anger by the Law
of Faith is as great a sin, as murder was by the Law of Moses. As some
Physicians have thought, that in man's body, the Spleen has very little use,
and might well be spared; and therefore in dealing with ^undry diseased
persons, they endeavor by Physic to abate, and take away that part in them,
as much as may be; so if we look into a Christian man, as he is proposed to us
in the Gospel, we may justly marvel to what purpose God has planted in him
this faculty and passion of anger; since he has so little use of it; and the
Gospel in a manner does spiritually, diet and physic him for it, and
endeavors much to abate, if not quite to purge out that quality. Beloved, we
have hitherto seen who Jacob is, and what manner of man the Christian is, that
is described unto us in holy Scripture. Let us a little consider his brother
Esau, the Christian in passage, and who commonly in the account of the world
goes for one. Is he so gentle and tractable a creature? Is his countenance so
smooth, his body so free from gall and spleen? To try this, as the Devil
sometimes spoke unto Job, Touch him in his goods, touch him in his body, and
see if he will not curse thee to thy face: so touch this man a little in his
goods, touch him in his reputation and honor; touch him in any thing that he
loves, (for this is the only way to try how far these commands of peace, and
forbearance, and long suffering prevail with us) and see if he will not forget
and loose all his patience. Which of us is there that understands the words and
precepts of our Savior in their litteral sense, and as they lie? The precepts
of suffering wrong, rather then to go to Law; of yiedling the coat to him that
would take the cloak, of readiness to receive more wrongs, then to revenge one:
these and all the Evangelical commands of the like nature Interpretamento
detorquemus, we have found out favorable interpretations and glosses,
restrictions and evasions, to wind our selves out of them, to shift them all
off, and put them by, and yet pass for sound and current Christians: We think
we may be justly angry, continue long Suits in Law, call to the Magistrate for
revenge, yea, sometimes take it into our own hands: all this and much more we
think we may lawfully, and with good reason do, any precept of Christ to the
contrary notwithstanding. And as it usually comes to pass, the permitting and
tolerating lesser sins, opens way to greater, so by giving passage and inlet to
those lesser impatiences an discontents, we lay open a gap to those fouler
crimes, even of murder and bloodshed. For as men commonly suppose, that all
the former breaches of our patience, which but now I mentioned, may well enough
stand with the duties of Christians: so there are who stay not here, but think,
that in some cases it may be lawful, yea, peradventure necessary, at least very
pardonable for Christians, privately to seek each others blood, and put their
lives upon their swords, without any wrong to their vocation; out of this have
sprung many great inconveniences, both private and public. First, Laws made
too favorable in case of bloodshed. Secondly, a too much facility and easiness
in Princes and Magistrates, sometimes to give pardon and release for that
crime. Thirdly and chiefly, (for it is the special cause indeed that moved me
to speak in this Argument) an over promptness in many young men, who desire to
be counted men of valor and resolution, upon every slight occasion to raise a
quarrel, and admit of no other means of composing and ending it, but by sword
and single Combat. Partly therefore to show the grievousness and greatness of
this sin of Bloodshed, and partly to give the best counsel I can for the
restraint of those conceits and errors which give way unto it, I have made
choice of these few words out of the Old Testament which but now I read. In the
New Testament there is no precept given concerning Bloodshed. The Apostles seem
not to have thought, that Christians ever should have had need of such a
prohibition; For what needed to forbid those to seek each others Blood, who are
not permitted to speak over hastily one to another. When therefore I had
resolved with my self to speak something concerning the sin of Bloodshed, I
was in a manner constrained to reflect upon the Old Testament, and make choice
of these words; And the Land cannot be purged of Blood that is shed in it, but
by the Blood of him that shed it.

In which words, for my more orderly proceeding, I will observe these two
general parts: First, the greatness of the sin. Secondly, the means to cleanse
and satisfy for the guilt of it. The first, that is, the greatness of the sin,
is expressed by two circumstances. First, by the generality, extent, and
largeness of the guilt of it: and secondly, by the difficulty of cleansing it.
The largeness and compass of the guilt of this sin, is noted unto us in the
word Land, and the Land cannot be purged. It is true in some sense of all sins,
Nemo sibi uni errat, no man sins in private, and to himself alone; For as the
Scripture notes of that action of Iepthe, when he vowed his daughter unto God,
That it became a Custom in Israel, so is it in all sins: The error is only in
one person, but the example spreads far and wide, and thus every man that sins,
sins against the whole Land, yea, against the whole world. For who can tell how
far the example and infection of an evil action does spread? In other sins the
infection is no larger then the disease, but this sin like a plague; one brings
the infection, (...), but thousands die for it; yet this sin of Blood diffuses
and spreads it self above all other sins; for in other sins, noxa sequitur
caput, the guilt of them is confined to the person that committed them; God
himself has pronounced of them, The son shall not bear the sins of the father,
the soul that sins shall die the death: But the sin of Blood seems to claim
an exception from this Law; if by time it be not purged, like the frogs of
Egypt the whole land stank of them; it leaves a guilt upon the whole land in
which it is committed. Other sins come in like Rivers, and break their banks to
the prejudice and wrong of private persons; but this comes in like a Sea,
raging and threatening to overwhelm whole Countries. If Blood in any land do lie
unrevenged, every particular soul has cause to fear, lest part of the penalty
fall on him. We read in the Books of Kings, that long after Readiness death, God
plagued the Land of Iewry with three years famine; because Saul in his
lifetime without any just cause shed the Blood of some of the Gibeonites:
neither the famine ceased, till seven of Readiness nephews had died for it. In
this story there are many things rare, and worth our observation. First, the
generality and extent of the guilt of Bloodshed, (which is the cause for which
I urged it) it drew a general famine on the whole Land. Secondly, the
continuance and length of the punishment; it lasted full three years and
better. Thirdly the time of the plague; it fell long after the person offending
was dead. Fourthly, whereas it is said in my Text, That Blood is cleansed by
the Blood of him that shed it: here the Blood of him that did this sin,
sufficed not to purge the Land from it; that desperate and woeful end, that
befell both Saul and his sons in that last and fatal Battle upon Mount- Gilboa,
a man may think had freed the Land from danger of Blood: yet we see that the
Blood of the Gibeonites had left so deep a stain, that it could not be sponged
out without the Blood of seven more of Readiness offspring. So that in some cases
it seems we must alter the words of my Text, The Land cannot be purged of
Blood, but by the Blood of him and his Posterity that shed it. St. Peter tells
us, that some men's sins go before them unto judgment, and some men's sins follow
after. Beloved, here is a sin that exceeds the members of this division for
howsoever it goes before or after us unto judgment, yet it has a kind of
Vbiquity, and so runs before, so follows us at the heels, that it stays behind
us too, and calls for vengeance long after that we are gone. Blood unrevenged
passes from Father to Son like an Heirlome or Legacy: and he that dies with
Blood hanging on his fingers, leaves his offspring and his Family as pledges
to answer it in his stead. As an Engineer that works in a Mine lays a train, or
kindles a Match, and leaves it behind him, which shall take hold of the powder
long after he is gone; so he that sheds Blood, if it be not betimes purged, as
it were kindles a Match, able to blow up not only a Parliament, but even a
whole Land, where Blood lies unrevenged.

Secondly, another circumstance serving to express unto us the greatness of
this sin, I told you, was the difficulty of cleansing it, intimated in those
words, cannot be cleansed but by the Blood of him that shed it. Most of other
sins have sundry ways to wash the guilt away; As in the Levitical Law, the
woman that was unclean by reason of Childbearing, might offer a pair of
Turtle-doves, or two young Pigeons: so he that travels with other sins, has
either a Turtle or a Pigeon, he has more ways then one to purify him: prayer
unto God, or true repentance, or satisfaction to the party wronged, or bodily
affliction, or temporary mulct. But, he that travels with the sin of Blood, for
him there remains no sacrifice for sin, but a fearful expectation of vengeance,
he has but one way of cleansing, only his Blood, the Blood of him that shed
it.

The second general part which we considered in these words, was, that one mean
which is left to cleanse Blood, expressed in the last words, the blood of him
that shed it. The Apostle to the Hebrews speaking of the sacrifices of the Old
Testament, notes, that without Blood there was no cleansing, no forgiveness. He
spoke it only of the Blood of beasts, of Bulls and Goats, who therefore have
their Blood, that they might shed it in man's service, and for man's use. But
among all the Levitical Sacrifices, there was not one to cleanse the manslayer:
For the Blood of the cattle upon a thousand hills was not sufficient for this,
yet was that sin to be purged with Blood too, and that by a more constant and
perpetual Law then that of Sacrifices. For the cleansing of other sins by Blood
is done away, the date of it is out; but to cleanse Blood by blood remains as a
Law to our times, and so shall unto the worlds end: Sanguine quaerendi reditus,
out of Blood no way to get but by Blood. (...), says St. Basil, have thou shed
Blood? would thou be free from the guilt of it? Thy best way is to be a
Martyr, and shed thy Blood for Christ's sake. Now that what I have to say may
the better be conceived and lodged up in your memories, I will comprehend and
order all that I will speak under three heads. First, I will in general yet a
little further, briefly show how great a sin the sin of Blood is. Secondly, I
will speak of the redress of some misorders very frequent in our age, which
give way to this sin, especially private revenge and single combat. Thirdly, I
will touch at the means of taking the guilt of Blood away, which here the holy
Ghost commends to those which are set in Authority to that purpose. And first
of the greatness of the crime and sin of Blood.

Of sins in holy Scripture there be two sorts recorded. One sort is a silent,
dumb, and quiet sin; God does as it were seek after it to find it, as the
people did after Saul, when he was hidden amongst the stuff: Of this nature are
the ordinary sins of our life, which do more easily find pardon at the hands of
God; but there is a second sort of sin, which is a vocal and a crying sin, a
sin like that importunate widow in the Gospel, that will not suffer the Judge
to be quiet, till he has done justice; and those are the more heavy and
grievouser sins of our lives: Of this second sort, there are two sins, to which
the Scripture does attribute this crying faculty. First, the sin of Sodom; for
so God tells Abraham, The cry of Sodom and Gomorrha is come up before me. The
second is the sin of which I am now to speak, the sin of Bloodshed; for so God
tells Cain, The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the earth. The
sin of Adam in Paradise doubtless was a great and heinous sin, which has thus
made us all the children of death; yet it seems to be but of the rank of mute
sins, and to have had no voice to betray it; God comes unto Adam, convents him,
examins him, as if he had not known it, and seems not to believe any such thing
was done, till himself had confessed it. But blood is an unmannerly,
importunate, and clamorous sin, God shall not need to come and enquire after
it, it will come up unto him, and cry as the souls do under the Altar in the
Revelation, How long, Lord, how long? Nec patimur iracunda Deum ponere fulmina,
suffers not God to forget judgment, or entertain a thought of mercy, To
satisfy therefore the cry of this importunate sin, and to show men the
grievousness of it, the Laws of God and men have wonderfully conspired in the
avenging of blood, by what means, or by what creature soever it were shed.
Beasts, unreasonable creatures, though whatsoever they do, they cannot be said
to sin: for whatsoever they do, they do by force of that natural instinct, by
which they are guided, and led as by their proper Law: yet man's blood if they
shed it, is revenged upon them: God himself is the Author of this Law, ( Genesis
ix.) where he tells Noah, The blood of your lives I will require, at the hands
of every beast will I require it: And accordingly in the xxi. of Exodus, he
precisely enacts a Law, De Bove petulco, If an Ox gore a man that he die, the
Ox shall be slain, and the flesh cast away as an abomination. The Laws of
natural men, who had no knowledge of God, come little behind this; yea, they
may seem to have gone before it in severe revenging of blood: For amongst the
Laws by which Athens, that famous City of Greece was governed, there was one,
that if a Wall by chance had fallen down, and slain a man as the tower of
Siloam did of which we read in the Gospel; that then the Judges should sit, and
formally arraign that Wall, condemn it, and throw the stones of it out of the
Country. This so formal proceeding against unreasonable, against dull and
senseless creatures, has been thus jointly both by God and man practiced only
for our example, to teach us how precious the life of man ought to be in our
eyes: and it resembles that action of Christ in the Gospel, where for our
instruction he curses the barren fig tree: Sterilitas nostra in ficu vapulat,
etc.

Now as exemplary justice is severely done on these creatures for man's
instruction; so much more if man himself kept not his hands clean from blood,
did the Laws of God proceed with much strictness and severity: for to say
nothing of gross, malicious, and wilful murder; if a man only in his haste
struck another with a weapon, or with a stone, so that he died, though the
striker intended but to hurt, yet he was to die for it. That he did it in
anger, that he did it in his drink, that de did it provoked, that he did it in
defense of his honor and reputation, none of all these pretenses might excuse
him. Nay, which is yet more, God himself propounds the case; If, says he, a
man cleaving wood, his ax head fly off, and hit his neighbor, so that he
kills him, except he could recover one of the Cities of Refuge, he was to die,
and having recovered a City of Refuge, if before the death of the High Priest
he were taken without the walls of the City, he was to die. So strict was God
in the case of chance-medly, (as they call it) in a case which he takes unto
himself, and makes himself the Author of. For in the xxi. of Exodus, speaking
of the man that thus sheds blood by chance and unwittingly, his words are
these, If a man lie not in wait, sed Deus objecerit manni ejus, but God put him
into his hands, I will appoint him a City of Refuge to fly unto. In which
words God acknowledges, that he who thus dies by chance, dies by his
providence, and not by the sin of him that slew him. If God (says he) shall
put him into his hands; yet you see what a penalty he lays upon the innocent
instrument of such Bloodshed. The blood that is shed in Battle, and in times of
lawful War, you all suppose as lawfully shed; yet notwithstanding, Moses in the
xvi. of Numbers, gives charge, that the soldiers returning from battle, should
stay a while without the camp, even seven days, until they were cleansed:
Again, when David advised with himself about the building of an house unto God,
he sends him word to lay by all thought of that, he was no fit person to do it;
and he gives the reason of it, Quia vir bellorum and sanguinum es tu, For thou
art a man have shed much blood, and fought many battles. Beloved, the Battles
which David fought were called the Lord's Battles, and therefore whatsoever he
did in that kind, he had doubtless very good warrant to do; and yet you see,
that it is an imputation to him, that he shed blood, though lawfully, ut fundi
sanguis ne just quidem, sine aliqua injustitia possit; so that it seems blood
cannot be justly shed, but that it brings with it some stain and spot of
injustice.

All this I have said to raise up in you as much as possibly I can, a right
conceit of the height and heinousness of this sin, and further, yet to effect
this in you, as in the beginning and entrance into my discourse, I briefly
touched at two reasons, showing the greatness of this sin, occasioned thereunto
by the words of my Text: so will I as briefly touch at the two more tending to
the same purpose; one drawn from the respect of the Wrong, which by this sin is
done unto God; another from the Wrong done to our selves.

And first, what wrong is done unto God: God himself shows us in the ix. of
Genesis; where giving this for an everlasting Law, [ He that sheddeth man's
blood, by man let his blood be shed;] he presently adds the reason of it, [ For
in the image of God made he man] We shall the better understand the force of
this reason, if we look a little into civil actions. It is the usual manner of
subjects, when they rebel against the Prince, to think they cannot more
effectually express their hate, then by disgracing, breaking, throwing down the
Statues and Images erected to his honor: The Citizens of Antioch, in a
sedition against Theodosius the Emperor, in one night disgracefully threw down
all his Statues; which fact of theirs caused St. Chrysostom, at that time
Preacher to that City, to make those famous Sermons, which from that action to
this day are called his (...), his Statues. This by so much the more is counted
a great offense, because next unto wronging and disgracing the very person of
the Prince, a greater insolence cannot be offered: For it expresses with what
welcome they would entertain him, if they had him in their power. Beloved, Man
is the Image of his Maker, erected by him as a Statue of his honor: He then
that shall despitefully handle, batter, and deface it, how can he be counted
otherwise then guilty of the highest Treason against his Maker. Rebellion,
says Samuel to Saul, is like the sin of superstition and idolatry; The sin of
Blood therefore equals the sin of Idolatry, since there cannot be a greater sin
of Rebellion against God, then to deface his Image. Idolatry, through
ignorance, sets up a false image of God, but this sin, through malice, defaces,
pulls down the true. Amongst the Heathen, sometimes the Statues of the
Emperors were had in such respect, that they were accounted Sanctuaries, and
such as for ^ffence fled unto them, it was not lawful to touch. Beloved, such
honor ought we to give unto a man, that if he have offended us, yet the Image
of God which shines in him ought to be as a Sanctuary unto him, to save him
from our violence, an admonitioner unto us, that we ought not to touch him.

A second reason, yet further showing the hainousness of this sin, is drawn
from the Wrong which is done to our selves. All other wrongs whatsoever they
be, admit of some recompense; Honors, Wealth, Preferments, if they be taken
from us, they may return as they did unto Job in far greater measure, and the
party wronged may receive full and ample satisfaction; but, What recompense may
be made to a man for his life? When that is gone, all the Kingdoms which our
Savior saw in the Mount, and the glory of them are nothing worth, neither is
all the world, all the power of Men and Angels, able to give the least breath
to him that has lost it. Nothing under God is able to make satisfaction for
such a wrong: the revenge that is taken afterward upon the party that has done
the wrong, cannot be counted a recompense; That is done In terrorem viventium,
non in subsidium mortuorum, It serves to deter the living from committing the
like outrage, but it can no way help him that is dead: David at the same time
committed two sins, great sins, Murder and Adultery; the reward of either of
which by Gods Law, is nothing else but death; yet for his Adultery he seems to
make some satisfaction to the party wronged; for the Text notes, that David
took her to his Wife, made her his Queen, and that he went in unto her, and
comforted her: all which may well be counted at least a part of recompense. But
for dead Vrias, what means could David make to recompense, to comfort him? For
this cause I verily suppose it is, that in his Penitential Psalm, wherein he
bewails his sin, he makes no particular confession, no mention of his Adultery;
but of the other, of Blood, he is very sensible, and expressly prays against it:
Deliver me from Bloud-guiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation; as if
Adultery in comparison of Murder were no crime at all.

I am sorry I should have any just occasion amongst Christian men, so long to
insist upon a thing so plain; and show that the sin of Blood is a great and
heinous sin: But, he that shall look into the necessities of these times, shall
quickly see that there is a great cause, why this doctrine should be very
effectually pressed: For many things are even publicly done, which in part argue
that men esteem of this sin much more slightly then they ought. Aristotle
observed it of Phaleas, (one that took upon him to prescribe Laws, by which a
Commonwealth might, as he thought, be well governed) that he had taken order
for the preventing of smaller faults, but he left way enough open to greater
crimes. Beloved the error of our Laws is not so great as that of Phaleas was,
yet we offend too, though on the contrary, and the less dangerous side; for
great and grievous sins are by them providently curbed, but many inferior
crimes find many times too free passage. Murder, though all be abominable, yet
there are degrees in it, some is more heinous then other. Gross, malicious,
premeditated, and wilful Murder, are by our Laws, so far as humane wisdom can
provide, sufficiently prevented: but Murders done in haste, or besides the
intent of him that did it, or in point of honor, and reputation, these find a
little too much favor; or Laws in this respect are somewhat defective, both in
preventing that it be not done, and punishing it when it is done; men have
thought themselves wiser then God, presuming to moderate the unnecessary
severity (as they seem to think) of his Laws. And hence it comes to pass, that
in Military Companies, and in all great Cities and places of Mart and
concourse, few months, yea, few weeks pass without some instance and example
of Bloodshed, either by sudden quarrel, or by challenge to Duel and single
Combat. How many examples in a short space have we seen of young men, men of
hot and fiery disposition, mutually provoking and disgracing each other, and
then taking themselves bound in high terms of valor, and honor, to end their
quarrels by their swords? That therefore we may the better discover the
unlawfulness of Challenge and private Combat, let us a little enquire and
examine in what cases Blood may lawfully, and without offense be shed; that so
we may see where, amongst these, single Combat may find its place.

The Manichees were of opinion, that it was not lawful to violate any thing in
which there was life, and therefore they would not pull a branch from a tree,
because forsooth there was life in it. To think that man's life may in no case
be taken from him, is but a branch of Manichism: and the words of my Text do
directly cross it, where it is laid down, that for the cleansing of blood,
blood may and must be shed. For the avoiding therefore of the extreme, we are
to note, that the lawful causes of Bloodshed are either Public or Private;
Public cases are two: First, in case of Justice, when a malefactor dies for
his sin by the hand of the Magistrate. Secondly, in case of public War and
defense of our Country; for the Doctrine of Christ is not (as some have
supposed) an enemy to Souldiership, and Military Discipline. When John the
Baptist began to preach Repentance, and amendment of life; amongst those that
came forth to understand and learn their duty, the Text says, that the
Soldiers came and asked him. Master, what shall we do? And John wills them not
to lay down their weapons, or to take another course of life (which he ought
and would have done, if that course had been unlawful) but he instructs them
rather in their calling; for, he gives them these two Lessons, Do no man wrong;
and, Be content with your pay, your wages; then which there could not have been
better, or more pertinent counsel given to Soldiers, these being the two
principal vices of Soldiers, to wrong places where they live, by forage and
pillage, and to mutiny in dislike of their pay. When St. Peter came to preach
to the Centurion in the Acts, we find not a syllable in all that Sermon
prejudicial to a Soldier's profession. And therefore accordingly in the times
of the Primitive Church, Christians served even under Heathen Emperors, and
that with the approbation of God himself.

For in the Ecclesiastic story we read of the Legio fulminatrix, of a Band of
Soldiers called the Thundering Band, because that at what time Marcus the
Emperor lying with his Army in Germany, was afflicted with a great drought,
and in great danger of the Enemy, when they were now about to join battle, the
Christian Soldiers ( that Band) fell flat on their faces, and by their instant
prayers obtained of God a great Tempest, which to the Emperor and his Army
brought store of cold refreshing water; but upon the Enemy nothing else but
fire and whirlwind. The Emperor's Epistle in which this story is related, is
this day extant, recovered by Justin Martyr, who lived about the time the thing
was done: Wherefore we may not doubt of the lawfulness of that profession,
which it has pleased God thus to grace, and honor with such a miracle.
Besides these two, there are no other public causes of Bloodshed. As for the
causes in private, I know but one, and that is, when a man is set upon, and
forced to it, in his own defense. If a theif be robbing in the night, and be
slain, the Law of God acquits him that did it: and by the Roman Laws, Nocturnum
furem quomodo libet, diurnum si se telo defenderet, It was lawful to kill a
theif by night at any hand, and by day if he used his weapon. Of private
Bloodshed there is no cause but this, and this we must needs allow of. For in
all other private necessities into which we may be driven, the Law and
Magistrate have place to whom we must repair for remedy: but in case of defense
of life against sudden onset, no Law can be made, except we would make a Law
to yield our throats to him that would cut them, or our Laws were like the
Prophet that came to Jeroboam at Bethel, and could dry up men's arms that
offered violence. Wherefore all cause of death, one only excepted, is public,
and that for great reason. For to die is not a private action to be undertaken
at our own, or at any other private man's pleasure and discretion: For, as we
are not born unto our selves alone, but for the service of God, and the
Commonwealth in which we live; so no man dies to himself alone, but with the
damage and loss of that Church or Commonwealth of which he is a member:
Wherefore it is not left to any private man's power to dispose of any man's
life, no not to our own, only God and the Magistrate may dispose of this. As
Soldiers in the Camp must keep their standing, neither may they move or alter,
but by direction from the Captain; so is it with us all: Our life is a warfare,
and every man in the world has his station and place, from whence he may not
move at his own, or at another man's pleasure, but only at the direction and
appointment of God, his General, or of the Magistrates, which are as Captains
and Leiutenants under him. Then our lawful times of death are either when our
day is come, or to fall in battle, or for misdemeanour to be cut off by the
public hand of Justice, Vt qui vivi prodesse noluerunt, little more respub.
utatur: He which otherwise wise dies, comes by surreption and stealth, and not
warrantably unto his end.

And though we have spoken something in Apology and defense of War, yet you may
not think, that in time of War your hands are loose, and that you may at your
pleasure shed the blood of your Enemy: Misericorditer etiam bella gerantur,
says St. Austin, even in War and Battle there is room for thoughts of peace
and mercy; and therefore many of the ancient Heroes, renowned Soldiers and
Captains, were very conscientious of shedding the blood of their Enemies,
except it were in Battle, and when there was no remedy to avoid it. In that
mortal Battle, Sam. 2. between the servants of David, and the servants of
Isbosheth, the Scripture reports that Abner fled, and Azahel, Ioab's brother,
following him hard at heels to kill him, Abner advises him twice, Turn aside,
says he, why should I smite thee to the ground; but when Azahel would not
hearken, but followed him still for his blood, then he stroke him with his
spear that he died: In the time of War, when he might lawfully have done it, in
the fury of the Battle Abner would not shed blood, but by constraint. Xenophon
would make us believe, that the Soldiers in Cyrus his Army were so well
disciplined, that one of them in time of the Battle, having lift up his arm to
strike his enemy, hearing the Trumpet to begin to sound the Retreat, let fall
his arm, and willingly lost his blow, because he thought the time of striking
was now past: So far were these men from thinking it lawful to shed the blood
of a Subject in time of peace, that they would not shed the blood of an Enemy
in time of War, except it were in the Field. Julius Caesar was one of the
greatest and stoutest Captains that ever was in the world, he stood the shock
of fifty set Battles, besides all Seiges and Out-rodes; he took a thousand
Cities and walled Towns; he overrun three hundred several Countries, and in
his Wars were slain well near twelve hundred thousand men, besides all those
that died in the Civil Wars, which were great numbers; yet this man protested
of himself, and that most truly, that he never drew blood but in the Field,
nunquam nis^ in acie stantem, never slew any man, but in a set battle: I have
been a little the bolder, in bringing these instances of Heathen men; First,
because the doctrine of Christ, through error, is counted an enemy to policy
of War and Martial Discipline; Secondly, because we have found out many
distinctions and evasions to elude the precepts of our blessed Savior and his
Apostles: For as it has been observed of the God-makers, I mean the Painters
and Statuaries among the Heathen, they were wont many times to paint their
Goddesses like their Mistresses, and then think them most fair, when they were
most like what they best loved: so is it with many Professors of Christian
Religion, they can temper the precepts of it to their liking, and lay upon them
glosses and interpretations as it were colors, and make it look like what they
love: Thirdly, because it is likely that the examples of these men will most
prevail with those to whom I speak, as being such to whom above all they affect
to be most like; Except therefore it be their purpose to hear no other
Judgment, but only their own unruly and misorderly affections, it cannot but
move them to see the examples of men, guided only by the light of reason, of
men, I say, the most famous in all the world for valor and resolution, to run
so mainly against them.

To come then unto the question of Duels; both by the light of reason, and by
the practice of men it does appear, that there is no case, wherein subjects may
privately seek each others lives: There are extant the Laws of the Jews, framed
by God himself; The Laws of the Roman Empire, made partly by the Ethnic,
partly by Christian Princes; A great part of the Laws of Sparta and Athens (two
warlike Commonwealths, especially the former) lie dispersed in our Books: yet
amongst them all is there not a Law or Custom, that permits this liberty to
Subjects: The reason of it, I conceive, is very plain; The principal thing,
next under God, by which a Commonwealth does stand, is the Authority of the
Magistrate, whose proper end is to compose, and end quarrels between man and
man, upon what occasion soever they grow; For were men peaceable, were men not
injurious one to another, there were no use of Government: Wherefore to permit
men in private to try their own rights, or to avenge their own wrongs, and so
to decline the sentence of the Magistrate, is quite to cut off all use of
Authority. Indeed it has been sometimes seen, that the event of a Battle, by
consent of both Armies, has been put upon single Combat, to avoid further
effusion of blood: but Combats betwixt Subjects for private causes, till these
latter Ages of the world was never allowed: yet, I must confess, the practice
of it is very ancient: For Cain, the second man in the world, was the first
Duelist, the first that ever challenged the Field (in the fourth of Genesis)
the Text says, That Cain spoke unto his Brother, and when they were in the
Field, he arose and slew him. The Septuagint, to make the sense more plain, do
add another clause, and tell us what it was he said unto his brother, (...),
Let us go out into the field; and when they were in the field, he arose and
slew him: Let us go out into the field, it is the very form and proper language
of a Challenge. Many times indeed our Gallants can formalize other words, but
evermore the substance, and usually the very words are no other but these of
Cain, Let us go out into the Field. Abel I persuade my self understood them not
as a challenge; for had he so done, he would have made so much use of his
discretion, as to have refused it; yet can we not choose but acknowledge a
secret judgment of God in this, that the words of Cain should still be so
Religiously kept till this day, as a Proem and Introduction to that action,
which doubtless is no other, then what Cain's was. When therefore our Gallants
are so ready to challange the Field, and to go into the Field, let them but
remember whose words they use, and so accordingly think of their action. Again,
notwithstanding Duels are of so ancient and worshipful a Parentage, yet could
they never gain so good acceptance as to be permitted, much less to be counted
lawful in the civil part of the world, till Barbarism had overran it. About
five or six hundred years after Christ, at the fall of the Roman Empire,
abundance of rude and barbarous people brake in and possessed the civiller part
of the world; who abolishing the ancient Laws of the Empire, set up many
strange Customs in their rooms. Amongst the rest, for the determining of
quarrels that might arise in case of doubtful title, or of false accusation, or
the like, they put themselves upon many unusual forms of Trial; as, to handle
red hot Iron, to walk barefoot on burning coals, to put their hands and feet
in scalding water, and many other of the like nature, which are reckoned up by
Hottoman a French Lawyer: For they presumed so far on Gods providence, that if
the party accused were innocent, he might do any of these without any smart or
harm. In the same cases, when by reason of unsufficient and doubtful evidence,
the Judges could not proceed to Sentence, as sometimes it falls out, and the
parties contending would admit of no reasonable composition, their manner was
to permit them to try it out by their swords; that so the Conqueror might be
thought to be in the right. They permitted, I say, thus to do; for at the best
'twas but a permission to prevent farther mischief; for to this end sometimes
some known abuses are tolerated: So God permitted the Jews upon slight
occasions to put their wives away, because he saw, that otherwise their
exorbitant lusts would not be bounded within these limits, which he is Paradise
in the beginning had set.

And it is observed of the wise men which had the managing and bringing up of
Nero the Emperor, that they suffered him to practice his lusts upon Act, one
of his Mothers Chamber-maids, Ne in stupra foeminarum illustrium perrumperet,
si illa libidine prohiberetur, Lest if he were forbidden that, he should turn
his lust upon some of the Noble-women. Permission and toleration warrants not
the goodness of any action. But, as Caiaphas said, Better one man die, then all
the people perish; so they that first permitted Duels seem to have thought,
better one or two mutinous persons, and disorderly, die in their folly, then
the whole Commonwealth to be put into tumult and combustion: yet even by these
men it was never so promiscuously tolerated, that every hasty couple, upon the
venting of a little choler, should presently draw their swords, but it was a
public or solemn action, done by order, with inspection, either of the Prince
himself, or of some other Magistrate, appointed to order it. Now certainly
there can be no very great reason for that action, which was thus begun by
Cain, and continued only by Goths and Vandals, and mere Barbarism.

Yet that we may a little better acquaint our selves with the quality of it,
let us a little examine the causes and pretenses which are brought by them who
call for trial by single Combat. The causes are usually two; First, disdain to
seem to do or suffer any thing for fear of death: Secondly, point of honor,
and not to suffer any contumely and indignity, especially if it bring with it
dis-reputation, and note of cowardice. For the first, Disdain to fear death; I
must confess I have often wondered with my self, how men durst die so
ventrously, except they were sure they died well: In aliis rebus siquid erratum
est, potest post modum corrigi, in other things which are learnt by practicing,
if we mistake, we may amend it: for the error of a former action may be
corrected in the next: we learn then by erring, and men come at length not to
err, by having often erred: but no man learns to die by practicing it; we die
but once, and a fault committed then, can never afterward be amended, quia
poena statim sequitur errorem, because the punishment immediately follows upon
the error. To die is an action of that moment, that we ought to be very well
advised, when we come to it: Ab hoc momento pendet aeternitas, you may not look
back upon the opinion of honor and reputation which remains behind you: but
rather look forward upon that infinite space of Eternity, either of bliss or
bale, which befalls us immediately after our last breath. To be loath to die
upon every slight occasion, is not a necessary sign of fear and cowardice: He
that knew what life is, and the true use of it, had he many lives to spare, yet
would he be loath to part with one of them upon better terms, then those our
Books tell us, that Aristippus a Philosopher being at Sea in a dangerous
Tempest, and bewraying some fear, when the weather was cleared up, a desperate
Ruffian came and upbraided him with it, and tells him, That it was a shame that
he professing wisdom should be afraid of his life, whereas himself having had
no such education, expressed no agony or dread at all. To whom the Philosopher
replied, there was some difference between them two: I know, says he, my life
may be profitable many ways, and therefore am I loath to lose it; but because of
your life you know little profit, little good can be made, you care not how
easily you part with it. Beloved it may be justly suspected, that they who
esteem thus lightly of their lives, are but worthless and unprofitable men: our
own experience tells us, that men who are prodigal of their money in Taverns
and Ordinaries, are close-handed enough, when either pious uses, or necessary
and public expense requires their liberality; I have not heard that Prodigals
ever built Churches. So these men that are so prodigal of their lives in base
quarrels, peradventure would be cowardly enough, if either public service, or
Religion did call for their help; I scarcely believe any of them would die
Martyrs, if the times so required it. Beloved, I do not go about to persuade
any man to fear death, but not to contemn life; life is the greatest blessing
God gives in this world, and did men know the worth of it, they would never so
rashly venture the loss of it: But now lightly prizing both their own and
others Blood, they are easily moved to shed it; as fools are easily won to part
with jewels, because they know not how to value them. We must deal with our
lives, as we do with our money, we must not be covetous of it, desire life for
no other use but to live, as covetous persons desire money, only to have it:
neither must we be prodigal of life, and trifle it away upon every occasion;
but we must be liberal of our lives, know upon what occasion to spare, upon
what occasion to spend them. To know where, and when, and in what cases to
offer our selves to die, is a thing of greater skill, then a great part of them
suppose; who pretend themselves most forward to do it; Nam impetu quodam and
instinctu currere ad mortem cum multis commune est; For brutishly to run upon
and hasten unto death, is a thing that many men can do; and we see that bruit
beasts many times will run upon the spears of such as pursue them: Sed
deliberare and causas expendere utque suaserit ratio vitae mortisque consilium
suscipere, vel ponere ingentis animi est; but wisely to look into, and weigh
every occasion, and as judgment and true discretion shall direct; so to
entertain a resolution either of life or death, this were true fortitude and
magnanimity. And indeed; this prodigality and contempt of life, is the greatest
ground of this quarrellous and fighting humor; Qui suam vitam contempsit,
dominus est alienae; There is a kind of men, who because they contemn their own
lives, make themselves Lords and Commanders of other men's; easily provoking
others to venture their Blood, because they care not how they lose their own.
Few places of great resort are without these men, and they are the greatest
occasioners of Bloodshed, you may quickly know them; there are few quarrels
wherein they are not either principals, or seconds, or some way or another will
have a part in them. Might there be public order taken for the restraint of
such men, that make a practice of quarrelling, and because they contemn their
own lives, carry themselves so insolently and imperiously toward others: It
will prevent much mischief, and free the Land of much danger of
Bloud-guiltiness.

The second cause which is much alleged in defense of Duels, I told you was
point of Honor, a conceit that it is dishonorable for men of place and
fashion quietly to digest and put up contumely and disgrace; and this they take
to be a reason of that authority and strength, as that it must admit of no
dispensation: For answer, First, the true fountain and original of quarrel are
of another kind, and Honor is abused as a pretense: The first occasioners of a
great part of them are indeed very dishonorable, let there an Inventory be
taken of all the Challenges that have been made for some time past, and you
shall find that the greatest part by far were raised either in Taverns, or
Dicing-houses, or in the Stews: Pardon me, if in a case of this nature I deal a
little plainly; Drinking, Gaming, and Whores, these are those rotten bones that
lie hid under this painted Sepulcher and title of Honor.

Lastly, to conclude, It is a part of our profession, as we are Christians to
suffer wrong and disgrace. Therefore to set up another doctrine, and teach that
Honor may plead prescription against Christ's precepts, and exempt you from
patient enduring of contumely and disgrace, you withstand Christ, and deny your
vocation; and therefore are unavoidably Apostates. But we lose our labor, who
give young men and unsettled persons good advice and counsel; the civil
Magistrate must lay to his hand and pity them, who want discretion to pity
themselves: For as Bees, though they fight very fiercely, yet if you cast a
little dust amongst them, are presently parted; so the Enacting and Executing
some few good Laws, would quickly allay this greatness of stomach and fighting
humor. How many have been censured for Schismatics and Heretics, only
because by probable consequence, and afar off they seemed to overthrow some
Christian principle? but here are men, who walk in our streets, and come to our
Churches, who (...), openly oppose that great point of Christianity, which
concerns our patience, and yet for their restraint, no Synod is called, no
Magistrate stirs, no Church-censure is pronounced. The Church of Rome has long
ago, to the disgrace of the Reformed Churches, shut them out of the number of
Christians, and pronounced them all Excommunicated persons, who upon what
pretense soever durst enter the Field for Duel and single Combat.

Theodosius the Emperor enacted it for a Law, and it is extant at this day in
the Code, a Book of Laws, that if any man spoke disgracefully of the Emperor,
Si ex levitate contemnendum, si ex infamia miseratione dignum, si ex injuria
remittendum.

Lactantius, Summa virtus habenda patientia est quam ut caperet homo justus
voluit illum Deus pro inerte contemni.

So great a virtue is patience, that for the attaining of it, it is Gods will
we should suffer our selves to be contemned as Cowards.

Christ is an Example to us of suffering disgrace; let us as the Israelites
look up to this Serpent, and all the stinging of fiery Serpents shall do us no
harm.

We must forsake all and follow Christ: therefore Honor and Reputation too; If
we be ashamed of this pattern of patience, Christ will be ashamed of us.

Now that God may give a blessing to what has been delivered, let us, etc.

Matthew. XXVI. Verse 75. And he went forth, and wept bitterly.
THus to commit to writing, as here our Evangelist has done, and so to lay
open to all posterity the many slips and errors which have much blemished and
disgraced the lives and actions of the best, and most excellent men, may seem
in the judgment of a reasonable man to participate of much envy and
uncharitableness: so that their good life had remained upon record for our
example, we might very well have suffered their errors to have slept and been
buried with their bodies in their graves. St. Paul makes it the property of
charity to hide the multitude of sins; whose property then is it thus to blazon
them at midday, and to fill the ears of the world with the report of them?
Constantine, the firstborn among Christian Emperors, so far mislik'd this
course, that he professed openly, if he found any of his Bishops and Clergy,
whom it especially concerned to have a reputation pure and spotless, committing
any grievous sin, to hide it from the eye of the world, he would cover it with
his own garment; he knew well that which experience had long ago observed, Non
tam juvare quae been dicta sunt, quam nocere quae pessime; things well said,
well done, do nothing so much profit and further us, as the examples of ill
speeches, ill actions do mischief and inconvenience us: and men are universally
more apt from the errors and scapes of good men to draw apologies for their
own, then to propose their good deeds for examples and patterns for themselves
to follow. Neither is this my own speculation, St. Austin observed it long
since, who discoursing upon the fall of David, complains, that from his
example, many framed unto themselves this apology, Si David, cur non and ego?
If David did thus, then why not I? Preparas te ad peccandum, says he, disponis
peccare; Librum Dei ut pecces inspicis; Scripturas Dei ad hoc audis, ut facias
quod displicet Deo: Thou do prepare thy heart to sin; thou providest thy self
of purpose; thou do look into the Book of God, even therefore that thou
might sin; the Scriptures of God thou do therefore hear, that by the
example of those that fell, thou may learn to do that which is displeasing
unto God. Yea, the greater is the person offending, the more dangerous is the
example; For Greatness is able of it self, as it were, to legitimate foul acts,
to add authority and credit unto ill doings: Facilius efficiet quisquis
objecerit, crimen honestum, quam turpem Catonem, says Seneca of Cato;
Whosoever he be, says he, that objects drunkenness to Cato, shall more easily
prove drunkenness to be a virtue, then that Cato, who used it, was to blame.
When St. Peter ( Galath. ij.) had halted in his behavior betwixt the Gentiles
and those of the Circumcision, St. Paul notes, that many of the Jews, yea,
Barnabas himself, was carried away with their dissimulation: and to speak
truth, whom would not the authority and credit of St. Peter have drawn into an
error? So easily the faults of great men, adolescunt in exempla, grow up and
become exemplary, and so full of hazard is it, to leave unto the world a
memorial of the errors and scapes of worthy persons. Yet notwithstanding all
this, the holy Spirit of God, who brings light out of darkness, and works
above and against all means, has made the Fall of his Saints an especial means
to raise his Church: and therefore has it pleased him by the Penmen of the
lives of his Saints in holy Scripture, to lay open in the veiw of the world
many gross faults and imperfections, even of the most excellent instruments of
his glory. That which he tells the woman in the Gospel, who anointed him before
his passion, that wheresoever the Gospel shall be preached, this fact of hers
should be recorded in memorial of her: the same, as it seems was his intent
concerning his Saints; that wheresoever the word of life should be taught,
there likewise should be related the grievous sins of his servants. And
therefore accordingly, scarcely is there any one Saint in the whole Book of
God, who is not recorded in one thing or other to have notably overshot
himself. Sometimes he has made the Saints themselves the proclaimers of their
own shame: So he makes Moses to register his own infidelity; so David in his
one and fiftieth Psalm, by the instinct of God's Spirit, leaves unto the Church
under his own hand, an evidence against himself for his Adultery and Murder:
Sometimes he makes their dearest friends the most exact chroniclers of their
faults; for so St. Chrysostom observes of St. Mark, the companion and Scholar
of St. Peter, who has more particularly registered the Fall of his Master, then
any of the other Evangelists, (...), etc. Who would not marvel, says he, that
St. Mark not only concealed not the gross escape of his Master; but, has more
accurately then any of the rest recorded the particulars of it, (...), even
because he was his Disciple; as if he could have done his Master no better
service, then to deliver a most exact relation of his fault. There are yet two
things further to be noted in this dispensation of Almighty God; the first, in
regard of us; the second, in regard of the Saints, whose errors are recorded:
For the first, who can but marvel, that since all things that are written, are
written for our instruction, that if they be good, they may serve for our
imitation; if otherwise, for warning to us: yet, many sinister actions of the
Saints of God are so expressed in Scripture, without censure, without note, that
it were almost some danger to pronounce of them? Abraham's equivocating with
Abimelech, Jacob's deluding his blind Father, Rachel abusing Laban with a lie,
Iephthe his sacrificing his daughter, Sampson killing himself with the
Philistines; these and many other besides are so set down, that they may seem
to have been done rather by divine instinct, then out of humane infirmity.
Wherein the holy Ghost seems to me tanquam adoriri nos ex insidiis, to set upon
us out of ambush, to use a kind of guile, to see whether we have (...),
spiritual discretion, to try whether we will attribute more to men's examples,
then to his precepts. Secondly, in regard of the Saints themselves: It is worth
our noting, that God seems to have had more care to discredit them, then to
honor them, in that their faults are many times particularly registered, but
their repentance is wrapped up in silence: so the story of Noah is concluded with
his drunkenness; after the report of Lot's Incest, there is not a word of him
throughout the Scriptures; as soon as the story of Solomon's Idolatry is
related, it immediately follows in the Text, And Solomon died. We should very
much wrong these men, if we should think that they past out of this life
without repentance, because their repentance is concealed. Doubtless if we were
worthy to search the mysteries of the Spirit, we should find that the holy
Ghost has left something for our instruction even in this particular; for
nothing in Scripture is done by chance: But, as St. Chrysostom is wont sometime
to tell his Auditory, that he will not resolve all doubts, but leave some to
meditate on by themselves; so will I now deal with you, I will leave this to
your private considerations, to practice your wits in the depths of
Christianity, and so to frame reasons unto your selves of this proceeding of
the holy Spirit.

In the New Testament, the holy Ghost constantly holds the same course of
relating the Fall of the Saints: and so accordingly by all four Evangelists
sets down at large, the fearful sin of St. Peter in denying and forswearing his
Master. But as it pleased him in mercy to give him repentance, so in these
words which I have read unto you, has it pleased him to leave unto the Church
a memorial of it. Our first note therefore, before we come to the words, shall
be a note of that exceeding use and profit, which has redounded to the Church
by the registring of St. Peter's repentance; for this is done by the holy
Ghost, to signify unto us the necessity and force of repentance, and sorrow
for sin. The concealing of Solomon's reclaim, has occasioned some, upon
acknowledgment of the necessity of repentance, to suppose, that Solomon past
away without it, and so received the final reward of the impenitent. But he
that should have read this story of St. Peter, and observed what authority he
had afterward, what especial favor our Savior did him after his
Resurrection, notwithstanding his Fall, if the manner of his Recovery had not
been recorded, might easily have entertained a conceit very prejudicial to
Repentance, Quid non speremus? Who might not hope to regain the favor of God
without shedding a tear, if St. Peter, notwithstanding so grievous a crime,
without repentance should again be reconciled? We might therefore with excuse
have presumed upon a non-necessity of repentance, as if it had been enough in
case of sin to practice that which common morality teaches, barely to
relinquish it without any more ado. That therefore which we learn by this
Registring of St. Peter's repentance, is this, That for the clearing of a
Christian man's account unto God, it is not sufficient barely to cease from
doing ill, to satisfy the Law which we broke, either with our life, or with
our goods; To make recompense to our neighbor for wrong done him; all this and
much more washes not away the guilt of sin before God. These are things which
the very light of nature teaches us to do. It was not to be thought that David
to his former Adulteries and Murder, would have added new: he that has been
forced to restore fourfold that which he had taken away by stealth, will
peradventure take warning to steal no more: But, this does not suffice him;
there is a further duty, a duty of repentance required of every Christian man,
a duty proper to him alone. For this doctrine of Repentance Nature never taught
in her Schole, neither was it ever found in the Books of the Learned; it is
particular to the Book of God, and to the doctrine that came down from Heaven.
In the sins against the first Table we offend immediately and only against
God; but in the sins against the second Table, there is a double guilt
contracted, one against God, another against our Neighbor; in these sins, as
there is a double fault, so there is a double satisfaction to be made, one unto
God, another to our Neighbor: for this second satisfaction between man and
man, many Heathen Commonwealths have been very sufficiently furnished with
store of excellent Laws; but, of an atonement over and above to be made to God,
they scarce seem to have had any thought: and indeed to speak truth, to what
purpose had it been to trouble their heads about it? it is impossible that it
should ever fall within the conceit of any reasonable creature, to pronounce
what satisfaction was to be made for offense committed against God: He is of
infinite Majesty, holding no proportion, no correspondence with any created
being; what recompense then can he receive from the hands of dust and ashes?
Ten thousand worlds, were we able to give them all, could not make satisfaction
for any part of the smallest offense we have committed against him: when
therefore the inventions of men were thus at a stand, when all discourse, all
reason were posed, it pleased God in mercy to open his pleasure in his word,
and to accept of true and unfeigned repentance, as the only means to wash away
the guilt of sin against his Majesty: A thing in the eye of flesh and blood
altogether ridiculous. And therefore Julian, that accursed Apostate, scorning
Constantine the Emperor for betaking himself to the Christian Religion, in
contempt and derision of Baptism and Repentance, thus speaks: (...), etc. Hoe,
whosoever is a corrupter and a defiler of women, whosoever is a manslayer,
whosoever is an impure and unclean person, let him from henceforth be secure,
and care for nothing; I will show him a little water, in which, if he do but
dip himself, he shall be forthwith clean: yea, though he desperately run again
into the same crimes; I will give him this gift, if he but knock his breast and
strike his forehead (which are the gestures of the penitent) he shall without
any more ado become as pure as glass. `Tis true indeed, in spite of
unbeleiving miscreants, it has pleased God through the foolishness of Baptism
and Repentance to save those that are his. The water of Baptism and the tears
of true Repentance, creatures of themselves weak and contemptible, yet through
the wonderful operation of the Grace of God annexed unto them, are able, were
our sins as red as twice-died scarlet, to make them as white as snow. The
sentence of God denounced unto Adam, What day thou eatest of the Tree, thou
shall die, certainly was absolute and irrevocable, neither could any repentance
of Adam's totally have reverst it: yet Abulensis cries out, O quam foelix
humanum genus, etc. O how happy should mankind have been, if Adam after his
Fall had used the benefit of Repentance, and in time acknowledged his sin unto
God: Yea, he goes further, and seems to intimate, that it had been of force
almost to restore us unto our primitive purity; for this way his words seem to
look, when he says, Quod si seipsum accusasset, nos omnes ab accusatione and
judicio liberasset: If he had accused himself, doubtless he had freed us all
from accusation and a curse: Whatsoever his meaning was, thus much without
danger we may think, that if our first Parents had not so strangely shuffled
their fault from the one to the other, the Man to the Woman, the Woman to the
Serpent; but, had freely acknowledged it, and humbly begged pardon for it, God,
whose mercies were then as many, and as ready as now they are, would, if not
altogether have revoked, yet doubtless much have qualified and mitigated the
sentence of the curse; If Adam had used more ingenuity in confessing, God would
have used less rigor in punishing. Out of all this I draw this one lesson for
your instruction; Whosoever he be that thinks himself quit of some sins into
which either through weakness or carelessness he has fallen, let him not
presently flatter himself, as if for this his book of debt unto God were
cancelled, as if he were in a state of grace and new birth; but let him examine
his own conscience, and impartially sift all the manner of his reclaim: He may
peradventure sind, that upon some moral respect he has broken off the practice
of his sin; he may find that he has satisfied his neighbor, contented the
Law, done many acts, by which he has purchased reconciliation with the world:
But, if he find not this passage of Repentance and hearty sorrow `twixt God and
his own soul, let him know, that God is yet unsatisfied, that he is yet in his
sin; his sin yet unrepented of, and therefore still remains.

THus from the necessity of Registring St. Peter's Repentance, I come to the
words wherein it is Registered, And he went out, etc, In these words we will
consider four things: First, the person, He] He went forth; or, and going forth
he wept. Secondly, the preparative to the Repentance, He went forth. Thirdly,
the Repentance it self, comprised in the word Wept. Fourthly, the extent, and
measure, and compass of this Repentance, in the last word, bitterly. 1. He. The
way of man's life is a slippery way, no man whilst he is in it has the
privilege of not sliding; just and unjust, thus far, are of like condition;
both fall: But here they differ, the just man rises again. Not the eminency of
St. Peter's person, nor his great understanding in the mystery of Christ, nor
his resolution in our Savior's quarrel, not the love and respect his Master
bare him, kept him from falling: But St. Peter being fallen, provides himself
to rise, and therefore in the second place, he went forth, says my Text: St.
Peter was now in the High-priest's Court, a place very unfit for one in St.
Peter's case. Princes Courts are no place for Repentance: To wear soft raiment,
to fare deliciously every day, this is courtiers guise; but (...), the shirt of
hair, the tears of Repentance; this is the habit of the penitent. But wherefore
went St. Peter out? Did he as our Savior observes of the Scribes and
Pharisees, go out into the wilderness to see, to gaze and look about him? No,
his eyes now must do him other service; He went out as Joseph did from the face
of his brethren, to seek a place to weep. Maldonat the Jesuit thinks it would
have been a more goodly thing, and far more beseeming St. Peter's resolution,
if in the place he had offended, in the same he had repented: if before those
he had made a constant confession of Christ, before whom he had denied him. But
be the reasons what they will which moved St. Peter to go forth, we will not
prescribe unto the Saints a form of Repentance; we will cease therefore to
dispute what St. Peter should have done, and rather gather lessons for our
selves out of what he did. Fourthly, and last of all, as St. Peter's fault was
great, so he contends that his Repentance may be as serious. The tears
therefore he sheds are not slight, and perfunctory, shed only for fashions
sake, such as Quintilian spoke of, Nihil facilius lachrymis marescit, Nothing
sooner grows dry then tears: but, as the Text says, He wept bitterly: to
summon up that Sicc-oculum genus Christianorum, a sort of Christians, who never
had tear dropped from their eye to witness their Repentance: to teach us to
enlarge the measure of our sorrow for our sins, and in case of grievous
relapse, not mince out our Repentance, but to let loose the reins unto grief.
And thus I come to handle the parts in order more particularly: and first of
the person, He.

Amongst all the Saints of God whose errors are set down in holy Scriptures,
there is none whose person was more eminent, or Fall more dangerous then St.
Peter's. That which wise men have observed in great and eminent Wits, that they
evermore exceed; either they are exceeding good, or else they are exceeding
bad, in St. Peter was true both ways. His gifts of Faith, of understanding in
the mystery of Godliness, of resolution to die in our Savior's cause, were
wonderful: but yet his errors were as many and as strange; yea, so much the
more strange, because in that thing he most offended, in which he was most
eminent. It was a great argument of his Faith, when in the Tempest meeting our
Savior on the waters, he calls out unto him, If it be thou, command me to come
unto thee on the waters; but no sooner was he come-out of the ship, but through
Infidelity he began to sink. Again, of his great understanding in the mystery
of Christ he gave a notable instance, when being questioned by our Savior whom
men took him to be? he gave the first evident, plain, and open testimony that
ever was given him by man, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. St. John
indeed gave testimony, and so did St. Simeon, and so did many more; but it was
more involved, done in more covert terms, more dark: Whence we may, and that
not without some probability argue, that the understanding of these men was not
so evidently, so fully, so perspicuously enlightened as was St. Peter's. Signum
est intelligentis posse docere: It is a great argument that a man does passing
well understand himself, when he is able perspicuously and plainly to speak to
the understanding of another: This confession therefore of St. Peter, that
carries with it greater light and perspicuity then any yet that ever was given,
does not obscurely intimate, that he had a greater measure of illumination,
then any of his Predecessors. Yet to see the wonderful dispensation of the
holy Ghost, scarce was this confession out of his mouth, but in the very next
bout where our Savior begins further to enform him in the particulars of his
Passion, and Death, and despiteful handling by the Jews, the edge of his
conceit was quite turned, quite blunted and dull: Poor man, as if he had been
quite ignorant of the end of Christ's coming, out of a humane conceit and pity,
he takes upon him to counsel and advise our Savior; Sir, favor your self,
these things shall not come unto you: and for this pains he is rewarded with no
less reproachful a name then that of Satan, of a seducer, of a Devil: He that
shall peruse the story of the Gospel, and here stay himself, might think that
that which we read, St. John vj. ver. 70. spoken of Judas, Have I not chosen
you twelve, and one of you is a Devil, were here fulfilled in St. Peter. Last
of all, his love to Christ, and resolution in his quarrel, he gave an evident
testimony, when he protested himself ready to lay down his life for him;
Greater love then this, in the Apostles judgment, no man has, then to lay down
his life for his friend: This St. Peter had, if we may believe himself; yea, he
began to express some acts of it, when in defense of his Master, he manfully
drew his sword, and wounded the servant of the high Priest. But see how soon
the scene is changed; This good Champion of our Savior, as a Lion that is
reported to be daunted with the crowing of a Cock, is stricken out of
countenance, and quite amazed with the voice of a silly Damsel; yea, so far is
he possessed with a spirit of fear, that he not only denies, but abjures his
Master, and perjures himself, committing a sin not far behind the sin of Judas;
yea, treading it hard upon the heels. But the mercy of God, that leaves not the
honor of his servant in the dust of death, but is evermore careful to raise us
up from the death of sin, unto the life of righteousness, suffers not this
Rock, this great Pillar of his Church to be overthrown. He first admonishes him
by the crowing of a Cock; when that would not serve, himself (full of careful
love and goodness) though in the midst of his enemies, forgets his own danger,
and remembers the danger of his servant; Himself was now as a sheep before the
shearer, dumb, and not opening his mouth; yet forgets he not, that he is that
great Shepherd of the flock, but, David like, rescues one of his fold from the
mouth of the Lion, and from the paw of the Bear; He turns about, and looks upon
him, says the Text, he cries louder unto him with his look, then the Cock
could with his voice: Of all the members in the body, the Eye is the most
moving part; that oft-times is spoken in a look, which by no force of speech
could have been uttered; this look of Christ did so warm St. Peter, almost
frozen-dead with fear, that it made him well-near melt into tears: As if he had
cried out with the Spouse, Cant. vi. O turn away thine eyes, for they have
overcome me; he grows impatient of his looks, and seeks for a place to weep;
what a look was this think you? St. Ierom discoursing with himself what might
be the cause that many of the Disciples, when they were called by our Savior,
presently without further consultation arose and followed him, thinks it not
improbable, that there did appear some Glory and Majesty in his Countenance,
which made them believe he was more then a man that thus bespake them:
whatsoever then appeared in his looks, doubtless in this look of his was seen
some Sovereign power of his Deity, that could so speedily recover a man thus
almost desperately gone: A man that had one foot in hell, whom one step more
had irrecoverably cast away: It was this look of Christ that restored St.
Peter: Quos respicit Jesus, plorant delictum, says St. Ambrose, They weep for
their sins, whom Jesus looks upon: Negavit primo Petrus, and non flevit; quia
non respexerat Dominus: Negavit secundo; non flevit, quia adhuc non respexerat
Dominus: Negavit tertio, and respexit Jesus, and ille amarissime flevit. St.
Peter denies him once, and repents not, for Jesus looked not back upon him: he
denies him the second time, and yet he weeps not, for yet the Lord looked not
back: He denies him the third time, and Jesus looks upon him, and then he weeps
bitterly. Before I come to make use of this, it shall not be altogether
impertinent to say something unto some Queries that here arise concerning the
condition of St. Peter, and in him of all the Elect of God, whilst they are in
a state of sin unrepented of; for, as for St. Peter's faith, which some make
doubt of, there can, as I conceive, no question be made. It is not to be
thought that St. Peter had reversed with himself the confession that he had
formerly made of Christ, or that he thought, doubtless I have erred, this is
not the person whom I took him to be: Indeed, through fear and cowardice he
durst not confess that with his mouth unto salvation, which in his heart he
believed unto righteousness: Any thing further then this, that speech of our
Savior takes away, wherein he tells him beforehand, I have prayed that thy
faith might not fail. But since, our Age has had experience of some, who
because the Election of God stands sure, and Christ's sheep none can take out
of his hands, conclude therefore, that for the Elect of God, there is no
falling from grace, that to David and Peter no ill could happen, no though (for
so they have given it out) that they had died in the very act of their sin: To
meet with such disputants, I will briefly lay down what I conceive is to be
thought in the point. Wherefore, parate fauces pani, as St. Bernard speaks;
Hitherto I have given you milk, provide your stomachs now for harder meat, and
such as befits strong men in Christ. Peter and Judas (for I will couple them
both together in my discourse, whilst they are both joined together in sin)
Peter, I say, and Judas, in regard of their own persons, were both, more or
less, in the same case, both fallen from grace, both in a state of sin and
damnation, till the Repentance of St. Peter altered the case on his part. But
the Grace of God signified two things: either the purpose of God's Election,
the Grace and Favor Inherent in the Person of God, which he still casts upon
those that are his, notwithstanding their manifold backslidings: or else it
signifies the habit of sanctifying qualities, Inherent in the Regenerate man;
those good Graces of God, by which he walks holy and unblameable. Again, the
state of Damnation signifies likewise two things: either the purpose of Gods
Reprobation, or else the habit of damnable qualities in the sinful man. From
the state of Grace, as it signifies the purpose of God to save, the Elect can
never fall: In the state of Damnation, as it signifies something inherent in
us, every man by nature is, and the Elect of God, even after their Calling many
times fall into it: that is, they may and do many times fall into those sins;
yea, for a time continue in them too, ( David did so for a whole years space)
which except they be done away by repentance, inevitably bring forth eternal
death, for the state of mortal sin unrepented of, is truly and indeed the state
of death; yea, the whole and sole reason of the condemnation of every one that
perishes, for Christ has said it, Except ye repent, ye shall all perish. So
then you see, that into the state of Damnation, as it signifies something
inherent in us, a man may fall, and yet not fall from the state of grace, as it
signifies God's purpose of Election: for both these are compatible for a time.
If then we look upon the persons of Peter and Judas, both of them are in the
state of mortal sin unrepented of, and therefore both in state of damnation:
but if we look back unto God, we shall see a hand reached out unto St. Peter,
pulling him back as he is now running down the hill, which hand we do not see
reached out unto Judas. Christ had a look in store for St. Peter, which if it
had pleased him to have lent unto Judas, Judas would have done that which St.
Peter did. When then we pronounce St. Peter, and in him any of the Elect of
God, as they are in St. Peter's case, to be fallen from grace, we speak not
with relation to any purpose of God; but we mean only, that they have not that
measure of Sanctification, which ought to be in every child which shall be an
heir to life; and what hinders to pronounce that man fallen from grace, whom we
must needs acknowledge to be in that state, in which if he continue, there is
no way open but to death? What then may some men say, had St. Peter lost the
Spirit of Adoption? had he not those sanctifying qualities of Faith, Hope, and
Charity, which are proper to the Saints, and are given them by divine
inspiration in the moment of their conversion? was that immortal seed of the
Word quite killed? No verily; How then? Having all these, may he not yet be
called the child of death? I answer, he may, and is indeed so; for these do not
make him, that at no time he can be so; but, that finally he shall not be so,
for they are not armor of proof to keep out all darts, neither do they make
our souls invulnerable, as the Poets fain the body of Cyenus or Achilles to
have been: but they are precious balms ever more ready at hand to cure the
wound when it is given: They are not of force to hinder mortal sin, (for then
every soul in whom they are, were pure, undefiled, neither were it possible,
that the Elect of God after their conversion should fall) but they are of force
to work repentance, which makes all our wounds remediable. He that is mortally
sick and dies, and he that is likewise mortally sick, and through help of
restoring physic recovers, in this both agree, that they are mortally sick,
notwithstanding the recovery of one party. The wound of St. Peter and of Judas
was mortal, and in both festred unto death; but there was balm in Gilead for
St. Peter, for Judas there was none. The sting of the fiery Scorpion in the
Wilderness was deadly, and all that looked not on the Brazen Serpent died: the
Brazen Serpent altered not the quality of the Scorpion's sting, it only
hindered the working of the poison. The sting of sin in St. Peter and in Judas
was deadly, but he that was lift up on mount Calvary, as the Brazen Serpent was
in the Wilderness, at him did St. Peter look and live; Judas did not look, and
therefore died. How comes it about, Beloved, that God every where in Scripture
threatens death, without exception, to all that repent not, if the state of sin
unrepented of, in whomsoever it is, be not indeed the state of death? When
David was intending to stay in Keilah, and suspecting the inhabitants of that
City, asks of God, whether the men of Keilah would deliver him over into the
hand of Saul? God tells him, they would: and therefore certainly had he stayed
there, he had been betrayed unto Saul. To urge that St. Peter, because of God's
purpose to save him, could not have finally miscarried, though he had died
without repentance, (as some have not stuck to give out) is nothing else in
effect, but to maintain against God, that David had he stayed in Keilah had not
fallen into Readiness hands, because we know it was God's purpose to preserve
David from the violence of Saul: All the determinations of God are of equal
certainty: It was no more possible for Saul to seize on David, then it is for
the Devil to pull one of God's Elect out of his hand; as therefore the
determinate purpose of God to free David from the malice of Saul took not away
that supposition, If David go to Keilah, he shall fall into the hands of Saul;
So neither does the Decree of God to save his Elect, destroy the supposition,
If they repent not, they die eternally; for the purposes of God, though
impossible to be defeated, yet lay not upon things any violent necessity, they
exempt not from the use of ordinary means, they infringe not our liberty, they
stand very well with common casualty; yea, these things are the very means by
which his Decrees are brought about. I may not stand longer upon this, I will
draw but one short admonition, and so to an end: Let no man presume to look
into the Third Heaven, to open the Books of Life and Death, to pronounce over
peremptorily of God's purpose concerning himself, or any other man. Let every
man look into himself, and try, whether he be in the faith or no? The surest
means to try this, is to take an unpartial veiw of all our actions. Many
deceive themselves, whilst they argue from their Faith to their Works, whereas
they ought out of their Works to conclude their Faith; whilst presuming they
have Faith, and the gifts of sanctification, they think all their actions
warrantable: whereas we ought first thoroughly to sift all our actions, to
examine them at the Touch of God's Commandments, and if indeed we find them
current, then to conclude that they come from the sanctifying Graces of the
holy Spirit. It is Faith indeed that gives the tincture, the die, the relish
unto our actions; yet, the only means to examine our Faith, is by our Works.
It is the nature of the Tree that gives the goodness, the savor, and
pleasantness to the Fruit; yet, the Fruit is the only means to us, to know
whether the Tree be good; By their fruit ye shall know them, says Christ: It
is not a rule not only to know others, but our selves too. To reason thus, I
am of the Elect, I therefore have saving Faith, and the rest of the sanctifying
qualities, therefore that which I do is good; thus I say to reason is very
preposterous: We must go a quite contrary course, and thus reason; My life is
good, and through the mercies of God in Jesus Christ, shall stand with God's
Justice: I therefore have the gifts of Sanctification, and therefore am of
God's Elect: For St. Peter to have said with himself, I am of the Elect, this
sin therefore cannot endanger me, had been great presumption; but, thus to have
reasoned, My sin is deadly, therefore except I repent, I am not of the number
of God's Elect, this reasoning had well befitted St. Peter; and becomes every
Christian man, whom common frailty drives into the like distress.

I made my entrance into my Sermon with the consideration of the wisdom of God,
in permitting his chiefest servants to fall dangerously: I have largely
exemplified it in the person of St. Peter: give me leave to make this further
beneficial unto you by drawing some uses from it; for great profit has
redounded to the Church through the Fall of these men; Felicius ille cecidit
quam caeteri steterunt, says St. Ambrose of this fall of St. Peter; His sin
has more availed us, then the righteousness of many others; for wheresoever it
pleases the holy Spirit of God to work effectually (I speak cautelously,
because I would give no place to presumption) in him he makes excellent use
oft-times, even of sin and evil. First of all, it is a tried case, that many
times through negligence and carelessness, we suffer our selves to lie open to
many advantages: In such a case as this, a blow given us, serves us for a
remembrance to call our wits about us, (...), to stir up the grace of God that
is in us, which many times is in interlunio, lies covered like fire under
ashes; for as a skilful Wrestler, having suffered his adversary to take
advantage upon some oversight, recollects himself, and comes forward with
greater strength and wariness; and pudor incendit vires and conscia virtus:
shame of the fall, and impatience of disgrace, adds strength unto him, and
kindles him: so oft-times is it with the Saints of God; the shame of having
fallen, makes them summon up their forces, to look better about them, to fulfill
their duty in larger sort, then if they had not slipped at all. Hence it is, that
we see that of the bitterest enemies of the Church, have been made the best
converts; of this we have a notable example in St. Paul; how eager was he in
the quarrel of the Jews against Christ? None a more mischeivous enemy of the
Christians then he; yet, when it pleased God to show him his error; he proved
one of the most excellent instruments of Christ's glory, that ever was on
earth; and so accordingly he gives himself a most true testimony, I have
labored more abundantly, not then one or two of them, but, then they all: his
writings being as much in quantity, as of them all: and St. Luke's story being
nothing else almost but a Register of the acts of St. Paul: The sense and
conscience, I doubt not, of that infinite wrong done to the Church, provoked
him to measure back to the utmost of his power, his pains and labor in making
up the breach he had formerly made. Here then is a notable lesson for us,
teaching us to make our former sins and impieties admonitioners unto us, to
know our own strength, and by Christian care and watchfulness to prevent all
advantages; which the Divil may take by our rechlesness and negligence: for,
Beloved, it is not so much our impotency and weakness, as our sloth and
carelessness, against which the common enemy does prevail; for through the grace
of him that does enable us, we are stronger then he: and the policy of
Christian war-fare has as many means to beat back and defend, as the deepest
reach of Satan has to give the onset. The envious man in the Gospel rushed not
into the Field in despite of the husbandman, and the servants, but came and
sowed his tares, whilst men slept, says the Text; our neglect and carelessness
is the sleep that he takes advantage of: When David was so strangely overtaken,
the Scripture tells us he rose from his bed, to walk on the top of his Palace;
from his bed indeed he arose, but not from his sleep; for mark, I beseech you,
David had spent much of his time about the Court, he had been abroad, and seen
and ransak'd many Cities, and doubtless he had seen many women as fair as the
wife of Vriah, and that in his younger days, when he was more apt to kindle;
why then now commits he so great an oversight? Look on him a while as now he
is; He is now at rest in his Palace, at ease on his bed, and to solace himself,
he must rise and walk at the top of his house, and idly gaze upon a naked
Dame; of this his idleness the Divil takes advantage; this is the sleep in
which he comes and sows Tares in David's heart, even all manner of lust: So
that David fell as Adam did in Paradise, not as a man that falls before an
enemy stronger then himself. The greatest part of the sins which we commit, are
in this rank with David's sin: He is faithful, says the Apostle, and suffers
no man to be tempted above his strength. Many creatures, if they knew their
strength, would never suffer themselves to be awed by man as they are. Beloved,
we are become like Horse and Mule, without understanding, we know not our
strength, we are more blind then the servant of Elizaeus, and see not that they
that are with us are more, and more mighty, then they that are against us: The
Angels are ministering spirits, sent out of purpose to guard us, and doubtless
do many and great services for us, though we perceive not; We have the Army of
God, ubi mill clypei and omnis armatura fortium; where are a thousand
bucklers, and all the weapons of the mighty; The Helmet of Salvation, the Sword
of the Spirit, the Shield of Faith, to quench all the fiery darts of sin: only
let us not neglect to buckle it on, and make use of it. We have to strive with
an enemy, such a one as Anibal reported Marcellus to be, Qui nec bonam, nec
malam far fortunam potest; seu vicit, ferociter instat victis; seu victus
est, instaurat cum victoribus certamen; a restless enemy that is never quiet,
howsoever the world goes; if he conquer us, he insolently insults upon us; if
we foil him, he still bethinks himself how to set upon us afresh. Let us not
therefore suppose sedendo and votis debellari posse, that the conquest will be
gotten by sitting still, and wishing all were well. We often maintain against the
Church of Rome, that our natural abilities, whilst we live, serve us not to
fulfill the Law of God. What boots it thus to dispute? shall the confession of
our unableness to do what we ought, excuse us at all, if we do not that which
we are able? St. Austin was of opinion, how justly, I will not dispute, but of
that opinion he was, and it was the occasion of his Book, De spiritu and
litera, ad Marcellinum; that it was possible for us, even in this natural life,
seconded by the grace of God, perfectly to accomplish what the Law requires at
our hands. Let the truth of this be as it may be; certainly that is most true
which the same Father adds; That let our strength be what it will; yet, if we
know not our duty, we shall do it no more, then the traveller, sound of body or
limb, can go that way aright, of which he is utterly ignorant: Yea, let our
ability be perfect, and let our knowledge be also absolute, yet if we have no
mind, if we want a love unto our duty, if we suffer our selves to be
over-swayed by affection to other things, yet shall we not do our duty: For
which of us being at liberty will do that which he has no love unto? Beloved,
as for our knowledge, God has left unto us Scripture, the perfect Register of
all our duty, the absolute Itinerary and Map of all the course which in this
life we are to run; and as for love, he plentifully sheds it in the hearts of
all those that by faithful prayer beg it of him: If we shall search the
Scripture to improve our knowledge, if we shall earnestly beg at his hands to
inflame our love; Let our natural possibilities be what they will; he that now
does little amongst us shall do much, and he that does much shall do much more:
and the promises made unto the Jews concerning their carnal enemies, shall be
made good on us concerning our spiritual and ghostly enemies; one of us shall
chase a thousand, and if they come out against us one way, they shall flee
before us seven ways. And thus much for the first use.

There is a second benefit of great weight and moment, which we reap out of the
consideration of the errors of these excellent Ministers of God; namely, a
lesson teaching us to beware of spiritual pride. Of all the vices which our
nature is subject unto, this is the most dangerous, and of which we had need be
most cautelous: For whereas all other vices proceed from some ill in us, from
some sinful imbecility of our nature, this alone arises out of our good parts:
Other sins draw their being from that original corruption which we drew from
our Parents, but this may seem to be the mother of that; as by which even
natures unstained and in their primitive purity, may most easily fall. And
therefore not without some probability is it concluded in the Schools, That no
other crime could throw the Angels down from heaven but this. That which one
leaves for a memorial to great men; that in dangerous times, Non minus
periculum ex magna fama quam ex mala, it was a matter of like danger to have a
great name, as an ill; that may I pronounce of a Christian man, the danger of
his innocence is not much less then of his faults. For this Divil, when he
cannot drive us to despair by reason of our sin, takes another course to see if
he can make us presume upon conceit of our righteousness: For when by the
preventing grace of God, we keep our selves from greater offenses, if we find
our selves to have a love unto the Word of God, and the true Professors of it,
to be rich in alms-deeds, to have a part in other acts of righteousness, he
makes us first take notice of these good things in us; notice taken, draws us
to love and admire them in us^ self-love draws us on to compare our selves with
others, then to prefer our selves before others, and thirdly to disdain others
in respect of our selves. Here now is a gap laid open to a thousand
inconveniences: And hence it is that we see diverse times men otherwise of life
and reputation pure and unblameable, upon conceit and inconsiderateness by a
secret judgment of God to fall upon extremes no less fearful, then are the
issues of open profaneness and impiety. To cut off therefore all way that may
be opened to let in spiritual pride, it has pleased God to make use of this as
of a sovereign remedy, namely, to permit even in his most chosen vessels,
evermore secret and hidden infirmities, and sometimes gross and open scapes,
which may serve when they look into themselves to abate all overweening
conceit of their own righteousness, and when they shall look into the errors
of others, may be secret admonitioners unto them, not rashly to condemn them,
considering their own weakness. I will therefore shut up this place with the
saying of St. Ambrose, Etiam Iapsus sanctorum utilis est; Nihil mihi obfuit
quod negavit Petrus, etiam profuit quod emendavit: The fall of the Saints is a
very profitable thing; It hurts not me that St. Peter denied Christ, and the
example of his amendment is very beneficial unto me. And so I come unto the
preparative unto St. Peter's Repentance, in these words, and he went forth.

THE wisdom of God has taught the Church sometime by express message delivered
by words of mouth, sometime by dumb signs and actions. When Jeremy walked up
and down the City with a yoke of wood about his neck, when Ezekiel lay upon his
side, beseiged a Slate with the draught of Jerusalem upon it; and like a
banished man carried his stuff upon his shoulders from place to place: they did
no less prophecy the captivity, desolation, famine, and woe, which was to fall
upon Jerusalem, then when they denounced it by direct word and speech: yea,
many of the ordinary actions of the Patriarks, which seem to participate of
chance, and to be in the same rank with those of other men, themselves (as a
learned Divine of our Age, Mercerus, observes) not intending or understanding
any such thing, contained by the dispensation of the holy Ghost, especial
lessons and instructions for us. That speech of Sarah, Cast out the bondwoman
and her son, etc. seemed to Abraham only a speech of a cursed heart, and she
her self perceives not her self to speak by direction from God, but moved with
impatience of Ismael's petulant behavior toward her son: Yet, the holy Ghost
himself has taught us, that this act of her prefigured a great mystery. Many
disputations there are concerning the cause of this action of St. Peter's going
forth: whether it were out of the common infirmity that is in most men, namely,
a greater shame to repent then to offend? or whether it were out of modesty and
good nature, that he could not endure the sight of Christ, whom he had so
greivously offended? Howsoever it were, we shall do this Scripture no wrong, if
we think it to contain an act in outward show casual, and like unto the actions
of other men, but inwardly indeed an especial action of a person great in the
sight of God; and therefore comprehending some especial instruction. And to
speak plainly, this abandoning the place wherein he fell, the company for fear
of whom he fell, and those things that were occasioners of his sin, does not
obscurely point out unto us an especial duty of speedy relinquishing and
leaving of all, either Friends, or Place, or Means, or whatsoever else, though
dearer unto us then our right hand, then our right eye; if once they become
unto us inducements to sin. In former days before the Fullness of time came, the
Calling of the Elect of God was not by any one-act more often prefigured, then
by this action of going forth; When the purpose of God was to select unto
himself a Church, and to begin it in Abraham, Come forth, says he unto him,
out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house: When
Israel being in Egypt, it pleased God to appoint them a set Form and manner of
serving him; before this could be done, they and all theirs must Come forth of
Egypt; they must not leave a hoof behind them. When the time of the Gospel was
come, our Savior holds the same course; none must be of his company, but such
as come forth, leave all and follow him: And therefore the Apostle putting the
Hebrews in mind of their duty, expresses it in this very term, Let us go forth
therefore unto him, says he, without the camp, bearing his reproach. And in
the original Language of the New Testament; the Church has her name from this
thing, from being called forth; so that without a going forth there is no
Church, no Christianity, no Service to God: the reason of all which is this; We
are all by nature in the High Priests Court, as St. Peter was, where we all
deny and forswear our Master, as St. Peter did; neither is there any place for
repentance, till, with St. Peter we go forth and weep.

For our further light, we are to distinguish the practice of this our going
forth, according to the diversity of the times of the Church. In the first
Ages, when Christianity was like unto Christ, and had no place to hide its
head, no entertainment but what persecution, and oppression, and fire, and
sword could yield it; there was then required at the hands of Christians, an
actual going forth, a real leaving of riches, and friends, and lands, and life,
for the profession of the Gospel. Afterward, when the Tempests of persecutions
were somewhat allayed, and the sky began to clear up, the necessity of actual
relinquishing of all things ceased, Christians might then securely hold life
and lands, and whatsoever was their own; yet, that it might appear unto the
world, that the resolution of Christian men was the same as in times of
distress and want, so likewise in time of peace and security, it pleased God to
raise up many excellent men, as well of the Laity as of the Clergy, who without
constraint, voluntarily, and of themselves, made liberal distribution of all
they had; left their means and their friends, and betook themselves to deserts
and solitary places, wholly giving themselves over to Meditation, to Prayer, to
Fasting, to all severity and rigidness of life: what opinion our times has of
these, I cannot easily pronounce; thus much I know safely may be said, that
when this custom was in its primitive purity, there was no one thing more
behoovful to the Church; It was the Seminary and Nursery of the Fathers, and of
all the famous Ornaments of the Church: Those two things which afterward in
the decay and ruin of this discipline, the Church sought to establish by
Decrees and Constitutions, namely, to estrange her Priests from the world, and
bind them to a single life, were the necessary effects of this manner of
living; for when from their childhood they had utterly sequestered themselves
from the world, and long practiced the contempt of it; when by chastising their
body, and keeping it under with long fasting, they had killed the heat of
youth, it was not ambition, nor desire of wealth, nor beauty of women that
could withdraw them, or sway their affections.

That which afterward was crept into the Church, and bare the name of Monkery,
had indeed nothing of it but the name, under pretense of poverty they seized
into their possession the wealth and riches of the world, they removed
themselves from barren soils into the fattest places of the land, from solitary
deserts into the most frequented cities; they turned their poor Cottages into
stately Palaces, their true Fasting into Formalizing and partial abstinence: So
that instead of going forth, they took the next course to come into the world;
they left not the world for Christ, but under pretense of Christ they gained
the world: (...), as Nazianzen speaks; One of their own, St. Ierom by name,
long ago complained of it, Nonnulli sunt ditiores Monachi, quam fuerant
seculares; and clerici qui possideant opes sub paupere Christo, quas sub
fallaci and locuplete diabolo non habuerant; ut suspiret eos ecclesia divites,
quos tenuit mundos ante mendicos. But I forbear, and come to commend unto you
another kind of going forth, necessary for all persons, and for all times:
There is a going forth in act and execution, requisite only at some times, and
upon some occasions; there is a going forth in will and affections: this let
the persons be of what calling soever, and let the times be never so
favorable, God requires at the hands of every one of us. We usually indeed
distinguish the times of the Church into times of Peace, and times of
Persecution; the truth is, to a true Christian man the times are always the
same: Habet etiam pax suos martyrs; says one; there is a martyrdom even in
time of peace; for the practice of a Christian man in the calmest times, in
readiness and resolution must nothing differ from times of rage and fire.
Josephus writing of the military Exercises practiced amongst the Romans,
reports, that for seriousness they differed from a true Battle only in this,
The Battle was a bloody Exercise, their Exercise a bloudless Battle; Like unto
this must be the Christian exercise in times of peace, neither must there be
any difference betwixt those days of persecution, and these of ours, but only
this, Those yielded Martyrs with blood, ours without. Let therefore every man
thoroughly examine his own heart, whether upon supposal of times of trial and
persecution, he can say with David, My heart is ready: whether he can say of
his dearest pledges, All these have I counted dung for Christ's sake? whether
he find in himself that he can, if need be even lay down his life for his
profession? He that cannot do thus, what differs his Faith from a temporary
faith, or from hypocrisy? Mark, I beseech you what I say, I will not affirm, I
will only leave it to your Christian discretion: A temporary faith, that is, a
faith resembled to the seed in the Gospel, which being sown on the stony
ground, withered as soon as the sun arose, a faith that fails as soon as it
feels the heat of persecution, can save no man. May we not with some reason
think, that the Faith of many a one, who in time of peace seems to us, yea, and
to himself too peradventure, to die possessed of it, is yet notwithstanding no
better then a temporary faith, and therefore comes not so far, as to save him
that has it? Rufus a certain Philosopher, whenever any Scholars were brought
unto him to receive education under him, was wont to use all possible force of
argument to dissuade them from it; if nothing could prevail with them, but
needs they will be his hearers, this their pertinacy he took for a sure token
of a mind thoroughly settled, and led as it were by instinct to their studies.
If God should use this method, to try who are his, and bring on us those
temptations, which would make the man of a temporary faith to shrink; think we
that all those who in these times of peace have born the name of Christ unto
their graves, would have born unto the rack, unto the sword, unto the fire?
Indeed to man who knows not the thoughts of his friend, some trials sometimes
are very necessary; But, he that knew and foretold David what the resolution of
the men of Keilah would be, if Saul came to them, knows likewise what the
resolution of every one of us would be, if a fiery trial should appear. Who
knows therefore whether God has numbered out the Crowns of life, according to
the number of their souls, who he foreknew would in the midst of all
temptations and trials continue unto the end? For what difference is there
betwixt the Faith that fails upon occasion, or that would fail if occasion were
offered? for the actual failing of Faith is not that that makes it temporary,
it is only that which detects it, which bewrays it unto us to be so. The Faith
therefore of that man which would have sunk as fast as St. Peter did, if
tempests had arisen, notwithstanding that through the peace of the Church he
dies possessed of, is no better then a temporary, and comes short of a saving
Faith. Durus sermo, it is a hard speech, some man may say; but let him that
thinks thus recount with himself, that Dura via, it is a hard way that leads to
life. Beloved, deceive not your selves; heaven never was, nor will be gotten
without Martyrdom: In a word, my Brethren, try therefore your selves, whether
you have in you true resolution: summon up your thoughts, survey every path in
which your affections are wont to tread; see whether you are prepared to leave
all for Christ: If you find in your selves but one affection looking back to
Sodom, to the things of this life, remember Lot's wife, her case is yours; you
are not yet sufficiently provided for the day of Battle.

CHRISTIAN OMNIPOTENCY.
Philip. IV. 13. I can do all things through Christ, [that enableth, or] that
strengthens me
FRom henceforth let all complaint concerning the frailty and weakness of Man's
nature for ever cease: For behold our weakness swallowed up of strength, and
Man is become Omnipotent; I can do all things, says my Apostle. The strongest
reason, which the subtilest above all the beasts of the Field could invent, to
draw our first Parents from their allegiance, was this, Ye shall be like gods:
Our Savior, who is infinitely wiser to recall us, then our adversary was to
seduce us, takes the same way to restore, as he did to destroy, and uses that
for Physic, which the Devil gave for poison: Is this it, says he unto us,
that has drawn ye from me, that ye would be like unto gods? why, then return
again, and ye shall be like gods, by a kind of Communicatio idiomatum, by
imparting unto you such excellencies, as are proper unto my self: As I my self
do all things, so shall you likewise be enabled to do all things through me.
Falso queritur de Natura sua Genus humanum, quod imbecillis sit; It was the
observation of the Heathen Historian, That it is an error in men, thus to
complain of the infirmities and weakness of their nature; For man indeed is a
creature of great strength, and if at any time he find himself weak, it is
through his fault, not through his nature: But, he that shall take into
consideration these words of my Text, shall far better then any natural man be
able to perceive, that man has no cause to complain of his weakness. (...),
says Aristophanes. It was a tale that passed among some of the Heathen, that
Vulcan offended with the men of Athens, told them that they should be but
fools; but Pallas that favored them, told them they should be fools indeed,
but folly should never hurt them. Beloved, our case is like to that of the men
of Athens; Vulcan the Devil has made us fools and weak, and so we are indeed
of our selves: but the Son of God, the true Pallas, the Wisdom of the Father
has given us this gift, that our weakness shall never hurt us: For, look what
strength we lost in Adam, that with infinite advantage is supplied in Christ.
It was the Parable of Iphicrates, that an Army of Hearts, with a Lion to their
Captain, would be able to vanquish an Army of Lions, if their Captain were but
an Heart. Beloved, were Mankind indeed but an Army of Hearts, were we Hinnuleo
semiles, like unto the fearful Hind upon the Mountains, that starts at every
leaf that shakes; yet through Christ that strengthens us, having the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah for our Captain and Leader, we shall be able to vanquish all
that force, which the Lion that goes up and down, seeking whom he may devour,
is able to bring against us. Indeed we do many times sadly bemoan our case, and
much rue the loss, which through the rechlesness of our first Parents has
befallen us; Yet let us cheer up our selves, our fear is greater then our hurt.
As Elkanah speaks unto Hannah, in the first of Samuel, Why weepest thou? am not
I better unto thee then ten sons? So will we comfort our selves in the like
manner; Let us sorrow no more for our lofs in Adam; for is not Christ ten-fold
better unto us, then all the good of Paradise? The Mulberry-tree indeed is
broken down, but it is built up again with Cedar. The loss of that portion of
strength, wherewith our Nature was originally endued, is made up with fullness
of power in Christ; it is past that conclusion of Zeba and Zalmana unto Gideon,
in the Book of Judges, As the man is, so is his strength; for now, Beloved, as
is God, so is our strength. Wherefore, as St. Ambrose spoke of St. Peter's
fall, Non mihi obfuit quod negavit Petrus, immo profuit, quod emendavit. So may
we speak of the Fall of our first Parents, it hurts not us that Adam fell; nay,
our strength and glory is much improved, that by Christ we are redeemed. Our
natural weakness be it never so great, with this supply from Christ, is far
above all strength, of which our Nature in its greatest perfection was capable.
If we survey the particulars of that weakness, which we drew from the loins of
our first Parents, we shall find the chiefest part of it to be in the loss of
Immortality. For as for the loss of that pleasant place, the blindness of
understanding, and perverseness of will, being supposed to betide us
immediately upon the Fall, these seem weaknesses far inferior to our
mortality. For, God forbidding us the fruit of the Tree of knowledge, and
setting down the penalty that should ensue, making choice (as it is most
likely) of the fearfullest judgment, and what he saw in his wisdom was most
likely to awe us, threatens neither blindness of understanding, nor crookedness
of nature, but tells us, What day ye eat of it, ye shall die. Yet see, Beloved,
with how great strength this mortal weakness is repaired: For thus to be able
to encounter with death, the fearfullest of all God's curses, and through
Christ to overcome it, as all true Christians do, to turn the greatest curse
into the greatest blessing, is more then Immortality.

Si non errasset, fecerat ille minus: Had not man been thus weak, he had never
been thus strong. Again, on the contrary, let us conceive unto the utmost, what
our strength might be in our first estate, let us raise our conceit unto the
highest note we can reach, yet shall we never find it to be greater, then what
here is expressed in my Text. For greater ability, then power to do all things,
is not imaginable, I can do all things. Beloved, these words are Anakims, they
beseem not the mouth of a man of ordinary strength; he that has right unto
them, must be one of the race of the Giants at least; for he says not simply,
(...), I can, though peradventure with some difficulty, hardly with much labor
and pains; but he says, (...), I can with ease, I have valor and strength to
do them. I ask then first, as the Eunuch does in the Acts, of whom speaks our
Apostle this, of himself, or of some other man? I answer, both of himself, and
all other Christians; for every Christian man, by reading it as he ought, makes
it his own, for in reading it as he ought, he reads it with the same spirit,
with which St. Paul wrote it. Wherefore as St. Paul somewhere records of
himself, that he was not found inferior to the chief Apostles, so is it true,
that the meanest Christian that hears me this day, in all that is contained in
my Text, is paralleled, is nothing inferior unto St. Paul, unto the chief
Apostles. What a comfort then is this unto the brother of low degree, when he
considers with himself, that how mean soever he may seem to be, either in the
Church or Commonweal, yet notwithstanding in so great a privilege, as is this
omnipotent power of doing all things; he is equal unto St. Peter, unto St.
Paul, the greatest Peers of the Church? If then the weakness of Christians be
so strong, as to deserve the name of Almightiness, what name, what title does
the strength of a Christian deserve to bear?

Secondly, I ask what meaning has this word (...), this can do in my Text? I
answer, very large: first, though it be rendered by this word doing, yet it
comprehends sufferings too: for possum: valeo, I can, is as well to suffer as
to do; and that our blessed Apostle amongst other things so meant it, is
apparent by the words foregoing my Text. And here is the first part of a
Christians omnipotency: his patience is infinite, it suffers all things. Never
any contumely, never any loss, never any smart so great, as could weary out
Christian patience. Talia (says Tertullian) tantaque documenta, quorum
magnitudo penes nationes detractatio fidei est, penes nos vero, ratio, and
structio. Such examples, such precepts, have we of Christian patience, as that
with infidels they seem incredible, and call in question the truth of our
profession; but with us they are the ground and foundation of faith. God
himself did never yet try the utmost of a Christian's patience; neither has he
created any object that is able to equal it: yet, he seems for our instruction
to have gone about to try, what might have been done: He commanded Abraham to
sacrifice his dear and only Son, Tam grave praeceptum, quod nec Deo perfici
placebat, patienter and audivit, and si Deus voluisset, implesset, says
Tertullian; So heavy was the command, that God himself liked not it should be
acted; yet Abraham heard it patiently, and had fulfilled it, if God would have
given him leave. What should I speak of poverty, of disease, of the sword, of
sire, of death it self. (...), says Gorduis the Martyr in St. Basil, (...):
Oh! at what a loss I am, says he, that I can die but once for my Savior? Take
the greatest instance of God's fury and wrath, even the pains laid up in hell
for the sinner, and we shall find that there have been Christians, who for the
glory of God, would gladly have endured them; St. Paul is the man amongst all
the Saints of God; the greatest and worthiest example of this wonderful
strength, of this omnipotency of a Christian man; What evil is imaginable,
which he did not either indeed, or at least in will and affection undergo?
Omnem patientiae speciem adversus omnem dia^oli vim expunxit, (...), I am on
fire, says St. Chrysostom, when I speak of St. Paul: and indeed, whom would it
not inflame, to read that admirable Synopsis and Brief of his sufferings,
registered in the second of the Corinthians, at the eleventh Chapter? In labors
more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths
often; and could he do more? Yes, he could; Sed ubi historiam praestare non
potuit, votum attulit: Hitherto he reports Historically what was done, and as
if that were not enough, he tells us what he would have done, and that his
patience was able even gladly to have encountered Hell it self, (...), says he
in the ninth of the Romans, I have prayed unto God, I have begged it at his
hands, as a favor, that for the increase of his glory through the salvation of
Israel my kinsmen, according to the flesh, I might become a castaway, and
endure the pains of eternal fire. Tertullian considering the wonderful patience
of our Savior upon his cross, thinks, that if there had been no other argument
to prove him to be God, yet this alone had been sufficient; Hanc vel maxim,
Pharisaei Dominum agnoscere debuistis; patientiam hujusmodi nemo hominum
perpetraret. In like manner may we truly say, were there no other argument to
prove that Christ does dwell in us, does mightily strengthen and enable us, yet
this wonderful measure of patience in so finite a creature, could never
subsist, if God were not in us of a truth.

Again, (...), this word of doing here in my Text, signifies not only
sufferings and patience, this were to make a Christian but a kind of stone: A
Christian has not only a Buckler to resist, but he must have a Sword to
strike. Wherefore this word of doing must signify yet further some action and
life, and so indeed it does; for it notes unto us the most glorious and eminent
kind of Christian action, Victory and Conquest; and when my Apostle here says,
I can Do all things, his meaning is, I can Overcome and Conquer all things.
And here is the second and most glorious part of Christian Omnipotency; never
was any true Christian overcome, or can he; For look how much he yields unto
his enemy, so much he fails of his profession and title. David complains of
Ioab and his Brethren, These sons of Zerviah are too strong for me: But,
Beloved, a Christian man finds none of these sons of Zerviah, whom he needs to
fear, or of whom he needs to complain. For as Aristotle tells us, that a
magnanimous man is he, (...), who thinks nothing great, but conceits all things
as inferior to himself: so may we define a true Christian to be such a one, as
to whom nothing is dreadful, in whose eye nothing under God carries any show of
Greatness. St. Paul has left us a Catalogue in the end of the eighth to the
Romans, of all the forces, outward and inward, bodily and ghostly, that can be
mustered against us; Life, Death, Angels, Principalities, Powers, things
present, things to come, height, depth, any creature imaginable, and
pronounces of them, that in all these we are Conquerours; Conquerours is too
mean a word, (...), we are more then Conquerours: (...), says St. Chrysostom,
we conquer them with ease, without any pains or sweat? Pancas Victoria dextras
-- exigit, we shall not need to bring forth against them all our forces, a
small part of them will be sufficient to gain the day; and not only overcome
them, but turn them to our benefit and behoof. For sin is like unto Sampson's
Lion, it comes upon us with open mouth to devour us, but when we have slain it,
we shall find honey in the belly of it: Wonderful therefore is the power of a
Christian, who not only overcomes, and Conquers, and kills the Viper, but like
the skilful Apothecary, makes Antidote and Treacle of him. Indeed our
Adversaries seem to be very great; St. Paul calls them by wonderful names, as
if he meant to affright us: Powers, Principalities, (...), Depths; the prince
that rules in the air, the god of this world, and what not? Yet
notwithstanding, as one speaks in Livy of the Macedonian War, as I remember,
Non quam magni nominis bellum est, tam difficilem existi maveritis victoriam;
we must not think there will be any doubt of the Victory, because it is a War
of great name and noise; For methinks I discover in our Apostle, when he uses
these strange astonishing words, a spiritual stratagem, by which to stir us up,
and make us stand upon our guard, he makes the largest report of our enemies
forces. We read that one of the Roman Captains perceiving his soldiers
unnecessarily to faint, draws out letters before them, and reads the news of
that which never was, of I know not what Kings with Armies and multitude coming
forthwith against them; which Art of his did much avail him to gain the
victory, because it made the Soldiers to recollect themselves, and fight with
all their might. Beloved, I may not think, that the Apostle in making this
report of our enemies forces, relates that which is not; but this, I think, I
may safely say, that he makes the most of that which is: For it can never hurt
us to take our enemy, to be as strong as he is, or peradventure stronger, for
this is a very profitable error, it makes us more wary, and provide our selves
the better. But to slight and contemn our enemy, to err on the contrary side,
and think him to be weaker then he is, this has caused many an overthrow. It
is a rule which Vigetius gives us, Difficilime vincitur, qui vere potest de
suis, and de adversarii copiis judicare; It is an hard matter to overcome him
that truly knows his own strength, and the strength of his adversary. And
here, beloved, is the error of most Christians, we do not know of what
strength we are; We look upon this body of ours, and suppose that in so weak
and faint a subject there cannot subsist so great strength, as we speak of; as
if a man should prize the liquour by the baseness of the vessel in which it is.
As diverse Landlords have treasures hidden in their feilds, which they know not
of, so many of us have this treasure of omntpotency in us, but we care not to
discover it, and to know it; did we but perfectly know our own strength, and
would we but compare it with the strength of our enemies, we should plainly
discover, that we have such infinite advantage above them, that our conquest
may seem not to be so great, as is pretended: For the greater the advantages
are, the glory of the victory is the less; and that which makes a conquest
great, is not so much the greatness of him that conquers, as the strength and
greatness of him that is overthrown. Now that proportion is there betwixt the
strength of God himself dwelling in us, and all the strength of Heaven, Earth,
and Hell besides? how then can we count this spiritual War so fearful, which is
waged upon so unequal terms; In quo si modo congressus cum host sis, viceris;
in which if we but give the onset, we are sure to gain the victory? restitisse
vicisse est; To resist is to conquer, for so says the Apostle, Resist the
Divil, and he shall flee from you. There was never yet any Christian conquered,
that could not: and in this war not to yield the victory, is to get it. As
therefore one spoke of Alexander's expedition into India, Been ausus est vana
contemnere; the matter was not much which he did, the greatest thing in it was,
that he durst do it: so considering our strength, and the weakness of our
adversaries, we may without prejudice speak even of the worthiest Soldiers,
that ever fought these spiritual Battles, Been ausi sunt vana contemnere; The
greatest thing that we can admire in them, is, that they durst do it. Would we
but a little examine the forces of our adversaries, we should quickly find it
to be as I have said: When Alcibiades, a young Gentleman of Athens, was afraid
to speak before the multitude: Socrates, to put him in heart, asks him, Fear
you, says he, such a one? and names one of the multitude to him; No, says
Alcibiades, he is but a Tradesman: Fear you such a one, says he, and names a
second? No, sor he is but a Pesant: or such a one? and names a third: No, for
he is but an ordinary Gentleman: Now, says he, of such as these does the whole
multitude consist: and by this device he encouraged Alcibiades to speak. He
that shall fear to encounter the multitude, and army of spiritual adversaries
which are ready to set themselves against him, let him do by himself as
Socrates did by Alcibiades; Let him sit down and consider with himself his
enemies one by one, and he shall quickly discover their weakness. Primi in
praeliis vincantur oculi; Its a saying, that the first thing that is overcome
in a Soldier, is his eye, while he judges of his enemy by his multitude and
provision, rather then by his strength. Beloved, if we judge not of our
adversary in gross, and as it were by the eye, we shall easily see, that we
shall not need to do as the King in the Gospel does, send to his enemy with
conditions of peace; for there is no treaty of peace to be had with these. Had
Zimri peace that slew his master, says the Scripture: and, There is no peace
unto the wicked, says my God. Not only Zimri, and the wicked, but no
Christian has, or can have peace, he must be always as fighting, and always
conquering. Let us single out some one of this Army, and let us examine his
strength. Is it Sin does so much affright us? I make choice of it, because it
is the dreadfullest enemy that a Christian has: Let us a little consider its
strength, and we shall quickly see, there is no such need to fear it: Sins are
of two sorts, either great and capital, or small and ordinary sins: I know it
were a paradox in nature to tell you, that the greatest and mightiest things
are of least force; yet this is true in the case we speak of, the greatest
things are the weakest. Your own experience tells you, that rapes and murders,
parricide, poisoning, treason, and the rest of that rabble of arch sins, are
the sins of the fewest, and that they have no strength at all but upon the
weakest men; for doubtless if they were the strongest, they would reign with
greatest latitude, they would be the commonest, they would be the sins of the
most: But wandering thoughts, idle words, petty lusts, inconsiderate wrath,
immoderate love to the things of the world, and the rest of that swarm of
ordinary sins, these are they that have largest extent and dominion, and some
of these, or all of these, more or less, prevail with every man. As the
Magicians in Exodus, when they saw not the power of God in the Serpents, in the
Blood, in the Frogs; at the coming of the plague of the Lice presently cried,
Digitus Dei hic est; this is the finger of God: so I know not how it comes to
pass, though we see and confess that in those great and heinous crimes, the
Devil has least power; yet at the coming of Lice, of the rout of smaller and
ordinary sins, we presently yield our selves captives, and cry out, Digitus
Diaboli, the strength of the Devil is in these: as if we were like unto that
fabulous Rack in Pliny, which if a man thrust at with his whole body, he could
not move it, yet a man might shake it with one of his fingers. Now what an
error is it in us Christians, when we see the principal and captain sins so
easily vanquished, to think the common soldier or lesser sort invincible? For
certainly, if the greatest sins be the weakest, the lesser cannot be very
strong. Secondly, is it Original corruption that does so much affright us? Let
us consider this a little, and see what great cause we have to fear it. And
first, Beloved, let us take heed that we seem not (...), to fight with our own
fancy, and not so much to find, as to feign an enemy: Mistake me not, I
beseech you, I speak not this as doubting that we drew any natural infection
from the loins of our parents: but granting this, I take it to be impossible to
judge of what strength it is, and deny that it is any such cause why we should
take it to be so strong, as that we should stand in fear to encounter it, and
overcome it; for we can never come to discover, how far our nature is
necessarily weak: for whilst we are in our infancy, and as yet not altered, a
puris naturaelibus, from that which God and nature made us, none of us
understand our selves; and ever we can come to be of years to be able to
discover it, or define any thing concerning the nature of it, custom or
education, either good, has much abated, or evil has much improved the force
of it; so that for any thing we know, the strength of it may be much less then
we suppose, and that it is but a fear that makes it seem so great, (...), says
S. Chrysostom, It is the nature of timorous and fearful men evermore to be
framing to themselves causeless fears. I confess, it is a strange thing, and it
has many times much amazed me, to see how ripe to sin many children are, in
their young and tender years: and ever they understand what the name of Sin and
evil means, they are unexpectedly, and no man knows by what means, wonderfully
prompt and witty to villainy and wickedness, as if they had gone to schole to it
in their mothers womb. I know not to what cause to impute this thing, but I
verily suppose I might quit Original sin from the guilt of it: For it is a
ruled case, and concluded by the general consent of the Schools, that Original
sin is alike in all: and St. Paul seems to me to speak to that purpose, when he
says, that God has alike concluded all under sin; and, that all are alike
deprived of the glory of God. Were therefore Original sin the cause of this
strange exorbitancy in some young children, they should all be so: a thing
which our own experience teaches us to be false; for we see many times even in
young children many good and gracious things, which being followed with good
education, must needs come to excellent effect: In pueris elucet spes
plurimorum, says Quintilian, quae ubi emoritur aetate, manifestum est, non
defecisse naturam sed curam; In children many times an hope of excellent things
appears, which in riper age for want of cherishing fades and withers away; a
certain sign that Nature is not so weak, as Parents and Tutors are negligent:
whence then comes this difference? certainly not from our Nature, which is one
in all, but from some other cause. As for Original sin, of what strength it is
I will not discuss: only thus much I will say, there is none of us all but is
much more wicked, then the strength of any primitive corruption can constrain.
Again, let us take heed that we abuse not our selves, that we use not the names
of Original weakness as a stale or stalking-horse, as a pretense to choke and
cover somewhat else: For oftentimes when evil education, wicked examples, long
custom, and continuance in sin has bred in us an habit, and necessity of
sinning, presently Original sin, and the weakness of man's nature bear the
blame: Vbi per secordiam, vires, tempus, ingenium, defluxere, naturae
infirmitas accusatur; When through sloth and idleness, luxury and distemper,
our time is lost, our bodies decayed, our wits dulled, we cast all the fault on
the weakness of our nature; That Law of sin in our members, of which St. Paul
spoke, and which some take to be Original corruption; St. Austin once
pronounced of it (whether he meant to stand to it I know not, but so he once
pronounced of it) Lex peccati est violentia consuetudinis; That Law of sin,
that carries us against our wills to sin, is nothing else but the force and
violence of long custom and continuance in sin: I know that by the error of
our first Parents the Devil has blinded and bound us more then ever the
Philistines did Samson: Yet this needs not to make us thus stand in fear of
Original weakness; for blind and bound as we are, let the Devil build never so
strong, yet if our hair be grown, if Christ do strengthen us, we shall be able,
Samson-like to bear his strongest pillars, and pull down his house about his
ears.

Thirdly, Is it the Devil that we think so strong an adversary? Let us a little
consider his strength: he may be considered either as an inward enemy,
suggesting unto us sinful thoughts; or as an outward enemy, lying in wait to
afflict us in body, in goods, or the like. First, against us inwardly, he has
no force of his own; from our selves it is that he borrows this strength to
overthrow us. In Paradise he borrowed the Serpent to abuse us, but now every
man is that Serpent, by which himself is abused. For as Hannibal having
overthrown the Romans, took their armor and fought against them with their own
weapons; so the Devil arms himself against us with our own strength, our
senses, our will, our appetite; with these weapons he fights against us, and
uses us against our selves; let us but recover our own again, and the Devil
will be disarmed: Think you that the Devil is an immediate stickler in every
sin that is committed? I know ye do: But take heed, lest this be but an excuse
to unlode your faults upon the Devil, and to build them upon his back; for St.
Chrysostom thought otherwise, (...): The Devils hand, says he, is not in every
fault, many are done merely by our own carelessness: (...). A negligent careless
person sins, though the Devil never tempt him. Let the truth of this lie where
it will, I think I may safely speak thus much, that if we would but shut up our
wills, and use that grace of God which is offered; I doubt not, but a great
part of this suggesting power of his would fall to nothing. As for that other
force of his, by which he lies in wait to annoy us outwardly, why should we so
dread that? Are there not more with us both in multitude and strength to
preserve us? The Angel of the Lord (says the Psalmist) pitches his tents round
about those that fear him, to deliver them; and the Apostle assures us that the
Angels are ministering spirits, sent forth for those that shall be heirs of
salvation: Shall we think, that the strength of those to preserve, is less then
that of the evil Angels to destroy? One Garcaeus writing upon the Meteors, told
me long since, that whereas many times before great tempests, there is wont to
be heard in the air above us great noise, and rushing, the cause of this was,
the banding of good and evil Angels, the one striving to annoy us with
tempests, the other striving to preserve us from the danger of it. And I doubt
not, but as about Moses body, so about every faithful person, these do contend,
the one to hazard, the other to deliver. Yea, but the Devil inspires into us
evil thoughts: well, and cannot good Angels inspire good? they are all for any
thing appears, by the Law of their Creation equal, and shall we think that God
did give unto the Devil an inspiring faculty to entangle; which he denied to
his good Angels to free us from? Though good Angels could not inspire good
thoughts, yet God both can and does: So that for any thing yet appears, we have
no such cause to stand in fear of the strength of the Devil, either inwardly or
outwardly. Thus have I examined the force of three of our principal enemies; I
could proceed to examine other particulars of this army of our adversaries, the
World, the Flesh, Persecutions, and the rest, and make the like question of
them, as I have done of these, and so conclude as Socrates did to Alcibiades.
If you have just cause to fear none of these, why should you fear them all,
since that of such as these the whole knot of them consists? But I must proceed
to search out yet another meaning of this word of doing in my Text; and that
briefly.

Thirdly, therefore we may take this word of doing in its largest sense: as if
the Apostle had meant literally, that indeed a Christian can do all things,
that he had such a power and command over the creature, as that he could do
with it what he list. In which sense it is likewise true, though with some
limitation; and here is the third degree of our Christian Omnipotency. In the
former parts the omnipotence of a Christian suffered no restraint, it was
illimited, unconfined. He is absolutely omnipotent in his patience, and can
suffer all things: he is likewise absolutely omnipotent in Battle, and can
conquer all his enemies. But in this third signification, his power seems to be
straightened: for how many things are there which no Christian man can do? yet
is he so straightened, as that his Omnipotency suffers not. We are taught in the
Schools, though God be Omnipotent, yet many things may be named which he cannot
do: He cannot deny Himself, He cannot lie, He cannot sin, He cannot die. Yet
may we not conclude, that therefore God is not Omnipotent; for therefore is he
the more Omnipotent, because he cannot do these things: for ability to do these
things, is imperfection and weakness; but in God we must conceive nothing but
what argues perfection and strength. In some degree we may apply this unto our
selves, in things that tend to Christian perfection, every Christian is
Omnipotent, he cannot raise the dead, turn water into wine, speak with tongues:
True, but if he could, had he for this any further degree of perfection above
other Christians? our Savior seems to deny it. For many (says he) at that day
shall come and say, Have we not cast out devils, and wrought miracles in thy
name? And he will answer them, Away, I know you not. Beloved, our Savior loves
not to slight any part of Christian perfection: yet my meaning is not to deny
unto a Christian the power of doing miracles, for every Christian man does
every day greater miracles, then yet I have spoken of. But, Beloved, in this
matter of miracles, we do much abuse our selves; for why? seems it unto us a
greater miracle, that our Savior once turned a little water into wine, then
every year in so many Vine-trees to turn that into wine in the branches, which
being received at the root was mere water? Or why was it more wonderful for him
once to feed five thousand with five loaves, then every year to feed the whole
world, by the strange multiplication of a few seeds cast into the ground? After
the same manner do we by the daily actions of Christian men. For why is it a
greater miracle to raise the dead, then for every man to raise himself from the
death of sin, to the life of righteousness? Why seems it more miraculous to
open the eyes of him that was born blind, then for every one of us to open the
eyes of his understanding, which by reason of Original corruption was born
blind? For by the same finger, by the same power of God, by which the Apostles
wrought these miracles, does every Christian man do this: and without this
finger, it is as impossible for us to do this, as for the Apostles to do the
miracles they did, without the assistance of the extraordinary power of Christ.
So that hitherto in nothing are we found inferior unto the chief Apostles:
what if there be some things we cannot do? shall this prejudice our power? It
is a saying in Quintilian, Oportet Grammaticum quaedam ignorare; It must not
impeach the learning of a good Grammarian to be ignorant of some things: for
there are many unnecessary quillets and quirks in Grammar, of which to purchase
the knowledge, were but loss of labor and time. Beloved, in the like manner
may we speak of our selves, Oportet Christianum quaedam non posse, it must not
disparage the power of a Christian, that he cannot do some things. For in
regard of the height and excellency of his profession, these inferior things
which he cannot do, they are naught else but Grammar quirks, and to be
ambitious to do them, were but a nice, minute, and over-superstitious
diligence. And yet a Christian if he list, may challenge this power, that he
can do all things; yea, even such things as he cannot do. St. Austin answering
a question made unto him, why the gift of Tongues was ceased in the Church, and
no man spoke with that variety of Languages, which diverse had in the Primitive
times, wittily tells us, That every one may justly claim unto himself that
miraculous gift of Tongues. For since the Church, which is the body of Christ,
of which we are but members, is far and wide dispersed over the earth, and is in
sundry Nations, which use sundry Languages, every one of us, may well be said
to speak with diverse Tongues; because in that which is done by the whole, or by
any part of it, every part may claim his share. Beloved, how much more, by this
reason, may every one of us lay a far directer claim to an absolute power of
doing all things, even in its largest extent, since I say not some inferior
member, but Christ, who is our Head, has this power truly rcsident in him.
Howsoever therefore in each member, it seems to be but partial, yet in our Head
it is at full; and every one of us may assume to our selves this power of doing
all things, because we are subordinate members unto that Head, which can do all
things. But I must leave this, and go on to the remainder of my Text.

Hitherto I have spoken, first of the person, I. Secondly, of his power, can
do: I should by order of the words proceed in the third place, unto the subject
or object of this power pointed out unto us in this word (...), all things. But
the subject of this Christian power has been so necessarily wrapped up, and
tied together with the power, that for the opening of it, I have been
constrained to exemplify at large, both what this (...), this all things is,
and how far it does extend: so that to enter upon it anew, were but to trouble
you with repetition of what is already sufficiently opened. I will go on
therefore unto the second General of my Text. For here me thinks that question
might be asked, which Dalilah asked of Sampson, Tell me, I pray thee, wherein
this great strength lies? Behold, Beloved, it is expressed in the last words,
through Christ that strengthens.

This is, as I told you, that hair, wherein that admirable strength of a
Christian does reside. I confess, I have hitherto spoken of wonderful things,
and hardly to be credited; wherefore (...), lest the strangeness of the
argument call my credit into question, Lo here I present unto you the ground
of all this: A small matter sometimes seems wonderful, till the cause of it be
discovered, but as soon as we know the cause, we cease to marvel: how strange
soever my discourse of Christian omnipotency does seem, yet look but upon this
cause, and now nothing shall seem incredible. For to doubt of the Omnipotency
of a Christian, is to question the power of Christ himself. As the Queen of
Sheba told King Solomon, that she had heard great things of him in her own
country, but now she saw truth did go beyond report: so, Beloved, he that
travels in the first part of my Text, and wonders at the strange report of a
Christian man's power, let him come to the second part, to our Solomon, to him
that is greater then Solomon, to Christ, and he shall find that the truth is
greater then the fame of it; for if he that was possessed of the evil spirit in
the Gospel, was so strong, that being bound with chains and fetters, he brake
them all: of what strength must he be then, whom it pleases Christ to enable?
or what chains or fetters shall be put upon him, which he will not break? From
this doctrine therefore that Christ is he, that does thus enable us, we learn
two lessons, which are as it were two props to keep us upright, that we lean
not either to the right hand, or to the left?

First, Not to be dejected or dismayed, by reason of this outward weakness and
baseness, in which we seem to be. Secondly, not to be puffed up upon opinion and
conceit of that strength and glory which is within us and unseen. For the
first, for our own outward weakness, be it what it will, we cannot be more
weak, more frail then Gideon's pitchers: now as in them their frailty was their
strength, and by being broken, they put to flight the Army of the Midianites:
so where it pleases Christ to work, that which seems weakness shall become
strength, and turn to flight the strongest adversary: Satis sibi copiarum cum
Publio Decio, and nunquam nimium Hostium sore, said one in Livie; we may apply
this unto our selves: be we never so weak, yet Christ alone is army and forces
enough, and with him we can never have too many enemies. The flesh indeed is
weak, for so our Savior tells us, yet this weakness of the flesh is no
prejudice at all to the strength of a Christian; for though the flesh be weak,
yet the spirit is strong, and so much our Savior tells us too: and why then do
we not follow the stronger part? Si spiritus carne fortior, quia generosior,
nostra culpa infirmiora sectamur, says Tertullian; If the spirit be stronger
then the flesh, what madness is it in us to make choice of, and follow the
weaker side?

Nulla fides unquam miseros elegit amicos.
Which of you is so improvident, as, in a faction, to make choice of that side,
which he sees to be the weakest, and which he knows must fall. Again, this
weakness of a Christian is only outward, within what he is, the words of my
Text do sufficiently show. Socrates outwardly was a man of deformed shape, but
he was one of an excellent spirit: and therefore Alcibiades in Plato compares
him to an Apothecary's box, which without had painted upon it an Ape, or a
Satyr, or some deformed thing; but within was full of sweet and precious
ointment. Thus, Beloved, it is with a Christian, whatsoever outward deformity
he seems to have, howsoever he seems to be nothing but rags without, yet he is
totus purpureus, all scarlet and glorious within: I have said, Ye are gods,
says the Scripture, the Magistrate is wont to ingross, and impropriate this
Scripture to himself; because sitting in place of Authority, for execution of
Justice, he carries some resemblance of God: but to whom can this Scripture
better belong then to the Christian man? For the magistrate indeed carries some
show of God without, but many times within is full of corruption and weakness;
the Christian carries a show of weakness without, but within is full of God and
Christ. The second thing which I told you we learned, was a Lesson teaching us,
not to be puffed up with opinion and conceit of our own outward strength and
glory: for if any man, because of this, shall begin to think of himself above
what he ought, let him know that he may say of his exceeding strength, no
otherwise then the man in the Book of Kings spoke, when his ax was fallen into
the water, Alas, Master, it was but lent! Those that build houses make Anticks,
which seem to hold up the beams, whereas indeed, as St. Paul tells the
Olive Branch, Thou bear not the root, but the root thee: So is it true in
them, they hear not up the house, the house bears up them. Beloved, seem we
never so strong, yet we are but Anticks, the strength by which the house of
Christ does stand, it is not ours, it is Christ's, who by that power, by which
he is able to subdue all things to himself, does sustain both himself and us.

Luke XVIII. 1. And he spoke a Parable unto them, to this end that men ought
always to pray, and not to faint.
MY Text is like the Temple at Jerusalem, it is the House of Prayer, wherein
we may learn many special points of the skill and practice of it. Now as that
Temple had two parts; First, the Forefront the Porch, the walk before it; and
secondly the Temple it self: So have these words likewise two parts; First,
there are words which stand before like a Porch or Walk, and they are these,
And he spoke a parable unto them: Secondly, here are words like unto the Temple
it self, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint. If you please, before
we enter into the Temple, or speak of these words, That men ought always to
pray, let us stay and entertain our selves a little in the Porch, and see what
matter of meditation it will yield; And he spoke a Parable unto them, etc. to
instruct and teach the ignorant, no method, no way so speedy and effectual, as
by Parables and Fables; Strabo gives the reason of it, (...); For man is a
creature naturally desirous to know; but it is according to the Proverb, as the
Cat desires fish, loath to touch the water, loath to take the pains to learn:
knowledge is indeed a thing very pleasant, but to learn is a thing harsh and
tedious above all the things in the world. The Book which St. John eats in the
tenth of the Apocalypse, was in his mouth sweet as honey, but bitter in his
belly: Beloved, those Librorum helluones, students that like St. John eat up
whole Volumes, these find the contrary; for in the mouth, in the perusal^ their
Books are harsh and unpleasant; but in the stomach, when they are understood
and digested, then are they delightful and pleasurable. Yet one thing by the
providence of God our nature has, which makes this rough way to learn, more
plain and easy: it is (...), common experience shows, we are all very desirous
to hear narrations and reports, either pleasant or strange; wise men therefore,
and God himself which is wiser then men, being to train up mankind, Genus
indocile, a subject dull of hearing, and hardly drawn to learn, have from time
to time wrought upon this humor, upon this part of our disposition, and
mitigated, sugared, as it were, the unpleasantness of a difficult and hard
lesson, with the sweetness of some delightful Parable or Fable: And S.
Chrysostom tells us of a Physician, who finding his Patient to abhor Physic,
but infinitely long for Wine, heating an earthen cup in the fire, and quenching
it in Wine, put his potion therein, that so the sick person being deceived with
the smell of Wine, might unawares drink of the Physic: or, that I may better
draw my comparison from Scripture, as when Jacob meant to be welcome to his
father Isaac, he put on his brother Esau's apparel, and so got access: So,
beloved, wise men, when they meant either to instruct the ignorant, or to
reprove offenders, to procure their welcome, and make their way more passable,
have been wont for the most part, as it were, to clothe their lesson or reproof
in a Parable, or to serve it in a dish savouring of wine, that so Jacob might
be admitted under Esau's coat, that the smell of the pleasantness of Wine might
draw down the wholesomeness of Physic. Great and singular have been those
effects, which this kind of teaching by parables has wrought in men; by
informing their ignorance, reproving their error, working patience of reproof;
opening the understanding, moving the affections, and other sovereign
commodities, (...). And for this cause not only our Poets and profane
Authors, but whole Cities, and men which gave Laws to Commonwealths, have
made especial choice of this course: Yea, our Savior Christ himself has
filled the Gospels with Parables, made them like a Divine and Christian AEsop's
Fables, because he found it to be exceeding profitable. For, first of all, it
is the plainest and most familiar way, and above all other stoops to the
capacity of the learner, as being drawn either from Trees, or Beasts, or from
some ordinary common and known actions of men; as from a shepherd attending his
flock, from an husbandman sowing corn in his field, from a fisher casting his
net into the Sea, from a woman putting leven into her dough, or the like. So
that in this respect a Parable is like Moses's Tabernacle, which outwardly was
nothing but Goats skins, or some ordinary stuff, but within it was silk, and
purple, and gold. And indeed, since those we teach are either children, or
ignorant persons who are but children, ((...), for every man in what he is
ignorant, is no better then a child) that manner of information fits best,
which is most easy and familiar. Again, a Parable is a kind of pattern and
example, expressing unto us what we hear; now nothing does more illustrate and
explain, then instance and example, (...), in a Parable as it were upon a
Stage, the thing that we are taught is in a manner acted, and set forth before
our eyes. Secondly, Parables do not only by their plainness open the
understanding, but they work upon the affections, and breed delight of hearing,
by reason of that faceteness and wittiness which is many times found in them,
by reason of which they insinuate themselves, and creep into us, and ere we are
aware, work that end for which they were delivered. Who is not much moved with
that Parable of Iotham in the Book of Judges, that the Trees went forth to
choose a King; or that of Menenius Agrippa in Livie, that the parts of the body
conspired against the belly, by which the one showed the wickedness of the men
of Sechem against the sons of Gideon; the other the folly of the common people,
in conspiring against the Senators and Noblemen? And no marvel, Beloved, if
this faceteness of Parables does thus work with men, since it seems to have had
wonderful force with God himself: For when the Canaanitish woman in the Gospel
had long importuned our Savior in the behalf of her daughter, and our Savior
had answered her with that short cutting and reproachful parable, It is not
meet to take the childrens bread, and cast it unto dogs; she facetely and
wittily retorts and turns upon our Savior his own parable; Truth Lord, says
she, yet dogs do eat the crumbs that fall from their master's table: be it that
I am but a dog, I require no more then is due to a dog, even the crumbs that
fall from your table: With which speech our Savior was so far taken, as that
he seems to have been stricken into a wonderment; for he presently cries out, O
woman, great is thy faith. Thirdly, there is one thing that this way of
instruction by Parable has above all other kinds of teaching: it serves
excellently for reproof; for man is a proud creature, impatient of plain and
open check and reprehension; (...): many times no way of dealing with him, when
he has offended, but by deceiving him with wiliness and craft; (...), he that
comes rudely and plainly to reprehend, does many times more hurt then good. I
speak not this only in regard of Ministerial reprehension, used by the
Preacher of the word, but of all other: for to reprove offenders is a common
duty, and belongs to every private man as well as to the Minister. St. Austin
in his Book de Civitate D^i, handling the question, Why in common calamities
the good do bear a part, as well as the evil, amongst many other reasons gives
this as a special one, That good men are not careful enough in reproving the
errors of their offending brethren, but by connivency and silence in a manner
partake in their sins, and as it were by consent, make them their own. It shall
not be amiss therefore, even for you of the Laity, to hear something concerning
this art of reprehension, as a duty concerning you as well as the Preacher. For
the wisdom and gentleness of a Christian is never better seen, then in
reproving: Now one common error of reprehenders, is their over-blunt and plain
manner of rebuking; dum sic objurgent, quasi oderint, whilst they reprove the
vice, as if they hated the person, and upbraid rather then reprehend: by this
our importunity, we destroy more sinners then we save. It is an excellent
observation in St. Chrysostom, (...), unseasonable and importunate reprehenders
make offending persons, depudere to steal their forehead, and to set a good
face upon their fact, as the phrase of the world is, and to seek out excuses
and apologies for their sin. Tully tells us, that Antony the Orator being to
defend a person, who was accused of faction and sedition, bend his wits to
maintain sedition was good, and not to be objected as a fault. That we force
not our offending Brethren unto this degree of impudency, let us consult with
our charity, and know the quality and nature of the offender. Husbandmen tell
us, that the young and tender branches of a Vine are not to be pruned away with
a knife, but gently pulled away by hand. Beloved, before we reprove, let us
know the condition of our brother, whether he be not like the young Vine, soft
and tender, and so to be cured rather with the hand, then with the knife: and
if he be grown so hard, that he shall need the knife, we must not rashly
adventure of it, but know there is a skill likewise in using the knife: As Ehud
in the Book of Judges, when he went to kill Eglon, carries not his Dagger in
his hand, but comes unto him with a present, and had his Dagger girt privily
under his garment; or as a skilful Physician of whom we read, being to heal an
impostume, and finding the sick person to be afraid of Lancing, privily wrapped
up his knife in a sponge, with which whilst he gently smoothed the place, he
lanced it: so, Beloved, when we encounter our offending Brother, we must not
openly carry the Dagger in our hand, for this were to defy our brother; but we
must wrap our knife in our sponge, and lance him whilst we smooth him, and
with all sweetness and gentleness of behavior cure him; as Esaias the Prophet
cured Hezekias, by laying a plaster of Figs upon the sore. Men when they have
offended are like unto fire, we must take heed how we come too near them; and
therefore as the Cherubims in the Book of Esay's Prophecy takes a cole from
the Altar with the tongs: so when the Prophets dealt with them, they did not
rudely handle them with their hands; but they came upon them warily under
Parables, as it were with the Cherubim tongs. How could Nathan have come so
near unto King David, and drawn from him an acknowledgment of his sin, had he
not come with the Cherubims tongs, and deceived him with a Parable? or how
should the Prophet made King Ahab see his error in letting go King Benhadad,
if he had not as it were put a trick upon the King, and disguised both himself
and his speech, and masked his errand with the Parable of him, who let go the
prisoner that was committed to his charge? So that in this respect, if we would
define a Parable, we must pronounce it to be piam fraudem, a civil or spiritual
Stratagem, by which persons who need instruction are honestly and piously
beguiled for their own profit. No marvel therefore, if our Savior Christ in
his preaching does every where drive upon Parables. For being to deliver to us
so many Lessons, so strange, so uncouth, so hard to learn, it was meet he
should make choice of that method of teaching, which has most likelihood to
prevail and commend them unto us. The doctrine which our Savior in my Text
labors to beat into us, is the continuing and perpetuating of our Prayer and
Religious meditation: A Lesson hard to be attained, and therefore thrice he
commends it unto us; once by Example, twice by Parable, both of them very
effectual means to teach: by Example of that importunate Canaanitish woman, in
the xv. of St. Matthew: by Parable, first in the xj. of St. Luke, of him that
lying warm in his bed, and loath to rise, yet at his friends importunity gets
up, and lends him bread; and secondly, by the Parable of the unjust Judge here
in my Text.

But all this while I must not forget, that I am but in the (...), in the
Porch, and entrance into the Temple, where to walk too long, were, if not to
lose, yet to abuse my time. Let us now therefore enter into the Temple it self,
and consider the main words of my Text: That men ought always to pray, and not
to faint: which words have a double meaning. First, there is Sensus quem
faciunt; there is a sense which the words themselves yield as they lie:
Secondly, Sensus quo fiunt, the sense and meaning in which the holy Ghost
intended and spoke them, If we look upon the sense which the words themselves
do give, it seems we are advised by them to be like Anna the Prophetess in the
ij. of S. Luke, who departed not from the temple, but served God with fasting
and prayer night and day. In all places, at all times, in season, out of
season, upon occasion, upon no occasion, perpetually without intermission to
pray: for thus the words do run, that we ought always to pray, and not to
faint. But if we look upon the sense in which the holy Ghost spoke these words,
and consider what was his intent when he wrote them, we shall find that the
Lesson which we are hence to learn, is, That we be like unto Jacob in the Book
of Genesis, wrestle with God, and tell him to his face, That he will not let
him go till he has given us his blessing: That we become like bold-fac'd
Suitours, or impudent Beggars, that will not be put by with a denial: but when
we have poured out our supplications unto God, and find his ear locked up
against us, yet to commence them again and again, and the third time; yea,
without any fainting, or giving over, till by a kind of importunate and
unmannerly devotion we have constrained God to let a blessing fall: and that
this was the intent of the holy Ghost in this place, it appears upon the very
reading of the Parable.

I will briefly speak unto you of both these senses in their order, and first
of the sense which the words do give, That we always ought without intermission
to pray.

Devotion in ordinary persons is a thing easily raised, and easily alay'd:
Every strange event, every fear, every little calamity or distress is enough to
put us into a strain of Religious meditation; but on the contrary side, a small
matter does again as quickly kill it. It seems to be like a quotidian Ague, it
comes by fits, every day it takes us, and every day it leaves us: or like flax,
or straw, or such light and dry stuff, which easily kindles, and as soon goes
out. Indeed it is a good thing when we find our hearts thus tender, and upon
every occasion ready to melt into devotion: for as to be quick of sense is a
sign of life, and the purest and best complexions are quickest of sense: so it
is a great argument of spiritual life in us, and of purity of soul, when we are
(...), so easily apt to fall upon devout meditation. But our Savior requires
yet another quality in our devotion, it must be as lasting as it is quick.
Quintilian advises his Orator to beware, how he stand too long upon a place of
passion, because that passion is not lasting, and nihil facilius lachrymis
marescit; and men cannot long weep. But, Beloved, our Savior gives other
precepts of Christian Oratory; he wills, if we will prevail with God, to insist
and dwell long upon a place of Religious passion, and provide that our tears
may be perpetual and never dry: an hard thing you will take it to be, yet
certainly it is very possible. There is a question raised among the great
Masters of Natural learning, Whether or no there may be a Lamp so provided,
that it may burn for ever? And they think it may be done: Beloved, our Savior
here teaches to practice that in Spirituals, which has been but a matter of
speculation in Naturals, even so to kindle and drefs our lamps, as that they
shall never go out; but be like unto the good House-wifes candle in the
Proverbs, that goes not out by night, or rather like the Sun which shines for
evermore. Daniel is said to have kindled this Lamp; and to have made his prayer
thrice a day, David seven times a day, but this is not enough; for in that the
one is noted to have prayed seven times a day, the other thrice: It is likely
at other times they did not pray, but God is not contented with this
intermittent prayer; for if we look upon my Text, we shall see that there must
be no instant free from prayer: we must not measure our prayers by number.
Number is a discreet quantity, as we call it, the parts of it are not connext,
are not tied together, there is a separation, a distance betwixt them. That
that measures out our prayer must be line and length, some continued quantity,
whose parts have no separation, no intermission: for so says my Text, men
ought always to pray. Always, the whole life of a man ought to be but one
continual prayer. But let us a little consider how possible this is, and see if
there be any thing, that does necessarily enforce intermission of prayer. And
first, that wonderful Lamp of which I but now told you great Scholars had
spoken, is not yet made, because they are not agreed of what matter to make it.
And indeed in the world, things either are not at all, or being; do at length
cease to be, either because there is no fit matter whence they may be framed,
or else the matter of which they are made, vanishes and dies. But, Beloved,
prayer is a strange thing, it can never want matter: It will be made (...)! e
quolibet, out of any matter, upon any occasion whatsoever; whatsoever you do,
wheresoever you are, does minister occasion of some kind of prayer; either of
thanksgiving unto God for his goodness; or of praising and admiring his
greatness; or of petitioning to him in case of want or distress; or bewailing
some sin, or neglect committed. Is it the consideration of God's benefits, that
will move us to thankfulness? Then certainly our thankfulness ought to be
perpetual, there is no person so mean, no soul so poor, and distressed and
miserable, but if he search narrowly, he shall find some blessing, for which he
ows thankfulness unto God: If nothing else, yet his very misery and distress is
a singular blessing, if he use it to that end for which it was sent. Is it the
consideration of distress and affliction, and some degree of the curse of God
upon us, that will stir our devotion? Indeed this is it with most men that
kindles the fire of prayer in our hearts: Men for the most part are like unto
the unslak'd Lime, which never heats till you throw water upon it; so they
never grow warm in devotion, till somewhat contrary to their wishes and
disposition begins to afflict them: then certainly our petitions to God ought
never to cease: For never was there man in any moment of his life entirely
happy, either in body, goods, or good name, every man has some part of
affliction? Blessing and cursing, though they seem to be enemies, and contrary
one to another, yet are never severed, but go hand in hand together. Some men
have more of one, some of another, but there is no man but has some part of
both; wherefore as it seems not only prayer in general, but all kind, all sort
of prayer ought to be continual. Prayer must not be, as it were, of one thread,
we must blend and temper together all kind of prayer, our praise or thanks, our
sorrow, and make our prayer like Ioseph's party-colored coat, like a beautiful
garment of sundry colors. So then, as fire goes not out so long as it has
matter to feed on, so what shall be able to interrupt our devotion, which has
so great and everlasting store of matter to continue it?

Secondly, many things in the world are necessarily intermitted, because they
are tied to place or times; all places, all times are not convenient for them:
but in case of prayer it is otherwise, it seeks no place, it attends no time;
it is not necessary we should come to the Church, or expect a Sabbath, or an
Holy Day; for prayer indeed especially was the Sabbath ordained, yet prayer it
self is Sabbathless, and admits no rest, no intermission at all: If our hands
be clean, we must, as our Apostle commands us, lift them up every where, at all
times, and make every place a Church, every day a Sabbath, every hour
Canonical, (...). As you go to the market, as you stand in the streets, as you
walk in the feilds, in all these places ye may pray as well, and with as good
acceptance as in the Church; for you your selves are temples of the holy Ghost,
if the grace of God be in you, more precious then any of those which are made
with hands. The Church of Rome has made a part of her Breviary, or
Common Prayer Book, which she calls Itinerarium Clericorum, and it is a set
form of prayer, which Clergymen ought to use when they set out in a journey,
and are upon their way; why she calls it Itinerarium Clericorum, and
impropriates it unto the Clergy, I know not; she might, for ought I see, have
called it Itinerarium Laicorum, The Itinerary of the Laity; since it is a duty
belonging unto them as well as to the Minister: Yet thus much the example of
that Church teaches, that no place, no occasion excludes Prayer. We read in our
Books, that one of the Ethnic Emperors was much taken, when he saw a woman
going in the streets with a vessel of water on her head, her child at her
girdle, her spindle in her hand twisting her thread as she went; he thought it
a wonderful portion of diligence thus to employ all paces and times
indifferently. Beloved, if it be thus with bodily labor, how much more should
it be so with the labor of the soul, which is far more easy, and needs not
the help of any bodily instrument to act it? And how welcome a spectacle will
it be, think you, unto the great King of Heaven and Earth, when he shall see
that no time, no occasion, is able to interrupt the labor of our devotion? Is
it the time of Feasting and Jollity, which seems to prescribe against prayer?
Indeed prayer is a grave and sober action, and seems not to stand with sport
and merriment; yet notwithstanding it is of so pliable a nature, that it will
accommodate and fit it self even to feasts and sportings. We read in the Book
of Daniel, that when Belshazzar made his great and last Feast to his Princes
and Lords, that they were merry, and drank wine in bowls, and praised the gods
of gold and silver, of brass, and of iron, of wood, and of stone: Beloved,
shall Ethnic feasts find room for their idolatrous worship, and praise of
their golden, brazen, wooden gods, and shall not our Christian Feasts yield
some place for the praise of the true God of Heaven and Earth? Last of all, is
it time of sleep that seems to give a vacation, and otium to prayer? Beloved,
sleep is no part of our life, we are not accountable for things done or not
done then; Tertullian tells us, that an unclean dream shall no more condemn us,
then a dream of Martyrdom shall crown us; and the Casuists do teach, that loose
dreams in the night shall never be laid to our charge, if they be not
occasioned by lewd thoughts in the day: for they are Cogitationes injectae, non
aenatae, they are not thoughts springing out, but cast into our hearts by the
Devil, upon his score shall they go, and we shall not reckon for them: So then,
though sleep partake not of our devotion, yet this hinders not the
continualness of it. Aristotle tells us, that men who sleep perceive not any
part of time to have passed, because they tie the last moment of their watching
with the first moment of their awaking, as having no sense of what past
betwixt, and so account of it as one continued time. Beloved, if we do with our
devotion as we do with our time, if we shut up the last instant of our watching
with a prayer, and resume that prayer at the first instant of our waking, we
have made it one continued prayer without interruption.

Thirdly, and last of all, the greatest reason why many businesses of the world
cannot be acted perpetually, is, because they must give room to others; Vnicum
arbustum non alit duos Erithacos; The actions of the world are many times like
unto quarrelsome Birds, two of them cannot peaceably dwell in one bush. But
prayer has that property which Aristotle gives unto substance, nulli esse
contrarium, it is at peace, and holds good terms with all our cares of the
world. No business so great, or that so much takes up the time and mind of a
man, as that it needs exclude prayer: it is of a soft and sociable nature, and
it can incorporate and sink into our business like water into ashes, and never
increase the bulk of them: it can mix and interweave it self with all our
cares, without any hinderance unto them; nay, it is a great strength and
improvement unto them, (...), etc. For, says St. Chrysostom, as they that
build houses of clay, must every where place studs and pieces of timber and
wood so to strengthen the building, (...), so all our cares of this life, which
are no better then buildings of dirt and clay, we must strengthen and compact
together with frequent and often prayer, as with bonds and props of timber. Let
no man therefore think it, (...), that it is too much to require at the hands
of men at one and the self-same instant both to attend their vocation and their
prayer: For the mind of a man is a very agile and nimble substance, and it is a
wonderful thing to see how many things it will at one moment apply it self unto
without any confusion or let. Look but upon the Musician while he is in his
practice, he tunes his voice, fingers his instrument, reads his ditty, marks
the note, observes the time, all these things simul and semel, at one and the
same instant, without any distraction or impediment: Thus should men do in case
of devotion, and in the common acts of our vocation, let prayer bear a part;
for prayer added unto diligent labor is like a sweet voice to a well-tuned
instrument, and makes a pleasing harmony in the ears of God, (...), The good
House-wife, says St. Chrysostom, as she sits at her distaff; and reaches out
her hand to the flax, may even then lift up, if not her eyes, yet her mind unto
Heaven, and consecrate and hallow her work with earnest prayer unto God. Arator
stivam tenens, Hallelujah secantat, sudans messor Psalmis sese evocat and curva
attondens falce vites vinitor aliquid Davidicum canit: The Husbandman (says
St. Hierom) at the Plough-tail may sing an Hallelujah, the sweating Harvest man
may refresh himself with a Psalm, the Gardener whilst he prunes his Vines and
Arbours, may record some one of David's sonnets. The reason of this pliable
nature of prayer is, because it is a thing of another condition then the acts
of the world are: It requires no outward labor of the body, no outward fashion
and manner of doing, but is internally acted in the soul it self, and leaves
the outward members of our bodies free to perform those offices which require
their help. Our legal business in the world must be done in certain forms of
breves and writs and I know not what variety of outward ceremony, or else it is
not warrantable: But prayer, Beloved, is not like an Obligation or Indenture,
it requires no outward solemnity of words and ceremony. Quaint, witty, and set
forms of prayer proceed many times from ostentation more then devotion; for any
thing I know, it requires not so much as the moving of the lips or tongue: Nay,
one thing I know more, that the most forcible prayer transcends and far exceeds
all power of words. For St. Paul speaking unto us concerning the most effectual
kind of prayer, calls it (...), sighs and groans that cannot be expressed.
Nothing does cry so loud in the ears of God, as the sighing of a contrite and
earnest heart. We read in the xiv. of Exodus, that God speaks unto Moses, Why
criest thou unto me? command the children of Israel that they go forward; yet
there appears not in the Text any prayer that Moses made, or word that he
spoke. It was the earnestness of Moses's heart that was so (...), that did so
sound in the ears of the Lord. Wherefore true prayer has no commerce with the
outward members of the body, (...), for it requires not the voice, but the
mind, not the stretching of the hands, but the intention of the soul; not any
outward shape or carriage of body, but the inward behavior of the
understanding. How then can it slacken your worldly business and occasions, to
mix with them sighs and groans, which are the most effectual kinds of prayer?

And let this suffice concerning the first meaning of the words; I will briefly
speak concerning the second meaning, which I told you was the sense intended by
the holy Ghost when he wrote, and it is an exhortation to a Religious
importunity in our prayers; not to let our suits fall, because they are not
presently granted, but never to leave soliciting till we have prevailed, and
so take the blessings of God by violence: Gratissima vis, this force, this
violence is a thing most welcome unto God; for if the importunity of Esau's
false, feigned, and malicious tears drew a blessing from his father Isaac, who
yet had no greater store of blessings, as it seems; how much more shall the
true Religious importunity of zealous prayer pull a blessing out of the hands
of God, who is rich in blessings above the sands of the sea in multitude? It is
the Courtiers rule, That over modest suitours seldom speed: Beloved, we must
follow the same rule in the Court of Heaven; intempestive bashfulness gets
nothing there. Qui timide rogat, docet negare, Faint asking does invite a
denial: Will you know the true name of the behavior which prevails with God?
St. Luke in his xi. Chapter calls it (...), and St. Chrysostom speaking of the
behavior of the Canaanitish woman in the xxv. of St. Matthew, tells us, (...),
improbity, importunity, impudency, these be the names of that person and
behavior which you must put on, if you mean to prevail in your suits with God.
And indeed, if we consider that habit and manner that God is wont to put on,
when his children do become suitours unto him, how he puts on a rigid, rough,
and untractable carriage, even toward his dearest children, even then when he
means them most good, we shall plainly see, we must use such kind of behavior,
if we will prevail with him: for the more effectually to express this demeanor
of God toward his children, and to assure us it is so, and to teach us
importunity, our Savior Christ, that great Master of requests, may seem to
have done himself some wrong; first, by drawing in a manner odious comparisons,
and likening the behavior of God in these cases to a slothful friend, that is
loath to leave his warm bed to do his friend a pleasure; and here in my Text to
an unjust Judge, that fears neither God nor man: and secondly, by his own
behavior toward the Canaanitish woman. It is strange to observe, how though he
were the meekest person that ever was upon earth, yet here he strives, as it
were, to unnaturalize himself, and lay by his natural sweetness of disposition,
almost to forget common humanity, and puts on a kind of sullen and surly person
of purpose to deterr her: you shall not find our Savior in all the New
Testament in such a mood, so bent to contemn and vilify a poor suitour. St.
Austin comparing together St. Matthew and St. Mark, who both of them record the
same story, and gathering together the circumstances out of them both, tells
us, that first she follows our Savior in the street, and that our Savior
takes house, as it were, to shelter himself from her; but she comes after, and
throws her self at his feet; and he, as offended with her importunity, again
quits the house to be rid of her, and all this while deigns her not a word. If
any behavour could have dashed a suit, and broken the heart of a poor suitour,
this had been enough; but here is not all, we have a civil precept, that if we
be not disposed to pleasure a suitour, yet to give him good words, and shape
him a gentle answer, it is hard if we cannot afford a suitour a gentle word; We
read of Tiberius the Emperor, (as I remember) that he would never suffer any
man to go sad and discontented from him; yet our Savior seems to have forgot
this part of civility, being importuned to answer her, gives her an answer
worse then silence, and speaks words like the peircing of a sword, as Solomon
speaks, I may not take the childrens bread, and cast it unto dogs: And yet
after all this strange copy of countenance, he fully subscribes to her request.
Beloved, God has not only expressed thus much in Parables, and practiced
these strange delays upon Canaanitish women, but he has acted it indeed, and
that upon his dearest Saints. David, one of the worthiest of his Saints, yet
how passionately does he cry out, How long, Lord, will thou forget me? how long
shall I seek counsel in my soul, and be so vexed in my heart? Not only the
Saints on earth, but even those in heaven do seem to partake in this demeanor
of God: We read in the Book of the Revelation, that when the souls of the
Martyrs under the Altar cried out, How long, Lord, just and holy, do thou not
avenge our blood from off the earth? they received this answer, Have patience
yet a little while. It is storied of Diogenes, that he was wont to supplicate
to the Statues, and to hold out his hands and beg of them, that so he might
learn to brook and devour denial, and tediousness of suit. Beloved, let us but
meditate upon these examples, which I have related, and we shall not need to
practice any of the ^ynick's art. For if the Saints and blessed Martyrs have
their suits so long depending in the Courts of Heaven, then good reason that we
should learn to brook delays, and arm our selves with patience and expectation,
when we find the ears of God not so open to our requests. When Ioseph's
brethren came down to buy corn, he gave them but a course welcome, he spoke
roughly unto them, he laid them in prison; yet the Text tells us, that his
bowels melted upon them, and at length he opened himself, and gave them
courteous entertainment. Beloved, when we come unto God, as it were, to buy
corn, to beg at his hands such blessings as we need, though he speak roughly,
though he deal more roughly with us, yet let us know he has still Ioseph's
bowels, that his heart melts toward us, and at length he will open himself,
and entertain us lovingly: And be it peradventure that we gain not what we look
for, yet our labor of prayer is not lost. The blessed souls under the Altar,
of which I spoke but now, though their petition was not granted, yet had they
long white garments given them. Even so, Beloved, if the wisdom of God shall
not think it fit to perform our requests, yet he will give us the long white
garment, something which shall be in leiu of a suit; though nothing else, yet
patience and contentment, which are the greatest blessings upon earth.

John xviij. 36. Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this world: If my Kingdom
were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be
delivered to the Jews, etc.
AS in the Kingdoms of the world, there is an art of Courtship, a skill and
mystery teaching to manage them: so in the Spiritual Kingdom of God and of
Christ, there is an holy policy; there is an art of Spiritual Courtship, which
teaches every subject there, how to demean and bear himself. But, as betwixt
their Kingdoms, so betwixt their Arts and Courtship, betwixt the Courtier of
the one, and the Courtier of the other; there is, as Abraham tells the rich man
in St. Luke, (...), a great distance, a great difference, and not only one,
but many. Sundry of them I shall have occasion to touch in the process of my
discourse; mean while I will single out one, which I will use as a prologue and
way unto my Text. In the Kingdoms of earthly Princes, every subject is not fit
to make a Courtier; yea, were all fit, this were an honor to be communicated
only unto some: Sic opus est mundo. There is a necessity of disproportion and
inequality between men and men; and were all persons equal the world could not
consist: Of men of ordinary fashion and parts, some must to the Plough, some to
their Merchandise, some to their Books, some to one Trade, some to another:
only (...), as Aristotle calls them, men of more then common wit and ability,
active, choice, picked out of a thousand, such must they be that bear Honors,
attend on Princes persons, and serve in their Courts. The Scripture tells us,
that when King Solomon saw that Jeroboam was an active, able, and industrious
young man, he took him and made him ruler over all the charge of the house of
Joseph. Again, when David invited old Barzillai to the Court, the good old man
excuses himself: I am, says he, fourscore years of age, and can thy servant
taste what I eat, or what I drink? can I hear any more the voice of singing men
and singing women? Lo here my son Chimham, he shall go with my Lord the King,
and do with him as shall seem good in thine eyes. Jeroboam and Chimham, strong,
and able, and active persons, such are they that dwell in Kings houses: of the
rest, some are too old, some too young, some too dull, some too rude, or by
some means or other unfit for such an end. Thus fares it with the Honors of
the world, they seem to participate of envy, or melancholy, and are of a
solitary disposition; they are brightest when they are alone, or but in few;
make them common, and they lose their grace, like Lamps they may give light
unto few, or to some one room, but no farther. But the Honors in the Court of
the great King of Heaven, are of another nature, they rejoice in being
communicated, and their glory is in the multitude of those that do partake in
them. They are like unto the Sun that rises, non homini, sed humano generi: not
to this or that man, but to all the world: In the Court of God, no difference
between Jeroboam and Barzillai, none too old, none too young; no indisposition,
no imperfection makes you incapable of Honors there; Be but of his Kingdom,
and you are necessarily of his Court: Every man who is a subject there, is a
Courtier, yea, more then a Courtier, he is a Peer, he is a King, and has an
army of Angels at his service to pitch their tents about him, to deliver him: a
guard of ministering Spirits sent out to attend him for his safety. It shall not
therefore be unseasonable for the meanest person that hears me this day, to
hear as it were a Lecture of spiritual policy and courtship: for no Auditory
can be unfit for such a Lesson. Aristotle was wont to divide his Lectures and
Readings into Acroamatical, and Exoterical: some of them contained only choice
matter, and they were read privately to a Select Auditory; others contained but
ordinary stuff, and were promiscuously and in public exposed to the hearing of
all that would: Beloved, we read no Acroamatick Lectures, the secrets of the
Court of Heaven (as far as it has pleased the King of Heaven to reveal them)
lie open alike to all. Every man is alike of his Court, alike of his Council;
and the meanest among Christians must not take it to be a thing without his
sphere, above his reach, but must make account of himself as a fit hearer of a
Lesson in spiritual and saving policy; since if he be a subject in the Kingdom
of Christ, he can be no less then a Courtier.

Now the first and main Lesson to be learned by a Courtier, is, how to discover
and know the disposition and nature of the Lord, whom he is to serve, and the
quality of that Commonwealth in which he bears a place, ad consilium de
republica dandum caput est. That therefore our heavenly Courtier may not
mistake himself, but be able to fit himself to the place he bears, I have made
choice of these few words, which but now I read; words spoken by the King of
that Commonwealth, of which I am to treat, unto such as mean to be his
Liege-men there: words which sufficiently open unto the Christian Politician
the state and quality of that Court in which he is to serve: My kingdom is not
of this world, for if it were, then would my servants fight; which words seem
like the Parthian Horsemen, whose manner was to ride one way, but to shoot
another way, they seem to go apace toward Pilate, but they aim and shoot at
another mark; or rather like unto the speaker of them, unto our Savior
himself, when he was in one of the Villages of Samaria, St. Luke the ix. where
the text notes, that though he were in Samaria, yet his face was set toward
Jerusalem: so, beloved, though these words be spoken to a Samaritane, to an
infidel, to Pilate, yet their face is toward Jerusalem; they are a Lesson
directed to the subjects of his Spiritual Kingdom, of that Jerusalem which is
from above, and is the Mother of us all.

In them we may consider two general parts. First, a Denuntiation and message
unto us; and secondly, a Sign to confirm the truth of it. For it is the manner
and method, as it were, which God does use, when he dispatches a message, to
annex a Sign unto it, by which it may be known: When he sent Moses to the
Israelites in Egypt, and Moses required a sign, he gave him a sign in his hand,
in his Rod; when he sent Gideon against Madean, he gave him a sign in the
fleece of Wool which was upon the floor; when he sent the Prophet to Hieroboam,
to prophecy against the Altar in Bethel, he gave him a sign, that the Altar
should rend, and the ashes fall out; when he sent Esaias with a message to King
Ahaz, he gave him a sign, Behold, a Virgin shall conceive. So, Beloved, in
these words, There is a Message, there is a Sign: The first words are the
Message My kingdom is not of this world, etc. The next words, For if it were,
then would my servants fight, etc. These are Moses 's Rod, and Gideon 's
Fleece; they are the Sign which confirm the Message.

The first part is a general Proposition or Maxim: the second is an Example,
and particular instance of it: For in the first, our Savior distinguishes his
Kingdom from the Kingdoms of the world, and from all the fashions of them; In
the second, amongst many other he chooses one instance, wherein particularly he
notes, that his Kingdom is unlike to earthly Kingdoms; for the Kingdoms of the
world are purchased and maintained by violence and blood, but so is not his.
The reason why our Savior fastens upon this reason of dissimilitude and
unlikeness, is, because in gaining and upholding temporal Kingdoms, nothing so
usual as the sword and war: No Kingdom of the world, but by the sword is either
gotten, or held, or both. The sword in a secular Commonwealth is like the rod
in a Schole; remove that away, and men will take their liberty. It is the plea
which the Tarquins used to King Porsenna in Livie, Satis libertatem ipsam
habere dulcedinis, nisi quanta vi civitates eam expetant tanta regna reges
defendant, aequare summa infimis adesse finem regnis rei inter Deos hominesque
pulcherrimae. The taste of liberty is so sweet, that except Kings maintain
their authority with as great violence, as the people affect their liberty, all
things will run to confusion; and Kingdoms, which are the goodliest things in
the world, will quickly go to wrack: when God gave a temporal Kingdom unto his
own people, he sent Moses and Joshua before them to purchase it with their
sword; when they were possessed of this Kingdom, he sends then Gideon, and
Sampson, and David, and many Worthies more to maintain it by the sword: But now
being to open unto the world another kind of Kingdom, of Rule and Government,
then hitherto it had been acquainted with: he tells us, that he is a King of a
Kingdom, which is erected and maintained, not by Joshua and David, but by St.
Peter and St. Paul; not by the sword, but by the Spirit; not by violence, but
by love; not by striving, but by yiedling; not by fighting, but by dying.
Pilate had heard that he was a King: it was the accusation which was framed
against him, that he bear himself as King of the Jews; but because he saw no
pomp, no train, no guard about him, he took it but as an idle report: To put
him therefore out of doubt, our Savior assures him, that he is a King, but of
such a Kingdom as he could not skill of: My Kingdom is not of this world, etc.
For the better unfolding of which words; first, we will consider what the
meaning of this word Kingdom is, for there lies an ambiguity in it. Secondly,
we will consider what Lessons for our instruction the next words will yield,
Not of this world. First, of this word Kingdom.

Our Savior is a King three manner of ways, and so correlatively has three
distinct several Kingdoms. He is first King in the largest extent and meaning
which can possibly be imagined, and that is, as he is Creator and absolute
Lord of all creatures. Of this Kingdom, Heaven, Earth, and Hell are three large
Provinces: Angels, Men, and Devils, his very enemies, every creature visible
and invisible are subjects of this Kingdom. The glory and strength of this
Kingdom consists least of all in men, and man is the weakest part of it: for
there is scarcely a creature in the world, by whom he has not been conquered.
When Alexander the Great had traveled through India, and overran many large
Provinces, and conquered many popular Cities; when tidings came, that his
Soldiers in Greece had taken some small Towns there, he scorned the news, and in
contempt, Methinks (said he) I hear of the Battle of Frogs and Mice. Beloved,
if we look upon these huge Armies of Creatures, and consider of what wonderful
strength they are, when the Lord summons them to Battle: all the Armies of men,
and famous Battles, of which we have so large Histories, in the comparison of
these, what are they, but a (...), but Homer's tale, a Battle of Frogs and
Mice? Infinite Legions of Angels attend him in Heaven, and every Angel is an
Army: One Angel in the Book of Kings is sent out against the Army of the
Assyrians, and in one night fourscore thousand persons die for it. Base and
contemptible creatures, when God calls for them, are of strength to conquer
whole Countries: He over-runs Egypt with his Armies of Frogs, and Flies, and
Lice; and before his own people with an Army of Hornets chases the Canaanites
out of the Land. Nay, the dull and senseless Elements are up in Arms when God
summons them: He shoots his Hail-shot; with his Hailstones from Heaven he
destroys more of the Canaanites, then the Israelites can with their swords. As
for his Armies of Fire and Water, what power is able to withstand them? Every
creature, when God calls, is a soldier. How great then is the glory of this
Kingdom, of which the meanest parts are invincible!

Secondly, again our Savior is a King in a more restrained and confined sense,
as he is in Heaven attended on by Angels, and Archangels, Powers,
Principalities, and all the heavenly Hosts. For though he be Omni-present, and
fills every place both in Heaven and Earth; yet Heaven is the Palace and Throne
of this Kingdom; there is he better seen and known, there with more state and
honor served, and therefore more properly is his Kingdom said to be there: And
this is called his Kingdom of glory: The Rules, and Laws, and admirable Orders
of which Kingdom, could we come to see and discover, it would be with us as it
was with the Queen of Saba, when she came to visit Solomon, of whom the
Scripture notes; that when she heard his wisdom, and had seen the order of his
servants, the attendance that was given him, and the manner of his table, There
was no more spirit left in her. Beloved, Dum Spiritus hos regit artus, whilst
this Spirit is in us, we cannot possibly come to discern the Laws and Orders of
this Kingdom, and therefore I am constrained to be silent.

Thirdly, our Savior is a King in a sense yet more impropriated. For as he
took our nature upon him, as he came into the world to redeem mankind, and to
conquer Hell and Death, so is there a Kingdom annexed unto him; A Kingdom, the
purchase whereof cost him much sweat and Blood, of which neither Angels nor any
other creature are a part, only that remnant of mankind, that Ereptus titio,
that number of blessed Souls; which like a brand out of the fire, by his death
and passion he has recovered out of the power of sin; and all these alone are
the subjects of that Kingdom. And this is that which is called his Kingdom of
Grace, and which himself in Scripture every where calls his Church, his Spouse,
his Body, his Flock: and this is that Kingdom, which in this place is spoken
of, and of which our Savior tells Pilate, That it is not of this world; -- My
Kingdom is not of this world.

Which words at the first reading, may seem to savor of a little imperfection;
for they are nothing else but a Negation or denial. Now our Books teach us,
that a Negative makes nothing known; for we know things by discovering, not
what they are not, but what they are: yet when we have well examined them, we
shall find that there could not have been a speech delivered more effectual for
the opening the nature of the Church, and the discovery of men's errors in that
respect. For I know no error so common, so frequent, so hardly to be rooted
out, so much hindering the knowledge of the true nature of the Church, as this,
that men do take the Church to be like unto the World. Tully tells us of a
Musician, that being asked what the Soul was, answered, that it was Harmony,
and is (says he) a principiis artis suae non recescit: He knew not how to
leave the principles of his own Art. Again, Plato's Scholars had been
altogether bred up in Arithmetic, and the knowledge of Numbers, and hence it
came, that when afterward they diverted their studies to the knowledge of
Nature, or Moral Philosophy; wheresoever they walked, they still feigned to
themselves somewhat like unto Numbers; the World they supposed was framed out
of Numbers; Cities, and Kingdoms, and Commonwealths they thought stood by
Numbers; Number with them was sole Principle and Creator of every thing.
Beloved, when we come to learn the quality and state of Christ's Kingdom, it
fares much with us as it does with Tullie's Musician, or Plato's Scholars,
difficulter a principiis artis nostrae recedimus; Hardly can we forsake those
principles, in which we have been brought up. In the world we are born, in it
we are bred, the world is the greatest part of our study, to the true knowledge
of God and of Christ still we fancy unto us something of the world. It may seem
but a light thing that I shall say, yet because it seems fitly to open my
meaning, I will not refrain to speak it: Lucian, when Priam's young son was
taken up into heaven, brings him in calling for milk and cheese, and such
country eats as he was wont to eat on earth. Beloved, when we first come to
the Table of God, to heavenly Manna and Angels food, it is much with us as it
was with Priam's young son, when he came first into Heaven, we cannot forget
the milk and cheese, and the gross diet of the world. Our Savior and his
blessed Apostles had great and often experience of this error in men: When our
Savior preached to Nicodemus the doctrine of Regeneration, and new birth, how
does he still harp upon a gross conceit of a re-entry to be made into his
mother's womb? When he preached unto the Samaritan woman concerning the water
of life, how hardly is she driven from thinking of a material Elementary water,
such as was in Jacob's well? When Simon Magus in the Acts saw, that by laying
on of hands the Apostles gave the Holy Ghost, he offers them money to purchase
himself the like power: He had been trafficking and merhandizing in the world,
and saw what authority, what a Kingdom money had amongst men; he therefore
presently conceited, coelum venale Deumque; that God, and Heaven, and All would
be had for money. To teach therefore the young Courtier in the Court of Heaven,
that he commit no such Solecisms, that hereafter he speak the true language and
dialect of God, our Savior sets down this as a principal rule in our Spiritual
Grammar, That his Court is not of this world. Nay, Beloved, not only the young
Courtier, but many of the old servants in the Court of Christ are stained with
this error: It is storied of Leonides, which was Schole-master to Alexander
the great, that he infected his nonage with some vices, quae robustum quoque
and jam maximum Regem ab illa institutione puerili sunt prosecuta, which
followed him then when he was at man's estate: Beloved, the world has been a
long time a Schole-master unto us, and has stained our nonage with some of
these spots which appear in us, even then when we are strong men in Christ.
When our Savior in the Acts after his Resurrection was discoursing to his
Disciples concerning the Kingdom of God, they presently brake forth into this
question, Will thou now restore the Kingdom unto Israel? Certainly this
question betrays their ignorance, their thoughts still ran upon a Kingdom like
unto the Kingdoms of the world, notwithstanding they had so long, and so often
heard our Savior to the contrary: Our Savior therefore shortly takes them up;
Non est vestrum, your question is nothing to the purpose; the Kingdom that I
have spoken of is another manner of Kingdom then you conceive. Sixteen hundred
years, Et quod excurrit, has the Gospel been preached unto the world, and is
this stain spunged out yet? I doubt it: Whence arise those novel and late
disputes, de notis Ecclesia, of the notes and visibility of the Church. Is it
not from hence they of Rome take the world and the Church to be like Mercury
and Sofia in Plautus his Comedies, so like one another, that one of them must
wear a toy in his cap, that so the spectators may distinguish them; whence
comes it that they stand so much upon State and Ceremony in the Church? Is it
not from hence, that they think the Church must come in like Agrippa and
Bernice in the Acts, (...), as St. Luke speaks, with a great deal of pomp, and
train, and show, and vanity; and that the service of God does necessarily
require this noise and tumult of outward State and Ceremony? Whence comes it,
that we are at our wits ends; when we see persecution, and sword, and fire to
rage against the true professors of the Gospel? Is it not because, as these
bring ruin and desolation upon the Kingdoms of the world; so we suppose they
work no other effect in the Kingdom of Christ? All these conceits, and many
more of the like nature, spring out of no other fountain, then that old
inveterate error, which is so hardly wiped out of our hearts; That the State
of the Church, and Kingdom of Christ does hold some proportion, some likeness
with the state and managing of temporal Kingdoms: Wherefore to pluck out of our
hearts, Opinionem tam insitam, tam vetustam, a conceit so ancient, so deeply
rooted in us, our Savior spoke most excellently, most pertinently, and most
fully, when he tells us, that his Church, that his Kingdom is not of this world.

In which words of his, there is contained the true art of discovering and
knowing the true nature and essence of the Church. For as they which make
Statues, cut and pare away all superfluities of the matter upon which they
work; so our Savior, to show us the true proportion and feature of the Church,
prunes away the world and all superfluous excrescencies, and sends her to be
seen as he did our first Parents in Paradise, stark naked: As those Elders in
the Apocryphal story of Susanna, when they would see her beauty, commanded to
take off her mask: so he that longs to see the beauty of the Church, must pull
off that mask of the world and outward show. For as Judah in the Book of
Genesis, when Thamar sat veiled by the way-side, knew not his daughter from an
whore: so whilst the Church, the Daughter and Spouse of Christ, sits veiled
with the world, and pomp, and show, it will be an hard matter to discern her
from an harlot. But yet further, to make the difference betwixt these Kingdoms
the more plainly to appear, and the better to fix it in your memories, I will
briefly touch some of these heads in which they are most notoriously
differenced.

The first head wherein the difference is seen, are the persons and subjects of
this Kingdom; For as the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world, so the
subjects of this Kingdom are men of another world, and not of this. Every one
of us bears a double person, and accordingly is the subject of a double
Kingdom: The holy Ghost by the Psalmist divides heaven and earth betwixt God
and man, and tells us, as for God, He is in heaven, but the earth has he given
to the children of men: So has the same Spirit by the Apostle St. Paul,
divided every one of our persons into heaven and earth, into an outward and
earthly man, and into an inward and heavenly man: This earth, that is, this
body of clay has he given to the sons of men, to the Princes under whose
government we live; but heaven, that is, the inward and spiritual man, has he
reserved unto himself; They can restrain the outward man, and moderate our
outward actions, by Edicts and Laws they can tie our hands and our tongues; --
Illa se jactet in aula AEolus: Thus far they can go, and when they are gone
thus far, they can go no farther: But to rule the inward man in our hearts and
souls, to set up an Imperial throne in our understandings and wills, this part
of our government belongs to God and to Christ: These are the subjects, this
the government of his Kingdom; men may be Kings of Earth and Bodies, but Christ
alone is the King of Spirits and Souls. Yet this inward government has
influence upon our outward actions; For the Authority of Kings over our outward
man is not so absolute, but that it suffers a great restraint; it must stretch
no farther then the Prince of our inward man pleases: for if Secular Princes
stretch out the skirts of their Authority to command ought by which our souls
are prejudiced, the King of Souls has in this case given us a greater command,
That we rather obey God then men.

The second head wherein the difference betwixt these Kingdoms is seen, is in
their Laws; for as the Kingdoms and the Lawgivers, so are their Laws very
different: First, in their Authors. The Laws by which the Commonwealth of
Rome was anciently governed, were the works of many hands, some of them were
Plebiscita, the acts of the people; others were Senatus consulta, the Decrees
of the Senate; others Edicta Praetorum, the Verdict of their Judges; others
Responsa Prudentum, the opinions of Wisemen in cases of doubt; others
Rescripta Imperatorum, the Rescripts and Answers of their Emperors, when they
were consulted with: But in the Kingdom of Christ there are no Plebiscita, or
Senatus-consulta, no People, no Senate, nor Wisemen, nor Judges, had any hand
in the Laws by which it is governed; Only Rescripta Imperatoris, the Rescripts
and Writs of our King run here, these alone are the Laws to which the Subjects
of this Kingdom owe obedience. Again, the Laws of both these Kingdoms differ in
regard of their quality and nature; For the Laws of the Kingdom of Christ are
Eternal, Substantial, Indispensible; but Laws made by humane Authority are but
light, superficial, and temporary; For all the humane Authority in the world
can never Enact one eternal and fundamental Law. Let all the Laws which men
have made be laid together, and you shall see that they were made but upon
occasion, and circumstance either of time, or place, or persons in matters of
themselves indifferent, and therefore either by discontinuance they either fell
or ceased of themselves, or by reason of alteration of occasion and
circumstance were necessarily revoked: Those main fundamental Laws upon which
all the Kingdoms of the world do stand, against theft, against murder, against
adultery, dishonouring of Parents, or the like; they were never brought forth
by man, neither were they the effects of any Parliamentary Sessions; they were
written in our souls from the beginning, long before there was any Authority
Regal extant among men: The intent of him who first Enacted them was not to
found a temporal, but to bring men to an eternal Kingdom; and so far forth as
they are used for the maintaining of outward state they are usurped, or at the
best but borrowed: So that in this work of settling even the Kingdoms of this
world, if we compare the Laws of God with the Laws of men, we shall find, that
God has, as it were, founded the Palaces and Castles, and strength of them;
but men have, like little children built houses of clay and dirt, which every
blast of wind over-turns.

The third head by which they may be seen, is in the notes and marks by which
they may be known: For the Kingdoms of the world are confined, their place is
known, their subjects are discernable, they have badges, and tokens, and Arms
by which they are discovered: But the Church has no such notes and marks, no
Herald has as yet been found that could blazon the Arms of that Kingdom.
AEsculus the Poet in his (...), describing the Captains that came either for
the seige or defense of the City of Thebes in Beotia, brings them in, in their
order every one with their shield, and upon his shield some device, and over
that device a Motto or word, according to the usual fancies of men in that
kind; but when he comes to Amphiarus, he notes of him, that he had no device in
his shield, no impress or word; and he gives the reason of it, Because he
affected not show, but to be that which others professed. But to carry marks, and
notes, and devices, may well beseem the world which is led by fancy and show;
but the Church is like Amphiarus, she has no device, no word in her shield,
mark and essence with her are all one, and she has no other note but to Be:
And, but that learned men must have something to busy their wits withal,
these large discourses de notis Ecclesiae, of the notes and marks by which we
may know the Church, might very well lie by, as containing nothing else but
doctas ineptias, laborious vanities, and learned impertinences. For the Church
is not a thing that can be pointed out: The Devil could show our Savior Christ
all the kingdoms of the earth, and the glory of them, I hope the Church was
none of these; It is the glory of it not to be seen, and the note of it to be
invisible; when we call any visible company of professors a Church, it is but
a word of courtesy: out of charity we hope men to be that which they do
profess, and therefore we so speak as if they were indeed that whose name they
bear; where, and who they are that make up this Kingdom, is a question unfit
for any man to move: for the Lord only knows who are his. It is but Popish
madness to send men up and down the world to find the Church; it is like unto
the children of the Prophets, in the second of Kings, that would needs seek
Elias, or like the Nobles in Jerusalem, that would needs go seek Jeremy the
Prophet, but could not find him, because the Lord had hid him. For in regard of
the profession, the Church (as our Savior speaks) is like a City set upon an
hill, you may quickly see, and know, what true Christianity is; but in regard
of the persons the Kingdom of Heaven is, as our Savior again tells us, like a
treasure hidden in a field: except the place of their abode and their persons
were discernable, who can tell? we go thus to seek them, whether we do not like
false hounds hunt Counter (as the Hunters phrase is) and so go from the game.
When Saul went to seek his father's Asses, he found a Kingdom; let us take heed
lest the contrary befall us, lest while we seek our Father's Kingdom thus, we
find but Asses. Will you know where to find the Kingdom of Christ? our Savior
directs you in the Gospel, The kingdom of heaven, says he, comes not by
observation, neither shall ye say, Lo here, or, Lo there; but the kingdom of
heaven is within you: Let every man therefore retire into himself, and see if
he can find this Kingdom in his heart; for if he find it not there, in vain
shall he find it in all the world besides.

The fourth head wherein the difference of these Kingdoms is seen, is outward
state and ceremony; for outward pomp and show is one of the greatest stays of
the Kingdom of this world: Some thing there must be to amaze the people, and
strike them into wonderment, or else Majesty would quickly be contemned. The
Scripture recounting unto us King Solomon's Royalty, tells us of his
magnificent Buildings, of his Royal Throne, of his servants, and his
attendants, of his cup-bearers, of his meats, and these were the things which
purchased unto him the reputation of Majesty, above all the Kings of the earth.
Beloved, the Kingdom of Christ is not like unto Solomon in his Royalty, it is
like unto David when he had put off all his Royalty, and in a linen Ephod,
danced before the Ark: and this plain and natural simplicity of it, is like
unto the Lilies of the field, more glorious then Solomon in all his royalty.
The Idolatrous superstitions of Paganism stood in great need of such pompous
Solemnities, Vt opinionem suspendio cognitionis aedificent, atque ita tantam
majestatem exhibere videantur, quantam praestruxerunt cupiditatem, as
Tertullian tells us; For being nothing of themselves, they were to gain
reputation of being something by concealment, and by outward state make show of
something answerable to the expectation they had raised: The case of the
Kingdoms of the world is the same; For all this State and Magnificence used in
the managing of them is nothing else but Secular Idolatry, used to gain
veneration and reverence unto that, which in comparison of the Kingdom we speak
of is mere vanity. But the Scepter of the Kingdom of Christ is a right Scepter,
and to add unto it outward state, and riches, and pomp, is nothing else but to
make a Centaure, marry and join the Kingdom of Christ with the Kingdom of the
world, which Christ expressly here in my Text has divorced and put asunder. A
thing which I do the rather note, because that the long continuance of some
Ceremonies in the Church, have occasioned many, especially of the Church of
Rome, to think that there is no Religion, no Service without these Ceremonies.
Our Books tell us of a poor Spartan, that traveling in another Country, and
seeing the beams and posts of houses squared and carved, asked, If the Trees
grew so in those Countries? Beloved, many men that have been long acquainted
with a form of worship, squared and carved, tricked, and set out with show and
ceremony, fall upon this Spartan's conceit, think the Trees grow so, and think
that there is no natural shape and face of God's service but that. I confess
the service of God has evermore some Ceremony attending it, and to our
Fathers, before Christ, may seem to have been necessary, because God commanded
it: But let us not deceive our selves, for neither is Ceremony now, neither was
Sacrifice then esteemed necessary, neither was the command of God concerning
it, by those to whom it was given, ever taken to be peremptory: I will begin
the warrant of what I have said out of St. Chrysostom; for in his comments upon
the x. to the Hebrews, he denies that ever God from the beginning required, or
that it was his will to ordain such an outward form of Worship; and asking
therefore of himself, (...); how then seems he to have commanded it? he
answers, (...), by condescending only, and submitting himself unto humane
infirmity; now this (...), this condescending of God, wherein it consisted,
Oecumenius opens; For because that men had a conceit, that it was convenient to
offer up some part of their substance unto God, and so strongly were they
possessed with this conceit, that if they offered it not up to him, they would
offer it up to Idols: God, says he, rather then they should offer unto Idols,
required them to offer unto him. And thus was God understood by the holy men
themselves, who lived under the shadow of those Ceremonies: for David when he
had made his peace with God, after that great sin of his, opens this mystery;
For thou requirest not sacrifice, says he, else would I have given it thee;
but thou delightest not in burnt-offerings: The sacrifice of God is a broken
spirit, a troubled and a contrite heart, O God, do thou not despise. After
the revolt of Jeroboam and the ten Tribes from the House of David, there were
many devout and religious persons in Israel, and yet we find not that they used
the outward form of Worship which was commanded. Elias and Elizaeus, two great
Prophets in Israel, did they ever go up to Jerusalem to worship? Obadiah, a
great Courtier in King Ahab's Court, and one that feared the Lord exceedingly;
the seven thousands which bowed not their knees to Baal, when came they up to
the Temple to offer? a thing which doubtless they would have done, if they had
understood the commandment of God in that behalf, to have been absolute indeed.
If we live in places where true religious persons do resort, and assemble for
the service of God, it were a sin to neglect it. But otherwise it is
sufficient, if we keep us from the pollutions of that place to which we are
restrained. Quid juvat hoc nostros templis admittere mores? Why measure we God
by our selves, and because we are led with gay shows, and goodly things, think
it is so with God? Seneca reports, that a Panto-mimus, a Poppet-player and
Dancer in Rome, because he pleased the People well, was wont to go up every day
into the Capitol, and practiced his Art, and dance before Jupiter, and thought
he did the god a great pleasure. Beloved, in many things we are like unto this
Poppet-player, and do much measure God by the People, by the World.

A SERMON On 1 SAMUEL xxiv. 5.
And it came to pass afterward, that David's heart smote him because he had cut
off Readiness skirt.
TEmptation is the greatest occasioner of a Christian's honor: indeed like an
Enemy it threatens and endeavors his ruin; but in the conquest of it consist
his Crown and Triumph. Were it possible for us to be at league and truce with
this Enemy, or to be (...), without danger of Gunshot, out of its reach; like
the Candle in the Gospel, that is put under a bushel, the brightest part of our
glory were quite obscured. As Maximus Tyrius spoke of Hercules, if you take
from him (...), the savage beasts that he slew, and the Tyrants whom he
suppressed, his journeys and labors, (...), you lop and cut off the manifest
Arms and Limbs of Hercules's renown: So, take from a Christian his Temptations,
his Persecutions, his Contentions, remove him from the Devil, from the World,
(...), you deprive him of the chief matter and subject of his glory. Take Job
from the Dunghill; David from Saul; Daniel from the Lions; the blessed Martyrs
from the Rack, from the Fire, from the Sword; and what are they more then other
men? As Sampson tells Dalilah in the Book of the Judges, If my hair be cut,
then my strength will go from me, and I shall become weak, and like unto
another man; so, Beloved, these things are, as it were, the hair wherein their
strength lay, shave that away, and they shall presently become weak, and like
unto other men. But Temptations are of two sorts, some are like professed and
open Enemies, which proclaim open War against us, like Goliath, they publicly
come forth and challenge us; And such are the outward Evils that befall us,
Loss of Goods, Sickness, Disease, Dishonor, Infamy, Persecutions, and the
like: Others there are of a more secret, close, and retired nature, like unto
Traitors, that bear the behavior and countenance of friends; that epsy out
their advantage, and set privily upon us; the most troublesome kind of Enemies,
per quos nec licet esse tanquam in bello paratos, nec tanquam in pace securos;
with whom we can have neither peace nor war, and against whom we can neither be
provided, nor secure; these are our own corrupt Thoughts and Imaginations,
which secretly lie in our hearts, and watch their times to set on us, as the
Philistines did in Dalilah's chamber to surprise Sampson. For let a man but
descend into himself, examine his own soul, take as it were an inventory of the
passions, affections, thoughts of his own heart, Iook but what the number of
them is, and let him make account of so many enemies; Tot venena, quot ingenia;
tot pernicies quod and species, tot dolores, quot colores; as Tertullian rimes
it. A sort of enemies by so much the more dangerous, because that all those
outward enemies, of which I but now spoke, cannot come so near as to raze our
skin, or endanger one hair of our head, if these give them not way: from these,
ut aspis a vipera venenum, as the Asp borrows poison from the Vipet, do those
other Temptations borrow all their power strength to hurt us. For let us take a
survey of all the outward afflictions, miseries and calamities, which have
befallen all the Saints of God in holy Scripture, and let us suppose them to be
all set and bent against some one alone^ yet notwithstanding, as the three
children in Daniel walked in the midst of the fire untouched, or as our Savior
Christ passed away through the midst of the people, that were gathered together
to mischief him, and throw him down the hill; so shall he be able to pass from
them all without any hurt or harm, if some discontented, or distrustful, or
despairing, or proud, or angry, or impure and lustful thought do not betray him
unto them, and as it were open a door, and let them in. David who is here the
subject of my Text, had very much ado with both sorts of enemies, and by his
own experience found, that this latter rank of secret and privy enemies, in
strength far surpassed the former. For whom neither the Lion, nor the Bear, nor
Goliath, nor Saul, nor the Philistines could ever fasten upon, or drive to any
inconvenience, one lustful thought forced to Adultery and Murder, one proud
conceit stirred up to number the people, and drew from God great inconveniences
and plagues both upon himself and his Kingdom. How careful then ought we to be,
and to stand on our guard, and keep a perpetual watch over our hearts,
diligently to try and examine our thoughts? Nunquam securo triumphaniur otio,
sed tantum sollicito premuntur imperio. St. August. Nor while we live shall we
be able perfectly to master, or securely to triumph over them: the only way to
suppress and keep them down, is, to have a perpetual and careful jealousy of
them. Now of this Religious care and watchfulness over our own thoughts, has
the holy Ghost recorded for our use a notable example in these words, which but
now I read, And it came to pass, etc.

To relate unto you at large the occasion of these words, and the story from
whence they depend, were but to wrong you; for I cannot think so meanly of your
knowledge in Scripture, as that any of you can be ignorant of so famous a
passage. Yet thus much for the better opening of my way unto such Doctrines, as
I shall draw from this Text, I will call back unto your memories, that Saul
hunting after David to kill him, unwittingly slept into a Cave where David was;
David having now his enemy in his hand, and opportunity to revenge himself,
lets slip all thought of revenging, and only cuts off privily the lap of his
garment. For this deed, so harmless, so innocent, the Scripture tells us that
his heart smote him, that he suffered great anguish and remorse in conscience
for it. That which I will require you to note, is the tenderness of conscience,
and strange scrupulousness in David for so small an action; for it will yield
us a great Lesson. I say it appears not by Scripture, that David intended any
mischief or treason to Saul, or that he harbored in heart any disloyal thought
against him. This purpose of cutting off the lap of Readiness garment, was no
other then to purchase to himself a harmless and honorable testimony of his
innocence, and to prove unto Saul, that there was no likelihood that he sought
his blood, whom he spared, having him at so great an advantage. Yet
notwithstanding, as if the rending of Readiness garment, had been the wounding of
Readiness body, or the shedding of his blood, David stands amazed, and is
affrighted at so honorable, so innocent a thought. His heart smote him, says
the Scripture. As men that have been at Sea, and endangered through the raging
of winds, and tempests, and floods, when afterward the weather is cleared up,
the winds allayed, the sea smoothed, and all calm, yet scarcely dare they set
sail again, and trust to so uncertain, so fickle an Element: so seems it to
have fared with David in this place; he was a man subject to the same passions
with other men, and doubtless, through the raging of unruly and misorderly
affections, he had many times been in danger of spiritual shipwreck; wherefore,
licet in morem stagni fusum aequor arrideat, and though now he could discover
no tempest in his heart, though the face of his thoughts were as smooth as
glass; yet when he looks upon such fair and calm affections, his heart misgives
him, and he dares not trust them magnos hic campus montes habet, tranquillitas
ista tempestas est; The care he has over his own heart fills him with
suspicions, and still he thinks, something he knows not what, may be amiss. But
I must come unto the words. And it came to pass afterward, etc.

In these words we will consider these three things.

1. The Person, David, And David's heart smote him. 2. David's Sollicitousness,
his care and jealousy, very significantly expressed in the next words, his
heart smote him. 3. The cause of this his care and anxiety of mind, in the last
words, because he had cut off Readiness skirt.
In the first point, that is, in the Person, we may consider his greatness, he
was a King in expectation, and already Anointed. A circumstance by so much the
more considerable, because that greatness is commonly taken to be a privilege
to sin: to be over careful and conscientious of our courses and actions, are
accounted virtues for private persons, Kings have greater businesses then to
examine every thought that comes into their hearts. Pater meus obliviscitur se
esse Caesarem; ego vero memini me Caesaris filiam; It is the answer of Iulia,
Augustus the Emperor's daughter, when she was taxed for her too wanton and
licentious living, and counseled to conform her self to the sobriety and
gravity of her father; My father, says she, forgets himself to be Caesar the
Emperor: but I remember my self to be Caesar's daughter. It was the speech of
Ennius the Poet, Plebs in hoc Regi ante-stat loco; licet lachrimari plebi, Regi
honest non licet: Private men in this have a privilege above Princes; but thus
to do becomes not Princes: and if at any time these sad and heavy-hearted
thoughts do surprise them, they shall never want comforters to dispel them.
When Ahab was for sullenness fallen down upon his bed, because Naboth would not
yield him his Vineyard, Iezabel is presently at hand and asks him, Art thou
this day King of Israel? When Ammon pined away in the incestuous love of his
sister Thamar, Ionadab his companion comes unto him, and asks, Why is the
King's son sad every day? so that, as it seems, great Persons can never be much
or long sad. Yet David forgets his greatness, forgets his many occasions, gives
no ear to his companions about him, but gives himself over to a scrupulous and
serious consideration of an Action in show and countenance but light.

Secondly, As the Person is great, so is the care and remorse conceived upon
the consideration of his action exceeding great, which is our Second part: And
therefore the holy Ghost expresses it in very significant terms: His heart
smote him; a phrase in Scripture used by the holy Ghost, when men begin to be
sensible, and repent them of some sin. When David had committed that great sin
of numbering the people, and began to be apprehensive of it, the Scripture tells
us, that David's heart smote him, when he had commanded Ioab to number the
people. Wherefore by this smiting we may not here understand some light touch
of conscience, like a grain of powder, presently kindled, and presently gone;
for the most hard and flinty hearts many times yields such sparks as these. He
that is most fleshed in sin, commits it not without some remorse; for sin
evermore leaves some scruple, some sting, some loathsomeness in the hearts of
those that are most enamored of it. But as Simeon tells the Blessed Virgin in
St. Luke's Gospel, Gladius pertransibit animam tuam, A sword shall pierce
through thine heart; so it seems to have been with David. It was not some light
touch to raze only the surface and skin of the heart, but like a sword it
peirced deep into him: To teach us one lesson, That actions spotted, though but
with the least suspicion of sin, ought not carelessly to be passed by, or
slightly glanced at, but we ought to be deeply apprehensive of them, and
bestow greatest care and consideration upon them.

The third part of our Text contains the cause of David's remorse, in the
last words, because he cut off Readiness skirt: In the two former parts we had to
do with greatness:: there was 1. a great Person, and 2. great Remorse; can we
in this third part find out any great cause or reason of this, so to make all
parts proportionable? Certainly he that shall attentively read and weigh these
first words of my Text, and know the story, might think that David had
committed some notable error, as some great oppression, or some cruel
slaughter, or some such Royal sin, which none but Kings and great men can
commit. But, Beloved, this my Text seems to be like the Windows in Solomon's
Temple, broad within, but narrow without: or like a Pyramide, large and
spacious at the Basis and ground of it, but small and sharp at the top. The
Person and Remorse, which are the ground and subject of my Text, both are great
and large; but the Cause, which is the very crown and top of all, that is very
small, yea peradventure none at all. For whether it be that my self, accustomed
to greater sins, and now grown old in them, have lost all sense of small and
petty errors, or whether indeed there be no error at all in this action of
David, but only some fancy, some jealousy arising out of that godly and
careful watch he kept over all his ways; or whatsoever else it was that caused
this scruple or remorse in David, it is a very hard matter to discover, and yet
notwithstanding, that we may make more open pass unto such Doctrines as I shall
raise out of these words, let us a little scan and consider what it was in this
action that made David thus strangely scrupulous.

And first of all, was it for that he had touched and taken that which was none
of his own, and therefore might seem to fall within compass of the Law against
injury and purloining? This seems not probable: for when afterward in the like
case he came upon Saul as he was sleeping in the Camp, and took from him the
Spear and the pot of water which stood at his head, we do not read that his
head, that his heart smote him, and yet he took what was none of his.

Or 2 ly. was it that he did wrong and dishonor Saul in mangling his garment?
Indeed the Jews have a Tradition, that this was the sin of which David was here
so sensible. And therefore say they, whereas we read in the first of Kings,
that when David grew old, they covered him with clothes, but he gat no heat,
this was the punishment of his sin committed against Saul: God so providing,
that garments should not be serviceable to him, who had offended in wronging
Readiness garments. But this I must let go as a fable.

Or 3 ly. was it that he had unadvisedly given way to some disloyal thought,
and at first resolved to revenge himself on Saul, having him at the advantage,
though afterward he repented? Indeed St. Chrysostom thinks so; and therefore on
those words at the latter end of the verse next before my Text, And David
arose, he notes; (...) See you not, says he, what a tempest of rage and anger
begins to rise in him; for he supposes him to arise in heat and fury, with a
resolution for blood: but it pleased God in the way to make him relent, and
change the purpose of revenge into the action of cutting off his skirt: and
that this smiting of David's heart was nothing else, but his repenting himself
for giving overhasty entertainment to such a rebellious thought. But, Beloved,
who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? David's thoughts were
only known to God and himself. Since therefore God gives not this as a reason
of David's remorse, but another thing; far be it from me, that I should wrong
David so far, as to burden him with that, with which none but God can charge
him. I rather choose to follow St. Basil's rule, (...), let the Scriptures be
understood as they lie. The Scripture tells us, David's heart smote him,
because he cut off the skirt of Readiness garment, and not because he had
conceived against Saul any thought of blood. But what cause then shall we give
of David's remorse, none other, Beloved, but that religious and careful
jealousy which still he had over his own thoughts, which made him pietatis
affectu etiam quae tuta sunt formidare, Hier. To suspect all things be they
never so safe, and never to think himself secure from the contagion of sin. It
was with David, as it was wont to be with men that are often troubled with
sicknesses and diseases, Suspicionibus inquietantur, medicisque jam san^ manum
porrigunt, and omnem calorem corporis sui calumniantur. Senec. Disquiet
themselves with every little alteration in their bodies, repair to the
Physician when they are well, and think every heat to be an Ague-fit: Horum
corpus non est parum sanum, sed sanitati parum assuevit: these men are not
sick; but they do not know what it is to be in health. In the same state is
David, he had been often infected with spiritual weakness and disease, and
therefore he suspects every motion of his heart, and takes every thought to be
a temptation: Hujus animus non erat parum sanus, sed sanitati parum assuevit;
His soul was not sick of any sin, but he did not know what it was to be in
spiritual health.

For us and for our use has the holy Ghost registered this example of scruple
and tenderness of conscience. Let us return to ourselves and see what lessons
we may learn hence for our behoof. Men usually are either grown old in sin, and
therefore their eyesight is decayed, they cannot easily see and discern
smaller sins: or else as Hagar in the Book of Genesis, laid Ismael afar off
from her, that she might not be greiv'd with the sight of him: so we labor to
lay our sins far out of kenn, that the memory and sight of them might not
exasperate and trouble us. For the cure of both these infirmities, I have
borrowed out of the Lord's treasury a Spectacle of Optic Glass, which if we
use it, will restore our decayed eyesight, and quicken and make us read our
sins in the smallest print; and let them lie never so far from us, yet will it
present them unto us in their true quantity and greatness. Toward the better
use of which spiritual Glass, one lesson would I especially commend unto you;
To be perpetually jealous and suspicious of your thoughts, and to be
quick-scented, easily to trace the footing of sin, to be easily sensible of it,
when we think our selves to have done amiss: a lesson naturally arising, as I
take it, out of David's example, commended unto us in this place. Now how
absolutely behoo^eful it is for us to hold a perpetual Watch over our hearts,
and be jealous of such thoughts as spring out of them, it will appear by these
reasons.

First, because that sin is of such a sly insinuating nature, that it will
privily creep in, and closely cleave to our thoughts and in^tents, though we
perceive it not. For as waters, though of themselves most pure, will relish and
savor of the earth and soithrough which they pass: so thoughts in themselves
good, pas^sing through the corrupt and evil ground of our hearts, canno but
receive some tincture, some dye, some relish from them. When David had an
intent to build God an house, he doubtless conceived no otherwise of this his
intent, then of a religious and honorable purpose, and in outward appearance
there was no cause, why he should doubt of God's acceptance; yet we see this
purpose of his misliked by God, and rejected, and the reason given, quia vir
sanguinum es tu, because thou art a man of blood. How shall we then secure our
selves of any thought, if such an intent as this, so savouring of zeal, of
sanctification, of love unto the glory of God, have such a flaw in it as makes
it unprofitable? and how necessary is it, that we bring all our imaginations
and intents to the fire and to the refining pot, so thoroughly to try them, and
bring them to their highest point of purity and perfection? Be it peradventure,
that the action be in it self good; if it be liable to any suspicion of evil,
it is enough to blast it. It is the holy Ghost's rule given by the blessed
Apostle, that we abstain from all show and appearance of evil, that we refrain
as much as possible from all such actions, as are capable of misconstruction.
What is more lawful, then for the labourer to have his hire? then for those
that labor in the Gospel, to live by the Gospel? Yet we see St. Paul refused
this liberty, and chose rather to work with his own hands; only for this
reason, because he would not give occasion to any, that would misinterpret his
action, to live at others cost, and feed on the sweat of others brows. What
befalls Princes many times, and great Persons that have abused their Authority,
the people rise and suppress them, deface their Statues, forbid their Coin, put
away all things that bear any memory of them: So seems our blessed Apostle to
deal here: look what actions they be which bear any inscription, any image and
title, any show or spot of sin, these has he thought good even to banish and
quite prohibit. Our profane Stories tell us, that when Julius Caesar had
divorced his wife; being asked why he did so, since nothing was brought against
her to prove his dishonest, his answer was, that she that will be wife of
Caesar, must not only be free from dishonesty, but from all suspicion of it:
Beloved, St. Paul tells the Corinthians, that he had espoused them unto one
husband, that he might deliver them as a chaste Virgin unto Christ; and God
every where in Scripture compares his Church unto an espoused Wife, and himself
unto an Husband, a Husband far more jealous then ever Caesar was: How careful
then must that Soul be, that intends to marry it self to such a jealous
Husband, to abstain not only from all pollution of sin, but from all suspicion
of it? Last of all, it is Tertullian's speech, Quanto facilius illicita
timebit, qui etiam licita verebitur; It is wisdom sometimes to suspect and shun
things that are lawful: For there are many actions in themselves good, which
yet to many men become occasions of sin and scandal: For it is with our
actions, as it is with our meats and drinks; As diverse meats fit not to diverse
constitutions of body, so all actions accord not well with all tempers of mind:
As therefore what dish it is we easily surfeit of, though it be otherwise good,
it is wisdom totally to abstain from; so look what actions they be in which we
find our selves prone to sin, it is good spiritual Physic to use abstinence,
and quite to leave them. For if our Savior commands us to pluck out our eyes,
and pare off ours hands, if once they become unto us cause of sin, how much
more then must weprune away all inward thoughts, all outward circumstances,
which become occasion of offense unto us?

A second reason, why I would persuade you to entertain a jealousy of all your
thoughts and actions, is a natural over-charitable affection, which I see to be
in most men unto their own ways; and which is strange, the worse they are, the
more are we naturally inclined to favor them: The reason is, because the worse
they are, the more they are our own. When question was sometime made, Why good
herbs grow so sparingly, and with great labor and pains, whereas weeds grow
apace without any culture and tilling? it was answered, That the earth was a
natural Mother to the one, to the other she was a Stepmother; the one she
brought forth of her self, to the other she was constrained. Beloved it is with
our hearts as it is with the Earth, the natural fruit of them is weeds and evil
thoughts, unto them our hearts are as mothers, injusta virescunt, they spring
up in us of themselves, without any care or manuring: but as for good thoughts,
if they be found in our hearts, they are not natural, they are set there by a
high hand, they are there by a kind of spiritual in-oculation and graffing, as
men graff Apples and kind fruits upon Thorns and Crabs: No marvel then, if like
choice herbs and fruits they grow so tenderly, and need so much care and
cherishing. As therefore Parents, though their own children be very deformed,
yet love them more then others, though more beautiful: so corrupt and evil
thoughts are naturally dearer unto us then good, because we are as Mothers unto
them, to the rest we are but Step-dames. Two notable fruits there are of this
over-charitableness to our own actions. First, a willingness that we have to
flatter, to deceive and abuse our own selves by pretenses and excuses. There is
a plain, a downright, and as it were a Country reprobate, one that sees his
sin, and cares not much to excuse it, and is content to go on, and as it were
in simplicity to cast himself away: There is a more witty, more refined, and as
it were a Gentleman-like reprobate, one that strives to smooth and gild over
his sin, to deceive others and himself with excuses and apologies; (...), as
St. Basil speaks, to take great pains, and with the expense of a great deal of
wit and art to damn himself. When Saul, being sent against Amalek, had spared
Agag and the best and fattest of the prey, at Samuel's coming to visit him, how
does he wipe his mouth, as if all had been well, and trimly composes himself to
entertain him, Blessed art thou of the Lord, I have performed the commandment
of the Lord? And when Samuel had showed him his error, how quickly has he his
excuse at his fingers ends, We have spared the best of the sheep and of the
oxen to sacrifice unto the Lord? Et Deo adulatur and sibi lenocinatur, as
Tertullian speaks, he thinks to gull Almighty God with fair and flattering
pretenses, and becomes a baud to his own vice; nimium idem omnes fallimur it is
the common error of us all, and in most of our actions we do as Saul did,
endeavor to put tricks upon our selves: Beloved, were we not partial, but
rigid censurers of our own thoughts, this corrupt fruit would quickly rot and
fall away. Again, there is a second fruit springing out of this favor and
dotage in our own actions, an error as common, though not so dangerous, for we
are content many times to acknowledge that something is amiss in our actions,
we will confess them to be sins, but we account of them as little sins, sins of
a lesser fize, not so fearful, easily pardonable. There is a sinner, who by
committing some great and heinous crime ( crimen devoratorium salutis, as
Tertullian calls it, such a sin as with open mouth devours salvation) does as
it were with one step leap into hell, and of this kind of sinners the number is
fewer: But abundance there are, who avoiding great and heinous sins, by
committing lesser sins, as they think, can be content to go by degrees, and as
it were step by step into hell. Beloved, let us a little put on the spectacle I
but now spoke of, that we may see whither any sin be so small, as we take it: I
know there is difference of sins; our Savior tells us, that there is a beam,
and there is a mote: but withal this I know, that the best way to keep us from
sin, is minima pro maximis cavere, to loath even the least, as if it were the
greatest; if we look through this glass, it will make us think every mote a
beam. Sins in themselves are unequal, but in regard of us, and of our endeavor
to avoid them, they are all equal. Fly from evil, says the Psalmist; he tells
us not, that there is one greater evil from which we must fly, and another
less, from which it is enough if we do but go: but he bids us fly, and to make
haste alike from all. To think that a sin is less then it is, may be dangerous,
for it makes us the less careful to avoid it: but to mistake on the other hand,
and think a sin greater then it is, this is a very profitable error. Vtinam
sic semper erraremus; would God we did always thus err; for besides that there
is no danger in it, it makes us more fearful to commit sin. Our Savior
reprehends the Pha^isees in the Gospel, because they could strain at gnats, but
swallow camels; but yet it is true, that men learn at length to swallow camels,
by swallowing gnats at first: Nemo repent fuit turpissimus, no sinner so
hardy, as to set upon the greatest sins at first. The way by which men train up
themselves to the committing gross and heinous sins, is by not being at first
conscientious of lesser sins, Et sane nescio, says Paulinus in St. Hierom, an
possimus leve aliquod peccatum dicere quod in Dei contemptum admittitur: who
dares call any sin little, that is committed against God? Small contempts
against great Princes are accounted great oversights; for what is wanting in
the thing, is made up in the worth of the person. How great a sin then is the
smallest contempt that is done against God? Prudentissimus ille est, qui non
tam considerat quid jussum sit, quam illum, qui jusserit; nec quantitatem
imperii, sed imperantis cogitat dignitatem. It is the best wisdom for us, not
so much to consider, what is commanded, as who it is that commands it, to
consider, I say, not the smallness of the Law, but the greatness of the
Lawgiver. Sins comparatively may be counted greater or lesser, but absolutely
none can be counted small. To conclude then this point, Charity suspecteth no
harm, says St. Paul: true, but we must note, that some virtues in us concern
our selves, as Faith, Hope, Temperance, and the like: some virtues concern not
our selves, but others; but such an one is Charity. Charity that wills
Christians to think well of all others, can have little room upon our selves:
Let us then make use of this Charity toward our Neighbors; hope the best of
all their actions; but let us take heed how we be over-charitably minded to our
selves. Caesar professed, that he would rather die, then suspect his friends;
and he sped accordingly, for he died by the treachery of those friends whom he
suspected not. Let us take heed how we be over-kind unto our own thoughts, how
we think it an error to be too suspicious of them: (...); peradventure those
sons of our own hearts, whom we least suspect, will in the end prove those who
shall betray us. But I come to a third reason. A third reason why I shall
advise you to this jealousy over your own thoughts, is the difficulty of
discovering them betime, and discerning of what spirit they are. For our heart
is like that field in the Gospel, in which the Husbandman sows good corn, and
the enemy sows tares. God infuseth good thoughts, and the Devil ill. Now as
weeds many times at their first budding are hardly known from good herbs; so at
the first springing and budding of our thoughts, a hard matter it is to know
the weed from the good herb, the corn from the tare. As Judah in the Book of
Genesis, knew not Tamar, till the fruit of his sin committed with her began to
show it self: so till the fruits of our thoughts and purposes begin to appear,
except we search very narrowly, we can scarcely discover of what rank they are.
Tunc ferrum quod latebat infundo supernatabat aquae, and inter palmarum arbores
myrrhae amaritudo reperta est; Then the iron that lay in the bottom, will swim
at the top of the water, and among the pleasant Palm Trees, will be found the
bitterness of Myrrh. We read in the second of Samuel, that when the Ark was
brought from Kirjath-jearim, the oxen that drew the cart shook it, and Vzzah
reaching out his hand to save it from falling, for his good service was laid
dead in the place. Doubtless Vzzah his accompanying the Ark was a sign of his
love unto it; his love unto it begat in him a fear to see it in danger; his
fear to see it in danger, bred in him a desire to keep it from danger. See,
Beloved, what a number of golden thoughts are here; yet as we read in the Book
of Job, when the servants of God came and stood before him, Satan also came and
stood amongst them; So in this chorus and quire of these Angelical thoughts,
the devil finds a place to rest himself in: For this desire of Vzzah to save
the Ark from danger, made him forget what was written, that none should touch
the Ark, save only the Priests: the breach of which precept brought that
fearful judgment upon him. You see, Beloved, that though the course of our
thoughts be like Jacob's Ladder, and God himself be at one end of them, yet
Satan, if he can, will be at the other. Let us learn by this example of Vzzah,
betimes to discover our thoughts, and not to suffer them to grow till their
fruit betray them. Indeed our Savior has given us a rule, You shall know them
by their fruits; but we must take heed that we extend not this rule too far:
Vzzah felt the fruit of his thoughts to his own cost. It is never good trying
conclusions there, Vbi poenastatim sequitur errorem. Let us learn to decipher
our thoughts then, when we may do it without danger, whilst they are in semine,
whilst they are yet but budding and peeping above ground, Donec Sarculo tantum
opus est, non Securi; whilst yet there is only need of the Weed hook, and not
of the Hatchet.

A fourth reason yet there is, for which I would counsel you to hold a strict
hand over your thoughts, and it is, Because that from outward sins we can
better preserve our selves, then from our sins in thought. Beloved, there is a
transient sin, and there is an imminent sin; there is a sin that is outwardly
acted by the service of the body, there is a sin that requires not the help of
the body, but is committed inwardly in the very thought and soul, a speculative
or an intellectual sin. Outward sins are many ways passed by, means may be
wanting, company may hinder, time and place may be inconvenient; but for
speculative sins, or sins in thought, all times, all occasions, all places are
alike: (...), says St. Basil: A man, says he, of great gravity and
countenance sits in the midst of the marketplace, with many hundreds about him,
and looking upon him, yet notwithstanding this man, (...), even this man in the
midst of all the company fancies to himself what he desires, and in his
imaginations goes unto the place of sin, or rather retires into his own heart,
and there he finds place and means to commit (...), a sin that has no witness
but God. If we retire to our private chambers, these sins will follow us
thither, and as Baanah and Richab did by Isboseth Readiness son, they will find us
out upon our beds, and slay us there. If we go to the Church, they will find us
out there, and as Adramelech and Sharezer slew Sennacherib, whilst he was
worshipping his god; they will set upon us even in the midst of our holiest
meditations and prayers: neither Chamber nor Church, no place so private, none
so holy, that can give us Sanctuary, or shelter us from them. St. Hierom
confesses thus much of himself, that when he had forsaken the world, all
outward occasions of sin, and gone into the Desert, and shut himself up in a
poor Cell, and macerated his body, (...), with watchings, with fastings, and
perpetual prayers and religious exercise, yet could he not be secure from them:
Pallebant ora jejuniis, and men's desideriis aestuabat in frigido corpore; his
body was now grown pale, and meagre, and cold, but yet his heart burnt with
unlawful desires. Again, they are sins of quick and easy dispatch, they are
done (...), as St. Basil notes; in a moment of time, without labor of body,
without care of mind: One wanton look makes us guilty of Adultery, one angry
conceit guilty of Murder, one covetous conceit guilty of Robbery. Whatsoever is
outwardly committed, either with difficulty of circumstance, or labor of body,
or danger of Law, that is inwardly committed in the soul without any trouble at
all. Thirdly, consider but the strength of your thoughts, and you will see
there is great reason to keep them low; for there was no man yet that ever was
foiled but by them, and not by the outward acting of sin. For the outward
action is but the Cortex, the bark of the sin; but the very body and substance
of sin is the wicked thought. Beware of men, says our Savior, when he gave
his Apostles counsel how to provide for their safety in times of outward
danger: but if you will provide against inward dangers, we shall not need to
beware of men, or of any outward force whatsoever. Let every man beware of
himself, for in this case, every man is his own greatest enemy. To draw then to
a conclusion: That sins of thoughts prevail not against us, our way is by a
jealous care first to prevent them; and to this has the greatest part of my
discourse hitherto tended. Secondly, if we have suffered them to gain a little
ground upon us, let us betimes take the reins into our own hands and pull them
back again, and cast out our Adversary whilst he is yet weak. (...), says St.
Chrysostom, such are the souls of holy men: their recovery is so quick, that
they may seem to have risen before they fell. It is a great sign of spiritual
life in us, to be quickly sensible of the first track and footing of sin. For
as bodies of the best and purest complexion have their senses quickest, so that
soul which soonest perceives the first scent of sin, is of the divinest temper.
Our Books tell us, that Dionysius the Tyrant was grown so gross and fat, that
though men thrust bodkins into him, he could not feel it. Beloved, there is a
sinner like unto this Dionysius; David tells us of him, when he describes unto
us a sinner whose heart is fat as brawn. That we fall not therefore into that
like (...), stupidity and senselesness, our way is to catch those young Foxes,
and strangle them in the nest: Nolo sinas cogitationem crescere, says St.
Hierom, suffer not your thoughts to increase and gather strength upon you. For
as the man that touches only at hot iron, and stays not on it, burns not his
hand, so the first glances of evil thoughts harm us not; the harm is, if by
consent, though never so little, you stay upon them. To be free from all onset
of evil thoughts is a matter impossible, whilst we have these hearts of flesh:
Ille laudatur qui ut coeperit cogitare sordida, statim interficit cogitata, and
allidit ad petram, petra autem est Christus. That man is praiseworthy, who
as soon as any unclean thought, any child of Babylon is born in his heart,
straightway strangles it in the birth, and dashes it against the rock, which
Rock is Christ. Thus, etc.

A SERMON On JOHN xiv. 27.
Peace I leave unto you: My peace I give unto you.
THis portion of Scripture (Beloved) contains a Legacy, which our Savior gave
to his Apostles, and in them to all that are his, when he was about to take his
leave of the world. The less shall I need seriously to commend it to your
considerations, or to take much pains in wooing your attention. The words of
dying men, though neither the speeches or the persons concern us at all, yet
they usually move us much, we hear them with a kind of Religion, and we suffer
them to take impression in us. With what affection then would this speech
deserve to be heard, delivered by a Person, the worthiest among the sons of
women, and concerning you near, yea, very near, as near as your own souls
concern ye, as being the Savior of them, and now breathing his last, and
spending the little remainder of his breath in gracious promises and comforts,
concerning the whole state and weal of your souls? And yet to raise your
attention a little higher: Such things as we are made present possessours of,
though they be of meaner value, we prize higher then things of better worth, if
we live only in expectation, if we have only a promise of them. Now this last
most excellent and comfortable Sermon of our Savior, though in it are many
special arguments of his Love, many Gifts and Legacies bestowed on his Church;
yet were they almost all assured unto his Disciples, but by way of Promise:
only this everlasting gift of Peace, of which alone they are made the present
possessours, that as at his coming into the world, he brought Peace with him;
for at his Birth there was peace throughout the whole world: so now at his
departure he might leave peace again unto the world, though after another
manner.

And this order of disposition seems to be observed, not without peculiar
reason. It seems that all other blessings the Apostles might be without; yea,
that Grand and Mother blessing, the miraculous coming of the Comforter, they
did for a time expect; but this blessing of peace, they might not, they could
not want. It is transcendent to all other blessings, and reciprocal with a
Christian man; it flows essentially from the very substantial Principles of
our profession. Seneca, that saw something, as it were, in a dream concerning a
wise man, could tell us, Securitas proprium bonum sapientis; Inward and solid
peace is a good appropriated to a wise man: We that know Christianity alone to
be truly wisdom, know likewise, that once a true Christian, then truly
peaceful, and no true peace but in the true Christian. Yea, it has pleased God
to characterize himself, his Kingdom, and his Servants, by this term of peace,
as by a stamp and seal to be known by. He styles himself the King and Father of
peace; his Kingdom, the Kingdom of peace; his Servants, the Sons of peace; the
fruits of his Kingdom, love and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. The Church
therefore anciently, that by this, as by a badge, she might be known whom she
served, every where throughout the public Form of Divine Service, interlaced
this comfortable manner of salutation, Peace be with you all. (...), says St.
Chrysostom, When the Bishop came into the Church or Temple, he came like Noah's
Dove into the Ark, with an Olive branch of peace in his mouth, and his first
words were, Peace be with you all; (...), when he began his Sermon, his Proem
was, Peace be with you all; (...) when he blessed the people, his blessing was
the blessing of peace, Peace be with you all; (...), etc. When the greatest
Sacrifice of Christ was represented at the Lord's Altar, he went to celebrate
the memory of it with the self same Insense, with which our Savior himself
here goes about to perform it, Peace be with all, (...) and ever and anon is
inserted, Grace be with you, and peace. Neither was the voice of the Church
only the voice of Jacob, a soft and still voice, and her actions like unto the
hands of Esau, rough, implacable, and indisposed to peace; but in all her
oppositions she showed a sweet and peaceable behavior. Misericorditer si fieri
posset, etiam bella gererentur a bonis, says St. Austin, Good men, as far as
it is possible, even wage war mercifully. And St. Hierom observes, that the
children of Israel went to fight with peaceable hearts; Inter ipsos quoque
gladios and effusiones sanguinis, and cadavera prostratorum, non suam sed pacis
victoriam cogitantes, amidst the swords, and bloodshed, and slaughtered
carkases, not minding their own, but the victory of peace.

Oft-times we prove unthankful to the giver, because we skill not of the worth
of the gift. Lest therefore we wrong our Savior, by undervaluing his
inestimable gift of Peace, it is necessary we look into the words of the Will,
and see what they purport, and know the worth of that, which by them he has
bestowed upon his Church, Peace I leave unto you, my peace I give unto you.

Again, whatsoever was made by God, and no good is there but of God, Every good
and perfect gift comes down from above, from the Father of lights, says St.
James; yet notwithstanding, some things there are, which it pleases him
peculiarIy to style His, It is a grant and favor that few things have merited
to be called the things of God. Having therefore said, Peace, Jest he might be
thought to have bestowed, facile aliquod and parabile, that which at another
hand might have been obtained, as well as his, he adds my peace, My peace: The
Latin expresses it more emphatically thus, Pacem illam meam, That peace of
mine, that you know of, and the world skills not of; so though all good things,
and peace in its amplest latitude, be of God, yet it is a peculiar grace, that
of peace here given to be called His. We are therefore to note, that it is one
thing to have pacem Dei, another thing to have pacem Deum: the peace of God, or
God which is peace. For Christ himself, as he is to us Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption, so is he our Peace. He therefore that knows
Christ, knows what the peace is that is here given.

Thirdly, as all good gifts are of God, so is he the Giver of them all; yet
somewhat there is, the Donation whereof he so appropriates to himself, that he
takes to himself a title to be the Giver of them. Silver and gold is mine,
says the Lord by the Prophet Haggee; yet Abraham would by no means accept of
the spoil at the hands of the King of Sodom: Why? Lest, says he, he should
say, I have enriched Abraham. Some things are so given by God, that men will
claim unto themselves a part in the Act of giving: Abraham was very jealous of
this, he suffers none to part stakes with God. As was Abraham there, so is
Christ here: Lest some Emperor, or great Potentate, upon conceit of the
Churches quietness, under his Government, or of Largesses, and great
Immunities, or rich Endowments bestowed upon the Church, should boast and say,
I have given peace unto the Church; Christ tells us, that the peace that rests
upon his Disciples He leaves, He gives: Peace I leave, my peace I give.

Fourthly, I told you what hitherto Christ had given to his Church, was but by
way of promise: Lest therefore he might seem to lessen his credit by large
promises, he tells them, this gift of peace they stood already possessed of, he
now left it with them; And yet further, lest they might imagine, that they were
rather made keepers of what was another man's, then possessours of what was
their own, he adds, My peace I give unto you, he makes them Lords of it, he
gives them an absolute propriety and interest in it.

Last of all, he has scattered and given to the poor, says the Psalmist,
(...) he has with a Royal kind of negligence, and heedlesness, thrown about,
catch who can; like Princes, who on some solemnities cast money among the
people, without care who take it up; he makes his Sun to rise upon the good and
bad, and rains upon the just and unjust; Quam multi sunt indigni luce, says
Seneca, and tamen dies oritur? How many men are there, that deserve not so much
as the benefit of common light, and yet the day dawns on them? Thus indeed it
fares in these outward and more general benefits of God; Deo parum curae de his
tribuendis, quae etiam hostibus tribuit, says Martin Luther; God seems to have
but little care in bestowing those benefits, of which his enemies are
partakers, as well as his friends. But here it is not so, that great Flood of
Liberality here receives an Ebb, and is bounded with certain banks. In
bestowing of this great gift of Peace he has given his arm a check, and seems
to be very scrupulous and careful where it lights: He singles out his Disciples
out of all the world, with them he makes his everlasting covenant of peace.
Peace, says he, I leave unto you, my peace I give unto you. So then, out of
this Paraphrase which I have made on these words, it appears there are three
points principally considerable in them.

First, the Gift, Peace, My peace. Secondly, the Giver, I leave, I give.
Thirdly, the Subject on whom the gift is bestowed, To you.
To speak of these three, of Peace, of Christ, of the Church, in their
latitude, were a matter infinite, we must therefore think of them with a mutual
relation of each to other; and so conceive of Christ as the Giver of peace, and
so of the Church as of the subject of peace, and so of Peace, as of the Gift of
Christ, and an Attribute of the Church. To these three points arising directly
out of the words, there may be added certain other very worthy your
consideration, arising out of the manner of delivery of them.

First, the Certainty of this promise; doubtless, though Heaven and Earth
shake, though men and devils rage, and the mountains be cast into the sea; yet
to the Church and every member thereof, wheresoever abiding, there is given,
left, and remains peace. And this I gather out of the doubling of the words,
Peace I leave, my peace I give. For as Joseph tells Pharaoh, Genesis xli. And for
that the dream is doubled unto Pharaoh twice, it is because the thing is
established by God, and God will surely bring it to pass: So may we say of
these words, they are doubled to his Disciples, because the thing is
established by God, and certainly with his Church is peace for evermore.

Secondly, the incommunicability of this peace, with many out of his Church; I
told you, this was a Legacy: of it therefore none partake, but such as are
specified in the Will. Here are none mentioned by the Testatour, but such as
were sealed by him for his own: Judas says the story, was gone from them. To
that part of the Church therefore, not which we see, but which we believe, is
this blessing of peace, by right of inheritance, pertaining.

But are these things so as we have said? is it a matter of so incontroleable
certainty, that Christ has left peace unto his Church; that it were almost
infidelity to doubt of it? Surely, if we look not narrowly into it, we shall
rather think peace, which we make the Churches peculiar, to have been an utter
stranger unto her. The Religious Rites of Gentilism, how had they their
beginnings? their progress? without opposition? no disputes? no contentions?
Scarce any thing of worth, for so many thousand years the world lived under it,
done for, or in pretense of Religion! But no sooner was Christian Religion come
to the birth, but straight it was attended by that great Dragon in the
wilderness, spewing out whole seas of dissentions to overwhelm it. The Apostles
themselves, as with one hand they sowed the seed of the Word, so were they
constrained with the other to pluck up and weed out Heresies arising with it.
So venterous was the envious man, not only whilst men slept (for the Apostles
were no sleepers) but whilst they were in act, and sweat, to intersperse his
Tares with God's good Seed. The Jewish Ceremonies, a plant of God's own
planting, seems scarcely to have been acquainted with it: God throughout that
story, of which himself was the Penman, registring no one act of any contention
concerning the interpretation of the Law; yea afterward, when some dissentions
had crept in, they seem to have been of an inferior order, and never to have
broken out to any remarkable inconvenience. But in the Churches story, what
leaf, what line almost gives not in large evidence against the Church's peace?
it being almost nothing else but an Index of controversies, which when they
were at least, occasioned great Schism and rents in the Church, and afterward
receiving strength, brake forth to further inconvenience, one Christian
persecuting another with that heat, that Christianity scarce ever felt under
the hand of Paganism: now in our Age they have enforced the rending asunder of
great Provinces, and mighty Kingdoms, without any hope, as far as humane reason
reaches it, of ever being reunited. Again, if we look into Peace, as the
world esteems it, that is, to the outward prosperity, to the good and civil
correspondence which is betwixt man and man: if we consider what part the
Church has had in this her estate, for some hundred of years, was truly
represented in her great Champion St. Athanasius, of whom it was said, St.
Athanasius against all the world, and all the world against St. Athanasius. She
was sent forth into the world with no other hope, but of the world's hatred;
with no other lot, then poverty and persecution: so little claim seems she to
have to secular ease, and outward state, which by most is termed the Church's
peace, much less to Riches, and Glory, and Provinces, and whole Kingdoms, which
by some are counted the Church's Patrimony.

To clear these things, and first, to remove the scandal of Ecclesiastical
dissentions, give me leave to commend unto you two facile notes, which of your
selves you might easily have observed. First, it has ever been the practice of
the divil, to bend his manifest strength and chief forces against that, which
God has with most strictness and severity commanded to be kept: Whence it
comes to pass, that what we are especially commanded to observe, in that we
usually show our selves most frequent and notorious transgressors. When the
Lord was to choose himself a people out of the whole world, habituated in
Idolatry, his greatest care was to wean them from the Idols of the Nations: His
commandments therefore to the Jews, and almost all the messages of the
Prophets, beat on nothing so much as on this point, to beware of the gods of
the Heathen, whence they were taken. Yet such a strange bewitching madness
possessed them, that even almost in the sight of the Sea, that had given way
unto them; when the cry of the drowned Egyptians was scarce out of their ears,
they fell to Idols. Afterward what breathing time had they from plagues and
calamities, into which, for this crime, if not altogether, yet chiefly they
fell, wherein they did not strangely relapse? Which of their Kings had his
heart right before God? Solomon himself, who had he not known God, yet by that
light he had of Moral and Natural Wisdom, could not choose but see the folly of
it, must needs to his other exorbitant lusts add this, Adultery with stocks and
stones! But when long experience had taught the world its error, and the
absurd Legends of their gods their lying miracles, and their halting Oracles
became, so palpable; that the learned writ in scorn of them, and the unlearned
sufficiently descried them. Christ by his Apostles being to lay the ground of
Christianity, seems to have thought it a matter superfluous to spend many
precepts in beating down Idolatry, a thing of it self now ready to fall.
Neither was there in the Church's increase ever feared a voluntary relapse unto
Paganism: few men being so simple, but though they had not the grace to embrace
Christ, they had the wit to see, as good do so, as follow Idols: And among all
the Christian Emperors, there is but one alone has fallen into the crime of
Apostasy, and is known by that name. Christ gives therefore a new and a great
commandment of Love, of Peace and Unity: This he makes the character of his, By
this, says he, shall men know that ye are my disciples: This he and his
Apostles every where beat on, and therefore by his Apostle St. Paul, he calls
the message which he sent by him, The Gospel of Peace, as being the chiefest
argument of his Embassage, yea, the whole sum of the Law: Love which is so much
spoken of, and an individual companion of Faith, being either peace it self, or
the eminency and perfection of peace. No marvel then, if that ancient enemy of
the Church's peace has pulled every cable, used all occasions, set all his
engines and instruments awork, to infringe the quietness and union of the
Church, especially in the Ministry, who as they are the Church of the Church,
so is their peace the very bond and seal of all union in the Church. Much might
I say, partly reproving, partly bewailing Ecclesiastical dissentions: but
neither were it fitting to my Auditory, nor profitable for the times, they
being so, as an Ancient spoke of his own, In quibus nec vitia nostra pati
possumus, nec remedia; in which we can endure neither our vices, nor their
remedies. Only thus much shall be added by way of advise unto the Laity, It
shall little avail them to urge these things against us: The light of the truth
shines too clear, the way of life is too plain for them to claim any privilege,
or plead any excuse from our dissentions: The voice which came to St. Austin,
Toll, lege, comes likewise to every one of them, Take up and read; Open your
books, and look on that which is before your eyes, and there needs no more ado.
It was never the intent of the holy Ghost, to make it a matter of wit and
subtilty, to know how to be saved. Bring me a soul, not one deeply learned,
sharp and subtle, Sed simplicem, rudem, and impolitam, and qualem habet, qui
^^m^ l^m habet, as Tertullian speaks, a dull, a silly, an unletter^ (...) and
such an one as that man has, that has nothing (...) to witness him to be a
man, and even this shall with ease apprehend what is necessary to save him.

The second thing I would wish you to observe, is this, That there is a great
error in many men, who guiding their eye by what they see of the Church, if
they descry a deluge, or darkness, or confusion in her, straight imagine the
powers of Christ's promise to be shaken: Whereas every Christian man is bound,
even in the midst of winds, and storms, and tempests, to recount with himself,
that notwithstanding this, still the Promise of peace is made good unto his
Church. We must observe therefore, that we have two manner of eyes to look upon
the Church of God; one of Charity, by which we suppose every one, which
professes the name of Christ, to be of his fold; another of Faith, by which we
believe that God doubtless has, and shall have to the worlds end, a select and
chosen company, sealed up for the day of Redemption, such as never shall
finally miscarry, or be taken out of his hands. The first extends it self to
the whole company of Professors, Here Charity may be sometimes, and many times
is mistaken.
to Heretical and Erring Churches, yea, even to Reprobates; and this is it we
term the Visible Church. The second comprehends only the number of his Elect.
Now all those glorious speeches, and gracious promises, made unto the holy
Church in Scripture, are belonging to none but this, on this alone, and on
every member thereof, wheresoever living under the roof of heaven, truly
resides that gracious promise of peace, even on the Celestial Jerusalem, and
the Israel that is of God. It is a fruitless labor for any man, to think to
make good to the eye of experience, those glorious words in Scripture spoken of
this Church. God has not acquainted any man so far with her, as to descry thus
much; neither could this be, unless the persons were definitely known. And this
is an Attribute of God, reserved to him alone, to know who are his. Though no
man therefore know any thing at all concerning this Church, it matters not: The
foundation of God still stands sure, notwithstanding this. That of the Church
of Rome, so much urged in disgrace of the Reformed Churches, Where was your
Church before Luther rose? to this purpose is clean impertinent; the Labors of
men, who have gone about to make it good, and prove a succession of true
Christians, save only to stop the mouths of idle Questionists, might well have
been spared. For all that is necessary to be proved in this case, is nothing
else but this, That there has been from the Apostles times a perpetual
succession of the Ministry, to Preach and to Baptize: Of this, by the
providence of God, there remains very good evidence unto the world, and shall
remain. But this makes nothing to the true succession of the Elct: for it were
not prejudicial to the Church of Christ, or any promise concerning it, though
none of the Ministry, ever since the Apostles times, had been of the number of
the Elect, according to that of St. Chrysostom, in his Comments on the Acts,
where considering the weight of the Minister's Calling, and their slackness in
executing it, he cries out, (...), etc. I much marvel, whether ever any
Minister were saved or no. As therefore no man ought to be discouraged in these
uncertainties and contentions, so let no man flatter himself in his outward
conformity and plausible correspondence with the Church's constitutions; as if
he might upon conscience of this, securely pronounce himself possessed of the
peace here given to the Church. When all this outward show of state shall be
gone off the Stage, it may peradventure prove for the good only of some few
unrespected, unthought of Souls, who had least part in all this mask. For that
falls out oft-times betwixt God's intent, and Man's comments, which the wise
Historian sometimes observed to have been the conceit of his times, concerning
Claudius the Emperor, Quippe fama, Spe, veneratione, potius omnes
destinabantur imperio, quam quem futurum principem fortuna in occulto tenebat:
by the common voice, hope, obsequious carriage of most, every one was destined
to the Empire before him, unto whom in secret the providence of God had
assigned it. I intend not by this to animate any man to disdain order, it is a
Divine thing, and without it, Angels, and the Commonwealth of God cannot
consist. Only I would wish men to beware, lest whilst they dote on the outward
consent and union of the Church, that befall them, which in our age has
befallen our Schools, where men for a long time were so studious of Order and
Method, that Arts and Sciences were almost forgotten. We must not so much gaze
on the outward quietness of the Church, as that we forget to reflect into our
selves, and examine our own inward peace.

From this part of the Church's peace, consisting in outward consent and
harmony, necessary in its kind, I pass to another of an inferior order,
namely, Peace from persecution, joined with outward glory, and temporal
felicity. The first days of the Church, those heroic and exemplary times,
never tasted of this: and when afterward under Christian Emperors it was
partaker of it, the censure of St. Hierom was most true, Potentia and Divitiis
major virtutibus minor fact a est; In Wealth and Authority she grew greater,
but in her Virtues she much impaired. But that which in the first times,
fuisset ejus impudens votum, as Seneca speaks in another case, it had been also
most impudence in the Church so much as to have wished. She is now provided of
Proctors for the purpose, that have entitled her, as it were, by right of
inheritance to all kind of secular honor and state, as if she had so sure a
claim unto it, as the Jews had to the Land of Promise. Yea, it is generally
thought a matter of congruity, that the world go well with every good Christian
man. Against those I will lay down this one conclusion, That if we look into
the tenor of the New Testament, we shall find, that neither the Church, nor
any Christian man by title of his profession, has any certain claim to any
secular blessing. Indeed if we look into the Jews Commonwealth, and consider
the letter of Moses Law, they may seem not only to have a direct promise of
Temporal felicity, but of no other save that. For in the Law God gives to Moses
the dispensation of no other but temporal Blessings and Cursings in the xxvj.
of Leviticus, and the xxviij. of Deuteronomy; where God seems to strive with
all possible efficacy, to express himself in both kinds, there is not a line
containing that which should betide them at their ends: all their weal, all
their woe, seemed to expire with their lives. What sense they had of future
rewards, or with what conceit they passed away to immortality, I list not to
dispute. This suffices to show, that there is a main difference in the hopes of
the Church before and since Christ, concerning outward prosperity, as for
Christians, to them (...), says St. Chrysostom, they have greater and harder
races to run, greater prizes to take in hand, then our Fathers before Christ.
The Church was then in her youth, she was to be led by sense as a child: we are
come to the age of perfect men in Christ. That the Church therefore might not
deceive her self with this outward peace, which is but a peace of ornament, he
strips her, as it were, of her borrowed beauty, and washes off her Fucus, gives
her no interest in the world, sends her forth into a strange Land as he did
Abraham, not having possession of a foot; and which is yet more, not having so
much as a promise of any, which yet Abraham had. If Christ and his Apostles
teach, as sometimes they do, Seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
righteousness thereof, and these things shall be cast in upon you. That
Godliness has the promise both of this life, and of the life to come; It is
not presently to be conceived, that every true Christian man shall doubtless
come on, and thrive in the world. That which they teach is no more but this,
That we ought not to despair of the Providence of God; for look what is the
reward and portion of virtue and industry in other men, the same and much more
shall it have in Christians, their goodness shall have the like approbation,
their moral virtues shall have the like esteem, their honest labors shall
thrive alike: If sometimes it has fallen out otherwise, it is but the same lot
which has befallen virtue and honesty, even in the Pagan as well as the
Christian. In the fifth of St. Matthew, where Christ teaches us, That the meek
spirited shall possess the earth, think we that it was the intent of the holy
Ghost to make men Lords of the earth, to endow them with Territories and large
Dominions? That which he teaches us, is but a moral lesson, such as common
reason and experience confirms, That meek and mild spirited men are usually the
quietest possessours of what they hold. But that these speeches, and such as
these in the New Testament, be not wronged by us, by being drawn to our
avaritious conceits, and thought to halt, if sometime the meek-spirited become
a spoil to the extortioner, and be stripped of all he has, give me leave to
commend unto you one rule for the interpretation of them, which will give much
ease to unstable minds. The holy Ghost delivering general propositions in
things, subject to variety and humane casualties, is to be understood for the
truth of them, as far as the things themselves are capable of truth, and
according to the certainty of them. There are many propositions framed even in
Natural things, of Eternal truth, no instance neither of time nor person can be
brought to disprove them, our daily experience evermore finds them so. There is
a second order of things created by God himself, subject to mutability, which
sometimes are not at all, and being produced owe their being sometimes to one
cause, sometimes to another, the efficacy of the cause no way being determined
to this effect, but of it self indifferent to produce it or not. The managing
of affairs, whether in public of Common-weals, or in private of any man's
particular state or calling; Moral rules of behavior and carriage, yea, all
the things that are spoken concerning the temporal weal or woe of actions good
or bad, they are all ranged in this second order. Now in all these things it is
impossible there should be propositions made of unavoidable certainty. If the
rules and observations drawn for our direction, ut plurimum, usually and in the
ordinary course of events, hold current, it is enough to make them Maxims of
Truth; it matters not though at some time, upon some occasions, in some person,
they fail. Now from the condition of these things, the propositions made by the
holy Ghost himself, are by their Author not exempted. In the Book of the
Proverbs, the holy Ghost has registered such store of Moral wisdom, and
Precepts of carriage in temporal matters, that all the wisdom of the Heathen,
most renowned for Morality, come far short of it. These Precepts, though with
us they have, as indeed they ought to have, much more credibility, as delivered
unto us by an Author of surer observation, and exempted from all possibility
of error; yet notwithstanding, in regard of the things themselves, they are of
the like certainty, of the same degree of truth, when we find them in the
Writings of these famous Ethnicks, whom it pleased the holy Spirit to endue
with Natural wisdom, and Moral discretion, which they have, when we read them
registered in the Oracles of God, and the same uncertainty have they in regard of
some particulars, when they be spoken by Solomon, which they have, when they
are uttered by Plato, or Euripides. Solomon much inveigheth against the folly
of Suretiship; was it therefore never heard of, that a wise man was surety for
his neighbor, with good success? I. Caesar, when he thought to have upheld his
estate through mercy and clemency, lost his life; is it therefore false which
Solomon teaches, that Mercy upholdeth the throne of the King? He knew well,
and his son had dear experience of it, that the peoples hearts are won and kept
by mild and merciful dealing, rather then by rough and tyrannous proceedings:
yet he could not be ignorant, that even Kings sometimes reap mischief, and
death there, where they have plentifully sowed love and mercy. Thus then, and
no otherwise, are we to understand the holy Ghost preaching unto us the reward
of the meek-spirited, and the promises of this life to the godly. For we are
not to suppose, that God in his ordinary proceedings concerning his Elect,
exempts things from that mutability and change, to which he made them subject
in the day of their Creation. All things come alike to all, (says the
Wiseman) There is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked, to the clean
and unclean, to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not. As is
the good, so is the sinner, and he that swears, as he that fears an oath.
Which speech is true, in regard of those humane casualties, from which the good
Christian is no more exempted, then the honest Pagan. But it is a maxim of
eternal truth. and the joint conspiracy of Heaven and Hell shall never be able
to infringe it, That all things work for the good of them that sear God. Though
sometime the meek-spirited men be turned out of house and home, and the godly
man have not a place whereon to rest his head. By this then it appears, that
the title of Christian men unto temporal blessings, is not out of any Divine
Right, giving undoubted assurance, but only of common equity and congruity, by
which it pleases God usually to crown honest counsels with good success. As
then this claim is uncertain, so has not the desire of Christians to
intermeddle with secular business been scandalous to our profession. Julian the
Emperor, in an Epistle of his to the Bostrenses, taxing certain seditious
Christians, tells them directly, that their tumult sprang not out of any
probable reason, but merely, (...). But only because he had made it unlawful
for them to sit as Judges between man and man, to interpose themselves in
matters of Wills, to interpret other men's possessions to their own uses, to
make division of all things unto themselves: That much of this might be
probable, I will not easily deny. He that shall look into the Acts of
Christians, as they are recorded by more indifferent Writers, shall easily
perceive, that all that were Christians were not Saints. But this is the
testimony of an Enemy. Yea, but have not our Friends taken up the same
complaint? Doubtless if it had been the voice and approbation of the
Bridegroom, that Secular State and Authority had belonged to the Church, either
of due or of necessity, the friends of the Bridegroom hearing it, would have
rejoiced at it; but it is found they have much sorrowed at it. St. Hilary much
offended with the opinion, that even Orthodox Bishops of his time had taken up,
that it was a thing very necessary for the Church to lay hold on the temporal
sword, in a Tract of his against Auxentius the Arrian Bishop of Millain, thus
plainly bespeaks them, Ac primum miserari libet nostrae aetatis laborem. And
first of all, I must needs pity the labor of our Age, and bewail the fond
opinions of the present times, by which men suppose the arm of flesh can much
advantage God, and strive to defend, by secular ambition, the Church of Christ.
I beseech you, Bishops, you that take your selves so to be, whose authority in
preaching of the Gospel did the Apostles use? By the help of what powers
preached they Christ, and turned almost all Nations from Idols to God? Took
they unto themselves any honor out of Princes Palaces, who after their
stripes, amidst their chains in prison, sung praises unto God? Did St. Paul,
when he was made a spectacle in the Theater, summon together the Churches of
Christ by the Edicts and Writs of Kings? It Is likely he had the safe conduct of
Nero, or Vespasian, or Decius, through whose hate unto us, the confession of
the faith grew more famous. Those men who maintained themselves with their own
hands and industry, whose solemn Meetings were in Parlours and secret Closets;
who traveled through Villages and Towns, and whose Countries by Sea and Land,
in spite of the prohibition of Kings and Councils. It Is to be thought that
these had the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. Did not the power of God
sufficiently manifest it self above man's hate, when by so much the more Christ
was preached, ^y how much he was forbidden to be taught. But now, which is a
grief to think, dust and earths approbation gives countenance to the Sacred
Faith: whilst means are made to join ambitious Titles to the Name of Christ,
Christ has lost the reputation of self-sufficiency. The Church now terrifies
with Exile, and Prisons, and constrains men to believe her, who was wont to
find no place but in Prisons and Banishment. She depends upon the good
acceptance of her favorites, who was wont to be hallowed in the fear of her
Persecutours; she now puts Priests to flight, who was formerly propagated by
fugitive Priests. She glories that she is beloved of the world, who could never
have been Christ's, except the world had hated her. What shall we answer to
this complaint? Our enemies are apt to traduce the good things in us, our
friends to flatter our vice and imbecility: But when our friends and enemies
do both jointly consent to lay open our shame, to whose judgment shall we
appeal, or whether shall we fly? Whether? Even to thee, O Lord Christ, but not
as to a Judge; too well we know thy sentence. Thou have sent us messengers of
peace, but we, like Jerusalem, thy ancient Love, have not understood the
things belonging to our peace. O Lord, let us know them in this our day, and
let them no longer be hidden from our eyes. Look down, O Lord, upon thy poor
dismembered Church, rent and torn with discords, and even ready to sink. Why
should the Neutral or Atheist any longer confirm himself in his Irreligion by
reasons drawn from our dissentions? Or why should any greedy minded worldling
prophecy unto himself, the ruins of thy Sanctuary, or hope one day to dip his
foot in the blood of thy Church? We will hope, O Lord, (for what hinders?) that
notwithstanding all supposed impossibilities, thou will one day in mercy look
down upon thy Sion, and grant a gracious enterveiw of friends so long divided.
Thou that wroughtest that Great Reconciliation between God and Man, is thine
arm waxen shorter? Was it possible to reconcile God to Man? To reconcile Man to
Man is it impossible? Be with those, we beseech thee, to whom the presecution
of Church Controversies is committed, and like a good Lazarus drop one cooling
drop into their Tongues, and Pens, too too much exasperated each against other.
And if it be thy determinate will and counsel, that this abomination of
desolation standing where it ought not, continue unto the end, accomplish thou
with speed the number of thine Elect, and hasten the coming of thy Son our
Savior, that he may himself in person sit, and judge, and give an end to our
controversies, since it stands not with any humane possibility. Direct thy
Church, O Lord, in all her petitions for peace, teach her wherein her peace
consists, and warn her from the world, and bring her home to thee; that all
those that love thy peace, may at last have the reward of the Sons of peace,
and reign with thee in thy Kingdom of peace for ever. Grant this, O God, for
thy Son's sake, Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost,
be ascribed all Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, now and for ever.

The profit of GODLINESS. The First SERMON On 1 TIMOTHY iv. 8.
But Godliness is profitable unto all things.
THat which Zeba and Zalmannah tell Gideon, in the Book of Judges, As is the
man, so is his strength, is true not only as we are men, but as we are
Christians too. As is the Christian, so is his strength for the performance of
the Acts of Christianity. Some Christians are as Iether was, young, and unfit
to draw the sword; others as Gideon, strong, and fit for manlike employments.
Some Christians there are, to whom there can no better Argument be used, then
the love of Christ, and the commemoration of their duties: such as St. Paul
was, who to gain Christ, esteemed all other things as dung. Others there are
that cannot think so meanly of the world at first, but as Naaman vowed to serve
God, and yet would bow himself in the house of Rimmon; so they can be content
to give their names unto Christ, but with some respect, and bowing to the
world: and such are the greatest part of Professors. The Spouse in the fortieth
Psalm could be content to forget her own people, and her Fathers house; but
scarcely is there a soul so wedded to Christ, as that it can forget the world,
that has nursed and breed it up; that has had so long, so inward, so sweet
acquaintance and familiarity with it. This is a second and weaker sort of
Christians: The holy Ghost being to deal with such, is content to condescend
unto their weakness, and in this little piece of Scripture which I have read,
seems as it were to show a willingness to endure the world, to enjoy some part
of our love: by an argument drawn from our love to gain and profit, he labors
to win our love to him: and as Rebecca did with old Isaac, provide us such meat
as our soul loves. In the words therefore, we will first by way of Introduction
and Preface consider, what cause the holy Ghost might have to use this
Argument, drawn from Profit and Commodity. Secondly, we will consider the words
themselves. And first, of the reason of this Motive.

Profit and Commodity is a Lure, that calls the greatest part of the world
after it. Most of the bargains which the world makes, are copied out according
to that pattern, which Judas gave at the betraying of Christ, What will ye give
me, and I will betray, deliver him into your hands? This question, What will ye
give me? what commodity, what profit will accrue unto me? is the preface and
way into all our actions. Good or evil men will do neither, except it be by way
of bargain and sale. This common disease of the world, has likewise seized
upon the Professors of godliness: except this also bring us in some Revenue, ^t
has no savor. It was the divils question unto God concerning Job. Does Job
serve God for naught? have thou not hedged him on every side, and laid thine
hand upon him? Indeed he mistook Job's mind for Job served not God for this,
but for another cause: yet (believe me) he had great cause to ask the question;
for who is it that can content himself to serve God for nothing? As David said
to old Barzillai, in the Book of Kings, Let Chimham go with me, and I will do
him good: so must God deal with us, if he will have us to serve him. God, like
the Husbandman in the Gospel, may go forth at the first hour, and at the ninth
hour, and at the eleventh hour, early and late, at every hour of the day, and
find idle persons, (for whosoever labors not with God is idle, how busy
soever he seems to be in the world) but except he bring his penny with him, he
shall find none to work in his Vineyard. Aristotle discoursing concerning the
qualities and conditions of man's age, tells us, that Young men, for the most
part, consider not so much profit and convenience, as equity and duty; as being
led by their natural temper, and simplicity, which teaches them to do rather
what is good, then what is profitable. But Old men, that have ends of their
actions, their minds run more on commodity and gain, as being led by advise and
consultation, whose property it is to have an eye to profit and convenience,
and not only to bare and naked goodness. I will not deny, but there may be
found some such men, that are but young in the world, men that are children in
evil, who know not how pleasant a savor gain has, yet certainly the most men,
even in their youngest days, are old and expert enough in the world. For we
bring with us into the world the old man, whose wisdom and policy is to have an
ear (...), not to enterprise any thing, but for some further end then the thing
it self; either the more free enjoying of our pleasures, or the filling of our
purses, or the increase of our preferments. These are the gods of the world.
These, like God, sit at the top of Jacob's Ladder, and all our actions are but
steps and rounds to go up to them. God and goodness is not reward enough to
draw men on. When God gave Laws to his own people the Jews, to bring them on
the better, how is he fain to make many promises of possession of the Land; of
freedom from bondage, of abundance of all things, which might work upon their
affections? And hence it is, that themselves, when by their manifold
backslidings they had shut up the passages of God's good and gracious
promises, complain in the Scriptures, What profit has come to us by serving of
the Lord? or, Which way has it availed us to have kept his Law?

Again, as it is on the one side with goodness, in regard of gain, so is it on
the other side with evil. Evil, though many love it very well, yet very few
there are that are grown to that height of wickedness, as merely to do
mischief, without any other respect of reward. When the Patriarchs, moved with
envy, had resolved to murder their brother Joseph, as soon as ever the
Ismaelitish Merchants did appear, as soon as any air of gain did show it self,
straight their thrist of blood began to allay, What profit, say they, is there
in our brother's blood? Let us sell him rather to the Ishmaelites. Hope of
gain, as if they had looked upon the Brazen Serpent, presently assuaged their
hot and fiery disease. All this that I have said does plainly show unto you,
how potent profit and gain are to sway with out weak natures: that God himself,
though he come with all spiritual graces possible, yet if he come empty-handed,
if he bring not something which may work upon our weak and sensible nature, he
may come and knock at our hearts, as himself speaks in the Revelation, but he
shall find none that will open to him, none that will give him any
entertainment at all. Now God who is (...), as Clemens speaks, who even studies
ways how to save us, and is witty in inventing of means to brings us to him;
amongst many other ways which he has used, has added this, and has made this
weakness of ours to draw us home. The love of gain, which is the root of all
evil, and which occasioned the greatest sin that ever was committed in the
world, is here made to bring forth fruit unto godliness, and becomes the
occasion of the greatest good that can betide us. For as Judas for love of gain
sold Christ, so here by the love of gain, we are taught to redeem Christ again.
So be the very blemish and imperfection of our nature may be a mean to save us,
God is sometimes content to give us leave to enjoy it. When God saw the Jews
exorbitant lusts would not be bounded within these limits, which himself in
Paradise at the beginning did ordain, he gave them leave, when they were weary
of their wives, even upon slight occasions, to put them away. Again, when he
saw the desire of gain would not suffer them to live within the compass of
charity, but that the custom of the world would draw them on to the practice of
Usury; forbidding them the use of it to their brethren, gave them leave to
practice it on strangers and Cananites. These Tolerations are no warrant to us,
that the actions were good: But as it was observed of the wise men^ that had
the managing and bringing up of Nero, the Emperor, they permitted him to
practice his lusts upon Act a servant, ne in supra illustrinm foeminarum
prorumperet. s^ illa libidine prohiberetur: lest if he were forbidden that, he
should turn his lust upon some of the Noblewomen; no otherwise did God deal
with his people. Lest too strict charge and prohibition might peradventure the
more kindle them, he permitted them some vent. And therefore if at any time
they did travel, as it were, with the sin of Usury, to keep them from the
practice of it upon their Brethren, he left the Stranger and Cananites as it
were midwives to ease them of it. No otherwise deals he with us in this matter
of gain and profit, then he did with his own people in the cases of Divorce and
Usury. Thus to part our love between God and our own gain, is but a toleration:
for to love God for any other respect, then of God himself, whether it be
health or wealth, or honor; be it for the fear of Hell, or the hope of Heaven
it self, is at the least a weakness and imperfection in us: the reason of it is
evident. That for which any thing is beloved, is of it self more beloved. When
David dealt kindly and lovingly with Mephibosheth for Jonathan his father's
sake, it is a certain argument that he loved Jonathan more then Mephibosheth.
He that loves a man for Money, or for Meat, loves money and meat more then the
man: For these are the causes and ends why he loves the man. Wherefore he that
loves God for any other end then God, certainly loves that more then God. But
we all know, that God is principally and solely to be loved, all things else in
him, and for him, but he only for himself. That which St. Paul says, that
perfect love casts out fear, is true in a far more general sense. For perfect
love lays by all other respects whatsoever. God must be loved by us, as David
loved Jonathan, but the creature, as Mephibosheth, in the second place, for
Ionathan's sake. Wherefore when God by promising us these outward blessings,
draws us on to love him, it is a certain argument that we love these things
more then God, which is no less then a degree of Idolatry, to take the honor
due to the Creator, and give it to the creature: yet, as the Husbandman in the
Gospel would not have the Tares pulled up, for fear least the Wheat should come
up with them; so it pleases God to tolerate these Tares in us, lest the rooting
out of our affections to the things of this life, might draw a little too near
the quick, and wrong our love to God. Out of the love therefore and desire he
has to our good, he does apply himself to this our infirmity, and contents
himself (for a time) to have a second room in our thoughts, if yet by this mean
he may win us to himself; as a skilful Artist, that works upon an evil matter,
if he cannot make what he would, yet makes that which the matter gives him
leave.

And hence it is, that as in many places of Scripture he draws reasons from
outward blessings, making our love unto them, a motive to bring us unto him: so
especially in this little portion of Scripture, which I have read unto you, he
makes our love unto commodity and gain the (...), as it were the Spokesman unto
us for him, and to gain our love unto him. Am I not (says he unto us)
sufficiently fair of my self to procure your love? What is it then that I shall
bring with me to win your affections? Is it gain? Lo, here it is, for Godliness
indeed is gainful: Or is it not only so, but some great and extraordinary
gain? Why here it is, a gain of infinite extent and latitude, even good success
in all the things you take in hand; Godliness is profitable unto all things. Is
it yet more? would you have this assured to you for your lives? Why here it is.
It is a Gain that has a promise, yea, an infallible promise of this life. Is
it yet more? would you have it accompany you not only in your lives, but even
lie down with you in your graves? Here it is. Such an assurance as no device in
Law can make void; not of this life only, but even of the life to come.

Thus having considered the causes, which we might suppose to have moved the
holy Ghost to make choice of this motive, drawn from gain; we come now to
consider the words themselves. In them I will especially observe two notes.
First, that Godliness is profitable; and what manner of profit it is that
Godliness brings. Secondly, we will show the latitude, compass, and extent of
that profit, in the later words, to all things. Godliness is profitable unto
all things.

Every thing that is called profitable, is so styled in regard of the end, for
the effecting of which it is ordained. All things therefore are not profitable
to all ends. The knowledge of the Merchants Trade is profitable to him that
practices Merchandise; but to Shamgar, to him that walks with his goad, or him
that labors at the Plough-tail, it is nothing available. That Godliness is a
thing profitable, no Christian man denies: but this many think is only for
certain private ends and purposes, which the world does not much hearken after.
He that shall provide for another world, he that shall forget his body, and
care only for the state of his soul, such a man at the last shall find the
profit of godliness. But the man that thinks it meet to divide himself betwixt
God and the world, that thinks it not fit his Virgin should pass its time, (as
the Apostle speaks) but bethinks himself of matching into the world: to such an
one the studies of piety may rather seem a rub and hinderance, then a profit
and commodity. For what carnal man is there that can persuade himself, that
piety will either improve his Wealth, or increase his Honors, or make him
thrive in his Trade, or any way better his Estate? Is it not rather thought to
be an hinderance to all these? by curbing our ambition, by moderating our over
having desires, by bounding us within certain limits of contentment, of
conscience, of moderation, and the like, which cut the very nerves and sinews
of all endeavor to grow extraordinarily great? Nay, does not piety rather come
unto us, as the Angel of the Lord did unto Balaam, forbidding us to do many
things, which if we did, they would be highly for our honor and preferment?
yea, if riches do offer themselves, and by God's providence, without our care,
come on abundantly, does it not teach us to lay them out for Christ's sake, and
not to lay them up for our own? So that if a man would define and tell what
Godliness is, we might define it, To be an Art teaching men not to be Rich, not
to be Great, not to thrive in proportion to the rest of the world. Yet
notwithstanding all this, it is most true, that godliness is truly profitable
many ways. I will briefly acquiant you with some of them.

First of all, in that gross and ordinary sense, in which the world takes
profit and commodity: for it blesses our store, it gives good success to our
preferments, it prospers all things that we take in hand. For what is more
usual in the Old Testament, then promises unto the keeper of the Law, of length
of days, of possession of the land, of victory against their enemies, of all
those things which by the world it self are so much desired? Neither were these
promises made only for fashions sake, to draw them on; but they were plainly
and evidently made good unto the people, to whom they were made. For God
promises his blessings in that style, in which old Isaac speaks to Esau
concerning Jacob, I have blessed him, yea, and be shall be blessed. For what is
there of which the world does make such store, in which God's own people had
not their greatest share? Was there any people so victorious a against their
enemies, so long as they kept themselves unto their God? Was there ever any
Nation which had such store of all things made for the use of man? It is almost
an incredible thing to think, that so little a span of Land as they inhabited,
should so abundantly bring forth all things requisite for the use of so mighty
and populous a Nation. For matchless strength of body and fears of Arms, whom
can the world oppose to Sampson, to David and to his Worthies? For wisdom and
learning did not Moses and Solomon out-goe all the wisdom of the East? yea, all
the wise men of the world besides? Their Kingdom indeed was but little; and
herein only, that is, in largeness of Dominion, the Great Monarch of the World
may seem to have gone beyond them. But the reason of this we shall examine by
and by, when we shall come to consider what causes there are, why many times
the children of this world outgoe the children of the Kingdom in abundance of
earthly good, notwithstanding piety only has the promise of them, and impiety
nothing else but a curse. Neither is this harvest of profit only in the Old
Testament, as if the New were waxen barren. The New Testament indeed is not so
frequent in mentioning of earthly blessings; and good reason why: For many
things in the New Testament are not so fully taught, because they are supposed
to be learned and known, as being sufficiently stood upon in the Old. In the
Old Testament, scarce any page is there, which does not entitle good men to the
possession of some temporal good: and for this reason, may seem the holy Ghost
spares to be over-frequent and abundant in mentioning them in the New. So then,
howsoever in our discourses unto you, we many times commend unto you simplicity
and lowliness, and preach unto you poverty and patience, and continual
persecution for the Truth's sake; yet piety does not require at our hands, that
we should be either short-witted or beggarly, but has its part in all the
blessings of this world, whether it be of soul or body, or of goods. That
therefore which anciently the son of Syrach spoke of these excellent men, who
lived before his time, the same has been true in Christian Commonwealths, and
our own eyes in part have seen it; The noble famous men reigned in their
Kingdoms, they bare excellent rule in their wisdom; wise sentences were found
in their instructions. They were rich also, and could comfort, they lived
quietly at home. Be it therefore Power, Riches, or Wisdom, or Peace, or any
other of these Apples of Paradise, which seem to the world so goodly, and so
much to be desired, God has not so rained them down upon the cities of men, as
that he left his own dry and unfurnished with them. I will not dispute unto
whom of right these blessings do belong, whether unto the Reprobate, or unto
the Just? This is a question which none but God can determine; yet has the
world been acquainted with some, who taking upon them to examine the Title,
have given sentence for the Godly, and pronounced that the right unto the world
belongs unto the Just: which to do, in my conceit, is to do nothing else, but
as the old Romans did, who when two Cities, contending for a piece of ground,
had taken them for their Judges, wisely gave sentence on their own behalf, and
taking it from both the other Cities, adjudged it unto themselves. Let the
Title to these things rest where it will, thus much we may safely presume of,
That God, in whom originally all the Right to these things is, does so bestow
them, as that they that are his, cannot doubt of that portion of them, which
shall be sufficient for their use.

Only, my Brethren, let us not mistake our selves in the means by which
godliness becomes thus exceeding profitable unto us; for it is not with us in
regard of these things, as it is with other men. It is not our great care for
them, our early rising, or late sitting up, that brings them to us: The best
and surest way to provide our selves of these things, is not to care for them,
not to ask them. For when our Savior tells us, we must seek the Kingdom of
Heaven, and all these things shall be cast in upon us, he chalks out unto us
the true way to posses our selves of the world sufficiently; for what does he
else but tell us, that if we ask as Solomon did, we shall doubtless be rewarded
as Solomon was. When God, in the Book of Kings, had given Solomon a promise to
have whatsoever he would ask, and Solomon had only asked an understanding
heart, to discern betwixt good and bad: Because, says God, thou have asked
this thing, and have not asked unto thy self long life, or the life of thine
enemies: Lo, I have done according to thy words, yea, I have given that which
thou askedst not, even riches. So that among Kings there shall be none like
unto thee all thy days. Here is the true method of prevailing with God for
temporal things and blessings. If we do earnestly beg at his hands those things
only, which are principally good for us, it is a thing so welcome to God, that
even because we have done this, all other things which we ask not, shall
abundantly be cast upon us. As Laban, when Jacob asked him Leah and Rachel to
wife, gave them unto him, and not only so, but gave him Zilpah and Billah as
handmaids to wait on them, (a gift which Jacob never requested) So has God
some blessings like unto Leah and Rachel, he will give us the latter, Zilpah
and Billah, though we never ask them.

I know it is a very hard matter to persuade the world of the truth of this,
which hitherto I have taught. For as St. Peter tells us, that there shall come
mockers, who shall ask, Where are the promises of his coming? do not all things
continue alike since the creation? So are there many mockers in the world, who
ask us, Where are these goodly promises made unto the godly? where is the
promise of the possession of the earth, made unto the meek spirited? where is
the promise of gain and commodity made unto the godly? Is it not with them as
it is with other men? are there any men whose case is more miserable then
theirs? have they not their shares in all the plagues that usually befall the
world? We have heard that piety still carries a blessing with it; but the world
takes it to be like unto that Equus Seianus, a certain Horse, which past for a
Byword, a Proverb amongst our forefathers, No man could ever thrive that kept
it. Beloved, he that shall look into the state and condition of good men, shall
see that there is some cause of these querulous questions. For the settling
therefore of the minds of Christians scandalized, we will, before we come to
consider in what other sense godliness is profitable, first, remove certain
errors which are like motes in the eyes of common Christians, and hinder them
that they cannot see so clearly in what sense these promises of earthly
blessings are made: and secondly, we will search the reasons, why
notwithstanding these promises, good men have commonly the least part of the
worlds good? and both these briefly.

The Errors to be removed are especially two.

The first, we usually mistake the nature and quality of God's promises. Men,
when they hear of God's promises, to preserve those that are his, presently
think, that God by these promises is bound to exempt them from common
casualties, and as it were to alter the common course of the world in their
behalf. And therefore whenever any common calamities, and inundation of evil,
overflow the world, they presently expect a Noah's Ark to Ferry them over, and
preserve them harmless. Beloved, these promises of God give us no ground thus
far to presume. There is no way of avoiding these common casualties, but by
providing our selves to bear our parts. Many are the troubles of the righteous,
but the Lord shall deliver them out of all. God has not promised that good men
shall have no trouble; but he has made a certain promise to deliver them. This
comfort therefore we have above all the world besides, that in all these
general deluges of Famine, of Captivity, of Pestilence, it is no hard matter to
descry, that God has extraordinarily taken care of those that are his, and
that in such sort as the world uses not to do. When his own people were led
into captivity, the Psalmist tells us, that he gat them favor and grace in the
eyes of their enemies, and made all those that had led them away captive, to
pity them. When Alaricus the Goth had taken Rome, by public proclamation he
gave security to all those that fled into the Temples of the blessed Apostles,
and made it death for any man to molest them. In which example St. Austin does
justly triumph, and challenges all the Ethnic Antiquity of the world besides,
to show where ever it was heard, that in open War the Temples of the gods gave
security to those that fled into them: and does very strongly prove, that all
the distress and felicity that befell the City of Rome at the time of the
saeking of it, was but of the common casualties and custom of War. But all the
graces and mercies by which men found refuge and security, came only for God's
sake, and through the power of the Name of Christ. In these common miseries
therefore which befall Cities and Commonwealths, we may easily read not so
much the Edict of Alaricus, as the Proclamation of God himself in the Psalmist,
Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm. And sometimes openly,
sometimes secretly, evermore certainly God does deliver.

Secondly, an other error there is, wherein we much abuse our selves, and
mistake the promises of God. They are many times made good unto us, when we
believe it not. For as the Jews anciently would not believe that Christ was
come into the world, because he came not in that manner as they expected he
should; so fares it with many Christians in regard of these promises of gain^
of good success and deliverance. Except God come home unto us in all our
desires, except he do all that we think good he should, we are easily apt to
except, and think, there is no truth in his promises. If we thrive not to our
mind, if the success be not that which we expected, we think this is reason
enough to charge God with breach of promise; whereas indeed we ought to know,
that be it little or much that comes unto us, it is sufficient to make God as
good as his word. For that a good man thrives at all, is merely from God. For
if the Divil and the World could do with all, no part of the worlds good should
fall on the righteous; be it therefore but little that they have, since they
have it, so much against the World's will, it is a great argument of God's
extraordinary providence over them, that they have that little. Since it is
apparent, that the world opposes against it, and that by reason of their
calling, they debar themselves of many the thriving Arts of the world; it must
needs be, that if riches do come upon them, that God himself does
extraordinarily pour them on. Wherefore good men must not consider how much, or
how little it is they have, but the means by which it comes unto them. All the
Prophets and Apostles which were hungry, had not that offer which St. Peter
had, all kind of flesh let down from heaven, and free choice to eat of what
they listed. When Daniel was in Babylon in the Lions Den, God sends his Angel
into Iewry, takes a Prophet by the hair of the head, carries him into Babylon,
and all to carry but a mess of pottage for Daniel's dinner. Daniel's fare is
meaner then St. Peter's, but the miracle is as great, and the care of God is
the same. The righteous man that has much is as St. Peter, he that has least
is as Daniel, the word and promise of God is alike made good unto them both.
And thus much of these two Errors, of which the due avoiding, shall keep us
from mistaking of those promises, and charging God foolishly.

Now because much of that, which we have formerly spoken, was spent in proving,
that God does force the world many times, even in a very eminent sort, to serve
the necessities and purposes of those that are his: yet since ordinarily the
case of good men in the things of this world, is meaner then that of the
world's children, their riches are many times small, if they be any at all, and
promotion looks little after them: That we may a little the better content our
selves, and know in what case we stand, give me leave to show you, how it comes
about, that the wicked, though they have no promise, yet have a larger portion
in the world's blessings, then the godly: Where it shall appear, that it cannot
otherwise be, except it should please God to alter the ordinary course of the
world.

The first cause therefore that the sons of this world thus usually climb aloft
above the sons of God, and nest themselves in the tallest Cedars, is their
infinite and importunate Ambition. From this root has sprung forth both that
infinite mass of wealth, which private men, and that boundless compass of
Government, which great princes have attained unto. Nothing was ever more
unjust, then the raising of these great Kingdoms; and if the Laws of equity and
moderation might have taken place, they had never been. St. Austin saw no
difference between the Roman Empire, and Spartacus his conspiracy, only the
one lasted a little longer, and this makes no difference in the thing it self.
And hence it is, that God gave limits and bounds unto the Kingdom which his
people had: and having poured out the vials of his wrath upon the usurping
people that held the Land of promise from them, to whom it was due, he
permitted not the Jews to grate too much upon the bordering Nations. And this
is the reason why the Jews, that in all other respects went side by side, or
rather before the rest of the world, only in latitude of Kingdom yielded to
the Monarchs of the earth. For the one made the will of God, the other their
own ambition, the measure of their desires. The most moderate, and wisest kind
of men are many times slowest, in giving entertainment to these great thoughts
of heart. In Iotham's parable in the Book of Judges, where the Trees go forth
to choose a King, the Olive would not leave his fatness, nor the Vine his fruit,
nor the Fig Tree his sweetness, no not for a Kingdom: Only the Brier, the
basest of all shrubs, no sooner had the Trees made the motion to him, but he is
very apprehensive of it, and thinks himself a goodly creature, fit to make a
King of. Sober men; who best understand the nature of business, know well how
great a charge extraordinary wealth^ and places of Authority bring with them.
There is none so poor, but has his time to make an account of; were there
nothing but this, what a sum would this amount unto? Add unto these, our Words;
unto Words, Actions; unto all these, Wealth and Ability, and last of all,
Honor and Authority: how do each of these successively, like places in
Arithmetic, infinitely increase the sum of our accounts? No marvel then, if
wise and considerate men are slow in tasking themselves so heavily, and rather
content themselves quietly at home. Let the world go well or ill, so it be not
long of them.

The second thing that makes them come on in the world, is their spacious,
wide, and unlimited conscience, which can enlarge it self to the swallowing of
any means, that bring gain and preferment with them; he that once has
cauterized and seared his conscience, and put on a resolution to gain by all
occasions, must needs quickly grow rich. But good men are evermore shie and
scrupulous what they do, though there be no apparent occasion. Evil is of a
sly insinuating nature, it will creep in at every little passage, all the care
and wariness we can possibly use to prevent it, is too little. When David had
cut off the lap of Readiness garment, the Scripture tells us, that his heart smote
him because he had done this thing. I have often wondered with my self what it
was that (in an action so innocent and harmless, done with so hohourable
intent, only to bring a testimony of his innocence and righteousness) might
thus importunately trouble his conscience: He intended no wrong unto Saul, not
so much as in his thought; yet had he but a little advised himself, through
scruple and tenderness of conscience, he would not have used so harmless a
witness of his innocence. Common reason told St. Paul, that the labourer is
worthy of his hire, and by instinct of the holy Ghost, himself learned, and
taught, that it was but justice and equity, that men that labor in the Gospel,
should live by the Gospel. Who feeds a flock, eats not the milk, and clothes
not himself with the wool of it? yet notwithstanding, that he might take away
all occasion of evil, that lazy and idle drones, who suck the sweet of other
men's labors, might not take example by him to live at other men's cost: that
he might make the Gospel (...), free, without any charge, that men that have no
silver might come, and buy, and eat; might come, I say, and buy the wine and
milk of the Word without money, that the Gospel might not be slandered, as a
means of gain, he would not use that liberty that God and men gave him, neither
would he eat the milk, or wear the wool of his own flock, but with his own
hands and labors purchased himself his necessary maintenance. What hope of
these men's extraordinary thriving, who are so nice and scrupulous of what they
finger? What then must we think of those that abuse godliness unto gain, that
refuse to do deeds of charity, except they bring them in some revenue? that
read Scripture for no other purpose, but to cull out certain thrifty Texts to
pretend unto their covetousness and distrust, as that Charity begins from it
self, that he is worse then an infidel that provides not for his family? But as
for those other Scriptures that persuade us to be open-handed, to lend, looking
for nothing again; having two coats, to part with him that has none: these we
can gently pass by as Meteors, and aerie speculations, and think we have done
God and men good service, when we have invented some shifting interpretation,
to put them, and remove them out of the way. When Azahel, wounded by Abner, lay
in the way wallowing in his own blood, the people which followed after Abner,
stood still as they came to Azahel, till he was removed out of the way. Men are
willing to be Christians, and yet unwilling to leave the thriving courses which
the world takes, when in their pursuit of gain, they meet with these or the
like places of holy Scripture, cannot choose but be much amused, and stand
still, as it were, at Azahel's body: Now those that have been the Authors of
certain mollifying Paraphrases and distinctions, and the like, have removed
these harsher places of Scripture, as it were Azahel's body, and made the way
open and clear to our covetous desires. How scrupulous our forefathers were in
expounding of these, or the like Texts of Scripture, themselves have left us
notable Monuments. St. Basil makes a strange Supposition, and to it gives as
strange an Answer: Were thou brought, says he, unto those streights, that thou
had but one loaf of bread left, and that thou knew'st no means to provide
other when that is spent, if there should come some poor and needy man, and ask
thee food, what think thou is thy duty to do? Even to take that one loaf,
and put it into the hands of him that requires it, and looking up unto heaven,
say, Lord, thou see this one loaf, thou know the streights in which I am,
and that there is no other means but thy providence: yet have I preferred the
keeping of thy commands, before mine own necessities. Beloved, this is a point
of piety, cujus non andeo dicere nomen, I should scarcely durst to have taught
it, had I not had the warrant of so grave a man. For in this Age we are taught,
that we must begin from our selves, that we must not tempt God by making our
selves destitute of means, and other such thriving doctrines, which strongly
savor of love unto the world, and distrust in God's promises. There may be
many reasons of mollifying some texts of Scripture, and restraining them; but
amongst those let that be the last which is drawn from our commodity: and, so
there be no other cause to hinder, let not respect to our persons, or to our
purses, restrain any Scripture from that latitude and compass of sense, of
which it is naturally capable.

I will yet draw a third reason, why the wicked should thrive in the world
above the rate of be^ter men: and that is the negotiating of the Divil in these
cases, who doubtless busies himself exceedingly, that those who do him service,
may have their hire: and therefore whatsoever he can do in disposing of the
things of the world, he will effect, and with all his might strive, that their
ambitious, and partial, and covetous desires may have good success. Doubtless
it was an overlashing speech which the Divil used unto our Savior, when he
offered him all the Kingdoms of the world, upon condition he would fall down
and worship him. For whatsoever the issue of the temptation had been, he could
not have made his promise good. Yet certainly there are many cases unknown to
us, wherein the Divil, by God's permission, does dispose of the world. Job in
his losses and afflictions takes notice of no such thing, yet we all know that
the divil had an especial hand in them. Wherefore wicked men, if God do not
hinder, doubtless have all the service that the world and the divil possibly
can do them: and on the contrary side, could the divil and the world hinder,
good men should have nothing at all. Needs therefore must they thrive, that
have the divil and the world to farther them, and to do them all the good
offices they can. Many other reasons may you frame to your selves, why the
wicked should thus flourish in the world, which I must leave to your private
Meditations. For I must not forget that there is yet a good part of my Text
behind.

Now as Homer is wont to tell us, when he speaks of Rivers and Mountains, that
men indeed call them thus and thus, but the gods have other names for them: so
you must know, that hitherto we have spoken of profit and gain, as men are wont
to like of it; we will now speak of it in a sense that God and holy Saints are
wont to use. For, besides this first, there is a second profit of Godliness, by
which it does reflect upon the former. Care and industry without godliness,
brings in the things of the world upon us but in this case we cannot call them
profits. What profit is it for a man to gain the whole world, and to lose his
own soul? Godliness it is therefore, that makes even profit it self profitable.
For the true profit is the enjoying, using, and bestowing of them; and this
alone does piety teach. So that piety serves not only as a Bailey to bring them
in, but as an Instructor, to teach us how to lay them out. For it is a greater
part of wisdom wisely to dispend them when we have them, then to get them at
the first. As one told Hannibal, that he knew how to conquer better, then how
to use the Victory: so many there are in the world, who know how to gather, but
few that know how to use. How many do our eyes see every day, who make no end
of heaping up wealth, but never bethink themselves how to employ it? By lying
thus idly by us, it gathers a rust, as St. James tells us, which rust eats out
our soul: but piety, Abdita terris inimica lamnae, washes off the rust of it,
and makes it bright by using it. One only true use there is of these outward
blessings, and that is it which our Savior teaches in the Gospel, Make ye
friends, says he, of the unrighteous Mammon. The world, I know, makes it
profit enough to have it; but this other profit that comes by expense, and
laying it out, it can hardly be brought to learn. Many there are that can be
content to hear, that Godliness is profitable to them, but that Godliness
should make them profitable to others, it should cost them any thing, that they
cannot endure to hear. It was St. Basil's observation of old, (...): I know
many, says he, that can with some ease be brought to fast, to pray, to lament
and mourn for sin, to perform all parts of (...), of piety that cost them
nothing: but hardly shall ye draw them on to any part of piety, that does
require but the cost of an halfpenny. Beloved, we that have the oversight of ye
in Christ, are witnesses of your labor, of frequenting of prayers, of hearing,
of thirsting after Sermons: all this is but (...), you are very free of it,
because it costs you nothing; but we would be very glad, and should give up our
account with much more joy, might we but understand a little more of that part
of piety, which consists in bestowing of these good blessings, which godliness,
I doubt not, has gained you. Seldom speaks the Scripture of laying up, for
this is a thing which of our selves we can fast enough practice, there needs no
great pains to teach, where Scholars are so willing to learn. But Scripture
oftentimes, and earnestly, deals with us concerning the laying them out, as
being an hard lesson, and long we are a learning it. To use them that they may
steed us in our last and greatest extremities; with them to purchase us
friends, that shall receive us into their eternal Tabernacles, this indeed is
to make true profit of them, and this is performed by godliness alone. In the
first profit of piety, namely, of bringing in unto us the things of this world,
godliness has others that partake with her. For honest labor and industry is
a thing so pleasing unto God, that he gives it a blessing in the mere Moral and
Heathen man: Impossible it is that a diligent man should not thrive, be the man
what he will. But this second profit of laying them out, to make them eternally
profitable unto us, by charitable dispending them, this we owe alone to
godliness. Beloved, of a Christian man's labor and industry, there is a double
profit, one from men, and another from God alone. In the first, the world, with
godliness, may have a great share; but in the second it has no part at all:
Godliness in the first can bear a great stroke, but it wholly and solely
effects the second.

Thirdly, there is yet a further profit of godliness, which does accrue unto
us: For it makes to men not only their wealth and riches profitable unto them,
but likewise all those inward endowments of body and soul, which God bestows
upon men. For whereas there are in us, as we are mere natural men, and
strangers unto the covenant of grace, many excellent things; without godliness
they are all nothing worth. In the fall of our first Parents, some things we
did utterly lose, and some excellent things did still remain; but the profit of
them was quite lost. They are unto natural men now, as the Rainbow was unto
the world before the Flood, the same still, but of no use. It is a wonderful
thing to see, what gifts of wisdom, of temperance, of moral and natural
conscience, of justice, of moral uprightness, do remain, not only in the Books
and Writings, but even in the Lives and conversations of many Heathen men,
utterly devoid of the true knowledge of God; yet what profit reaped they of
these things, since all the good that does remain in the natural man, can never
further him one foot for the purchasing his eternal good. Suppose ye unto your
selves some such man as Epictetus was, let him have all graces that are, piety
only excepted, let him wear out himself with studies, pine himself with
temperance, keep his hands clean from corruption, his heart from unchaste
desires. Nay yet more, let us add unto these the patient enduring of all
disgrace, of loss of goods, of banishment, yea, of torment of body for Goodness
sake. (For so we find, that not only Christianity, but even Moral goodness
amongst Heathen men, sometimes endured a persecution.) Our Books are full of
the commendation of Regulus, a famous Roman, who did undergo a kind of Moral
Martyrdom for his conscience sake, and with great patience for a long time all
the unspeakable torments of body, which a most cruel, perfidious, and bloody
people could lay upon him, only because he would not break his Oath. Let us, I
say, suppose some one man, in whom all these things concur; and what shall
these profit him, when having put off this body of flesh, he shall find one and
the same place provided for him, and the wickedest wretch that ever lived?
Indeed I cannot think, that in this one place, there is the same degree of
punishment inflicted upon Epictetus and Regulus, and upon Nero and Julian. The
Gospel distinguishes and tells us, that there is a servant that shall be beaten
with many stripes, and a servant that shall be beaten with few stripes. All
these great graces in Heathen men, may serve to lighten their weight of
punishment, to diminish their number of stripes, they may procure them less
inconvenience, but they bring them no positive profit at all. Add but only
godliness to these things, and forthwith they shall become exceeding
profitable. This alone is that which gives them (...), a loveliness and beauty,
which is of force to attract and draw the favor of God unto them. Those
natural graces, they are at the most only as it were the matter and body of a
Christian man, a thing of it self dead, without life; but the soul and life
that quickens this body, is godliness. They are of the same kindred and
brotherhood with godliness, and God is the common Father unto them all, yet
without godliness, they find no entertainment at God's hands. As Joseph said
unto his brethren, Ye shall not see my face, unless your younger brother be
with you; The same is the countenance of God toward these, they shall never
come to have any part of that blessed Vision of God, wherein all happiness does
consist, except this Brother be with them. And as the same Joseph, when his
brethren came to him accompanied with their brother Benjamin, gave portions to
every one of them, but Benjamin's part was five times more then theirs; so when
these shall come to appear before God, accompanied with this Brother, they
shall every one of them receive worthy portions from him, for Godliness sake,
but the portion of Godliness shall be five times more then any of the rest.

Fourthly, and last of all, there is yet one further profit of Godliness. For
whereas hitherto we have showed, that godliness makes that which we do possess
profitable unto us, it shall now appear that godliness makes even the want of
them advantageous unto us. That which makes all things profitable unto us, that
makes even Nothing it self profitable, so that in respect of godliness it is
alike gainful unto us, either to enjoy the things of the world, or not to have
them. For I verily persuade my self, that it is as meritorious (if I may use
the word) as great a part of Religious Worship, to know how to want these
things for God's sake, as to know how to abound, and use them to his service.
Epaminondas a Theban Nobleman, when the people in scorn had put him in a base
Office, told them, that he would so manage it, as that he would make it a place
of as great Honor and Credit, as any was in the State. Godliness is like this
Theban Nobleman, and is able to make the basest and most penurious estate,
equivalent unto the most Honorable Calling in the world. God, who made us out
of Nothing, is able, and does make Nothing as beneficial unto us, as if he had
made us Lords of all his creatures. Neither to enjoy, nor to want, is a thing
with God of any worth; but to know how to use, or to know how to want, this
becomes beneficial to us. But the man that has nothing in this world, if he
have not this Art of enjoying nothing, Perdidit in foelix totum nihil, has
utterly lost the benefit of this Nothing. When Job from so great an estate had
fallen to nothing, by patience, by humble submission under the hand of God, by
receiving calamities and giving of thanks, had purchased to himself a greater
measure of glory, then if he had never tasted of misery. Many do want, and make
their want a greater increase of evil unto them; for they do it either with
repining at God's providence, or secret indignation and envy against them that
abound, (both which, as they make the present evils worse, so they heap up
wrath against the day of wrath) or if they can quiet their minds, and make a
show of calmness and contentedness, it is rather out of a senselesness and
stupidity, then Religious discretion. As little children that laugh at their
parents Funerals, because they do not understand their calamities. But to
resign our selves up into the hand of God, to be thoroughly contented, that he
should dispose of his creatures as he pleases, to want without repining, this
is a part of piety as great as giving our bodies to the fire, or entertainment
of Christ and his Prophets, of founding of Churches, of Almsdeeds, or
whatsoever part of godliness is so much in Scripture commended unto us. What a
comfort then is this to a brother of low degree, when he shall consider with
himself, that his want is as rich as the greatest wealth? That between rich and
poor, in regard of our last Landing, as it were, and entrance into our Haven,
it is but as it was in St. Paul's broken Ship, some by swimming, some by broken
parts of the Ship, some one way, some another, but all came safe to Land.

The End of the First Sermon.
The profit of GODLINESS. The Second SERMON On 1 TIMOTHY iv. 8.
But Godliness is profitable unto all things.
WHen I made my first entrance upon these words, you may be pleased to call to
mind, that I considered in them two things: First, the profit that comes by
Godliness, in the first words, Godliness is profitable. Secondly, the Latitude,
compass, and extent of this profit, in the next words, Unto all things. [
Godliness is profitable unto all things.]

In the first part, concerning the profit that comes by Godliness, I showed
you, first, that Godliness was profitable in that plain and gross sense, in
which the world in her language commonly takes the name of profit. For so I
taught, and by example I proved it, that Godliness blesses our store, gives
good success to all our drifts and counsels, prospers our preferments, and
makes all things successful which we take in hand.

Secondly, I showed you, that Godliness is profitable in a sense, unto which
the world is an utter stranger, for this is that which makes even profit it
self profitable. For wealth, and riches, and the like, which the world commonly
means, when it speaks of profit, in and of themselves are not profit: but the
true profit of them is in the enjoying, using, and bestowing of them, and this
alone does Piety teach us. For this alone it was, that taught us to make them
eternally profitable unto us, by charitably dispending them. Aristotle
discoursing to us concerning Moral Virtues, and man's happiness, could tell us,
that Virtue, though it were an excellent thing, yet our happiness did not
consist in having it, but in the use of it, and living according unto it^ As it
was Aristotle's opinion betwixt Virtue and Happiness, so is it betwixt Riches
and Profit: Profit consists not in the possession of riches, but in the using
them, and bestowing them.

Thirdly, I showed you yet a farther profit of Godliness, in making not our
riches and wealth, but our inward faculties, and powers, and endowwents of our
souls and minds, profitable unto us. For all these excellent faculties of wit
and apprehension, of learning and industry, yea, of honesty and civil
behavior, if they were not joined with Godliness, were utterly unprofitable.
For all these might be, and were in very many Heathen men, who were utter
strangers to the Covenant of Grace.

Fourthly, I taught yet a further profit. For Godliness makes not only that
which we do possess, but it makes even the want of them advantageous. For I
showed it is a great part of Religious worship, to know how patiently to want
these things for God's sake, as to know how to abound and use them to his
service: so that in respect of Godliness, it is alike gainful to us either to
enjoy the things of this world, or not to have them. Job by patiently wanting
the things of this life, purchased to himself as great a Crown, as ever he did
by enjoying them at full. Thus far at that time, and so I went away indebted
unto you for my second part, which debt I now come to discharge.

The second part therefore which we are now to consider, is the Latitude,
Extent, and Largeness of this profit of Godliness. Godliness is profitable unto
all things. Of which, I shall be the less occasioned to speak, because that in
speaking of the former point, I have here been necessarily drawn to touch at
it. For in that I have spoken concerning rich and poor, concerning plenty and
want, that Godliness is profitable unto both, is part of this second point,
namely, of the Latitude and extent of that advantage which comes of piety.
Though therefore the more briefly, yet must we add somewhat more concerning
the wonderful compass of it, and show, that as the leven in the Gospel
transfused its force into the whole lump of dough; so godliness does mix it
self with every part of our life. They that have written in praise of Music,
have much admired it, for that great sympathy and correspondence which it holds
with man's nature: that it so applies it self to all occasions, that whether a
man be alone or in company, whether sad or merry, whether at his devotion or at
his sports, in what estate soever he be, Music is still seemly and sitting.
Certainly then is Godliness wonderfully Harmonical, wonderfully Musical, that
does so easily accommodate and fit it self to all persons, all estates, all
degrees, all sexes, all ages, all actions whatsoever.

The Arts of this world are by God's providence so divided, that they must of
necessity belong only to some; all the world cannot be practitioners in any
one of them. If all were Husbandmen, what would become of the Merchant's
Trade? If all were Merchants, where were the Scholar? The profit of every one
of these may peradventure redound to many, the skill necessarily resides in
few: And let us suppose all to be professors of any one, the profit of that
must needs perish. But this wonderful Art of Godliness is of an higher nature,
and has a kind of Metaphysical community: it must descend unto all
particulars; we must, if we will have any profit by it, be all professors of it.

Secondly, few or no Arts are there in the world, that are befitting both
sexes, some are well befitting men, but are utterly unfit for women. To go
abroad, to handle the sword, to manage foreign matters, this belongs unto the
man; but to keep home, handle the distaff, to manage the business of the
family, these belong unto the woman. But for the profession and practice of
Piety, (...), says St. Basil, Womenkind are as far forth capable of it as men
are. And Gregory Nyssen tells us, that in prayer, and fasting, and other
exercises of Godliness there have been women found, who have far surpassed men.

Thirdly, in the world Arts and Professions are to be distributed amongst men
according to their several complexions, as it were, and constitutions of men's
wits. Ex quo libet ligno non fit Mercurius. Every temper of nature fits not
every profession, as every soil will not bring forth all kind of seeds. And
hence it is, that those who have delivered unto us their opinions, concerning
the institution of youth, have advised men warily to observe, toward what
Profession or Trade their nature leans, and to build upon this as upon a
foundation. All this labor of examining and trying men's capacities and
constitutions in the business of piety is at an end. For there is no
constitution, no temper of nature unapt to receive impression from it. There is
no Nature so stubborn, no wit so weak and silly, but can make a perfect
Christian, and quickly by the help of the grace of God, inwardly working with
it, believe and understand the darkest mysteries of Godliness. The reason of
this difference is evident. For Man's Art cannot alter the nature of the
Subject on which he works: and therefore if he cannot do what he would, he must
content himself to do that which the matter upon which he works will give him
leave. As the Sun which warms the earth gives nothing unto it, only stirs up
the nature and faculty it finds in it, and so makes it bring forth fruit; so
good education in any Art, if it find a Nature fit to receive and entertain it,
it will cause it, as it were, to bud, and blossom, and bring forth fruit; but
give, or infuse, or make a nature, it cannot. But the holy Spirit of God, where
it pleases him to sow the seed of Grace, does alter the very complexion and
nature of the foil, and were our hearts as hard as flint, or as barren as the
sand, he can make them as soft as wax, and as fertile as Canaan, or the
Paradise of God. Create a new heart within me, says the Psalmist. The
conversion of a sinner, is a kind of degree of Creation. But I must proceed.

Fourthly, Aristotle discoursing concerning the fit hearer and learner of Moral
and Civil Virtues, quite excludes Youth, as utterly unfit for any such drift
and end; And why? He is yet forsooth impatient of admonition, hot in passion;
when these things are calmed and allai'd, then is he fit wax to receive the
impression of natural instruction. But he whom the Schole of Nature has thus
excluded, the Schole of Grace and Piety has especially made choice of. From a
child to have known the Scriptures. Suffer young children to come unto me. He
that receives not the kingdom of heaven like a young child. Wherewith shall a
young man cleanse his way? Many more testimonies of holy Scripture, which
plainly declare unto us, that Youth is the fittest subject to receive the
influence and operation of the holy Spirit of God. Let the passions of Youth
rage never so violently, let him as much contemn and set at naught the good and
grave advise of his Ancients, as ever Rehoboam did; yet God, that sits upon the
floods, and gives them Laws, and tames them, can bridle the unruliest passion
of the most disorderly young man, and make him like unto young Joseph or Daniel.

Fifthly, Old men are very unfit learners of the lessons which the world
teaches, and almost impossible it is for a man to begin to study in his age.
Therefore Opsimathie, which is too late beginning to learn, was counted a great
vice, and very unseemly amongst Moral and Natural men. For the longer we defer,
the more unapt still we grow, our senses wax duller, our memory frailer, yea,
our understanding too will sensibly decay. But in the Schole of Christ, none is
too old to learn, no memory too short to remember his duty; no disgrace, no
unseemliness, even for old men to come to Schole. For the Spirit of God
strengthens the memory, softens the brain, supplies all defects that Age brings
with it, and makes it, were it as dry as Aaron's Rod, to bud and blossom, and
bring forth ripe fruit unto righteousness. When David, in the Book of Kings,
had invited old Barzillai to the Court; Barzillai, who had so kindly
entertained him, when he fled from his ungracious son, he excuses himself unto
the King, by reason of his age, his taste fails him, his hearing is gone, he
has lost all sense of Court delights and pleasures; and therefore he requests
that favor for his young son Chimham, as a fitter person to make a Courtier. I
am this day, says Barzillai, fourscore years old, and can I discern between
good and evil? Can thy servant taste what I eat, or what I drink? Can I hear
any more the voice of singing men, and singing-women? Wherefore then should thy
servant be yet a burden to my Lord the King? Let thy servant, I pray thee,
turn back again, that I may die in my own city, and be buried in the grave of
my father and of my mother. But behold, thy servant Chimham, let him go over
with my Lord the King, and do to him what shall seem good unto thee. Thus
indeed it is in the Courts of earthly Princes, men by age do grow
unserviceable, and combersome, and therefore there is a time for them to
retire. The counsel which Quintilian gives his Orator, Desinere cum
desidereretur, to resign and give over whilst as yet he is serviceable,
belongs especially unto Courtiers: Best for them to resign their places with
honor, whilst yet they are able to do service, lest if they stay till age
has made them unserviceable, they may peradventure be forced unto it with
disgrace. But in the Court of Christ, none is too old to do service, there is
no difference betwixt Barzillai and Chimham, their strength and senses are
alike. Fourscore years could impair Barzillai's taste and hearing, but the
spiritual taste and hearing, no age or length of days can make decay. It were
to be wished, that in our youngest days, we would dedicate ourselves unto God's
service, that we would think of that counsel which Seneca gives his friend
Lucilius, Perge mi Lucili, and propera, ne tibi accidat quod mihi, ut senex
discas. On betimes, and make haste, lest that befall you which has befallen
me, To learn in your age. But if the grace of God shine not on us, till the
last hour of our day, yet as the Husbandman in the Gospel, gives unto the last
as unto the first, so will God give unto the eldest as unto the youngest; their
strength and ability, as far as Christ's service requires it, shall return unto
them again: as the flesh of Naaman after his Leprosy became unto him again as
the flesh of a little child.

Sixthly, the Arts of the world seem to be somewhat of an unsociable
disposition, they hinder one another: and a very hard thing it is to learn, and
practice perfectly more then one. The mind of a man distracted amongst many
things, must needs entertain them brokenly and unperfectly. But Piety is of a
more pliable nature: no Art, no Profession, no Trade whatsoever, unto which the
learning and continual practice of piety can be any hinderance. He that
studieth piety alone all his days, shall find in it more then all the time he
has can bring to perfection. And yet the most troublesome Arts that are, which
take up and exact of us most part of our time, leave time enough for the
learning of this sacred Art. As it was with those who gathered Manna, He that
gathered little, had no want; and he that gathered much, had nothing over:
every man gathered his Gomer full according to his eating: so is it in the
gathering of this spiritual Manna, he that spends all his time in it, and seems
to gather much, gathers only his Gomer full, as much only as is sufficient
for his spending; and he that is necessarily detained with other cares of this
life by some Trade, or some other Vocation whatsoever, and seems to gather
less, gathers notwithstanding his Gomer full too, even that which is sufficient
for his use. No Arts there are that do so wholly take up the mind of man, as
that they leave no room for any other thought. The experience of Tradesmen
themselves does witness thus much unto us, who in the midst of their most
serious business and labor, can talk, and sing, and make themselves merry, and
by this means deceive the time, and ease themselves something of the burden of
their labors. Even here is space enough for the practice of Godliness. For why
cannot as well a Prayer, and holy Meditations, take up the rooms of these idle
thoughts and talk? Certainly it is an hallowing of our actions to distinguish
them, and intersperse amongst them good and pious meditations. So that for the
practice of piety, it is not always necessary for you to lay down your work, to
come to Church and solemn Service, or still to use some such form as suffers
you to do nothing else; but you may very well do it as you walk in the streets,
as you stand at the stalls, as you sit at your shop-boards, and make every
place a Church where you are. Arator stivam tenens Halelujah decantat; sudans
mes^or psalmis sese evocat and curva attendens falce vites vinitor aliquid
Davidicum canit. It is St. Hierom's in his xvij. Epistle: The Husbandman as he
holds the Plough may sing an Hallelujah: the sweating harvest-man may cool and
refresh himself with a Psalm: The Gardener whilst he prunes his Vines and
Arbours, may record some one of David's sonnets. So that as the Jews report of
Manna, that it had not one kind of savor with all men, but was in taste unto
every man like unto that which he best liked: so Piety fits it self, as it
were, unto every man's palate; and look what it is which he has been bred up
in, or best likes, piety will become like unto it, and taste as he would have
it.

Seventhly, and last of all, as one said wittily in another case, Nullius
agricolae cultae stirps tam diuturna quam poetae versu seminari potest. No tree
grows so well, as that which is planted by a Poet's verse; so in this matter of
piety, it is far more true, that no Trade thrives so well, as that no Tree
grows so well, no Corn so fruitful, as that which is set or sown by the hand of
a Religious Husbandman. Now further, to prove that piety is exceedingly
beneficial to every one of these, there is no better means then for you to
believe it. The labors of Christian men are many times not successful, because
themselves are distrustful. That which our Savior so usually said to those who
sought for remedy at his hands, According to your faith, be it unto ye, is said
unto every Christian man, that looks for a blessing of his industry, it is unto
him according as his faith is. But I need not strive to express my self, the
holy Ghost himself has saved me that labor, who in two several places of
Scripture, the xxvj. of Leviticus, the xxviij. of Deuteronomy, has most
effectually shown, how the profit of Godliness does descend unto our most
particular necessities. Blessed shall thou be in the city, and blessed in the
field; blessed shall thou be in the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
cattle, and the increase of thy kine^ and in thy flocks of sheep. Blessed shall
thou be in thy basket, and in thy dough. Blessed shall thou be when thou come
in, and blessed when thou go out. I will send you rain in due season, and
the land shall yield her increase, and the trees in the field shall yield their
fruit. And your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall
reach unto the sowing time; and you shall eat your bread unto the full, and
dwell in your land safely; and I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie
down, and none shall make you afraid. And I will rid evil beasts out of the
land, neither shall the sword go through your land, etc. Therefore as the
Scripture tells us of Joseph, that wheresoever, or with whomsoever he conversed
he brought a blessing with him; when he was in Potiphar's house, he brought a
blessing upon Potiphar's house; when he went into the prison, he brought a
blessing with him to the prison; when he went into Pharaoh's house, he brought
a blessing upon it, and upon all the land of Egypt. So. piety doubtless,
wheresoever it walks, leaves a blessing behind it, as the Hare leaves the
scent of her footing. Did piety afford us nothing else but its company, brought
it no improvement to our estate, but only taught us to be content with it,
whatsoever it be, yet this were profit enough if men could see it. But because
profit and gain is that which the world so much doats on, and hard, if not
impossible it is to wean men from the love of it; it has pleased God to annex
unto piety such a force, that it shall increase and enhance what estate soever
it shall apply it self unto. When Cyrus the King was gathering his Army, he
made a proclamation to this effect, That whosoever would put himself into his
service, should doubtless find great advancement of his estate; were he
possessor of a little Manor, he would make him Governor of a City; were he
the Governor of a City, he would make him Lord of a Province; were he Lord of
a Province, he would make him a King of many Nations. This which here our
Apostle tells us, that Godliness is profitable, that Godliness is profitable to
all things, is indeed the very drift of his proclamation. For it gives us to
understand, that look what estate it is, to which piety adjoyns it self, it
shall receive not only security, but even great increase and improvement from
it. Thus has appeared unto you, both the profit that comes by Godliness, and
likewise the exceeding largeness and compass of the profit.

But for our further instruction, something yet is there, by occasion of this
Text, farther to be learned. For lest any man of upright life and conversation,
should, upon the reading of this, or the like Texts of Scripture, forthwith
expect, that the world should come in upon him, that he should receive Grace,
and Honors, and Preferments; and finding himself to fail in his expectation,
and instead of all these, to meet with disgrace and reproach, should begin to
call in question the truth of these promises, and charge God foolishly, let us
a little consider the nature of God's promises in this kind. Wherefore we are
to note, that God, although he be a most free and liberal Giver, yet
notwithstanding, most of his promises are conditional. The gift of God is
eternal life, says St. Paul. Salvation is a mere and free gift: yet
nevertheless, God gives it to none, but to those that live either uprightly, or
penitently. As it is with the things of the life to come, so is it much more
with the things of this life; they are a mere Donative, a Gift, an Alms; and
wheresoever God bestows them, he bestows them freely. For do we all we can do,
yet is not God a debtor to us for the least and meanest temporal blessing. And
it is not to be thought, that he that out of his mere grace and liberality
gives us Heaven, a thing of that inestimable value, would set a price upon the
things of this life, and so sell them unto us, which are indeed things of no
worth at all. Yet notwithstanding he gives them not, no not to those that are
his, without conditon. It Is worth noting which St. Basil has, (...), etc. As
Farmers, and Tenants, that Rent lands of other men, till the ground according
to the will of him that lets it them: (...). So the care and manage of this
flesh of ours is committed unto us, (...), upon Obligation, upon Indenture or
Lease, that so husbanding this flesh of ours according to the conditions upon
which it is let us, we may make it fruitful unto him that let it. Not our flesh
only, but all things that pass between God and us upon conditions, they are
let unto us by Indenture. Let us therefore, like careful Tenants, look into our
Lease, and see what Conditions they are, which God requires at the hand of
those, who look to take of God the things of this world, who claim a promise of
him of the things of this life. These shall not find in other places of
Scripture, where the same Doctrine is taught, but with some restraint, which
here the holy Ghost seems to deliver absolutely. For this is the best way of
interpreting of Scriptures, when as what is in one place briefly and concisely
delivered, is expounded by another place, where it is more largely taught. Our
Savior therefore in the sixth of St. Matthew, treating of the things of this
life, and our care for them, bids us first seek the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness of him, and all these things shall be added unto us. That which
here in my Text our Apostle calls Godliness, is by our Savior expressed by the
terms of seeking the kingdom of God, and the righteousness of him: that which
our Apostle calls profit, our Savior calls these things. Where our Savior
seems to me to speak with some kind of scorn and indignation, that our
infirmity should force him to name the things of this life (as we commonly say)
the same day with the things of the life to come. Wherefore having expressly
named the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness of him, he passes over the
rest, as disdaining to name them otherwise, then by the general name of These
things. As Ezekiah pulling the brazen Serpent, calls it no otherwise but by the
scornful name of Nehushtan, brazen Stuff: so Christ willing to pull down in us
the things of this life, (after which we run a whoring, more then ever the Jews
did after the brazen Serpent) telling us of Divine matters, wills us first to
seek the Kingdom of God, and then shall these things, this Trash, this
Nehushtan, this Leaden, P^wter, or at the best Brazen stuff of the world, be
cast in upon us. Here then is the prime and principal condition to be kept by
us, if we will claim a promise of the things of this life at the hands of God.
Where we are to note, that not quomodolibet simply unto Godliness is there made
a certain promise of profit, and the things of this life, but unto Godliness
upon condition, if it be first of all studied, and sought out by us. If the
first stone of our building be Godliness, the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness of him: then will the things of this life come in, otherwise no:
or if they do, they come not in because of God's promise, but for some other
cause. As it is with those who build, some things they provide for main walls
and foundation, some things only for ornament and furniture: that Building
must needs prove weak, where that is laid for a foundation, which was provided
only for garnishing. These outward things are but a seeming kind of furniture
for this life, but the main wall is Godliness. Her foundations, says the
Psalmist, are in the holy Hills. St. Paul telling us of some builders, who
having laid a good foundation, built upon it hay, and stubble, shows what great
damage they shall sustain by so doing: If this be the case of those builders,
whose foundation is supposed to be good, what think we shall be the loss of
those builders, whose very foundation is hay and stubble? as is theirs, who
have laid the things of this life as their prime and cornerstone. First, seek
ye the Kingdom of God. First, is a word of order, and order is (...), says
Theon in his Comments upon Ptolomy, it is a Divine thing, a thing of wonderful
force and efficacy. For cost may be laid out, matter may be provided, labor
may be bestowed, and all to no purpose, if there be not a set course, an order
observed in the business. The experience of the meanest Tradesman amongst you,
is able to tell you thus much. For whosoever he be amongst you that goes to
practice his Trade, he cannot begin where he list; something there is that must
be done in the first place, without which, he cannot go unto the second;
something in the second place, which will not be done, except something be done
before it. Some order there is which prescribes a law and manner to his action,
which being not observed, nothing can be done. As in all other business, so in
this great business of Christianity, we may not think that we may hand over
head, huddle up matters as we list; but we must (...), we must keep a method
and order, a set course in our proceedings. Not, First, these things, and then
the kingdom of God, and the righteousness of him: but, First, the kingdom of
God, and Then, these things. We have amongst our Books an Author, who
commending unto us the great use of Method and Order in our studies, tells us,
that if a man could assure himself thirty years of study, it would be far more
profitable for him to spend twenty of them in finding out some course and order
of Study, and the other ten in studying according to this order, then to spend
the whole, though it be in very diligent study, if it be with misorder and
confusion. Howsoever it be with Method and Order in these Academical studies,
certainly in our studies which concern the practice of Christianity, it cannot
choose, but be with great loss of labor and industry, if we do not observe that
Method and Order which here our Savior prescribes. Simplicius in his Comments
upon Aristotle, makes a question, Whether Youths in their reading of
Aristotle's books, should begin with his Logicks, where he teaches them to
dispute and reason; or with his Moral books, where he teaches them to live
civilly and honestly. If, says he, they begin from his Logic without Morals,
they were in danger to prove wrangling Sophisters: if from his Morals without
Logic, they would prove confused. Thus indeed it fares in the knowledge of
Nature, where all things are uncertain; thus it is with Students in the
University, who have Aristole for their God. Scarcely will all their Logic do
them so much service, as to show them where they would begin, or where end. But
in the studies of Christianity,, it is nothing so. Christ is our Aristotle, he
has written us a Spiritual Logic, he has showed us a Method and Order, what
first to do, what next, and how to range every thing in its proper place. He
that shall follow this, may be secure of his end, it is impossible he should
lose his pains. But if we follow our own conceits, if we like best of our own
courses, God deals with us no otherwise then parents do with their children:
For so long as children follow the direction and advice of their parents, so
long it is fit that their parents should provide for them: but if once children
like best of their own courses; then it is but meet they should take the event
and fortune of them. Yea, so much the more dangerous is our error of not
observing the order and method that Christ has given us, because it cannot
afterward be remedied, we have for ever lost the claim to God's promises in
this kind. As Cato said of errors committed in Battle, In aliis rebus si quid
erratum est, potest postmodum corrigi, praeliorum delicta emendationem non
recipient quia poena statim sequitur errorem: Errors in other things may be
again amended, but the error of a Battle cannot possibly be remedied, because
the inconvenience immediately follows upon the mistake. For if we have not
observed this Method of our Savior, if any thing have possessed our thoughts,
before or above the thought, study, and care of Godliness, we have mist of our
Method, we have broken out condition, and therefore now for ever can we claim
no promise of God in this kind. Here therefore is a most certain touch, by
which we may come to examine our claim unto these promises; for if at any time
we shall perceive our selves overtaken with passion and discontent, upon
consideration that we be disgraced and impoverished. When as men, who, as we
suppose, have nothing so much care of God, and the things that are his, do
flourish in grace and favor with the world. Let us presently examine our
selves, whether or no we have kept the conditions; viz. sought first the
kingdom of God, and the righteousness of him? or have given somewhat else the
first room in our thoughts? Thus if we do, our own conscience will presently
tell us, what part we have in these promises. For which of us can say, that,
with Samuel, we have been dedicated to God from our first and tender infancy?
What do I say? from our first? nay, how many of us are there, who can scarcely
spare the latter end of our days for God? When the world has crop'd the prime
of our age, of our labor, of our industry; when it has sifted and bolted out
the flower, when our health and youth is spent in the world's service, with
much ado can we be content to bestow our old, decrepit, sickly, and
unprofitable part of our age upon God, and the study of Godliness? How then can
we claim this promise at God's hands, that have thus grossly neglected our
conditions? To conclude. When God, in the Book of Kings, made a covenant with
Solomon, he tells him plainly what he and his people must trust to.

1 Kings ix. 4. If thou will walk before me, as David thy father walked, in
integrity of heart, and uprightness, to do according to all that I have
commanded thee, and wilt keep my statutes and my judgments:

5 Then will I establish the Throne of thy Kingdom upon Israel for ever, as I
promised to David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man upon the
Throne of Israel.

6 But if you shall at all turn from following me, you or your children, and
will not keep my commandments, and my statutes, which I have set before you,
but go and serve other gods, and worship them:

7 Then will I cut off Israel out of the land which I have given them; and this
house which I have hallowed for my Name, will I cast out of my sight, and
Israel shall be a Proverb, and a Byword among all people. Here are threats as
well as promises, and those promises are conditional. It is but just, that they
who claim the promises, look well and truly to the conditions.

Jacob's VOW. A SERMON On Genesis xxviij. 20.
And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and keep me in this way
that I go, and give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, etc.
ANd Jacob vowed a vow. (...). The Interpreters of Homer observe unto us, that
he gives unto God one kind of Dialect, to Men another. When he brings in God
speaking, he makes him use fair, smooth, and clear running words; but the
speeches and discourse of men, he fits with words of harder and harsher sound
and composition. (...) and (...), they are but two names of one and the same
River; the one a word of pleasing sound taken up by the gods, the other a word
of unpleasing and rougher accent, used by men. Moses the great Interpreter of
the Greatest God of Heaven and Earth, in those first words of my Text, seems to
have borrowed a piece of the same Art. For that which here in the language of
the holy Ghost he calls a Vow ( And Jacob vowed a vow) that (...), to speak
according to the manner and phrase of men, is nothing else but a contract or
bargain. Vow and Bargain in this place, are but (...), and (...). Vow is a
Religious and Sacred word, and therefore best fits to express our carriages and
demeanor with God: Bargain is a degenerous and sordid word, and therefore best
suits with Merchandising and Trafficking betwixt man and man. All things pass
by way of Contract and Bargain. Do ut des, facio ut facias: service requires
hire, and one good turn demands another. It was the divil that asked the
question, Does Job serve God for naught? But the Saints of God may above all
other most truly answer, That indeed they do not. For God may go forth at all
hours in the day, and find enough standing idle in the marketplace, yet shall
he get none to work in his Vineyard, except he bring his Penny with him. When
Jacob, in the xxx. of Genesis, returned out of the field, Leah meets him, and
tells him, Thou must come in to me, for surely I have hired thee with my sons
Mandrakes. Jacob, that great Saint of God deals no otherwise with God himself,
then he did with Leah; if God will have Jacob, he must purchase him with his
Mandrakes, he must buy him with food and raiment: If God will be with me, and
give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, then shall the Lord be my God.

In which words, the first thing very remarkable, is a singular disproportion
which seems to be contained in them. Demetrius Phalereus, a grave and judicious
Writer, much blames an ancient Author, who describing a small Fly, that lives
amongst the grass, and nests it self amongst the trees, extremely over-worded;
and over-spake himself in his expression of it: (...), as if, says he, he had
spoken of the Nemean Lion, or the Caledonian Bore, or some such great and
terrible beast. He that shall observe the Apparatus, the great preparation that
is here made, might well conceive, that there were some great matter intended.
For first, here is a Vow. Secondly, here is the Person who conceives the Vow,
Jacob. Thirdly here is the Person to whom the Vow is made. Fourthly, here is
the End, for which it is made. He that shall rightly sum up the first three
parts, and truly consider the greatness of them, might justly think, that the
last, wherein, as it were, the Vpshot and total of the rest is comprised, did
certainly contain some extra ordinary matter. First, here is a Vow. This may
not be in any light of trivial thing. Wise men are seldom serious, much less
will they make a Religion in small matters. Secondly, here is the Person,
Jacob; a person of great note and worth: For who greater in the House of God
then Jacob? one of those famous Triumviri, ( Abraham, Isaac, Jacob) from whom
God was pleased to denominate and style himself. Could such an Eagle strike at
a Fly? Could a person of such note, make a Vow, or commence a Suit for a
trifle? So great a Courtier in the Court of Heaven had learned his Courtship a
little better, then to spend favor in small matters. Quaedam beneficia
accipiente minora sunt. Benefits and favors, such may be, as that they may be
unworthy and too mean for him to whom they are tendered. When Caligula the
Emperor had sent to Demetrius, a famous Philosopher, a round sum of money to
tempt him, and try what was in him, he rejected it with scorn, and replied, Si
tentare me voluerat, toto illi experiendus eram imperio: If the Emperor (says
he) had a purpose to try me, he should have cast his whole Empire at my feet,
and tried me with that. And how can it be that Jacob, a person so far above
Demetrius, could think of asking, or receiving a small and common benefit? As
it is fabled of Thomas Aquinas, that being asked of Christ in a Vision, what
reward he would have, replied, Nullum, Domine, praeter teipsum; None, Lord, but
thy self: So, Beloved, had God made proffer unto Jacob of all the benefits he
had to give, I do not see what better choice he could have made, then that of
Aquinas, Nullum, Domine, praeter teipsum; None, Lord, save thy self. For the
whole kingdom of Heaven it self, might it be without God, would not be worth
the taking. The circumstance therefore of the party suing, must needs put us in
expectation of some great matter. But we have not yet done. For to raise our
expectation yet a little higher, a third circumstance offers it self. The
circumstance of the Person, to whom the Vow or Suit is made, and that is God,
the Great King of Heaven and Earth. So great a Donor, especially at the request
of so great a Suitor, cannot bestow but some great benefit. Quaedam beneficia
minora sunt, quam ut exire a magnis viris debeant. Benefits and favors must
carry some proportion with the greatness and worthiness of the Donor. When a
friend of Alexander the Great had asked him ten talents, he tendered to his
fifty; and when reply was made, that ten were sufficient, True, said he, Ten
are sufficient for you to take, but not for me to give. Beloved, had Jacob been
but some ordinary suitor, and contented himself with some small suit, yet is it
not likely that so Royal a Donor as God is, would see his Honor and
Magnificence to suffer, by parting with some ordinary or contemptible favor.
Hitherto all things speak and promise nothing but Greatness. But see here the
great disproportion I noted unto you. For what is the end of all this serious
and Religious Vow, or what request is it that this great Suitour moves to so
great a Lord? Nothing else but bread, and raiment to put on. If God will give
me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, then shall the Lord be my God. A suit
of the lowest and meanest rank imaginable. For which of us all would serve, I
say not some great King, but even a mean Lord, at so cheap a hand? The wandering
Levite in the Book of Judges, which hires out himself to Micha, thinks it not
enough to have apparel and victuals, but he will have ten shekels by the year
for his wages. We have a common saying, No service to the service of a King.
Jacob, it seems, finds it not so. The wandering Levite finds a better service
with a Country Farmer, then Jacob does with the great King of Heaven and
Earth. Food and raiment, they are rather Debita then Beneficia, they seem
rather due debts then favors. Non homini dantur, sed humanitati. None so
wicked, none so contemptible, but thus much is due to him, if not to his
person, yet to his very Nature and Being. Good Laws and Magistrates many
times, and in many fashions, cut off offenders by death; but no Law did ever
prescribe, nor no good Magistrate did ever practice to take away the life of
any offender by starving him. Tiberius and Caligula, and some others, who are
recorded to have practiced this, are noted and pointed out for Tyrants and
Monsters of their age. He who has no right to his life, as having forfeited it
to the Law for some offense, yet whilst his breath remains in him, has a
right unto his bread, and this a right which nothing can forfeit. How then
shall we esteem this as a favor, for which Jacob does thus Religiously oblige
himself unto God? In the first of Samuel, God leaves it as a curse upon the
posterity of Eli, that they should come and crouch for a piece of silver, and a
morsel of bread, and say, Put me, I pray thee, into one of the priests offices,
that I may eat a piece of bread. When Jacob does thus sell himself unto God for
food and raiment, what is it else in outward show, but a piece of that curse,
which is laid upon the posterity of Elie?

Yet all this which we have said, and what else to the same purpose may be said
notwithstanding, the parts of my Text do all hold one with another good
symmetry and proportion, there is nothing amiss, nothing to be amended in them.
As some curious Statues, if ye look upon them, not in their due light and
distance, seem very ill-favored and disproportioned; but veiw them at their
light and distance, and nothing shall seem more beautiful, more proportionable.
So, Beloved, fares it with this Text of Scripture, how deformed and
disproportioned soever it may seem to sense, and in that which sense does
yield; yet if we look into it in the right spiritual light, with which God
endows those which are spiritually minded, we shall not find any thing fuller
of true art and beauty. That I may therefore help you a little, and place you
in the true light, I will consider this Vow of Jacob's, first, comparatively,
in regard of himself; and secondly, absolutely, in its own nature; and out of
both draw lessons for your instruction.

And first, of the Vow comparatively, in regard of the person vowing. Where

First of all I will speak a little by way of concession and grant. For let it
be supposed, that it had been some small and contemptible thing that Jacob had
asked, such a thing, that a great heart would scarcely have deigned to stoop
to; yet Jacob had done nothing unbefitting himself. Timanthes was a famous
Painter among the Ancients, and it was observed of his pieces, that there was
always in them somewhat more then was expressed: He pictured Hercules sleeping,
in a small Table, but that it might be known to be the draught of a man of
extraordinary bulk and stature; he drew two Pigmies by him, taking the compass
and measure of his Thumb. This act of Jacob's like to one of Timanthes pieces,
there is more to be understood in it then is expressed; for though it seem but
small, and nothing proportionable to so great a person, yet if we compass and
fathom it well, we shall understand a greater lesson contained in it. Jacob
dedicating himself unto God, upon such easy terms, and accepting a thing so
small, showed most apparently what esteem he had of his God, and that he valued
him in his person, not in his benefits, and has left unto us an absolute
example in what manner we ought to love our God. To love God for himself, this
is to be a friend of God; to love him for his benefits, this is to be a
Merchant. Could Jacob have passed by food and raiment, as well as he did all
other good benefits of God, he would not have given himself thus unto God upon
composition, but absolutely, and without condition. Now he is constrained to
fall upon the condition of food and raiment; for without this he could not love
his God, because without this he could not subsist, or have his being. By this
he evidently witnesses, that he therefore, and for no other end desired to be,
but only to love and serve his God. It was God alone, and his good acceptance,
which Jacob does here compound for, under the terms of food and raiment. It was
an excellent speech of Crispus Passienus, a witty Gentleman of Rome, Quorundam
se judicium malle quam beneficium, quorundam beneficium, malle quam judicium:
Some man's love is better then some man's money; some man's respect and good
opinion is more to be esteemed, then another man's benefit. Malo Divi Augusti
judicium, malo Claudii beneficium. I had rather have Augustus's good opinion,
then reap any benefit or commodity by him; for he was a wise understanding
Prince: but I had rather reap some benefit by Claudius, then have his good
opinion; for he was a Prince of shallow and weak understanding. Does not Jacob
here express the same conceit? It seems he does: For when he came to compound
with men, he made his bargain in another manner. When he came to Laban, he
would not serve him for bread and raiment only, but fourteen years he serves
him for his wives, and six years for his flock: By these means he raised unto
himself a great and numerous family, and became rich and wealthy. Why did he
thus? could he not have covenanted with God, as he did with Laban, and so have
grown rich at an easier hand? He could; but in dealing with God and with Laban,
his end was not the same. Maluit Dei judicium, maluit Labanis beneficium: with
God he sought acceptance and good opinion; with Laban he sought his own
commodity, for what could the good opinion of a fool profit him? for spell
Laban a little but the other way, and Nabal is his name, and folly is with him.
Let us reflect a little upon our selves, (...), says St. Chrysostom; See here
the express image and character of an Apostle, that which we can hardly digest
in St. Paul, to be content with food and raiment, that we see to be the
practice of the ancient Patriarchs, who were in so great a place of esteem with
God. But as for us, which of us all does so live, as if he could content
himself with Jacob's portion, and serve God for food and raiment? Malamus Dei
beneficium quam judicium: We serve God more for commodity, then to gain his
good acceptance. And yet we see not that this does give a deadly wound to our
love to God, or rather indeed quite pluck off our mask, and shows that we have
no love to God at all. Does not our own experience show us this? Such as are
richly rewarded by us, if they bear us respect, and love, either we suspect it,
or think it not a thing thank-worthy, because they are well hired unto it, but
such who unprovoked and of themselves affect and respect us, of such men's love
we have no cause to be suspicious. Let us therefore look upon God, not on his
benefits: Neither let us be too busy, too importunate to call for them.
Whilst they lie in the hand of God, they are like moneys put to the Bankers,
the longer they lie there, they shall return with greater profit. It is an
excellent thing to have God our debtor. Happy is that man, who having lived
uprightly, has had the least part of God's temporal blessings. For when God is
so free of his secular benefits, Suspectam habe hanc Domini indulgentiam; It
shall not be much amiss, to be somewhat jealous of this his kindness: May be,
it is to give us that answer which is in the Gospel, Accepistis mercedem, You
have your reward. Let us not therefore over-hastily pull them out of the hands
of God, lest peradventure we much diminish, or quite lose the reward which we
expect at that day, (...), says St. Chrysostom, Let us not ask of God these
temporal blessings further then he himself has given us leave. When he taught
us to pray, Give us this day our daily bread, that Father calls these words,
(...); He calls them bounds and limits, showing how far we are permitted to go
in requiring these temporal blessings at the hand of God. All this have I
spoken by way of concession and grant, (as I told you) by way of supposal, that
the thing here covenanted for by Jacob, is a small and contemptible matter. But
if we speak uprightly, it is a great, a very great thing; (...), as St.
Chrysostom speaks, full of Philosophical resolution. The Ethnic Philosophers,
who in contempt of the world and worldly things, went well near as far as
Christians, have out of their own reason found out, and acknowledged thus much.
The Stoics, who were accounted a wise Sect of men, and great contemners of the
world, have gone so far, as that they have plainly told us that; and the Books
of Seneca the Philosopher are full of it, That a wise and honest man, if he
have his necessary food and raiment, for true happiness is comparable even to
God himself. This was somewhat a large Hyperbole, and overreaching speech; yet
out of it, thus much is apparent, that Jacob when he made this covenant, did
not descend a whit beneath himself, neither did he ought, which did not well
beseem so great a person.

The Doctrines which are here considerable for your instructions I will raise
from these two heads. First, from the Person that makes the covenant. Secondly,
from the thing and covenant it self.

And first, from the Person, this excellent lesson may be drawn, That it is no
enemy to true state and greatness, to have but a small portion of the world's
benefit. Jacob's portion, food and raiment, is an heritage well befitting great
persons, men in greatest place and authority. Jacob, who was a great person
indeed, and knew, doubtless, what would best maintain his greatness, would not
have stuck to make demand of more, had he thought it had concerned his place
and person. The world had a long time stood, ere poverty was counted an enemy,
or disgrace to Greatness; and certainly he was an utter adversary to true and
real worth, who first begat that conceit, and put any difference betwixt rich
and poor. Jupiter, in Lucian, calling the gods together to a consultation,
gives order that they should sit (...), according to the matter out of which
they were made, not according to the Art by which they were framed: First, the
gods of Gold and Silver, though but roughly and grossly made, without art; and
next to them the Grecian gods of Ivory, Marble, and Brass, though wrought with
much more art and skill. It was Jupiter, that is, the Divil, whom the Scripture
calls the god of this world, that first set this order, that men should be
ranged (...), according to their wealth, not according to their worth. For God,
who best knows how the world ought to be managed, in the seventeenth of
Deuteronomy, setting down the quality and manner of a King, expressly forbids
him to multiply horses, or greatly to multiply gold and silver; but instead of
these he commends unto him pity, humility, and the frequent study of the Law,
for the true means and ways by which his Kingdom should be upheld. If it be
thus with Supreme Authority, much more ought it to be so with inferior Power.
It was the speech of Julian the Apostata to his soldiers, Nec pudebit
Imperatorem cuncta bona in animi cultum ponentemprofiteri, panpertatem
honestam. Honest poverty can never be a disgrace to that King or Emperor, who
places his greatest happiness in the culture of his own heart. He was an
Apostate that spoke this, but in this he was a Christian: and that Christian
that thinks otherwise, in that he is an Apostata. Never went it better with
Kingdoms and Common-weals, then when Authority and Magistracy were thus minded.
Itaque tunc illi pauperes magistratus opulentam Rempublicam habebant: nunc
autem dives potestas pauperem facit esse Rempublicam, says Salvianus. Poor
Magistrates make a rich Commonwealth, but a rich Magistracy makes the
Commonwealth but poor. It may seem a Paradox, as the world goes, but if you
look near, ye shall find it most true, that none are so fit to be raised to
places of Eminency and Power, as those who can best content themselves with
Jacob's portion. The practice of the world in another kind can show it you. Men
who seek out fit instruments for Villainy, make choice of such as have no
dependances, no families, no means, that are sine re, sine spe, that neither
have any thing, nor hope of any thing to bias them. For men that stand alone,
that are free from incombrances, that are only themselves, and evermore most
resolute in undertaking dangers. Now, Beloved, there is nothing more dangerous,
then the true and unpartial managing of place of Authority: so full is the
world of those, quorum interest, whom it does nearly concern, that justice and
equity take no place. Now who so likely to walk uprightly here, as they who
have no respects to sway them. And who so free from respects, as they who
content themselves with least? What is it that can sway them from their
integrity? whose person need they to respect? what losses need they fear? But
he that has his ambition, his hopes, his ends, his friends, his fears; how is
it possible he should ever drive right? The Mariners tell us, That their
Compass can never be set right near unto Iron; for Iron has an attractive
force, and perpetually makes the Needle to swerve. Men in place of Authority
are like the Compass in a Ship; and by these the whole State does direct it
self. Ambition, Hope, Fear, and the like, these are so many Irons, every one of
force to sway the Needle, and who sees not then in what danger we go? From
hence come all those mischeifs under which we groan, corruption in place of
Judicature; in our Elections, Bribery and Perjury, and preferring persons
worthless, or at least not so worthy, upon the Letters of great Persons, whom
we dare not displease. For when our own ambition has made us obnoxious to
great persons, needs must we lay ourselves, our offices, our consciences, at
the feet of those on whom our hopes are built. All these inconveniences were at
an end, if great men could but think favorably of Jacob's portion, or learn of
Jacob, That honest poverty is no disgrace to Greatness: But Greatness flies to
these helps of Wealth, and worldly Pomp only, as the Lame does unto his staff,
because, for the most part, it wants that true and natural strength, by which
it ought to be upheld. For when we have well searched the point, we shall see,
that store of wealth, and outward glory, are nothing else but the miserable
supplies of other things more necessary, more substantial, which are wanting.
For were it not for these supporters, Greatness without Integrity and
uprightness must needs fall to the ground. Nihil enim turpius est quam
excellentem esse quemlibet culmine, and despicabilem-vilitate, Quid est enim
aliud principatus sine meritorum sublimitate, nisi honoris titulus sine homine?
aut quid est dignitas in indigno, nisi ornamentum in luto? There is nothing
more odious then to be great in place, and contemptible in life and carriage.
For what is honor without desert, but a bare inscription upon a rotten
carcass? or what is dignity in a worthless person, but a jewel thrown into the
dirt? To supply therefore the lameness of it, and to keep it from falling, that
which is wanting in inward worth, must be made good with outward pomp and show,
which are but as nails to fasten Idols to the wall, who cannot stand of
themselves for want of life. For let no great person deceive himself, if he
have not the true life of greatness, he is but an Idol, and the public
reverence which men yield him, is but a kind of Idolatry. Seneca having
considered with himself the vanity of idol-worship used in his times, tells us,
that wise men did such things, tanquam legibus jussa, non tanquam diis
placentia; not out of true zeal to please the gods, but because the Laws
prescribed this form of service. Beloved, all this ceremony and outward honor
which is given to these civil Idols, to worthless persons, seated in place of
greatness, it is but a kind of Idol-worship, proceeding, not out of any true
zeal to their persons, but only the Laws and Customs under which we live,
command us to yield reverence unto persons in Authority, let their lives be
what they will. When Shishak King of Egypt had taken away those golden sheilds,
which Solomon had dedicated in the Temple, Rehoboam his son (that wise man)
supplied them with brazen sheilds. Beloved, piety, integrity, invictus adversus
grattam animus, unswayed constancy, these and the like are these golden sheilds
which should hang up in our Temples of honor: But if any man, having lost
these, supply them with outward pomp and glory, he does but as Rehoboam did,
instead of sheilds of gold, he brings in nothing but Nehushtan, base and brazen
stuff. So then it appears, that Jacob's portion, honest poverty, is no
impediment to Jacob's greatness, nay, it is rather a way to increase it.

Yea, but ye will say, That wealth and outward means may serve to adorn and set
forth virtue and integrity, and commend it to the world; and in this respect
Jacob might have done well to have had some thought of it in his covenant with
God. No, Beloved, it did not deserve to be thought of. It is but an error to
think, that integrity and uprightness of life receives any beauty or luster
from any thing without it. It is reported of the Rhodians, that having a Statue
of excellent work, to add grace unto it, they would gild it; and when they had
so done, they saw they had much obscured the workmanship, and therefore were
fain to wash off the gilt again. Shall I apply it thus, that true piety is a
thing of such excellent workmanship, that riches and outward luster added to
it, are but like the Rhodian gold, which must be washed off again? No, Beloved;
but this I will say, That as it receives beauty and ornament from no estate of
life, so it gives it unto all. Be it a poor and low estate, or be it in a rich
and ample estate, it is the same in both; it makes both poverty and riches like
acceptable unto God, and it gives unto all estates that beauty, that art and
life, of which they are capable. Eadem virtute and mala vincitur fortuna, and
ordinatur bona. Indeed Aristotle, our great Master in the Schole of Nature,
would needs persuade us, that to make up a complete happy man, besides the
inward virtues of the soul, there is required a measure of the outward
benefits, both of Person, and of Fortune. But, Beloved, these Peripatetical
discourses, that thus compound an happy man of so many ingredients, they are
like unto the Bills of some deceitful Physicians, who to make the greater
ostentation and show of Art, are wont to put in many Ingredients, which do
neither good nor harm.

Hitherto I have spoken of Jacob's Covenant relatively, with respect unto
Jacob's Person. The rest of the time I will take up in considering the Precept
simply and alone by it self, and showing you in brief what reasons they are
which moved Jacob, and so ought to move us, thus to covenant with God for food
and raiment only.

And first of all, we shall not need to seek far, here lies a reason hard at
hand, which though it concerns not Jacob, yet nearly concerns us: Would you
know what it is? It is Jacob, the person of whom all this while I have spoken.
One and the same Jacob is to us both a Precept, and a Reason, and an Example
thus to do. For which of you all, Beloved, who seriously and religiously
reading this passage, is not prompted by his own heart thus, Si Jacob, cur non
and ego? If Jacob, so great a person, so powerful with God and man, if he
thought it fit thus to do, then how much more should I? And so much the more
powerful is this reason, because it brings an Example with it: For in precepts
of difficulty, no reason so effectual as an Example, especially of some great
and worthy personage; such a reason is of force above all other reasons and
precepts whatsoever.

For first of all, bare precepts and reasons are speculative; much may be said,
and yet still room left for doubting, either of possibility, or of convenience
and profit, or the like; and every such doubt and scruple abates much of desire
to enter into action. But a reason accompanied with an example, and that of
some memorable and great Person, this leaves in us no doubt at all, neither of
possibility nor convenience.

Again, of Reasons and Precepts, that may sometimes be said, which one speaks
in Herodotus, This Shoe was made for Hestiaus, but Aristagoras wears it. For
many times to give a precept, and to do it, is more then one man's work. A
thing which does exceedingly hinder the practice of many good lessons; for he
that will persuade a good lesson, shall hardly do it, if he follow it not
himself. But here we have one that persuades us, by the strongest and most
effectual manner of persuasion, namely, by example and action. And that you may
see I have cause to please my self in this reason, I must confess, I do not see
to what Logic place I can go, to draw thence a more forcible motive. For let
all the precepts, all the examples of Christians tending this way, be laid in
the scale, and this one example shall weigh them all down. For many things,
many circumstances are there, which should make this resolution familiar and
easy to us, which to Jacob must be very hard, and therefore of the greater
merit. For first, St. Paul has given us the precept, Having food and raiment,
we ought therewith to be content; and many Christians have left us their
examples upon record. But who gave Jacob any precept, or left him an example?
For ought appears, himself was to himself both precept and example. Again, he
had not the like promises, (so far forth as we can conjecture by what is
written) at least he had them not so fully, so evidently, so plainly laid down
as we have; he saw them but obscurely, under Types and Figures; but with us,
all the vail of Types and Figures is quite removed. Last of all, he had not the
like abilities as we have. For (if what we teach in our Books be true) there is
a larger measure of grace, enabling us to the fulfiling of this duty, shed in
the hearts of us Christians, then was given the Fathers before the coming of
our Savior. All these laid together, serve to show the strength of this our
first reason. Si Jacob, cur non and ego? If Jacob, who was to meet with so many
disadvantages to wrestle with so many difficulties, from all which we are free:
If Jacob, I say, could make such a vow, then how much more ought we to do it.
And let this suffice for a first reason.

Our second reason let be this, To us in this life there is nothing necessary
but food and raiment, and therefore ought we, as Jacob here does, covenant with
God for nothing else. A reason of very good consequence: For, Beloved, while we
are in this life, it does much import us not to trouble our selves with
superfluities. The Scripture every where tells us, that we are strangers and
p^lgrims upon earth, that the world is not our country, and that we seek a
city to come: Now (Beloved) our own experience tells us, how dangerous a thing
it is for strangers, pilgrims, and wayfaringmen to be encumbered with
unnecessary stuff, and baggage. First, it hinders us in the way, and makes us
drive on but slowly. Secondly, it exposes us to the danger of theives and
robbers. How dangerous it is to grow rich in a strange place, Jacob himself, of
whom we speak, is a notable instance; for whilst he sojourned with his Uncle
Laban, and kept his estate but low, no man envied, no man troubled him: But no
sooner was his flock increased, and he grown wealthy, but presently the
countenance of Laban was changed, his sons give out harsh and angry words, and
he is fain to fly for his life. Magno consilio jacturam sarcinarum
impedimentorumque contempsit, says one of Alexander the Great, It was a
singular part of wisdom and of good advise, which Alexander used in the Battle
against Darius, that he contemned the loss of his stuff and carriages: And when
Parmenio complains of it, Go tell him, said Alexander, that if we gain the
Battle, we shall not only recover our own again, but possess our selves of
what was our enemies. Beloved, this spiritual Battle that we fight against the
world, is much like to that of Alexander against Darius, sine jactura
sarcinarum, it will never be won without loss of our stuff and carriages. And
let no man be dismayed for this; for behold, a greater then Alexander, even the
Captain of the Lord of Host, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, has assured
us, that if we gain the Battle, (and gain it we shall, if we be not too careful
of our stuff) we shall not only recover our own again, but possess our selves
of what was our enemies, with a thousand-fold increase. When Joseph sent for
his Father and Brethren into Egypt, he sent them bread, and meat, and provision
for the journey, for the way; but withal, he sends them this message also,
Regard not your stuff, for the good of the land of Egypt is yours. Beloved, our
Savior Jesus Christ, that true Joseph, who is gone before to provide us a
place, as himself told us, has sent us bread, and meat, and provision
sufficient for our way: but for that superfluous stuff of the world, he wills
us not to regard that, for the good of a better land then that of Egypt, is all
ours.

But all this while I have not proved the main, That nothing else is necessary
but food and raiment. Indeed, if nothing be necessary but food and raiment,
then shall we do well to let all the rest fall away. But how appears it, that
all things else are superfluous? Thus; Let your conversation be in heaven,
says the Apostle. If it must be in heaven, then must it be like to that of the
Angels: Do the Angels care for silver and gold, for the treasures, and honors
of the world? Or if thy self were an Angel, would thou do it? The Body we
bear about us, lays upon us a necessity of food and raiment; from which
necessity Angels are exempted, because they have no bodies. This only
excepted, what difference is there betwixt us and Angels. Having therefore food
and raiment, the rest we need no more then the Angels do: And why then should
we desire them any more then the Angels do? Look then for what reason they are
not necessary for the Angels, for the same reason they are superfluous for us.

But here I see I may be questioned. What then shall become of all these goodly
things of the world, which men so much admire? riches, pleasures, and delights,
so many good creatures in the world, were they not made to be enjoyed? If
Jacob's portion be nothing else but food and raiment, why did God provide more
then that? Was it his pleasure, that all the rest should run waste? I answer, I
would be loath to oppose that common principle of Nature, Deus and Natura nihil
faciunt frustra, God and Nature are not wont to lose their labor. There is use
for those things, but not that peradventure which we would make. There goes a
fable, that when Prometheus had s^ol'n fire out of Heaven, a Satyr, as soon as
he saw it, would needs go kiss it. There may be many good uses of Fire, yet
kissing none of them. They who thus plead for the things of the world, they
would do as the Satyr did by the Fire, they would kiss them, and hug them, and
love them as their own soul. This is that use, or rather abuse, which, if I
could, I would willingly remove; will you know then the chief use for which
they were made? It is somewhat a strange one, and one of which you will have no
great joy to hear; They were made for Temptation. They are in the world as the
Canaanites were in Canaan, to try and prove us whether we walk in the ways of
God or no. For it was the purpose of God, that the way to life should be
narrow, that man should be the subject of obedience, and virtue, and industry.
For this purpose, by the very ordinance of God, are so many enticements, so
many allurements, so many difficulties, ut fides habendo tentationem, haberet
etiam probationem, as Tertullian speaks; that our obedience and love unto God,
encountering and overcoming so many temptations, so many difficulties, might at
length approve it self unto him. Seems it so strange a thing unto you, that God
should make a thing only for Tentation? What think ye of the Tree of knowledge
of good and evil? it was a fair fruit, it was beautiful to the eye, yet was it
made for no other use that is known to us, but only to be a trial of our
obedience, and that yet it should be more difficult, God has mingled these
very temptations even with our necessities. For this very Vow of Jacob, how
strict soever it may seem to be, yet it is full of danger. Food and raiment
become temptations, dangerous above all others. For how easily do they
degenerate into wantonness, the one into pride, the other into luxury? So that
as it seems, we must circumcise and pare even this our Vow, and covenant with
God, not in large terms of food and raiment, but for no more of that also then
is necessary. As for those other glorious superfluities of the world, he makes
best use of them, that least uses them; and he sets the truest price of them,
that least esteems them.

DIXI CUSTODIAM. A SERMON On PSALM. xxxvj. 1.
I said, (or resolved) I will take heed to my ways.
BEfore of a Good desire -- Beati qui esuriunt and sitint justitiam; now it
will follow well, to make way for an Absolute Resolution, here in two words.

These two words must ever be linked together in this order: 1. Dixi. Purpose
and Resolution. 2. Custodiam. Practice and Execution.


First, a settled purpose must usher the way. Then the Action must follow hard
at heels.

-- Mature facto opus est.
In these two our whole life is comprised. For man is by nature an active
creature, he cannot be long idle; either for good or bad he must take up his
Dixi, and proceed to his Custodiam. For he was born for labor, as the sparks
fly upward.

And well it is that he was so; otherwise, he would find as they do, ( Qui
transgrediuntur naturam in this point) That Idleness is but a preparative and
introduction to do evil: and as fat grounds (if you sow them not with good
seed) will quickly abound with weeds: so the soul of man left empty and void of
good purposes, will soon (...), be overspread and overgrown with evil
intentions.

Neglectis urenda filix innascitur agris. Therefore (if Nature do not, yet)
Christian wisdom at the least should move us quickly (with David) to take up
our Dixi, resolve for action.

David in that case sets the words thus, [ Dixi custodiam] he makes Resolution
take the upper place, and go before practice; and Nature it self requires it
should be so.

Yet it may be good Heraldry, first, to range them in this order, ( Custodiam
dixi) to take heed, to be well advised what we resolve; for resolution is the
immediate cause of Action, the only thing that sets us all on work: Reason (be
it never so good) is yet of no force without a strong resolution.

A strong resolution is of great force, though the reasons be weak or none at
all. There is great reason we should be very careful upon what we set our
resolutions: For (...), dixi, (I am resolved) is with most men a word of great
weight.

Quod dixi, dixi.
There were anciently a sect of Philosophers, who thought themselves bound
(...), to make good whatsoever they had resolved. We read of one of them in
Epictetus, of his time, of his acquaintance, that for no reason resolved to
die, by pining and abstaining from all necessary sustenance; when he had begun
to put it in practice, being required a reason, cur sic? he answered, (...), I
have said, I am resolved it shall be so: and scarcely could his friends
persuade him to break his resolution.

This Sect of Philosophers is not yet extinguished; more or less we are all of
it: Many men in most things, all men in some things, have no other reason but
their (...), dixi, they are resolved upon it. In such a posture have they
voluntarily put themselves, and in that they purpose to pass on.

Now a resolution if it be taken up in A Lightness and vanity, is a singular
Folly, A Sin and wickedness, is a singular Madness.
As being nothing else but pertinacy, a reprobate sense and induration.

So ( e contra) if it be taken up for the guiding of our actions to goodness,
for sanctity, integrity, and uprightness of life; it is an admirable virtue,
and the very Crown of Christianity. For that excellent virtue of perfect
righteousness, which is so in commendation; that constancy and unswayedness in
our lives and actions; that Rock which no tempest can move; that perpetual and
habituated goodness, which no hard fortune can dant, no felicity can corrupt,
that to which our Savior has promised Salvation, ( he that continues to the
end, shall be saved) All this is contained in this word, Dixi, I am resolved.

Again, from whence comes that main imperfection of our lives? Vnsettledness,
and flitting from one thing to another? frequent relapsing into sins once
forsaken? Whence are we so easily carried with every wind of Fear. of Hope. of
Commodity.


All is, because we have not yet learned our Dixi, are not yet resolved: we
know not what to will, or nill, till present occasion take us; we have not
advisedly decreed; set down before hand what we will follow in our lives, in
our conclusions.

And without that [ Dixi] a man is but like a Ship without a Ballast, easily
overturned with every blast. (...), The double-minded man is unstable in all
his ways. The kingdom of Judah was full of such men: for amongst twenty two
Kings who sat in the Throne, nine of them totally relapsed and fell away to
Idolatry, and all the Priests and People with them.

But we need not go to fetch Examples so far, so long since; our own Kingdoms
and latter times are able sufficiently to store us. How easily were the
branches of Popery lop'd under Hen. 8. and and the very stumps of it rooted up
under Edw. 6.

How easily did it recover again under Queen Mary, both Top and Cut? and yet
(with the same facility) was it again lop'd, rooted up under the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth? Certainly were Religion a matter of conscience, and not of
formality, undertaken first with Dixi custodiam, out of Love and Conscience; it
could not be that so often, so easy, so general a change could be made, from
one Religion to another.

The like we may see in all moral courses, interrupted by inconstancy,
mutability, and change: He that can comply, and piece in with all occasions,
and make an easy forfeiture of his honesty, makes it a custom to relapse into
sins formerly repented of, may well impute it to this, that he has not taken
up a resolution; that he has not made his Dixi custodiam, like unto the Laws
of Medes and Persians, which alter not; and without which a man is like the
Sea, moved and troubled with every wind that blows upon it: For would he say
the word, this Dixi custodiam would quit him from the greatest part of his
follies and sins too. How said I? (would he but speak the word? Nay I fear me)
most men think these two words, [ Dixi custodiam] a greater difficulty then so,
and more indeed then they have.

For (first for) Dixi: It is not a word of such strange and unknown sound,
which we that are aliens (by nature) from the Covenant of Grace, utter
strangers to the language of God, can never learn rightly to pronounce? Are we
able to sound it in our hearts thoroughly? to take up this resolution?

Resp. I see no reason, but that I may say, We are able:. For first, David did
it, not by any spirit peculiar to himself, as that by which he Prophesied, and
did those things which lay not within the rule of common persons. 2. David did
it, who was by nature as great a stranger to the Covenant of Grace as we. 3.
David did this for example to us, and it is here recorded, that we might learn
to do the like. But all this were labor lost, if it were impossible to do it.

2. Custodiam, this is enough to prove Dixi feasible.

But yet there is a greater doubt for [ custodiam] Having learned this
language, taken up this resolution, are we able to stand to it, to make it
good? Was there ever man, who had so settled his resolution, ( custodire vias)
but that he was sometimes constrained to leave his right way, and wander, in
spite of all his ( custodiam) careful watch he kept?

Resp. For answer to this question, I must confess I am in a straight. For me
thinks it is no good argument to say, we know of none that have so kept their
ways, Therefore it is impossible they should be kept.

Yet if I should say, it were possible, whether I should offend the truth, I
cannot so easily pronounce; but (sure I am) I should offend the times. For many
learned men can delight themselves in discoursing of the weakness of man's
nature, of the difficulty, yet impossibility of keeping the Laws of God. 2.
Again (on the contrary side, should I say, that we are bound to take up this
(Dixi custodiam) Resolution with David, but with reservation, that in this life
we can never be able to make it good; I do not see what I could do more to
dishearten, to deter men from entertaining this lesson of Christian Resolution,
which (above all lessons in the world) I would have commended unto them. For
what wise man will attempt that, which he knows beforehand to be impossible?

To those who enquire whether it be possible to bring this Dixi into Fieri,
make it good in practice, I answer (as the Angel does, Revel. vj.) Veni, and
vide, try and make experience an possibile? For many things have been thought
impossible, till experience has proved them possible.

It is observed by those who writ the Acts of Alexander the Great, that he
enterprized many things with good success, which no man else would ever have
attempted, because they doubted of the possibility of the enterprise. Let us be
like Alexander, and attempt impossibilities. It may be experience will discover
that to be possible, which fear never could.

They are ill discoverers, that think there is no Land, where they can see
nothing but Sea. How many (of late times) have ventured their persons, their
purses by Sea and Land, in new Discoveries, and new Plantations; of the good
success whereof, they have had little or no assurance before hand? How much
better and surer adventure were this whereof we now treat, which if we attain
unto, the honor and profit is infinite? If we fail of it, the very missing of
it cannot be without a great and rich return?

We read of a Father, who dying, commanded his sons to dig in his Vineyard, for
there they should find much Gold: Accordingly they did so, and Gold they found
none; yet the digging and moving of the earth about the roots of the Vine,
caused it to bring forth so abundantly, that it yielded them a rich revenue.
What if God do so by us? Suppose he commands us to dig for Gold, to keep his
Laws, which yet he knows we cannot; yet the labor it self (though it miss the
end intended) cannot but infinitely benefit us; for our very endeavor (in this
kind) is much set by. Est aliquid prodire tenus -- He that by striving to keep
all, has kept most, has done himself an happy turn.

And now lastly; by so much the more I will exhort you, to make through trial
and experience of your selves in this point of Christian Resolution, because
the want of experience it is, which makes the question of Possibility a matter
so difficult to determine.

For to make this trial requires all our power, all our will: And which of us
have served God so? Many men in some things perchance have done their best, yet
in some things they were utterly defective; in many things, wherein they did
ill, they might have done much better then they did. Show me the man who has
made experience of the uttermost of his strength in the service of God; and who
can tell what the issue might be, if that were done, that was yet never done?

Could I therefore persuade my self or you to put this matter to trial, which
might peradventure be able to satisfy that question, wherein (otherwise) it is
no great matter whether we are satisfied or no. If we cannot entreat this of
our selves, yet at least let us ( insecundis consistere) take up such
resolutions as others have done before us, go as far in the execution as they
have done; let us begin with David here, Dixi custodiam; let us say with
Joshua, ((...). 15.) As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord: Or with
Matthias, Though all the nations under the Kings dominions fall every one from
the Religion of their father, yet will I; and my sons and brethren walk in the
covenant of our fathers^ 1 Match. ij. 29. Or with them in Hier. (51. 5.) Come,
let us join our selves to the Lord with a perpetual covenant, that shall not be
forgotten^ Or with Job, Though he slay me, yet will I put my trust in him.

We have all need thus to encourage our selves, to take up such resolutions as
these; for the heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; who
can know it? Ier. xvij. 1. Because the Lord searches the heart, to give every
man according to his way, and the fruit of his doings.

Hitherto I have spoken of Dixi and Custodiam in their Generals^ now I would
come to look upon them in these circumstances, which may not be omitted:
Wherein, 1. We may observe the tense, Dixi custodiam. David only promises that
he will do it, but shows not when; this may seem to countenance those, who
promise God fairly every day, yet do no more but promise. A common error,
wherein many trifle and spin out their life to no purpose. As Antigonus, (...),
always ready, but never doing; St. George always on horseback, but never rides:
so we (...), that will but do not. This error was far from David's thought.
Nor is the word it self dilatory, it puts not off till the time to come; it
binds him for the present. 1. It is a rule of the Canonists, Sponsalia per
verbum, etc. Persons contracted in words of the future, make the Contract good
for the present. 2. In the practice of Law and common Equity betwixt man and
man, every Obligation by which we bind our selves for the time to ^ome (if so
be the particular time be not expressly specified) binds us for the present, if
it be of money to be paid, or service to be performed. So here, he that
contracts with God (as David) Dixi custodiam, binds himself for the present;
and if he neglect any occasion, any time whatsoever, he has offended against
his Contract.
2. It is the person, Dixi custodiam. David puts it not upon Abiathar (the High
Priest) or any of his Prophets or Chaplains; but takes it as a duty, he will
perform himself, not by a proxy: for in these cases, every man must look to
himself, and amend his own ways. Kings and Priests, who have a general
oversight over your ways, are bound to give you warning and direct you. When
that is done, they are excused, you must (every one) lay to your hands, take
heed to your own ways.

In your Husbandry for the world, you are wont to say, The Master's foot does
soil the ground, The Master's eye does sat the horse; nothing so well done, as
that which the Master of the house looks to, posts not over to his servants.
Were you as wise for God as you are for the world, careful of the spiritual
husbandry of your souls, as that of your grounds and cattle, you would not so
much call upon us, (your Ministers, i. e. servants in this case) as take your
selves into your own hands, and then think your ways well husbanded, when your
own eyes see them. There is good use to be made of others eyes, for the
guidance of our ways; and they are wise men that will suffer their Seers to
tell them plainly what they think; yet (when all is done) every man must take
up custodiam in his own person.

The happy success of careful taking heed to your ways, consists not in our
Teaching, or reproving, but in your learning and amending.

3. The object. In general, My ways. In particular, That I offend not in my
tongue.



For therein the Prophet (it may be) had been overtaken; he had been
over-lavish in his language, given some offense with his tongue; and now he
resolved to redress all his ways, and that in special. And the naming of that
alone had included all.

1. St. James tells us, If any offend not in word, he is a perfect man, able to
bridle the whole body: In the judgment therefore of St. James, when David
purposes not to offend in word, he takes the immediate way to perfection, to
bridle the whole body, to overlook all his ways, to offend in nothing.

2. No one sin will well be cured, except all go out, and there be a general
reformation of all our ways. It was accounted a great cruelty in Haman, when
Mordecai had offended him, to wreck himself not only upon him, but upon the
whole Nation of the Jews. That which was cruelty in Haman, may be Religious
policy in us, if any one sin offend us, to let the whole Nation suffer for it.

It was a law amongst the Macedonians, if any one of the family had committed
Treason against the King, he was not to die alone, but all of the lineage and
kindred were to die with him, the better to secure the King; they thought fit
to remove all out of the way that might harbor any resolution of revenge.
Therefore well might David (having found treason against God) in the sin of his
tongue, think best to proceed according to the Macedonian Law, and remove the
whole family and lineage of sin: For sins are good-fellows, (...), go always in
droves and companies; and (if we leave any untouched) they are likely to
revoke, and call home their former sins again.

3. It is to no purpose to endeavor the removal of some one sin alone: For in
regard of Heaven, the loss of it, one sin does as much as a million. Therefore
when we go out against sin, we go out with the same commission that Saul did
against the Amalekites, one of these whom Saul spared, lived to cut his throat,
and executed that judgment upon Saul, which Saul neglected to do on him: So, if
we let but one sin alone, there may come a time when that one sin may ruin us.

Therefore let Dixi custodiam be of the extent it is here: 1. In the first
person. 2. To bind us for the present. 3. Over all our ways.


These three Circumstances show the meaning of the words.

And now since you know what they mean, what think you of taking them up for
your own? Can you find in your hearts thus to resolve? Will you try whether it
be possible to make it good or no? I showed (you last day) that the only way
to know whether it be possible, is to make trial your selves; and that you have
this for your comfort, that in other cases, by making of trial, many things
have been found possible, which till then many wise men thought impossible.

If other kind of trials have sped so well, why may not God give the like
success to this, which certainly is more pleasing to God.

Do ye rightly apprehend what I mean? I do not say it is possible for any man
to keep the whole law, and never offend. It is too late for you and me to make
trial of that; for we have all offended deeply; and without the Merits and
Mediation of Christ we are utterly lost. But this I say, When a man is in
David's case here, when he is brought to the knowledge of God, and his own
miserable estate, to the free pardon of great offenses that he has committed;
may he not then resolve for the time to come, as David does? May he not then
keep that resolution, not so as never to slip; but not to fall, and leave his
right way? Is he bound to think it impossible? shall he so discourage himself
from the happiest experiment in the world? I know many men hold it impossible,
and live accordingly; but I would have all under my charge to hold it possible,
and to live as they meant to prove it. Or (if you will needs think it
impossible) be persuaded to undertake it howsoever; for if you do your best,
and cannot effect it that endeavor will be highly prized.

Shall I speak plain? I imagine it is impossible; for I fear we have brought
our selves to that pass, that it comes not far short of impossibility for us to
do it. Yet why should we not venture upon impossibilities in this so good a
cause, as well as we do (of our own accord) in other cases? Is not the greatest
part of our lives spent in attempting things merely impossible? Petrarch. It a
se res habet, ad impossibilia studium omne conversum est. We would want
nothing, never be troubled, not be sick, not die, this all desire, this is
impossible: Why do we not as much desire not to sin, which is the only cause
of all our want, trouble, sickness, and death too? If you would be exempted
from them, little offended with them, take up this Dixi custodiam. If you will
be affrighted with this impossibility, you shall have enough of all the other.
Therefore among so many impossibilities, we undertake for our own fancy. Let us
attempt this one of perfect Christian cautelousness; especially since God
commands us, and David here undertakes the practice of it.

Certainly, either David saw some possibility in it, which we do not see; or
else he thought some impossible attempts, were not misbecoming us. And would
you but look a little to the Institution and Discipline of the ancient Monks,
or to the practice of our adversaries the Jesuits of our times, you would
wonder what strange examples you might find of the obedience of inferiors
toward their superiors, even in cases of apparent impossibilities.

If one of you which are fathers should bid your little children bring you that
which you knew were beyond his strength, only to try him; would you not
commend, reward his endeavor? And do you think your heavenly Father has not
as much love and respect unto his own children?

By this time (I hope) you are in charity with these words; with the main word
Custodiam, I will observe, I will take heed.

Now I will tell you what it is: It is a word of that singular weight and
moment, that it contains in it all the Christian art and wisdom, by which,
whatsoever the force and fraud of sin and hell can secretly suggest, or openly
oppose, is frustrated and defeated altogether.

If we surveigh and sum up all the forces which the Divil, Flesh, World, are
able to raise, those (...), Satan's deep unfathomed policies, (...), spiritual
juglings and cousenages, all devises and means whatsoever, by which he abuses
us, or we our selves; This one word, [ Custodiam] I will take heed, contains
that in it, which disannuls them all.

Galen observed it of the diseases of the body, (...), etc. To suppose there
were some one cure of all maladies, were extreme folly. Among the world, the
diseases that our frail bodies are subject unto, every one (if we will cure it)
must have a proper remedy; if we will prevent it, must have a proper Antidote.
Besides the difference from the temper, age, complexion, custom, trade, and
diet of the patient. But (in the cure of souls) though our spiritual diseases
be more and more dangerous; yet all these, if you would cure and remove them,
prevent and shun them, have but one remedy, antidote, and preservative. Would
you know what these are? The one is (...), Repentance; the other is Custodiam,
cautelousness. These two Simples, cheap and easy, growing in every man's
Garden, are universal medicines in all our spiritual diseases, the one curing,
the other preventing; the one lifting up when we are fallen, the other
supporting us that we fall not. All Gilead will yield no other balm but this.
We have not (as some Physicians have) a Box and a Box; one receipt for great
persons, and another for meaner: the spiritual cure of our souls admits of no
such partiality, but from the Scepter to the Spade, there is but one way to
prevent sin, Custodiam; cure sin committed, (...), Repent ye.

Now of these two, David here (like Mary in the Gospel) teaches you to make
choice of the better part. For let it not offend you, if I compare these two
great Christian virtues, Cautelousness. Repentance.
and not only compare, but much prefer the one before the other.

I know the doctrine of Repentance is a worthy lesson, the joy and comfort of
our souls, we drink it in with thirsty ears; yet (let me tell you) to be all
for it, is some wrong and impeachment to this Christian cautelousness and
wariness here commended. For as the ancient Romans were wont to use vomiting,
to procure them an appetite for farther eating; so it seems many Christians use
Repentance: When we have sur^eited and are sick of sin, by repentance we
disgorge, cast it up again; bibit, and vomit; sin and repent, repent and sin
again. Thus goes our life away. Polybius tells us, though man be generally
accounted the wisest of all creatures, yet some have thought him the foolishest
of all other: For the Fox will never return to the snare, which he has once
escaped; nor the Wolf to the pit, nor the Dog to the staff that has beaten
him; only Man will never be taught to beware: sed peccat fere semper in
iisdem, though he smart never so often, yet will he return to the same offense
and fault again. He that should well observe the follies of men, might more
pardonably take them to be utterly more devoid of memory, then Aristotle holds
it of Bees, so easily do we forget the danger of sin, (and being now driven of)
return to it again.

Now a great part of this our folly we owe to the doctrine of Repentance, as it
is commonly taught and understood. For as trusting to the help of the
Physicians, has overthrown the health of many, while they think they may use
excess, take their pleasures the more securely, because they see the remedy: So
it is to be feared, that relying upon the promises made to the repentant man,
has been the ruin and the overthrow of many a soul: For repentance is
physic, and therefore to be used sparingly, and with good manners, lest too
familiar use of it make it cease to be a duty, and a cause of presumption and
wantonness.

There is not any Doctrine, in the delivery whereof we ought to walk more
warily and wisely, then in the Doctrine of Repentance; so quickly may we make
that an invitation to offend, which was ordained as a Farewell; turn the remedy
of sin into an occasion of sinning. The discipline of the ancient Church was
never to admit any to public penance more then once, and if (after such kind
of penance) he offended scandalously again, like the Leper in the Law, he was
shut out of the camp, never to return unto the congregation.

Nay (in the Scriptures) we shall never find an example of Repentance upon
relapse and falling, but into sins once repented of. Do not think this fell out
by chance, but rather probably conclude from thence, either our Forefathers
durst not make trial of any such conclusion, and to make no practice of it; (or
if they did) yet it pleased not the holy Ghost that any such example should
stand upon record, lest peradventure it might prove a president to posterity;
most men being quick scholars at such kind of lessons.

Will you know whether all this tends? This is my meaning, It is better for you
to study health, [ Custodiam] then physic, [ Repentance.] Labor rather in
prevention, not to commit it again, then in repenting, the same remedies
afterward. Think of our Savior's counsel to one that he had cured, Behold,
thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. And indeed
repentance ever goes with this condition, Sin no more, etc. He that repents and
forsakes his sin, shall find mercy, (says the Wiseman.)

Now therefore, since Repentance at best is but a Remedy, the benefit of it
(except we manage it wisely) uncertain; the danger, if we use it too often, may
be great: Let us not suffer the hope of frequent Repentance to abuse us; for
this is but the cold comfort of a miserable man: But with our serious
repentance, let us take up this resolution as David did; for it is folly to
wound our selves, that we may need the Salve again. It is a good thing to seek
what we have lost, and this repentance does: but it is a thing of higher
excellency not to be of the lacking hand, but to enjoy still what we have. And
this the benefit of Cautelousness, [ Dixi custodiam.]

But leave we therefore this comparative discourse, and so come (in the second
place) to treat of this Virtue in it self.

Custodiam is but care, wariness, and he that has this one Art, needs no
other. The good providence and mercies of God appear in this, that propounding
a course of eternal life to men of all sorts, he has laid it down in such
terms, that nothing but negligence and uncautelousness can hazard it. Might he
not have done this in a more high and reserved manner, with respect to some
sorts and orders of men? If he had done so, the greatest part, I will not say
of mankind, but of the professors of Christianity, had perished, finally
perished. If he had required great knowledge, sharpness of wit, what had become
of slower spirits, and shallower capacities? But he says, Not many wise, not
many learned. And there is some reason for it, de facto, (as we may guess by
other cases.) For men of low abilities are more jealous of their actions, and
the jealousy makes them the more cautelous. And if they use the like caution
with their craftiest enemy the Divil, it must needs be custodiam, safety.

2. If God had required great strength, extraordinary abilities, and stoutness
of men, then the greatest part had perished, because of weaker temper: but he
rather chooses the weak things of the world to confound the strong.

Miscellanies.
Mr. HALES Confession of the TRINITY.
THe Sum of whatsoever either the Scriptures teach, or the Schools conclude
concerning the Doctrine of the TRINITY, is comprised in these few lines.

GOD is ONE; Numerically ONE; more ONE, then any single Man is One, if Unity
could suscipere magis and minus: Yet, GOD is so ONE, that he admits of
Distinction; and so admits of Distinction, that he still retains Unity.

As He is ONE, so we call Him GOD, the Deity, the Divine Nature, and other
Names of the same signification: As He is Distinguished, so we call Him
TRINITY; Persons, FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST.

In this TRINITY there is One Essence; Two Emanations; Three Persons, or
Relations; Four Properties; Five Notions.

[A Notion is that by which any Person is Known or Signified.]
The One Essence is GOD, which with this Relation, that it does Generate, or
Beget, makes the Person of the FATHER: the same Essence, with this Relation,
that it is Begotten, makes the Person of the SON: the same Essence, with this
Relation, that it Proceeds, makes the Person of the HOLY GHOST.

The Two Emanations are, to be Begotten; and to Proceed, or to be Breathed out:
The Three Persons are, FATHER, SON, and HOLY SPIRIT. The Three Relations are,
to Beget; to be Begotten; and, to Proceed, or to be Breathed out. The Four
Properties are; the First, Innascibility, and Inemanability; the Second, is to
Generate; these belong to the FATHER: the Third, is to be Begotten; and this
belongs unto the SON: the Fourth, is to Proceed, or to be Breathed out; and
this belongs unto the HOLY SPIRIT. The Five Notions are; First, Innascibility;
the Second, is to Beget; the Third, to be Begotten; the Fourth, Spiratio
Passiva, to be Breathed out; the Fifth, Spiratio Activa, or, to Breathe; and
this Notion belongs to the FATHER and the SON alike; for, Pater and Filius
spirant Spiritum Sanctum.

Hence it evidently follows, that he who acknowledges thus much, can never
possibly scruple the Eternal Deity of the Son of God.

If any man think this Confession to be Defecti, (for I can conceive no more in
this point necessary to be known) let him supply what he conceives be
deficient, and I shall thank him for his favor.

How we come to know the Scriptures to be the Word of God?
HOw come I to know that the Works which we call Livie's, are indeed his whose
name they bear? Has God left means to know the profane Writings of men? has
he left no certain means to know his own Records?

The first and outward means that brings us to the knowledge of these Books, is
the voice of the Church, notified to us by our Teachers and Instructors, who
first unclasp'd and opened them unto us, and that common duty which is exacted
at the hand of every learner: Oportet discentem credere. And this remaining in
us, peradventure is all the outward means, that the ordinary and plainer sort
of Christians know.

To those who are conversant among the Records of Antiquity, farther light
appears: To find the ancient Copies of Books, bearing these Titles, to find in
all Ages since their being written, the universal consent of all the Church,
still resolving it self upon these writings, as sacred and uncontrolable; these
cannot choose but be strong Motioners unto us, to pass our consent unto them,
and to conclude, that either these Writings are that which they are taken for,
or nothing left us from Antiquity is true. For whatsoever is that gives any
strength or credit to any thing of Antiquity left to posterity, whether it be
Writings and Records, or Tradition from hand to hand, or what things else
soever, they all concur to the authorizing of holy Scriptures, as amply as they
do to any other thing left unto the world.

Yea, but will some man reply, this proves indeed strongly that Moses and the
Prophets, that St. Matthew and St. Paul, etc. writ those Books, and about those
times which they bear show of, but this comes not home; for how proves this
that they are of God? If I heard St. Paul himself preaching, what makes me
believe him that his Doctrine is from God, and his words, the words of the holy
Ghost? For answer. There was no outward means to persuade the world at the
first rising of Christianity, that it is infallibly from God, Vide Basil, 313.
B. C.
but only Miracles, such as impossibly were naturally to be done. Had I not
done those things (says our Savior) which no man else could do, you had had
no sin: Had not the world seen those Miracles, which did unavoidably prove the
assistance and presence of a Divine power with those who first taught the will
of Christ, it had not had sin, if it had rejected them: For though the world by
the light of natural discretion, might easily have discovered, that that was
not the right way, wherein it usually walked; yet, that that was the true path,
which the Apostles themselves began to tread, there was no means undoubtedly to
prove, but Miracles; and if the building were at this day to be raised, it
could not be founded without Miracles. To our forefathers therefore, whose
ears first entertained the word of life, Miracles were necessary; and so they
are to us, but after another order: For as the sight of these Miracles did
confirm the doctrine unto them, so unto us the infallible records of them: For
whatsoever evidence there is, that the Word once began to be preached, the very
same confirms unto us that it was accompanied with Miracles and Wonders; so
that as those Miracles by being seen, did prove unanswerably unto our
forefathers the truth of the doctrine, for the confirmation of which they were
intended; so do they unto us never a whit less effectually approve it, by being
left unto us upon these Records; which if they fail us, then by Antiquity there
can be nothing left unto posterity which can have certain and undoubted oredit.
The certain and uncontrolable Records of Miracles, are the same to us the
Miracles are.

The Church of Rome, when she commends unto us the Authority of the Church in
dijudicating of Scriptures, seems only to speak of her self, and that, of that
part of her self which is at some time existent; whereas we, when we appeal to
the Church's testimony, content not our selves with any part of the Church
actually existent, but add unto it the perpetually successive testimony of the
Church in all Ages since the Apostles time, viz. since its first beginning; and
out of both these draw an argument in this question of that force, as that from
it not the subtilest disputer can find an escape; for who is it that can think
to gain acceptance and credit with reasonable men, by opposing not only the
present Church conversing in earth, but to the uniform consent of the Church in
all Ages.

So that in effect, to us of after-ages, the greatest, if not the sole outward
mean of our consent to holy Scripture, is the voice of the Church, (excepting
always the Copies of the Books themselves, bearing from their birth such or
such names) of the Church, I say, and that not only of that part of it, which
is actually existent at any time, but successively of the Church ever since the
time of our blessed Savior: for all these testimonies which from time to time
are left in the Writings of our forefathers (as almost every Age ever since
the first birth of the Gospel, has by God's providence left us store) are the
continued voice of the Church, witnessing unto us the truth of these Books, and
their Authority well: but this is only fides humano judicio and testimonio
ac^quaesita; what shall we think of fides infusa? of the inward working of the
holy Ghost, in the consciences of every beleiver? How far it is a perswader
unto us of the Authority of these Books, I have not much to say: Only thus
much in general, that doubtless the holy Ghost does so work in the heart of
every true Beleiver, that it leaves a farther assurance, strong and sufficient,
to ground and stay it self upon: But this, because it is private to every one,
and no way subject to sense, is unfit to yield argument by way of dispute, to
stop the captious curiosities of wits disposed to wrangle; and by so much the
more unfit it is, by how much by experience we have learned, that men are very
apt to call their own private conceit, the Spirit. To oppose unto these men to
reform them, our own private conceits under the name likewise of the Spirit,
were madness; so that to judge upon presumption of the Spirit in private, can
be no way to bring either this or any other controversy to an end.

If it should please God at this day to add any thing more unto the Canon of
faith, it were necessary it should be confirmed by Miracles.

Concerning the Lawfulness of Marriages betwixt First Cousins, or
Cousin-Germans.
September. 8. 1630. Worthy Sir,
IT is too great an Honor which you have done me, to require my judgment (if
at least I have any judgment) in a matter in which your self, both by reason of
your skill and degree, cannot choose but over-weigh me: yet such as it is, since
you are pleased to require it, lo, I present it to you, and wish it may be for
your service.

IN Marriages, two things are most especially to be considered, Convenience,
and Affection: Convenience, thereby to advance, or otherwise settle our Estates
to our content: Affection, because of the singular content we take in the
enjoying of what we love. Now because these Two are great parties, and sway
much in the manage of our Temporal Actions, by common consent and practice of
all men, they freely take their course, fave only there where the Public Laws
of God or Men have given them some check and inhibition, for the propagation of
Mutual Love and Acquaintance among men. And for avoiding of Confusion in Blood,
God and Men have jointly enacted, that it shall not not be lawful for us to
make our commodity, or place our affection by way of Marriage within certain
Degrees of Propinquity and Kindred: but this was with some restraint. For as
St. Augustine tells us, Fuit autem antiquis Patribus religiosa cura number ipsa
propinquitas se paulatim propaginum ordinibus dirimens longius abiret, and
propinquitas esse desisteret; eam nondum long positam rursus Matrimonii
vinculo Colligare and quodammodo revocare fugientem. Now the question is, How
far in the Degrees of Propinquity this restraint does reach? and where we may
begin to couple and lock again?

For the opening of which Quaery, let us a little consider in general of all
kinds of Propinquity, so shall we the better find, where we may safely begin.

All Degrees of Propinquity amongst which Moses may be supposed to seek a Wife,
are either of Mothers and Daughters; or Aunts and Nieces; or Sisters and
Cousins. Now as in the Ascending Line of Mothers, I may not marry my Mother; so
can I not marry my Grandmother, nor Great-grandmother, and so infinitely
upward: Insomuch as if Eve were now alive, and a Widow, no man living could
marry her, because all men are her sons. In the Descending Line of Daughters,
as I may not marry my daughter, so neither my Grandchild, nor Great-grandchild,
and so infinitely downwards. Again, in the Ascending Line of Aunts, I may not
marry my next Aunt, so nor my Great-Aunt, nor her Aunt, nor hers, and so
upwards in infinitum. In the Descending Line of Neices, as I cannot marry my
first Neice, so nor my second, nor third, nor fourth, unto the thousandth
Generation, because I am properly Uncle to them All, how far soever distant in
Descent. As for marriage with Sisters, notwithstanding that the immediate sons
of Adam; because God created only one Woman, were constrained to marry their
Sisters; yet, ever since, by General consent of all Nations, it has been
counted Incestuous. So then, all Marriage with Mothers, Daughters, Neices,
being expressly prohibited; if Moses will marry within his Kindred, he must seek
his Wife amongst his Cousins.

Now here is the Question, Where he may first adventure to make his choice? If
we look to ancient Laws of God and Men, we shall find, that in any Degree
whatsoever marriage was permitted, beginning even from the First-Cousins, or
Cousin-germans. For if we look into Moses, we shall find no restraint imposed
upon Cousin-Germans; and how ever some have pleaded, that there is a Degree
farthen off prohibited, and therefore by consequence this must be taken for
prohibited: this (as hereafter I shall make plain in the sequel of my
Discourse) is but a mere mistake. And not only my self, whose insight into
matters may peradventure not be great: but those whose sight is far quicker
then mine, could see in the Law of God no prejudice to the marriage of
Cousin-Germans. For not only Zanchy, 18 Levit.
Calvin, in Lib. de Repudiis.
Beza, in Iudicum. cap. 1. and Matthew. c. 4.
Bucer, de Conjugio.
Melancthon, in a word, all the Divines of the Reformed Churches, of whose
judgment and learning we have any opinion, do grant, that First-Cousins may
couple, any thing in God's Law notwithstanding, I must confess my ignorance.

I know not any of our Reformed Divines that have written, that have thought
otherwise. Indeed Calvin having first acknowledged, that the Law of God does
not impeach it; yet gives advice in regard of the scandal the Churches might
suffer, to abstain from Marriage in that Degree; and so accordingly the
Churches of Geneva, of the Palatinate, Misnia, Thuringia, and Saxony, have
severally by their several Constitutions prohibited it. But this touches not
the case; for I perceive the question is of Second Cousins, unto whom those
Churches (which forbid the First Degree) expressly give leave; for I find it
recorded, Zepper. de Lege Mosaic. l. 4. c. 9.
In tertio aequalis lineae gradu permitti possunt conjugia: where that those
words, in tertio gradu, deceive you not, and make you to think that not Second,
but Third Cousins are permitted to marry, you must understand that Second
Cousins are in the Third degree of Kindred, and Third Cousins in the Fourth,
and so forward, by the Account of all Lawyers; which that you may see, and
because in my ensuing Discourse I shall have occasion to refer unto it, I will
set down some part of the Stem, so much as shall concern our purpose.



By this rude Draught you may see, that if you count the Degrees of Kindred
betwixt Second Cousins, you shall find them six Degrees distant by the Civil
Law, and in the third Degree of the Canon Law. For in the Civil Law the Rule
is, Quot sunt personae tot sunt Gradus stipite dempto, [Stipitem] we call him
that stands at the Top, and in whom the Cognation first unites, who here is my
Grandfather. But, in respect of the Second Cousins, here is Great-grandfather:
If then you begin with Second Cousins, and count about till you come to Second
Cousins again, leaving out the Grandfather, you shall find them to be six
persons, and so distant six Degrees in Kindred. Now two Degrees in the Civil
Law, make but one Degree in the Canon Law, where the Rule is, that in Linea
aequali quoto gradu distant a stipite, toto distant inter se: By which you see
that Second Cousins, being in the Third Degree from the Grandfather, they are
three Degrees distant from each other. I have stood a little upon this, for
this cause, that if any one should perchance put you off with the Authority of
the Churches which I have mentioned, you might not be deceived through the
equivocation which seems to lurk in those words, in Tertio Gradu.

But to return to our question of Cousin Germans, as there is nothing in the
Law of God which forbids marriage betwixt them, so accordingly was the practice
of God's own people; for so we read that the daughters of Zelophehad were
married to their Uncle's Sons; and Caleb gives his Daughter Achsah in marriage
to his Brother's Son; and sundry instances more in this kind might be given.
Now that those things should be done by dispensation and permission only
(which I see is pleaded by some men) I know no warrant nor reason for it: so
that what may be done in this case by the Law of God, I think is out of
question.

Let us see a little what the light of Nature taught the Gentiles. Amongst them
the wisest and most potent were the Romans, whose Laws have long been esteemed
for the soundest and best, by the general approbation of the most and greatest
Kingdoms and Commonwealths in Europe.

Now amongst these, the Romans both by their Law and practice did warrant
Marriages between First Cousins; their Law is plain, and thus we read it in
their Pandects, about the beginning of the 23. 6. Si nepotem ex filio and nepta
ex altero filio in potestate habeam nuptias inter cas me solo authore contrahi
posse: Pomponius scribit, and verum est. This one Text is sufficient, though I
could quote many other Testimonies out of their Law concerning this kind of
Marriage.

What their practice was, these instances which ensue will be sufficient to
show: Anciently under the first Kings, Dionysius Halycarnasseus tells us, that
two daughters of Servius Tullius were married to Lucius and Arnus their
Cousin-germans, Nephews to Tarquinius Priscus. Livie in his 42. 6. brings in
one Spurius Ligustinus reporting, that his father had given him for wife his
Uncle's daughter; and thus he speaks to his own praise and commendation, as it
will appear, if you please to peruse the place. Tully in his Orat. pro
Cluentio, tells us, that Cluentia was married to Melius her Cousin-german: and
erant hae Nuptiae (says he) plaenae dignitatis plaenae concordiae: which I
think he would never have said, had their lien upon such marriages any note of
infamy. Augustus the Emperor gave his daughter Iulia in marriage to Marcellus,
nephew to Augustus by his sister Octavia: And Quintilian tells us, that his son
(whose immature death he does bewail) was designed, when he came to age, to
marry his Uncle's daughter; and Marcus Brutus was married to his Cousin-german,
as Plutarch relates.

Out of this heap of instances it appears, that in the Roman Commonwealth
throughout all Ages, and amongst all sorts of people, Marriages between
First-Cousins ran uncontrolled: The first that gave restraint unto them was
Theodosius the Great, which Law of his is yet to be seen in that Book of his
Laws, called Codex Theodosianus. But this Law continued not long, for his own
sons, Arcadius and Honorius quickly reversed it; and in leiu of it made this
Law, which is extant in the Book called Iustinian's Code, and stands for good
Law amongst the Civilians at this day, Celebrandis inter consobrinos
matrimoniis licentia legis hujus salubritate indulta est, ut rovocata prisci
juris authoritate, restrictisque calumniarum fomentis, matrimonium inter
consobrinos habeatur legitimum, sive ex duobus fratribus, sive ex dual us
sororibus, sive ex fratre and sorore nati sunt: and ex eo matrimonio editi
legitimi and suis patribus successores habeantur. Thus stood the case
concerning those Marriages, until the Bishops of Rome began to grow great, and
took upon them to make Laws: For then, whether to make way for Dispensations,
whereby to get money, or for what other By-respects, I know not; not only First
and Second cousins, but all Cousins until the seventh Generation, were expressly
prohibited to marry mutually: till at length the Bishop of Rome freed the three
latter Degrees, and prohibited marriage only to Cousins in four Descents: and
so till this day among those that acknowledge the superiority of that See, all
marrying within four Degrees, except it be by Dispensation, is utterly
forbidden.

And if it be lawful for me to speak what I think, I verily suppose, that not
from any reason, but only by reason of the long prevailing of the Common Law,
Marriages betwixt near Cousins were generally forborne. And from hence arose a
scruple in the minds of many men, concerning the lawfulness of such Marriages:
But all cause of such scruple amongst us is long since taken away. For at what
time we cast off the yoke of the Bishop of Rome in the 33 year of King Hen. 8.
a Statute was Enacted in Parliament, which was again confirmed in the first of
Queen Elizabeth, that no degrees of kindred should be forbidden Marriage, but
only such as were set down in the Levitical Law, and amongst the degrees
specified in that Act as lawful (if my memory fail me not) Cousin-germans are
expressly mentioned.

To sum up all then what hitherto has been said, What reason have we to doubt
of the lawfulness of that, which the Law of God permits, the people of God
practiced, the best and learnedest Divines have acknowledged, the wisest
amongst the Gentiles in their Laws and Practices have approved, and our own
Municipal Laws, under which we live, expressly allow.

This had been enough to satisfy any gain-sayer whatsoever. And indeed I had
ended here, but that when your letters came to my hands, there was delivered
with them a Schedule, containing reasons persuading all such kind of Marriages
to be utterly unlawful. Concerning the authority of which Discourse, to profess
what I think, I take him for a very pious and zealous man; and I earnestly
desire of him, if ever he chance to be acquainted with what I write, to
conceive of me as one who delights not in opposition, except it be for the
Truth, at least in opinion. My advise to him is to add Knowledge to his Zeal,
and to call again to account his reasons, and more diligently to examine them.
The strength of his discourse is not so much his Reason, as his Passion, a
thing very prevalent with the common sort, who as they are seldom capable of
strength of reason, so are they easily carried away with passionate discourse.
This thing ought to be a warning to us of the Clergy, to take heed how we deal
with the people by way of passion, except it be there where our proofs are
sound. Passion is a good Dog, but an ill Shepherd. Tortum digna sequi potius
quam ducere funem; it may perchance follow well, but it can never lead well. I
was much amazed to read his resolution of preaching in this case so earnestly,
as to break here is, or his heart (who desire to marry) or his own, or all -- He
that suffered himself thus far to be transported with affection, ought to have
furnished himself with stronger reasons then any I here can find: But I will
let his passion go, for to contend with it were infinite; for Passion has
Tongue and clamor enough, but no Ears. The Reasons, so many as I think require
answer, I will take up in order as they lie in the Paper. And first, I find one
phrase of speech, which is very predominant, and runs almost through the veins
of the Discourse; it is this,

That Christians loath, Christians abhor, men, women, and children cry out
against such kind of Marriages. But who are those Christians of whom he speaks?
If he means the better sort of Learned and Judicious Divines, he is certainly
deceived, for I have showed already the contrary; and let him for any
information, if he can, produce for himself some one Protestant Learned Divine.
If he mean some of the ordinary sort: I answer, it is the fault of their Guides,
who ought better to have informed them. And whereas toward the latter end of
the Discourse, we are told of a dying woman, afflicted in conscience, because
she had married her Cousin: First, I ask, of what weight the judgment of a
silly woman is? Secondly, I answer, that this proves not the thing to be
unlawful. Now let our Acts be what they will, good or bad, yet if we do them,
supposing them to be unlawful, we sin. It is a Ruled Case amongst the
Canonists, Conscientia erronea ligat habentem, He that does a good action,
taking it to be unlawful, to him it is unlawful. If therefore against her
conscience (though peradventure misinformed) she married her Cousin, she
deserved the torment of mind; and yet Marriage between Cousin-germans may be
lawful enough. Wherefore I pray you advise those, concerning whom this question
is proposed, that if they find in themselves any doubt concerning the
lawfulness of the action, they forbear to attempt it, until all scruple be
removed. But I see that the main foundation of this discourse is laid in these
words of Moses -- You shall not approach to any that is near of kin, to uncover
her nakedness: where by near of kin, First, and Second Cousins amongst the rest
are thought to be meant. For answer to which, we say, That the enumeration of
particulars (which Moses in that place makes) is a sufficient comment upon
those words, and those who are reckoned up expressly together with all others,
in whom the same reason is found, are to be esteemed for near of Kin, and
besides them no other; I say those in whom the same reason is found. Because
some Degrees there are, which are not mentioned by Moses, and yet are confessed
to be prohibited. It is not forbidden a woman to marry her mother's sister's
husband: yet it is not lawful; for the man is forbidden to marry his father's
brother's widow. Now the samo reason is there betwixt a man and his father's
brother's widow, which is betwixt a woman and her mother's sister's husband,
and therefore both are understood as alike forbidden, though both be not alike
expressed. But for a full answer to these words, I refer the Author of this
Discourse to Francisc. Hottoman, a learned Civilian, and an earnest Protestant,
who in his disputation, de jure Nuptiarum, cap. 6. has these words, Qui vero
propinquorum numero sint non cujusque hominis nati sed solius dei judicium est,
qua de causa eadem lege illos ordine nominatim enumerat ut facile intelligatur,
quos non enumerat, propinquorum numero habendos non esse, quoniam ut dici
solet, quod le ge prohibitoria vetitum non est per missum intelligitur.

Now the better to work us to a conceit, that such marriages are unlawful, the
examples of the Gentiles are called to help; and we are informed that Plutarch,
a grave Writer, tells us of one who was greatly endangered by marrying his
Cousin-german; certainly it was great want of examples, which moved the
Gentleman to make choice of this: A worse for his purpose he could not easily
have found. For indeed it is true, that Plutarch tells us, that some one ( who,
or when, he tells not) was publicly questioned for it; but withal he tells
us, that he was absolved, and a Law made, that for ever after no man should be
questioned for so doing. More of these examples were not likely much to
prejudice our cause. For certainly they that absolved the party, and made a
Law, that no man ever after should be molested on the like occasion, in
likelihood could do it, upon no reason, but upon conceit, that the accusation
was founded upon an error.

But what the authority of Plutarch cannot do, that peradventure the judgment
of St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, St. Gregory, and no less then Ten Councils, will
effect; for all these are brought and urged to discountenance all marriage
betwixt near Cousins. First, for St. Ambrose and St. Austine, no marvel if they
speak suspiciously concerning this kind of Marriages, since they lived at the
time when the Law made by Theodosius in prejudice of them was as yet
unrepealed: Indeed St. Ambrose would make us believe, that such Marriages are
against the Law of God; but in that point he was deceived. St. Austine speaks
more cautelously concerning this kind of marriages, and acknowledging, that by
the Law of God they were permitted, observes, that they had been but lately
prohibited by humane Authority. And as for St. Gregory, it is well known that
the Bishops of Rome had already began to enlarge their Phylacteries, and taken
upon them to make Laws fa^ more then they needed: and now looking bigger then
their Fellows, All Councils, especially in the West, were made with some
respect to what they had decreed. No marvel therefore if so many Councils are
brought to cry down Marriages with First and Second Cousins, which the Popes
had already discountenanced; we should rather much have marvelled if any
Council had appeared in favor of them. All therefore that these Councils have
said in this point, is in a sort to pass for nothing else but the will of the
Bishop of Rome, to which how much we are to attribute, I leave to the Author
of the Discourse to judge. And should we attribute any thing to St. Gregory,
his greatest Authority makes nothing against our cause: For he in his Answer to
Austin our English Prelate, forbids the Laws only against First Cousins,
against Second and Third he has no quarrel; nay, his words sound quite
contrary, Vnde necesse est, says he, ut in tertia, which is the case vel in
quarta generatione, Fideles sibi licite Conjungantur. So that this Authority of
St. Gregory may well enough return to the place where it was taken, for any
harm it is likely to do. The same may be said to St. Ambrose and St. Austine,
that in the case they may be admitted without any danger. For what they say
concerns only First Cousins, which falls a Degree short of the case.

There is yet one reason of some consequence remains. For we are informed, that
it must needs be that Marriage betwixt First Cousins is forbidden, because a
Degree farther off is forbidden. For this purpose we are asked, Is not thy
Father's Brother's Widow farther off, then thy Father's Brother's Daughter? I
answer No; for my Father's Brother's Widow is my Aunt; but my Father's
Brother's Daughter is my Cousin German; but my Aunt is nearer to me then my
Cousin. Look but upon the Draught of Degrees which I have before drawn, and if
you count from Me to my Father's Brother, (which is the place of my Aunt) you
shall find but three Degrees; but from Me to my Cousin-german, or First-Cousin,
you shall find four Degrees. And whereas we are told, that to make amends for
this we must take notice, that my Uncle's Widow is tied to me only by outward
affinity, but my Cousin-German is near to me by blood and consanguinity. I
answer, that the difference betwixt Affinity and Consanguinity in this place
helps not at all: It is confessed, that look what degree of Consanguinity is
forbidden, the same degree of Affinity likewise is forbidden, if any be
contracted: For as I may not marry my Mother, so I may not marry my Father's
Widow; my Daughter, and my Son's Wife; my Neice, and my Nephew's Wife, are all
alike forbidden to me. And by the same Analogy, as I may not marry my Aunt, so
I may not marry my Uncle's Widow. Yet to help the lameness of this reason we
are told, (but not for news I trow, for who knew it not?) that in
Consanguinity, some degrees further removed are excluded marriage; for
instance, my Brother's Grandchildren to the Fourth and Fifth Generation: yet
all this wind blows no corn; for it is already granted, that I am excluded the
whole Line of my Neices, not only to the Fourth and Fifth, but to all
Generations possible. And here the Line of Neices suffers the same which the
Line of Mothers, of Aunts, of Daughters does, which are wholly excluded in the
furthest degree imaginable; so that the total exclusion of Neices proves not
the marriage of First and Second Cousins unlawful; much less does the exclusion
of them to the Fourth and Fifth Generation: So that any Law of God, or sound
Reason notwithstanding, Marriage betwixt First Cousins may very well pass for
lawful. But whereas some of the Ancients, and likewise some of the Modern
Churches, out of scrupulosity, have excluded marriage betwixt First Cousins;
yet neither any of the Ancients, nor any Churches at this day that I know ( the
Church of Rome only excepted) have prejudiced the marriage of Second Cousins:
so that whosoever they be that marry in that degree, if themselves be persuaded
of the lawfulness of their Action, they have no cause to doubt of the Blessing
of God upon them and their posterity.

That which remains of the Discourse yet untouched, is of no great weight,
though of some heat; for indeed it is nothing else but Rhetorical and
passionate amplification, and to return Answer to it were but to lose my
labor: If this which I have done give you content, I have my desire. Only
thus much I request of you for my pains, that you will cause your Amanuensis,
to transcribe a copy of my Letters, and at your leisure send it me. For whereas
I was long since desired to deliver my self in this point, in the behalf of a
great Person of this Land, who is now with God, I kept no copy of my
Meditations, by which error I was now as far to seek as ever, which was the
cause which made me slower in returning Answer to your Letters. This courtesy,
if you shall be pleased to grant me, you shall for ever oblige unto you,

Your true Friend and Servant, JOHN HALES.

The Method of Reading Profane History.
IN perusal of History, first, provide you some Writers in Chronology, and
Cosmography. For if you be ignorant of the Times and Places, when and where the
things you read were done, it cannot choose but breed confusion in your reading,
and make you many times grossly to slip and mistake in your discourse. When
therefore you set to your Book, have by you Helvicus his Chronology; and a Map
of the Country in which you are conversant; and repair unto them to acquaint
you with time and place, when, and where you are. If you be versing the Ancient
Histories, then provide you Ptolomy's Maps, or Ortelius his Conatus
Geographici: if the latter, then some of the Modern Cards.

As for Method of Reading History, note, that there are in Story two things
especially considerable. First, the Order of the Story it self: and secondly,
Moral, or Statical observations, for common life and practice.

For the latter of these, there needs no method in reading; all the method is
in digesting your reading, by bringing it into Heads or Common places, or
Indices, or the like. For in this kind, read what Books, and in what order ye
list, it matters not; so your Notes may be in some such order as may be useful
for you. For the former, that is the course and order of the Story; The order
of reading ought to be the same with the order of the things themselves; what
was first done, that is to be read in the first place; what was next, in the
next place, and so forward; the succession and order of time and reading being
the same. This if you mean to observe exactly (which I think it is not so
necessary for you to do) you must range your Authors according to the times,
wherein the things they writ were acted, and in the same order read them.

But before you come to read the acts of any people: as those that intend to go
to Bowls, will first see and veiw the ground upon which they are to play; so it
shall not be amiss for you, first, to take a general veiw of that ground, which
you mean more particularly to traverse, by reading some short Epitome. So, ere
you read the Roman Story, (for that way you mean your studies shall bend)
first, read carefully L. Florus, who briefly continues the story from Romulus
till Augustus, shut the Temple of Ianus: And if you would yet go lower, add
then unto Florus, Eutropius his Breviarium; who from the same point brings the
Story unto Iovianus the Emperor. This will give you a general taste of your
business, and add light unto particular Authors.

This done, then take Livie in hand. Now because Livie is very much broken and
imperfect, and parts of him lost; it may be questioned, whether were better to
read Livie throughout, bawking his imperfections, before you meddle with any
other? or when you come to any imperfection, to leave him, and supply his wants
by intercalation of some other Author, and so resume him into your hands
again, toties quoties? For answer, Were it your purpose exactly to observe the
course of the Story, it were not amiss where Livie fails you, before you go to
his next Books, to supply the defect out of some other Authors: but since this
is not that you principally intend, but some other thing; and again, because
variety of Authors may trouble you, it will be better for you to read Livie
throughout, without interruption. When you have gone him through, then, if you
please, you may look back, and take a veiw of his imperfections, and supply
them out of some other Authors, partly Latin, as Iustine, Salust, Caesar's
Commentaries, Hirtius, Velleius Paterculus: partly Greek, as Polybius,
Plutarch, Dionysius, Halycarnasseus, Appianus, Alexandrinus, Dion Cassius: out
of which Authors you may reasonably supply whatsoever is wanting in Livie.

Having thus brought the Story to the change of the Empire, you must now begin
another course; and first you must take in hand Suetonius Tranquillus, who
being carefully perused, your way lies open to the reading of our Politician's
great Apostle Tacitus. Now the same infelicity has befallen him, which before
I noted in Livie: for as this, so that is very imperfect, and broken, a great
part both of his Annals and Histories being lost. And as I counseled you for
Livie, so do I for Tacitus, that you read him throughout, without intermingling
any other Author; and having gone him through, in what you shall see him
imperfect, Dion Cassius, or his Epitomizer Xiphiline, will help you out: though
by reason of your fore-reading of Suetonius, you shall find your self, for a
good part of the Story, furnished before hand.

And thus are you come to the Reign of Nerva, where Suetonius and Tacitus.
ended; hitherto to come is a reasonable task for you yet.

If you shall desire to know the State and Story afterward till Constantine's
death, and the Division of the Empire, or farther, to the fall of the Western
Empire; let me understand your mind, and I will satisfy you.

For the Editions of those Authors hitherto mentioned; your choice is best of
those, whom either Lipsius, or Gruterus, or Causabon have set forth: though if
you be careful to buy fair Books, you can scarcely choose amiss; your Greek
Authors, if you list not to trouble your self with the Language, you shall
easily find in Latin sufficient for your use. Only Plutarch, what ever the
matter is, has no luck to the Latin, and therefore I would advise you either
to read him in French, or in English. But as for Tacitus, the chief Cock in the
Court-basket; it is but meet you take special good advise in reading of him:
Lipsius, Savile, Pichena, and others, have taken great pains with him in
emaculating the Text, in settling the Reading, opening the Customs, expounding
the Story, etc. and therefore you must needs have recourse unto them; yet this
in only Critical, and not Courtly Learning: Tacitus for your use requires
other kind of Comments. For since he is a Concise, Dense, and by repute a very
Oraculous Writer, almost in every line pointing at some State-Maxim: it had
been a good employment for some good Wit, to have expounded, proved,
exemplified at large, what he does for the most part only but intimate.
Something our Age has attempted in this kind, though to little purpose.
Gruterus has collected certain places here and there, collected out of him:
and Scipio An^mirati has glossed him in some places according to the
shallowness of the new Italian Wits. But Annibal Scotus, Groom of the Chamber
to Sixtus Quintus, has desperately gone through him all, whom I would wish you
to look upon, not for any great good you shall reap by him (for he is the worst
that ever I read) only you shall see by that which he has with great
infelicity attempted, what kind of Comment it is, which if it were well
performed, would be very acceptable to us.

From the order of Reading, we come to the Excerpta, and to such things as we
observe and gather in our reading. Here are two things to be marked: First, the
matters and things which we collect; Secondly, the manner of observing,
gathering, registring them in our paper-books for our speedy use.

To omit all that which belongs to the style and language wherein your Author
writes, in which I suppose you mean not much to trouble your self; matters
observable in History, may be all ranked under three heads; First, there is the
Story it self, which usually we gather by Epitomizing it. Secondly, there are
Miscellanea, such as are the Names and Genealogies of Men; descriptions of
Cities, Hills, Rivers, Woods, etc. Customs, Offices, Magistrates; Prodigies;
certain quaint observations, as who was the first Dictator,? when the Romans
first began to use Shipping? or to coin gold? what manner of Moneys the
Ancients used? their manner of War and Military Instruments; and an infinite
multitude of the like nature. Thirdly, there are Moralia.

For the first, you need not trouble your self about it, it is already done to
your hand. For there is almost no story of note, whereof there is not some
Epitome, as good as any you can frame of your own. Indeed, if you did intend
any exact knowledge of History, it were good you did this your self, though it
were Actum agere: Because what we do our selves, sticks best in our memories,
and is most for our use. But since your aim is at something else, you may spare
your own, and make use of others labors. The second Head is pleasant, but is
merely Critical and Scholastical, and so the less pertinent to you, and
therefore I shall not need to speak any more of it. The Third, which I called
Morals, is that Penelope which you must woo; under this I comprehend all Moral
Sentences and Common Places, all not able examples of Justice, of Religion,
etc. Apothegins, Vafre and s^mulanter dicta and facta; Civil stratagems and
plots to bring ends about: censures upon men's persons and actions:
considerations upon men's natures and dispositions: all things that may serve
for proof or disproof, illustration or amplification of any Moral place:
considerations of the circumstances of actions, the reasons why they prove
successful; or their errors, if they prove unfortunate: As in the second
Punick War, why Annibal still prevailed by hastening his actions; Fabius, on the
contrary, by delay. And this indeed is one of the special profits that comes by
History. And therefore I have always thought Polybius (might we have him
perfect) one of the best that ever wrote Story. For whereas other Historians
content themselves, to touch and point at the true reasons of Events in civil
business; Polybius, when he has Historically set down an action worthy
consideration, leaves it not so, but reveiws it, insists, and, as it were,
comments upon it, considers all the circumstances that were of any force in the
manage of it; and contents not himself, as it were, to cast its water, but
looks into its bowels, and shows where it is strong, and where diseased.
Wherefore I would have you well acquaint your self with him, and especially
with those passages I now spoke of, that they may be patterns to you to do the
like, which that you may with greater assurance and profit do, make special
account of those who wrote the things of their own times, or in which
themselves were Agents, especially if you find them to be such as durst tell
the truth. For as it is with Painters, who many times draw Pictures of fair
Women, and call them Helen, or Venus; or of great Emperors, and call them
Alexander, or Caesar; yet we know they carry no resemblance of the persons
whose names they bear: So, when men write and decipher actions, long before
their time, they may do it with great wit and elegancy, express much politic
wisdom, frame very beautiful pieces; but how far they express the true
countenance and life of the actions themselves, of this it were no impiety to
doubt: unless we were assured they drew it from those, who knew and saw what
they did.

One thing more, ere I leave this Head, I will admonish you of. It is a common
Scholical error to fill our papers and Note-books with observations of great
and famous events, either of great Battles, or Civil Broiles and contentions.
The expedition of Hercules his offspring for the recovery of Peloponnese, the
building of Rome, the attempt of Regulus against the great Serpent of Bagradas;
the Punick Wars, the ruin of Carthage, the death of Caesar, and the like. Mean
while things of ordinary course and common life gain no room in our
Paper-books. Petronius wittily and sharply complained against Scholemasters in
his times, Adolescentulos in Scholis stultissimos fieri, quia nihil ex iis quae
in usu habemus, aut audiunt aut vident, sed piratas cum catenis in littore
stantes and tyrannicos edicta scribentes, quibus imperent filiis, ut patrum
suorum capita praecidant, sed responsa in pestilentia data ut virgins tres aut
plures immolentur; in which he wisely reproves the error of those, who
training up of youth in the practice of Rhetoric, never suffered them to
practice their wits in things of use, but in certain strange supralunary
arguments, which never fell within the sphere of common action. This complaint
is good against diverse of those, who travel in History. For one of the greatest
reasons that so many of them thrive so little, and grow no wiser men, is,
because they slight things of ordinary course, and observe only great matters
of more note, but less use. How does it benefit a man who lives in peace, to
observe the Art how Caesar managed wars? or by what cunning he aspired to the
Monarchy? or what advantages they were that gave Scipio the day against
Hannibal? These things may be known, not because the knowledge of these things
is useful, but because it is an imputation to be ignorant of them; their
greatest use for you being only to furnish out your discourse. Let me
therefore advise you in reading, to have a care of those discourses which
express domestic and private actions, especially if they be such, wherein your
self purposes to venture your fortunes. For if you rectify a little your
conceit, you shall see that it is the same wisdom, which manages private
business, and State affairs, and that the one is acted with as much folly and
ease, as the other. If you will not believe men, then look into our Colleges,
where you shall see, that I say not the plotting for an Headship, (for that is
now become a Court-business) but the contriving of a Bursership of twenty
nobles a year, is many times done with as great a portion of suing, siding,
supplanting, and of other Court-like Arts, as the gaining of the Secretary's
place; only the difference of the persons it is, which makes the one Comical,
the other Tragical. To think that there is more wisdom placed in these specious
matters, then in private carriages, is the same error, as if you should think
there were more Art required to paint a King, then a Country Gentleman:
whereas our Dutch Pieces may serve to confute you, wherein you shall see a cup
of Rhenish-wine, a dish of Radishes, a brass Pan, an Holland Cheese, the
Fishermen selling Fish at Scheveling, or the Kitchen-maid spitting a loin of
Mutton, done with as great delicacy and choiceness of Art, as can be expressed
in the Delineation of the greatest Monarch in the world.

From the order of Reading, and the matters in Reading to be observed, we come
to the method of observation. What order we are for our best use to keep in
entering our Notes into our Paper-Books.

The custom which has most prevailed hitherto, was common placing a thing at
the first Original very plain and simple; but by aftertimes much increased,
some augmenting the number of the Heads, others inventing q^^^ter forms of
disposing them: till at length Common-place-books became like unto the Roman
Breviarie or Missal. It was a great part of Clerk-ship to know how to use them.
The Vastness of the Volumes, the multitude of Heads, the intricacy of
disposition, the pains of committing the Heads to memory, and last, of the
labor of so often turning the Books to enter the observations in their due
places, are things so expensive of time and industry, that although at length
the work comes to perfection, yet it is but like the Silver Mines in Wales, the
profit will hardly quit the pains. I have often doubted with my self, whether
or no there were any necessity of being so exactly Methodical. First, because
there has not yet been found a Method of that Latitude, but little reading
would furnish you with some things, which would fall without the compass of it.
Secondly, because men of confused, dark and clowdy understandings, no beam or
light of order and method can ever rectify; whereas men of clear
understanding, though but in a mediocrity, if they read good Books carefully,
and note diligently, it is impossible but they should find incredible profit,
though their Notes lie never so confusedly. The strength of our natural memory,
especially if we help it, by revising our own Notes; the nature of things
themselves, many times ordering themselves, and tantum non, telling us how to
range them; a mediocrity of care to see that matters lie not too Chaos-like,
will with very small damage save us this great labor of being
over-superstitiously methodical. And what though peradventure something be
lost, Exilis domus est etc. It is a sign of great poverty of Scholarship, where
every thing that is lost, is missed; whereas rich and well accomplished
learning is able to lose many things with little or no inconvenience. Howsoever
it be, you that are now about the noon of your day, and therefore have no
leisure to try and examine Methods; and are to bring up a young Gentleman, who
in all likelihood will not be over-willing to take too much pains; may, as I
think, with most ease and profit, follow this order.

In your reading excerpe, and note in your Books such things as you like: going
on continually without any respect unto order; and for the avoiding of
confusion, it shall be very profitable to allot some time to the reading again
of your own Notes; which do as much and as often as you can. For by this means
your Notes shall be better fixed in your memory, and your memory will easily
supply you of things of the like nature^ if by chance you have dispersedly
noted them; that so you may bring them together by marginal references. But
because your Notes in time must needs arise to some bulk, that it may be too
great a task, and too great loss of time to reveiw them, do thus, Cause a large
Index to be framed according to Alphabetical order, and Register in it your
Heads, as they shall offer themselves in the course of your reading, every Head
under his proper Letter. For thus, though your Notes lie confused in your
Papers, yet are they digested in your Index, and to draw them together when you
are to make use of them, will be nothing so great pains as it would be, to have
ranged them under their several Heads at their first gathering. A little
experience of this course will show you the great profit of it, especially if
you did compare it with some others that are in use.

A Letter to an Honorable Person, concerning the WEAPON-SALVE.
Honorable Sir,
I Am very sorry that a Gentleman of your quality, so desirous of information
in a point of obscure and subtle Learning; should find so slender means to
satisfy your desire, as to be constrained to reflect on me, a man of no great
capacity, and by reason of my privacy, unacquainted abroad, and of my small
abilities, not able to make Experiments, and try conclusions.

Yet, that I may not seem to neglect your love, and courtesy, of which, upon
all occasions, you have not failed to make liberal expression, I will rather
hazard my judgment with you, then my good manners, and try what I can deliver
unto you concerning the late proposal you made unto me, in the matter of the
new devised cure of wounds, by applying the Salve to the Weapon that did the
mischief.

Where first I must request you to consider, that my attempt is weightier in
refuting the conceit, then theirs was, who have first broached it. For first, I
am to prove the Negative, a thing in Nature and Art very difficile. For always
the proving part lies upon the Affirmer: and he that means to acquaint me with
a Novelty, must make account to prove it to me, and not look that I should
undertake a refutation of it.

Again, he that undertakes to inform the world with a discovery of Secrets, and
vent Paradoxes, shall never want favorable hearers: For the mind of man much
delighting in Novelty, accepts easily and with delight, what shall be opened in
that kind; and every show of probability shall be taken as lawful proof:
whereas the Refuter must be sure to look to the strength of his reasons, and be
they never so weighty, yet any probable show of escape from them, shall be
accounted a sufficient defeat.

But to leave prefacing, the first thing I would require you to reform, is your
opinion you have conceived concerning the Antiquity of Weapon-Salve; for me
thinks you speak of it, as of a thing of some Antiquity and years, whereas
indeed it is a child of yesterday's birth.

There have of late appeared in the world a new kind of Students, who by trying
conclusions, and making experiments, especially by the Fire, have made
discovery unto us of many strange and pleasant effects in Nature, which in
former Ages have not been known. To put on these men, and commend them a little
more unto us, there has been not long since within the compass of these twenty
years, a merry gullery put upon the world, concerning a Guild of men, who style
themselves The Brethren of the Rosy Cross: a Fraternity who, what, or where
they are? no man yet, no not they who believe, admire, and devote themselves
unto them, could ever discover. Otrebius (a Gentleman well acquainted with your
great St. Iohns-man, the Champion for the Weapon-Salve) in a Tract of his
lately written, De vita, morte and Resurrectione, would persuade us, that
doubtless they are in Paradise, which place he seateth near unto the Region of
the Moon: Well may that be some Fools Paradise; for certainly that there is any
earthly Paradise at all, no wise man will easily believe. These men, whosoever
they are, or their defenders, have taken up that new devised Learning delivered
to us by Chymicks, and Paracelsians, and now hotly endeavor to possess the
world with it. Wherein I must give them this commendation, that they have given
us abundance of delightful Experiments, and that is the thing that gains them
the reputation they have. But two things they have attempted with no felicity
or good success.

First, they endeavor to make us believe, that the ancient Principles of
Philosophy, which hitherto great Clerks have Canonized, are to be rejected, and
new from them to be received in their rooms. And, secondly, that this may be
the better effected, they have brought in a new Language, which they make by
collecting of Epotick words and phrases out of Paracelsus, and adding unto them
forms of speech borrowed from the holy Scriptures, and of these have framed us
that style of Language, which you read not only in the Author you write of,
but in Paracelsus himself, and others who follow him. But all this attempt,
upon examination, is proved fruitless. For neither have they shaken the truth
of any Principle (I say not in the Trivials and Quadrivials, as old Clerks were
wont to name them, but neither in Physical nor Metaphysical Learning, which is
more subject to quarrel) of which the world has hitherto been persuaded, no^
added any new to increase the number of them: Only they have said the same
thing in other words, and, which is strange, all their new Experiments, which
are the chiefest strength of their cause, are plainly and evidently
demonstrable out of the ancient Aphorisms. The Author whom you commend unto
me, what a noise makes he with his Volatile and Essential Salt, Balsom of
Nature, Vivifying Spirit, and other trim Phrases of the same cut? Now what is
it, think you, that is contained under this abstruse Language? Certainly no
more, but only that Mass of Moisture and Heat in us, which follow upon the
temperature of every mixed body, and wherein all Specification, all Vegetation
and Animation does reside, which in our ordinary Schools we call Humidum
primogenium, and Calidum innatum. Anatomize other of their new and quaint
phrases, and you evidently deprehend the same Sophistry. So that if you desire
a definition of this new Learning, you cannot better express it, then by
calling it, A Translation of Vulgar Conceits into a new Language.

Sir, from these men, amongst many other pleasant fantasies, has sprung the
conceit concerning your wonderful Weapon-Salve, which, that I may show you upon
what firm foundation it stands, lays claim to three great proofs, but indeed
performs none of them: I see Reason promised, Phrases of Scripture used, and
Experience pretended; But I cannot yet discover any thing demonstratively
proved, by any of the three.

For the Reasons are nothing else but certain Generalities, which prove no more
but this, that if any such thing as Curing by Weapon-Salve be existent, such or
such Concentricks or Epicycles of Sympathies and Antipathies, of Eradiations or
Emanations of Spirits, may well be thought to be the causers of it: Whereas
true and lively Demonstration does not only suppose the thing to be, which it
endeavors to prove; but shows that necessarily it must be so, and possibly it
cannot be otherwise. For this kind of proof arises out of such principles, as
which being apprehended by the understanding, leave no room for contradiction,
by reason of the light they bring with them.

Scripture is promised, but with worse success, for what proves it in the
behalf of Weapon-Salve, to plead, that the Spirit of God moves in all things?
that Sanative faculty is of God? that God's power and Spirit is not to be
confined, but will pass a termino in terminum, according as is the will of him
that sends it forth? For still it remains to be proved, that this All-doing
Spirit of God has left any such force in things, as is pretended. The
discourses which by these kinds of men are made out of Scripture, many times
are not far dwelling from danger, that I may not say from Blasphemy. For what
means your Doctor to tell you in one part of his Book against Mr. Foster, that
the virtue of Elisha his bones, by which he raised the dead to life; the voice
of the Souls under the Altar in the Revelation; is the effect of that Volatile
Balsam of Nature, of which he so much treats? For so he must mean, or else
his speech concerning them is impertinent. He must a little temper his language
that way, or else as he threatens Mr. Foster with the Star Chamber, so
perchance himself may hear from the High Commission, who shall do well to take
to task and censure speeches of such danger. I understand you are well
acquainted with the Gentleman. I would you would advise him to beware of such
uncantelous speeches, in which, whilst he seems to praise the work of God, in
nature, he does as much disadvantage his Supernatural and Miraculous Acts.

So then, Reason and Scripture being removed, the only defender of
Weapon-Salve must be Experience. A proof, I confess, of great weight, were
there certainty of it. For if our senses do deceive us, which are the first
admitters of all ground of Science and skill, what certainty can we have of any
thing? Besides, that mine Aristotle has told me, I confess, and I believe him,
that it is a true sign of weakness of understanding, to follow our Reason,
against our Senses. Here Magnam mihi invidiam sentio esse subeundam. For first
I see the Authorities of great and noble Personages used to gain credit to this
conceit: for they are alleged not only for the belief, but for the practice
of it. Secondly, the frequent experience made of it, must needs decry all those
that stand up against it. To the first (saving all good respects to all persons
in their places) I must crave pardon, if I think that Civil Greatness ought to
have no room in my Topics. For in case of trial by Reason, I have done
Greatness all the honor it can demand of me, if I recede from it with that
reverence that I owe. My Reasons must be tried by Peers of the same rank, like
to true Iury-men of the same Country; else at the Bar of Reason, I shall
except against Civil Greatness as a stranger, or demand some Act of Parliament,
by which I may find it to be free denized.

But of this enough. To the Experience it self, I answer, That still I doubt,
whether there ever were any such Trial as might certainly plead for it. For it
is not only true that Hippocrates tells us, (...), Experience is dangerous;
but, it is as true, that Experience is many times very fallacious. For it is
hard so to make trial of any conclusion (at least of many) by reason of diverse
concurrences, of many particulars, which are seen in most Experiments, amongst
which concurrents, it is a hard matter to discover what it is that works the
effect: And oftentimes that falls out in Nature, which befell the Poet, Hos ego
versiculos feci, tulit alter honores.
The effect is wrought by one thing, and another carries the glory of it. A
better instance of this cannot be found, then this very case which is now in
handling. A man is wounded; the Weapon taken, and a wound-working Salve laid to
it: In the mean while the wounded person is commanded to use abstinence as much
as may be, and to keep the wound clean; whilst he thus does, he heals, and the
Weapon-Salve bears the Bell away: whereas it is most certain, that wounds not
mortal (for I hope their Salve cures not mortal wounds) will of themselves grow
whole, if the party wounded abstain as much as possibly he can, and remove from
the wound such things as may offend. For nothing hinders wounds from
cicatrising, more then concourse of humor to the diseased part; and keeping
things irritatory about the orifice of the wound; The first of these is
performed by abstinence, which is naturally a drier: the other by keeping the
wound clean: He that can do these two things, shall need no other Chyrurgery to
cure an ordinary wound.

Now whereas it is pleaded, that for further experience sake, it has been
tried, the Salve being thus applied, the party greived has been at ease; but
immediately upon the removal of the Salve, the party has fallen into torment
and pain: who sees not that this only remains to be said to make the tale
good? For naturally a man would look for this part of the story, to hold up the
cowples, as King James was wont to say. And therefore I must crave pardon for
the present, if I advise my self well ere I pass any part of my belief unto it.

Hitherto have I only used my buckler, and put off the thrust; you perchance
would gladly know, how I can use my weapons. Truly I must confess, I am not
very good at it. I find in my self that imperfection, which I see most Scholars
complain of, that they know better how to refell what is false, then to confirm
what is true. Yet to give you as good satisfaction as I may, I will endeavor
to draw such reasons, as may serve in some good measure to show the
impossibility of it.

And first, I would willingly know, if any such thing be, how he that was the
first Author of the discovery of it, came first, like a second Columbus, to
take knowledge of it. The ways that lead us to the knowledge of all
conclusions, of which we have any knowledge, (for I speak not of things taken
up Historically, and upon trust) are but two: first Experience; secondly,
Ratiocination; and the one of these is commonly the way to the other, by
comparing one thing with another, and applying actives and passives, and thence
producing sundry conclusions; and making one an occasion of another, as man is
in these cases a witty creature. Now I would willingly know from which of these
two, the knowledge of this Weapon-Salve was first derived? From Experience it
could not be; for see you not what a multitude of particulars must concur, ere
any such experience could be made? First, the Salve must be made: a Salve of
strange ingredients: and who would make such a Salve, except he first knew it
would work this cure? and such a knowledge before the making of the Salve,
cannot possibly be imagined: For into whose head could it possibly sink, that
such a Cure could be thus wrought, except he had formerly collected it by
Reason or Experience? The first, it is impossible he should have; the second,
it is granted he had not: so that the Salve must at first be made in likelihood
for some other use, and being made for some other end; by what chance must it
come, that it is found to cure after this strange manner? no man in his right
wits could think of applying it to the Weapon; some casualty must fall out to
discover this force: as it fared with Bercholdus Swartzius, who first invented
Gunpowder, who having made a mixture of Nitre and Sulphur, by chance it
conceived Fire, and went off with incredible celerity and noise; and from that
chance came he, and others after him, to make that use of it that now we see:
Even some such chance must here be. First, the Salve made for some other end,
must fall on the weapon, and that upon the place where the blood was, and there
rest, and then some man must observe it, and find that it wrought the cure. Now
who would ever apply himself to expect such an event? So then, Experience could
never open this mystery, and therefore Reason much less.

It remains therefore, if any such thing be, the first knowledge of it must
come by a kind of Revelation, and that must be either from above, or from
beneath: And I persuade my self, that this apparent difficulty of the first
discovery of it, was the cause of the imputation of some Sorcery or Witchcraft,
which of late has stuck upon it. Certainly if any such thing be, it will be
hard to exclude some either Supernatural or Unnatural way, by which the first
discovery of it must come in; I would be loath to wrong any man, by fowling him
with any vile aspersion; and I am yet far enough from it, because I believe not
the thing? Yet if any such thing be, I should think the Original knowledge of
it proceeded from some such principle I spoke of, yet will I not charge any,
that either believe or practice it, with stain of Witchcraft. For howsoever, he
who first knew it, might receive it from some Spirit, (for Spirits, by reason
of the subtilty of their nature, and long experience, know certainly more
mysteries in nature then we do) and therefore might justly undergo a hard
censure: yet those to whom afterward the knowledge of the mystery descended,
might be free from all blame. Upon occasion of a great Plague in Greece,
recourse was had to Apollo's Oracle for remedy: where they received this
answer, That they should double Apollo's Altar: Now Apollo's Altar was a Cube:
and hence it came to pass, that so many famous Mathematicians, both amongst
Ethnicks and Christians, both anciently, and even at this day, do labor to
find out the demons^ration of doubling the Cube, a thing yet never was done. In
this action they which first consulted with Apollo were to blame, (for Apollo
was the Devil) but they which by industry would have found it, if they could,
were not guilty of the first consulters fault. So might it here well be, that
he that first discovered the Weapon-Salve, might know it by the ministry of
some Spirit; yet they who afterward practiced it, might be guiltless.

But leave we this, and consider yet some other reason. I have often much
mused, why this Salve is called the Weapon-Salve? For I ask, Cannot this Cure
be done, but only by means of the Weapon? It may seem, by your Doctors
Apology, It may: for he tells us, It is done by the blood upon the Weapon, and
by reason of a seed of life lurking in it, which by the Salve is wakned: If
this be so, then wheresoever the blood falls, there apply your Salve, and you
shall work the same Cure; any linen, or stool, or floor, or Wall, or whatsoever
else receives the blood, may receive the Salve, and work the Cure; a thing of
which I never yet heard: neither do I think the practice of it stretches
beyond the Weapon: else we shall give the Salve so many names, as chance shall
allot it places to be applied unto? Whence it follows, that either it is not
done by the Weapon; or done by a thousand things as well as it; or that there
is some strange quality in the Weapon to work the Cure; which quality yet
remains to be discovered.

That I kill you not with length of discourse, I will urge but one reason more,
and that shall be drawn from the very cause it self, unto which your Doctor
attributes this Curing faculty. He first supposes some Eradiation and
Emanation of Spirit, or secret quality, or whatsoever, to be directed from our
bodies to the blood dropped from it. Secondly, that in the blood thus dropped,
there remains a Spirit of life, congenious to that in the body; which stirred
up by the Salve, conveys upon this Beam a healing quality from this blood to
the body. Thirdly, he grants, that not only in the Blood, but in the Urine,
after it is gone from us, remains the like Spirit, which by the like Beam from
a party sick of the Iaundies, conveys a cure to him: for so he tells of a great
Person, who usually works such Magnetical Cures of that disease, by a Paste
made of the Ashes of a kind of Wood amongst us, (it is the Barbary: For that
Wood, by our new Doctrine, De signaturis rerum, by reason of the deep Yellow by
which it is dyed, is thought to have in it something Sovereign against the
Iaundies) mixed with the diseased Parties Urine. Nay more, our Hair, our Nails,
and Skin, pared from us, have the same Spirit of life; and from our bodies to
them whilst they are subsisting, proceeds the like radii: and by such device
he thinks a starved member may be recovered, as you may see in his Books. Now I
suppose if it be thus with the Urine, with the Hair, and Nails, and Skin; why
then should I not conceive it to be so with our Sweat, with our Tears, with
every excrement that falls from us, as our Spittle, and Phlegm, and the like?
For, what reason can your Doctor give to confine these things to some part of
our Excrements, and not enlarge them unto all? As for the amputated members of
our bodies, it fares with them no otherwise, as it appears by the Neapolitan
Gentleman's Nose, cut out of his servant's arm ( one letter altered in that
word would have made the story much pleasanter) and of others the like reported
and believed by him.

The vanity of which conceit that you may discover, let me request you to
observe this with me. Look what way we may be pleasur'd and convenienced, by
the same way we may be harmed and wronged. The beams then that pass from us to
these things, which come from our bodies, as they may be the conveyers of good
to us, so may they be the ministers of mischief: for if they encounter with
things good, and simpathizing with them, they relieve and cherish us; so if
they meet with their enemies, with antipathizing materials, may they not
distress and annoy us as much? Certainly to think otherwise, is merely
voluntary and unreasonable. See now, I pray you, into what infinite hazard this
Doctrine casts us; there is not a drop of Blood, of Sweat, of Spittle, and
Phlegm; not any part of our Flesh, our Nails, our Hair, our Stool, but has in
it a Spirit of life, homogenious to that in our bodies; and beams that emanate
perpetually from our bodies to them; but, as they may comfort us, being well
encountered; so, if they meet with ill company, they may distress us: A thing so
much the more to be feared, by how much the things that annoy us are in number
more, then the things that pleasure us. Now what mean we then to be thus
negligent of our droppings, as to let them fall at random into the earth, the
fire, the water, and God knows where, since there is such danger depends from
them? Were this doctrine true, it were not possible, that either Man or Beast
(for it is the case of Beasts too, as appears by his discourse about an Horse)
should enjoy one moment of health and safety.

Sir, were I at leisure, and free from other occasions, which at this time of
the year especially attend me by reason of my place: as poor a Philosopher as I
am, I think I might challenge any reasonable man, at this trial, and not think
over-well of mine own undertakings. This which I now have commented is very
subitany, and I fear confused. Mr. Bagley, who was by me all the time I wrote
it, would not conceive, that the frequent discourses betwixt his little son and
himself, could be an hinderance to me; and truly, to confess the truth, I found
it not much to further me. And least I quite weary you out, I will only add
this one thing concerning our admirers of Weapon-Salve.

I have read, that a Learned Jew undertook to persuade Albertus, one of the
Dukes of Saxony, that by certain Hebrew letters and words taken out of the
Psalms, and written in Parchment, strange Cures might be done upon any wound:
As he one day walked with the Duke, and labored him much to give credit to
what he discoursed, in that argument: the Duke suddenly drew his sword, and
wounding him much in diverse places, tells him, he would now see the conclusion
tried upon himself. But the poor Jew could find no help in his Semhamphoras,
nor his Hebrew characters, but was constrained to betake himself to more real
Chirurzery. Sir, I wish no man any harm, and therefore I desire not the like
fortune might befall them who stand for the use of Weapon-Salve: only thus
much I will say, that if they should meet with some Duke of Saxony, he would go
near to cure them of their errors, howsoever they would shift to cure their
wounds. Thus have I freely imparted my judgment to you in this point, which
having done, I leave it to your favorable construction, and rest as ever,

From Eton College this xxiij. of November. 1630. Your Servant, JOHN HALES.

Mr HALES LETTERS From the SYNOD of DORT TO THE Right Honorable Sr. DUDLEY
CARLTON, Lord Ambassador, etc.
Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
MAy it please your honor: We arrived at Dort this last night betwixt six and
seven of the clock; our passage was without any impediment at all, and
wheresoever we were to take boat still we found some ready to put off, as if
they had waited our coming. Immediately upon my arrival I went to My Lord
Bishop, and as soon as I had done my message unto him, I fortwith went to
Monsieur Bogermannus, who humbly thanks your Honor for your great courtesy
toward him, and promises to acquaint your Lordship by me with whatsoever
passes in the Synod: had he known of so convenient means of writing to your
Lordship, I suppose he would have written: but when I spoke with him I knew not
so much my self. Festus Hommius and Polyander I have not yet seen, and it will
be the afternoon ere I shall speak with them, because this morning they have a
sitting. Whatsoever has past in the Synod formerly, your Lordship shall
understand by a packet from my Lord Bishop; whatsoever speeches or other
passages are to be copyed I shall this afternoon get of Mr. President, and I
will not fail to send your Honor the transcripts of them, when Daniel returns.
What shall be disputed of or decided in the next Sessions at the Synod, I will
at large in form your Lordship by the next messenger, mean time I humbly take
my leave.

From Dort this 14/24 of November. 1618. Your Lordships Chaplain, and bounden in
all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
YOur Honor shall here receive enclosed an index of all the acts of the Synod
since the beginning, till the 16/2^ of this present. It is not that which I
required, but is so much as Festus Hommius (whose writing it is) could spare
your Lordship. My desire was to obtain not only the bare conclusions, but the
whole manner of proceeding, with all particulars propounded and concluded in
the Synod: but it seems this was thought nimis grande postulatum. If I can come
so far to perfect my notes of all the former sessions, as that I shall be able
to express them in form as I did the session, on Saturday last, and by Gods
help will express the following sessions, I will in time acquaint your Lordship
with it. Mean while I come to the session on Monday morning 16/^^ of this
present.

It had been in some of the Former sessions determined that there should be
chosen six Divines for the Translation of the Bible, three for the Old
Testament, and three for the New with the Apocrypha: and likewise Revisors one
out of every Province, to whom the work being done should be brought to be
revised and censured. In this present Session they proceed to the choice of
them. The manner of election was by Scrutiny: the Deputies in every Province in
Scripto exhibiting one. The Scrutators were two of the Seculars, D. Simon
Schottus, Secretary of Middleburrough, and President this week, and Martinus
Gregorii, these calculated the voices and pronounced the election. And first
for the translation of the Old Testament were chosen these three, Ioh.
Bogermannus, Guil. Baudaritus, and Gerson Bucerus: for the translation of the
New, were chosen Iac. Rolandus, Hermannus Fauckelius, and Petrus Cornelii. From
these they proceed to the nomination of the revisors. Here arose a doubt
concerning the province of Utrecht. For because they are equally divided three
Contra-Remonstrants, and and three Remonstrants, they could not agree upon the
nomination of a Revisor for that Province, which thing bred a demurre in the
Synod. The Praeses required the judgment of the Synod, what they thought fit to
be done. Some thought they might be altogether past by. For there would be
Revisors enough, though that Province chose none. Others thought fit it should
be deferred till the end of the Synod, and then some one of that Province
should be chosen communibus suffragiis totius Synodi. A third sort determined
that it should be deferred till that Province were reconciled in it self,
(which it was hoped would be at the end of the Synod) and then they should name
some one of their Province to be approved by the rest of the Translators and
Revisors; and this sentence past for current. So that for the present there is
no Revisor for the Province of Utrecht. Another doubt yet was moved, for one of
the Provinces had named two paribus suffragiis: the question was who should
stand. It pleased the Synod to put it to Lots. And so the Praeses wrote their
names in two little Tickets of paper, each by it self, and rould them up, and
delivered them to Martinius Gregorius; that which he took stood, that which he
refused, was presently torn. The Revisors for the Old Testament were these, ex
Geldria Ant. Tysius: ex Suyd-Hollandia Io. Polyander: ex North-Holl. P.
Plancius: ex Zelandia Iod. Larenus: ex Frisia Sibrandus Lubbertus: ex
Transisulania Iac. Revius: ex Groaning. D. Gomarus: ex Drentia Onias Boethus.
The Revisors for the New Testament were these. Ex Geldria Seb. Dammannus: ex
Suyd-Holl. Festus Hommius: ex North-Holl. Goswinus Geldorpius: ex Zelandia Ant.
Walaeus: ex Frisia Bern. Fullenius: ex Transisulania Io. Langius: ex Groaning.
Vbbo Emmius: ex Drentia Io. Cuperus. It was farther enacted, that if any of the
Translators should die, or by Sickness became unable for the Service, that then
he that was next him in number of voices in the Scrutiny should succeed in his
place: If any of the Revisors should die, or be sick, power was given to the
Praeses, the two Assessors, and the two Scribes to depute another in his room:
and so this Session concluded; in which though little was done, yet was it long
adoing by reason of the Scrutiny.

Upon Tuesday the 17/1^ of this present, the Deputies met in the morning, where
the first thing that was propofed was concerning those of Drent. For whereas
the day before they had named two Revisors for the Translation, they now upon
better advice require to be excused in that behalf, because in their Province
the Belgic Tongue was not well known. Which Petition of theirs was accepted.
In the second place it was thought good, that since all the business concerning
the Translation was determined of, there should be a repetition made in the
Synod of all that had passed about it: to this purpose, that if any thing were
either omitted or misrelated, it might be rectified: forthwith followed a
Narration of all that had been done, where some small exceptions not worth
relating were stood upon. In the third place was proposed the defect of the
Afternoon Sermons and Catechizing, especially in the Country Villages; and the
Synod was moved to deliver it self concerning Remedies of this Defect. What had
been heretofore decreed in some of their Synods concerning this matter was
publicly read. The Impediments were, First the negligence of the Pastors;
Secondly Combinations, that is double Benefices, when men having two Cures
could not sufficiently attend both: Thirdly the difficulty of reclaiming the
Country people on the Sundays either from the Sports or from their Work. The
Synod beginning to consider of means to cut off these abuses, Festus Hommius
amongst other things complained, that through the negligence of the
Remonstrants it came that Catechizing was so much decayed; which words of his,
it is thought, will be an occasion of some choler, though for the present they
passed uncontroled. Many delivered their opinions how the forementioned
hindrances of Afternoon Sermons and Catechizing might be removed. First by
imploring the help of the States General, that it would please them by their
Authority to prohibit that ordinary profanation of the Sabbath by working or
playing: Secondly by requiring the like help of the particular Magistrate in
every Town and Village: Thirdly by taking away those Combinations: Fourthly by
providing of sufficient Schole-Masters in every Village who should not only
teach Grammar, but instruct Youths in the prnciples of Religion: Fifthly that
the Pastors should not omit afternoon Sermons by reason of the negligence of
their Auditors, but should perform them, though they brought to the Church none
but their own Family: that the Pastors and Deacons and Seniors should deal with
their Friends and acquaintance and bring them to Church with them. Sixthly that
if any Pastor neglected to perform this Duty, he should be subject to
Ecclesiastical Censure. Seventhly that the Deputies of other Nations should be
requested to make overture of their Customs in this behalf. Lastly that
diligent inquiry should be made throughout all the Classes, whether
Cathechizing and afternoon Sermons were observed. It was decreed that in every
Parish there should be two Sermons every Sunday, of which that in the Afternoon
was to be Catechetical. That the ministers should give good example by bringing
their own Family to Church; that the help of the Magistrate should be implored;
that Combinations should be taken away. When all was done, then was that
required which should have been done before: the Deputies of other Nations were
desired to deliver their Customs in this behalf. Where first my Lord Bishop
showed that with us in England the Magistrate imposed a pecuniary Mulct upon
such as did absent themselves from Divine duties; which pecuniary Mulct
generally prevailed more with our people, than any pious admonitions could.
Those of the Palsgrave's Country showed that each Sunday they had two Sermons,
and such as were absent, were first admonished by the Clergy, and if this
sufficed not, they required the help of the Civil Magistrate. Those of Geneva
told us, that in the Churches in their Cities they had every Sunday four
Sermons, etc. Those of Breme that they had three Sermons, of which one was
Catechetical; and to avoid profanation of the Sabbath, it was not lawful to
celebrate any Marriage Feast, or such like upon the Sunday, till six a clock in
the Evening. Many other things of this nature were related, of which a great
deal I could not understand. When all had spoken, the Praeses told them that
this proposal was not made because in the Belgic Churches there had not been
order taken for Catechizing: and Sermons, but because the Laws formerly made in
this behalf were neglected: and that now means was thought of to bring them in
force again. And so they brake up.

I received your Honors Letters of the 16/1^ of this present, in which your
Honor requires to be informed of such Proposals as Episcopius lately made in
behalf of the Arminian Party. The thing is this. Shortly after that the Letters
of Citation were sent to the Arminians, Episcopius, with other of the
Remonstrants came privately to the Deputies of the States, and exhibited a
Remonstrance, in which they required especially these things. First that all of
their Party throughout the Provinces might be allowed to make one Body, and out
of it depute such as they thought good, whom they might send to the Synod to
plead in their behalf. Secondly that it might be lawful for them instead of
some of those who are written unto, to substitute others. Thirdly that
Vtenbogart and Grevinchovius might have safe Conduct and free access to the
Synod. The Delegates immediately sent for the Praeses, the two Assessors and the
two Scribes, and required their opinion in this business. For the first point,
the Clergy men thought it not to be granted, as being feared would be
prejudicial to the Belgic Churches. The Deputies for the Seculars answered,
that they had given Episcopius this answer. For the two latter, the Clergy
thought that if it pleased the Seculars it might be done. Reply was made by the
Seculars, that they were men infamous, tumultuous, on whom the Church censure,
for Grevinchovius had extended, and therefore they would permit them no place
in the Synod. So was Episcopius and his Company dismissed. This was a thing
done only in private: the Synod had no notice of it, neither is it recorded in
any public Register. What more passed between the Seculars and the
Remonstrants at this meeting is not known, and the Clergy know no more than it
pleased the Seculars to impart. Of this I heard nothing, till by reason of your
Lordships Letters I enquired into it.

Whilst the Synod was sitting on Tuesday morning, there came in News of the
death of one of their Company, Henricus ab Hell, Senior of the Church of
Zutphaw, who died in the time of the Session. I am desirous to know whether my
Letters upon Mondy containing the Saturday Session came to your Lordships
hands. I intended them by way of Roterdam, but Daniel t^l^s me he delivered
them to a Gentleman that went immediately for the Hague, marie what he was he
knew not, this has made me a little jealous. I beseech your Honor, by the
next that comes from you hither, by word of mouth to let me know. Mr. Praeses,
Festus Hommius, Polyander, Tronchinus of Geneva required me to remember their
Love and service to your Honor: and so for this time I humbly take my leave.

From Dort this 1^/2^ of November. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in
all Duty Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
UPon Saturday, the day after my coming to Dort, I went to Festus Hommius, and
delivered him your Honors Letters, upon perusal of which, he liberally
promised me an Index of all whatsoever had past in the Synod until my coming to
Town. The time of making his promise good was Sunday morning. When I saw it
came not at the time, after dinner I wrote a little note unto him, to put him
in mind of his promise, but yet I heard nothing of him. I suppose this falls
out by reason of his multiplicity of business, not that he would slight your
Lordship; though I remember in a speech that passed between him and me, he told
me that there passed among the brethren of the Synod a consent de non
eliminandis, etc. of not divulging of any passage till all was done, which I
interpreted as spoken only upon the by, not with any intent of hindering any
intelligence which should be given your Honor. I dealt with Mr. Praeses and
with Festus for a Copy of Martinus Gregorii his Oration: the answer from them
both was the same, that he would not at any hand be entreated to deliver a Copy
of it, no not so much as the sum of it: whether it was because of some matter
that was in it, as that he spoke somewhat roundly in disgrace of the Spanyard,
or that the Politics have some end in it, or that he himself is desirous to
have it thought that he delivered it only ex tempore, or for what other reason
I know not. As concerning what has passed in the Synod, till I hear farther
from Festus, I will acquint your Honor with what past there since my coming.

On Saturday the 14/24 of this present, in the Morning the Deputies met, and
debated some things of no great moment, concerning their intended TRANSLATION
of the BIBLE. The first thing proposed was, whether the name JEHOVAH should be
retained untranslated, or rendered by the Dutch word Here, as the Greeks (...),
the English Lord. The Praeses thought fit it should be rendered Here, because
the Holy Ghost in the New Testament, citing some things out of the Old, renders
the Hebrew Jehovah, by the Greek (...), according as the Septuagint had done.
This past for current, till it came to Martinius of Breme, who divided the
sentence, and thought that it might ordinarily so be rendered, if some places
were excepted. And to this purpose he cited some places of Scripture, where the
word Jehovah had a peculiar energy and force, which the Belgic Here could not
attain unto. To the same effect did others speak: and great disputation would
have arisen about this point, as whether the Name Jehovah had any points of its
own, or borrowed his points from Elohim and Adonai, and the like, but that the
Praeses still cut them off. It was at length by the greater part concluded,
that it should be rendered by the Belgic Here, which was always to be expressed
in Capital Characters, and concerning this the Reader should be advertised
farther in the Preface. And when there should be in any place some peculiar
force in that word which the Belgic word did not express, of this the Reader
should be admonished by a marginal gloss.

The second Proposal was, whether the Hebrew proper Names should be retained,
or translated likewise into Dutch. It was concluded they should be retained,
for avoiding of all unnecessary novelty and alteration. The third proposal was,
whether the ancient division of Chapters should remain, for many Hebrew Copies
differed from our Common in this point, and sometime the old division did seem
somewhat inconvenient, as that somewhere it brake off in the midst of a matter,
somewhere in the midst of a sentence. It was concluded that the old division
should remain. For there would arise great confusion in quotations, if the
number of Chapters and Verses should alter. As for the variety of other Copies,
and inconvenient division, of this the Reader should be advertised in the
margent. The fourth proposal was whether there might not be added some
Appendices to the Bible, as Chorographical and Topographical Tables,
Genealogies, and the like. It was thought fit they should, provided that in the
Tables and Maps there were no pictures and babies, for avoiding superstition.
The fifth proposal was concerning the appointing of persons fit for the work of
the Translation. The Praeses willed that every Province should exhibit by Bill
the Names of those, who they knew in their Provinces were of sufficiency for
the Translation, which forthwith was done, and the Names that were exhibited
were all pronounced in the Synod: but out of these who should be chosen for the
work was differed, until the next Session appointed upon the Monday following:
and so with prayer they brake up the meeting.

As I have done in this Session, so will I do in all the rest, if I shall get
convenient place where I may stand and note. For, for any thing I see, mine own
notes must be my chiefest help. The matters are but small, but I suppose they
will amend when the Arminian Party shall make their appearance. Here is your
Honors old Friend come to Town, and passes under the name of a Doctor of
Physic. He is to dine with my Lord Bishop this day, but I have discovered him
unto his Lordship what he is. I have presumed to keep Daniel with me longer
than I determined at my departure; the reason is, because I am unskilful of the
streets, and I have not Dutch enough to enquire my way; I will shortly send him
home. What shall be done in the following Sessions, I will not fail to inform
your Lordship by the next Messenger, in the mean while I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 16/12. November. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in all Duty,
Jo. Hales.
I have sent your Honor a Catalogue of the Synod Printed here with us.



Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
ON Wednesday the 1^/2^ of November, those of the Synod me^ in the morning.
This Session was only deliberative, for they concluded nothing. The proposal
was, what form of catechizing both for children and youths should be thought
fittest to be put in practice in the Belgic Churches, The Praeses first spoke
many things learnedly of the necessity of Catechizing, that it was the basis
and ground of Religion, and the sole way of transfusing the principles of
Christianity into men: that it was very ancient, practiced by the Patriarchs,
by the Apostles, by Origin, and approved by the consent of the Fathers: that
from the Neglect of this came the ignorance of the common sort, and that
multitude of sects amongst them, of Papists, Anabaptists, Libertines, etc.
whereas if an uniform course of teaching them their first principles had been
taken up, there would not have been so many differences: that there was now
greater necessity than ever of reviving this custom, because of the Jesuits who
mightily labor in this kind, as appeared by some of their acts lately in
Fris^a, etc. Next were the Deputies for the strangers called upon to deliver
what forms of Catechizing were in their Churches put in use: which they did,
and gave them to the Praeses in writing. After these, the Professors, and the
other Deputies spoke their minds, and almost all gave them up in writing,
which were immediately pronounced in public by the Scribe; and such as spoke
memoriter, promised to set down their opinions in scripto, and deliver them to
the Praeses after dinner. The principal heads on which they insisted, were
these: that there might be three degrees of Catechizing, one Domestical, to be
practiced by Fathers and Masters in their Families: another Scholastical to be
used by Scholemasters in public Schools: and a third Ecclesiastical to be
practiced by the Minister in the Church, that so Fathers might fit their
Children for the Schools, the Schools for the Church: That therefore Parents
and Masters should be admonished to look to this duty in their Families: That
Scholemasters should be chosen, such as were skillful themselves to Catechize,
and that they should be careful to bring their Scholars to Catechetical
Sermons; that from Sermons they should presently call them to the Schole, and
there examine them how they had profited: That the Minister of every Parish
together with the Seniours and Deacons should monthly or quarterly visit the
Schools, and know the Scholars proficiency in this behalf: that the Ministers
before the times of the Communion should repair unto private Families, and
Catechize: that the Magistrates would be pleased to provide stipends for
Schole-Masters, so to make them the more cheerful: that there should be variety
of Catechizing according to the variety of the age, one for Children, which
should contain The Lords Prayer, the Creed, the Commandments, the Doctrine of
the Sacraments, etc. that for such as were elder, other things should be added
according to their capacity: that to take away confusion, one form of Catechism
in each kind should be used; that the Jesuits Catechisms of Lessius, Canisius,
Ledesma, etc. should be abolisht. All this and more by sundry men was exhibited
in writing, and read in the audience of the Synod.

That which hitherto has been done concerns only the manner of Catechizing, as
for the matter of the Catechism, that was not now thought fit to be spoken of,
but was put off till the end of the Synod. When all had spoken their pleasures
the Praeses signified, that he together with the Assessors and Scribes would
compare all these Writings together, and out of them all gather one form of
Catechizing as they thought best, and exhibit it unto the Synod to be approved
of, or altered to their liking. And so the Session ended. Amongst the rest,
there were some particulars told. One of the Deputies of Geldria, to show the
force of Private Catechizing, related that amongst them there was a Minister,
who when he first came to his Living, found his Church quite empty, because all
his Parishioners were Papists; and therefore if he would preach, he was to
preach to the bare Walls: but he takes so much pains as to go to every of his
Parish privately unto their Houses, and there by familiar conversing with them,
and expounding unto them the grounds of Religion, he so far prevailed with
them, that in the compass of a year he gained them all to come to Church, and
by this means has scarce a Papist in his Parish. But doubtless the most
effectual way of all the rest to bring young persons to learn their Catechism,
was that which was related by one of the Helvetian Deputies. For he told us
that in his Country the manner was, that all young persons that meant to marry
were to repair, both he and she, unto their Minister, a little before they
meant to marry, and by him to be examined how well they had conned their
Catechism: If they had not done it perfectly to his mind, he had power to defer
their Marriage till they had better learnt their Lessons. I was much affected
to this course when I heard it; and I thought that doubtless it was a speedy
way to make all young persons, excepting my self and two or three more that
mean not overhastily to marry, to be skilful in their Catechism. The Synod
shall be ill advised if they make no use of it.

Mr. Dean this day is to make a Latin Sermon in the Synod-house, and after that
there are certain Supplications exhibited to the Synod to be considered of.
What they are, and what they contain I will inform your Honor by the next
convenient Messenger. I have suffered Daniel to come home, and supply himself
of some necessaries, but to return to me again upon Saturday, except your
Honor shall otherwise appoint. His lodging and diet are provided, and he will
be serviceable to me this ill weather, to be sent in business, my self not
being so well able in dirt and snow to trace the streets. But this I leave to
your Lordships consideration, and for this present I humbly take my leave.

From Dort this 19/29 of November. 1618. Your Lordships Chaplain, and bounden in
all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Thursday, 19/29 of this present, the Synod being met together, Mr. Dean
of Worcester made in the Synod-house a polite and pathetical Latin Sermon; the
portion of Scripture he chose for his Theme was the 17th verse of the 6th of
Ecclesiastes, N^li esse justus nimium, neque esto sapiens nimis. After a witty
coming upon his test, how it should come that Righteousness and Wisdom, which
are every where commended unto us, should here seem to receive a check, he
showed how men might seem to be too just; First the Seculars, when sitting in
place of Justice they stood too strictly in keeping the Letter of the Law, and
then by inflicting too heavy punishments, when in equity lighter would serve:
next in the second word sapiens nimis, he taxt the Divines for presuming too
far in prying into the Judgments of God, and so came to reprove the curious
Disputes which our age has made concerning Predestination; that this Dispute
for its endlesness was like the Mathematical line, divisibilis in semper
divisibilia; that it was in Divinity, as the Rule of Cos is in Arithmetic. For
the ending of these Disputes his advice unto the Synod was, that both parts
contending should well consider of S. Paul's discourse in the ninth to the
Romans, and for their final determination both should exhibit unto the Synod a
plain perspicuous and familiar paraphrase on that Chapter. For if the meaning
of that Discourse were once perfectly opened, the question were at an end. From
hence he came to exhort them to stand to the former determinations, which had
hitherto most generally past in the Reformed Churches, in these points: and
told them that it was an especial part of his Majesty's Commission to exhort
them to keep unaltered the former Confessions. How fit it was to open so much
of their Commission, and thus to express themselves for a party against the
Remonstrants your Honor can best judge. After this he brought a very
pathetical conclusion, consisting of a vehement exhortation to peace and union,
and so he ended. The Praeses gave him thanks for his good pains, and then told
us, whereas it was once purposed to lay open before the Synod certain Libelli
supplices (which I mentioned to your Honor in my last Letters) he might not
now do it, for some reasons which he then concealed. And so he dismissed the
Synod without doing any thing farther. What these Libelli supplices contain, is
unknown. Some imagine it to be from the Remonstrant party; others more probably
think, that the subject of them were certain Gravamina of the Country
Ministers.

Mr. Deans Sermon was taken well, for any thing I can yet learn to the
contrary; but your Lordship shall understand^ there was a little doubt made
concerning these Latin Sermons. Mr. Praeses, when the Letters were directed to
the Arminian party, requested the Foreigners that they would be pleased to
bestow in their Courses some Latin Sermons to entertain the Synod till the
Arminians made their appearance; And first commended this unto the English. My
Lord Bishop refused it because of the sudden warning: but Mr. Dean would needs
undertake it. But certain of the Exteri came to the Bishop, and showed him how
dangerous this might be. For it was as they thought, a very hard matter so to
walk, as not to touch upon some points that are in controversy, which could not
be without the offense of one party. My Lord Bishop, and the other two, for
this reason thought the motion very inconvenient: but Mr. Dean would by no
means apprehend of it, but as of a business very fit to be done. It seems this
was the general conceit of the Foreigners, which was the cause that there was
in this kind nothing done till now, notwithstanding that the motion was made a
pretty while before my coming to Dort. But how well this example is approved,
it will appear, if others of the Foreigners do follow it. Here is a rumor of
a certain Jesuitical book, lately set forth in disgrace of our Synod. I have
not yet seen it, but I understand it is in the hands of the Praeses unto whom I
had repaired to have looked into it, but that I conceive him to be exceeding
full of business. As soon as I can learn what it is, I will acquaint your
honor with it. We have much speech of a strange Comet of an unusual length
seen this morning. I saw it not; and peradventure it is no News unto your
Lordship, if it have appeared in the Horizon of the Hague. My Lord Bishop and
his Company remember their Love and Service to your Honor, and thank you for
your Letter of English news, which they here return. I have sent according to
your Lordships Will six Catalogues of the Synod, printed with us in Latin. And
so for this time I humbly take my leave.

From Dort this 19/1^ of November. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in
all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Friday the 20/^^ of November, the Deputies met in the Morning: where
first of all, there were recited the Judgments of some concerning the manner
of Catechizing which was yet depending, who had not delivered their minds in
writing the day before. In this was there nothing extraordinary, save only the
advice of the Remonstrants of Vtrecht. For the Deputies of that Province gave
their Judgments severally, the Contra-Remonstrants by themselves, and the
Remonstrants by themselves. These first blamed the common Catechism passant
amonst them, as being too obscure for the Simple, and too long for the Memory.
Secondly, they thought it not necessary that there should be a threefold
Catechism, for one well learnt might serve for all the rest. Thirdly, they
would have a Catechism so made, that the Answers might be nothing else but bare
Texts of Holy Scriptures. For they thought, that if Scripture alone were
taught, and not any men's glosses, it would be a more immediate means to gain
the Anabaptists and other Schismatics to accept of the Catechism. Fourthly,
they thought fit that in the Preface to these Catechisms, there should be a
note given to this purpose; that these kinds of writing by Catechisms etc. were
to be esteemed only as the Apochryphal Scriptures. To the third point some
little was answered to this purpose, that this was a mean utterly to extirpate
all other Forms of Catechizings out of the Church, there never yet having been
any form of Creed or Catechism so conceived. Yet their might be a time
hereafter for the Synod to consider of it, when they pleased. After this
followed the Form of Catechizing, which the Praeses and Assessors had agreed
upon. My purpose was to have taken an extract of it and sent it to your Honor,
and I dealt with Festus Hommius about it; but his answer was, that he was to
communicate about this with the Praeses, and that it was in the hand of Sebast.
Dammannus his fellow Scribe. To Dammannus I was not known, neither did I
understand of any acquaintance he had with your Honor, and therefore I let it
rest. The sum of it was this. That there should be observed a threefold
Catechizing. 1. At home by the Parents. 2. In the Schole by the Schole-Master;
A third in the Church by Catechetical Sermons: then, that there should be a
threefold Catechism, one for Incipientes, containing the Lords Prayer, the
Creed, the Commandments, the Doctrine of the Sacraments, and the Church
Discipline. A second for the Middle sort, which should be a brief of the
Palatine Catechism: A third for Youths, the Palatine Catechism it self. That
every one that was admitted Scholemaster should be bound to teach no other
Catechism, and that all other Forms should be abolisht: that if either
Scholemasters in the Schools, or Ministers in the Church, should refuse or
neglect to Catechize, they should be subject to censure etc. When this Form was
read, the Provinces were in order asked what they would have altered or
supplied. Those of Geldria thought it fit that the Minister before his
Catechetical Sermon, should not only take the words of the Catechism (as the
custom had in most places been) but likewise some Text of Scripture upon which
the Doctrine of the Catechism was grounded. For, as it seems, the custom is in
Catechistical Sermons, not to take a Text of Scripture, but a portion of the
Catechism for their Text and Theme. It was answered that this custom had been a
long time laid down, and could not now conveniently be recalled: the same
Deputies proposed, whether it were not fit, that whereas in the Decree there is
mention made of a censure to pass on those who neglected it, there should be
some particular form of Censure set down by the Synod. The thing being put to
voices, it was decreed, that it should be left to the Judgment of the Classes
how they should be censured. The South Hollanders thought it necessary there
should be public catechizing in the Church by way of Question and Answer. It
was answered, that this could not be by reason of the frequency of Sermons.
Those of Overyssell proposed somewhat concerning the form of Catechetical
Sermons. It was answered that this should hereafter be thought of. Which answer
is a civil way which the Praeses uses, when he means to put by an impertinent
question. Last of all, those of the Walon Churches required that this Decree
should not prejudice them, who had already accepted of Beza's Catechism in
their Churches. Now whereas there were three Catechisms proposed, of which
there was but one in being, namely the Palatine, they consulted of deputing
some, who should make the other two. The matter being put to Scrutiny there
were chosen these six, Polyander, Gomarus, Tysius, Lydius, Fauchelius,
Vdemannus. Here the Praeses proposed to the Synod, that they would think of fit
means for the Education and training up of those who should enter the
Ministry: but those of North Holland proposed a doubt, wherein the Church of
Amsterdam required the determination of the Synod. The matter is this. The
Merchants of Amsterdam having Traffic into the East Indies, took into their
Families many of the Youths and Infants of that Country, but doubted whether
they were to be baptized or no. The question was thus proposed, Whether the
Children of Ethnic parents adopted into the Families of Christians were to be
baptized, if so be they who did offer them to be baptized did undertake that
they should be brought up in the Christian Faith. But both these questions were
put over to the nex Session, and so the Synod brake up. This afternoon the
Duchess of Tremullio came to Town. The English went to entertain her, where my
Lord Bishop made a speech unto her in Latin, which by her Chaplain was
interpreted unto her, who likewise in her name returned answer. But of the
particulars of this entertainment, I suppose my Lord Bishop in his Letters
relates more fully to your Honor, that I can; for I was not there.

On Saturday the first of December, stylo novo, the Deputies being met in the
morning, the question concerning means of education of those who should be
fitted for the Ministry was proposed; where, because they found it to be a
greater matter than it seemed when at first it was proposed, the Provinces
requested further respite, excepting the Zelanders and South-Hollanders, who
there delivered up their Judgments in scripto. The substance of what the
Zelanders delivered was this: that it would please the States General to
appoint that a certain number of Youths might be bred up for the Ministry at
the charge of the public purse. That the wealthier sort would send such of
their Children to the Schools, as they thought fittest to make Scholars. That
out of these should be chosen youths of ingenuous Parentage and Manners, of
good wit, of strength and health of body, which should be sent unto the
University. That in the University there might be distinct Colleges for every
Province, and in these Colleges there might be Regents and Supervisors, which
might prescribe unto Youths a Method of study, and not suffer them to wander in
variety of Study, and not perfect themselves in some one kind. That there might
some time be prefixed for their abode in the University, as five or six years.
And because many upon two years study seek for preferment in the Church, and
others on the contrary stay in the University over long; for remedy of both
these there might a time be fixed wherein the whole course of study should be
absolved. That these Students every year should give an account of their
proficiency to their Parents and Benefactors, and such as bred them up: that
after this they should go and visit foreign Churches and Universities to see
and observe. That at their coming home they bring with them the Testimonies of
the Pastors and Governors of the Churches and Universities wherein they have
been, and exhibit them to the Classes where they are to live; and expect their
calling to the Ministry. That they should publicly in the Church read the
Scriptures before the people, for this would make them known to the Church,
embolden them to speak to the multitude, and mend their voices and delivery.
That by consent of the Classes they be permitted to be with the Pastors, to
confer with them in Cases of Conscience, to go with them when they visit the
sick, that thus they may learn how to deal in these cases, and how to conceive
prayers upon occasion. That to fit them for the Church Regiment, which is a
thing not learnt in Schools, some months before their institution, they
converse in the greater Cities, to be present in the Presbyteries and the
meetings of the Deacons, to understand how Voices may be asked and gathered,
how Church Disciple is to be exercised, and what in diverse cases is to be done.
That they be examined how fit they be to reform men's manners. That it were fit
that even in Universities Youths were trained up in Practick Divinity and Cases
of Conscience. The substance of what the South-Hollanders delivered was this.
First that Youths should stay at least two years in the University, and
publicly read the Scriptures in the Church. Secondly, that after this they
publicly dispute of some difficult question in Religion. Thirdly, that they be
examined of all the Articles in Religion, and if they give satisfaction, then
they may be admitted ad propositiones, (what these are I know not) and after a
years exercise in them, they may be examined by the Classes, who if they find
them fit may give them leave to exercise themselves in Catechizing and
Preaching. That to learn Church Government they be admitted to Consistories and
Classes to see what there is done, so that what there they see they keep in
silence. That they leave not the studies of Divinity to meddle with other
things. That they may have leave to Baptize, if the necessity of Rural Churches
require. Yet they must expect a year ere they be admitted, which is not to be
done without sufficient Testimony that all has been done which is required.
The rest of the Provinces required respite till Monday: and so they past to the
question which was proposed in the name of the Churches of Amsterdam,
concerning the Baptizing of the Children of Ethnic Parents. The English first
exhibited their minds in Writing to this effect. That Infants, if they were
justly taken, as, if they were given, or bought, or the like, (for it might not
be lawful fraudulently or violently to take them from their Parents) ought to
be baptized. For so it is recorded of Abraham, that he circumcised every one in
his house, even those whom he had bought with his Money: but if they were
Adulti, they might not be Baptized till they made Profession of the Christian
Faith. With these agreed the Bremenses and the Professors. On the contrary the
Helvetians and South-Hollanders concluded, that the Infants of Ethnic Parents
ought not to be Baptized, till they came to be of years to declare their Faith.
Their chief reason was, because Baptism was a Sign of the Covenant: but the
Infants of Ethnic Parents are not born within the Covenant, and therefore they
cannot be partakers of this Sign. Here was a little indirect dealing betwixt
the Helvetians and the Bremenses. The Helvetians Scribe had by some means or
other suffered a Copy of the reasons for their opinion to be brought aforehand
to those of Breme, who openly in the Synod house, in scripto refuted them:
which thing is feared will cause some choler. And this is all that this day was
done concerning this question, and so both the questions yet depend. The Synod
did the sooner end, because they were at eleven a clock to go to the Funeral of
Henricus ab Hell, who died lately, as I think I told your Honor. The Solemnity
was no more but this. Some of the chief of the Town together with the whole
Synod went to the House where he died, accompanied him to the Church, laid him
in his Grave, and went home again, almost in as little space as I have told it
you. The Duchess of Tremullio was at this Session, and as I hear, spoke very
well of the Synod, commending it both for Piety and good Order.

The Remonstrants are now every day expected. We understand that they are
already met together at Leyden. Mr. Praeses came this day to my Lord Bishop,
and under Benedicite told him, that it was thought the Remonstrants would
become Suitors to the Secular Deputies, for some greater respect in the Synod,
than it is likely otherwise they should have: and that for this they would use
the English as mediators. Then, that they would call in question the right of
his presidentship, as being made only by the Provincials without any respect
had unto the Foreigners. To this my Lord Bishop replied, that for the first,
since they were Members of the Synod, they would not do any thing clancularly
without the consent and Privity of the whole Company. To the second he
answered, that hitherto they had acknowledged him for their Praeses, and so
they would continue to do notwithstanding any objection might be fancyed, so
that of them he might secure himself. And this is all has happened since Friday
Morning, at what time I addressed my last Letters unto your Honor: and for this
time commending your Lordship to Gods good Protection, I humbly take my leave.

Dort, December. 2. 1618. Stylo novo. Your Honors Chaplain, and Bounden in all
Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
MY Letters containing the acts of our Synod upon Friday and Saturday, I
dispatched this morning unto your Honor by a Soldier whom I knew not, and he
delivered them to a Skipper whom he knew not, and whether or no they came to
your Lordships hands I am uncertain. There are come with them Letters from my
Lord Bishop to your Honor. Upon Monday the 3d. of December. the Deputies being
met, they prosecuted the two questions before left undecided; First of the
Baptizing of children born of Ethnic parents: secondly, of means considerable
how to breed up those who are to enter the Ministry. In the first, concerning
the adulti the Synod agreed, that if they made profession of the Christian
Faith they might be baptized, etiam invitis parentibus. Their reason was,
because that after children came to be of years, in case of Religion they
depended not from the power of their parents, but might make their own market.
All the difficulty was of infants, and children not yet of discretion to make
their choice. The English, the Professors, those of Hassia, those of Breme, of
Zeland, of Freesland thought it necessary they should be Baptized if they were
rightfully adopted into Christian Families, and that their parents had
altogether resigned them into the hands of the Christians. They grounded
themselves upon the examples of Abraham circumcising all that were of his
Family; of Paul Baptizing whole households; of the primitive Church recorded in
Saint Austin, who shows that anciently children that were exposititii were wont
to be taken up by the Christians and baptized. Now such were the children of
Ethnic parents; for it was never esteemed lawful for Christians to expose
their children. All the rest were peremptory that they were not to be baptized,
till they came to be of years of Discretion, to make profession of the Faith.
The North-Hollanders themselves, whose business it was, and who moved the Synod
in it, were expressly against it; whether they were bought, given, taken in War,
or howsoever. Their reasons were, because they are immundi; because they are
extra foedus, of which Baptism is a sign; because Adoption could entitle them
only to terrene, not to an Heavenly inheritance, etc. So that if plurality of
voices carry it, the negative part prevails. The Praeses required some time to
compare the opinions together, and so for that time forbear to pronounce
sentence. And because the examples of Abraham and Paul were much stood upon by
those who held the affirmative, he proposed these two things to be considered
of. First, whether it were likely that in Abraham's Family, when he put
circumcision in act, there were any Infants, whose Parents died uncircumcised.
Secondly, whether it were likely that in the Families baptized by Paul, there
were any Infants, whose Parents died unbaptized: and so he past away to the
second Question, concerning the manner of training up those who were to enter
the Ministry. In my last Letters to your Honor I related at large the advice
given in this point by the Zelanders and South-Hollanders. It was now proposed
to the Synod, whether they did approve their Counsel, or except against it.
Some thought it was unlawful for men not in Orders to preach publicly, or
baptize; (for the South-Hollanders in their advice, had determined they should)
others thought it unmeet, that they should be present in the Consistories and
meetings of Deacons, or that they should read the Scriptures publicly in the
Church (which was the joint advice of the Zelanders and South-Hollanders.)
Lastly, it was doubted whether the Synod could make any Decree in this
Question; because of the several customs in several Provinces, which it lay not
in the power of the Synod to prejudice. So that instead of deciding this one
doubt the Praeses proposed five more to be considered of. 1. Whether men not in
Orders might make public Sermons. 2. Whether they might baptize. 3. Whether it
were fit they should come into the Consistories. 4. Whether they should read
the Scriptures publicly. 5. Whether the Synod could make a Decree in this
business, for the reason above mentioned, or only give advice. The Synod had
begun to speak to the two first, and it was the general opinion that they might
not baptize. In the point of preaching they differed. Some thought absolutely
it might be permitted them: others on the contrary thought no: some took a
middle course thinking they might preach privately before a select Auditory,
who were to be their Judges how sufficient they were for that end: some that
they may do it openly, so that it were understood they did it not cum potestate
solvendi and ligandi. But when part of the Synod had spoken their minds,
because the time was much passed, they brake up, and put off the determination
to the next Session.

Here is a rumor that some of the Remonstrants are come to Town, who they are I
cannot yet learn. I shall to morrow make inquiry, and by the next Messenger
acquaint your Lordship with it. In the mean time I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 3. of December. 1618. Stylo novo. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden
in all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Tuesday the fourth of December, Stylo Novo, the Deputies being met in the
morning they proceeded to determine of those doubts, which were moved the
Session before. In the matter consulted concerning the training up of those who
were to take upon them the Ministry, there were five questions moved. 1.
Whether it were fit they should preach publicly. 2. Whether they should
baptize. 3. Whether they should come to the Consistories and meetings of the
Classes. 4. Whether they should read the Scriptures publicly in the Church
before the People. Lastly, whether they should make a Decree to bind all
Provinces necessarily, or only to advise them. To the first two the Exteri had
given their answer in the former Session. For the question of Baptism, no man
stood upon it, but all accounted it unlawful, for men not in Orders to take
upon them to baptize: the doubt was concerning Sermons. Io. Polyander thought
it very fit that such as intended the Ministry, before they were admitted
should practice Preaching. First because it was the practice of some of the
Belgic Churches. Secondly, because it took from them that (...), that
subrustick shamefastness of many men, by which they feared to speak unto the
people. Thirdly, because it was convenient that they should be known for men
fit for that duty, before they should enter upon it. Fourthly, that they might
approve themselves to their Parents and Benefactors, who had been at the charge
of their Education. Provided that it were with these conditions: first, that it
were done with consent of the Classes: Secondly, that it were practiced only
when the Church was unsupplied, either by the death, or absence, or sickness of
their Pastor, or in case of like necessity. With Polyander did Wallaeus of
Middleburgh agree, and grounded himself upon the practice of the Jews, amongst
whom not only the Levites, but others also publicly taught the Law, as it
appears by the story in the Acts, where Paul and Barnabas coming into the
Synagogue, the Rulers called unto them, that if they had any word of
exhortation, they should speak unto the people. Contrary unto both these was D.
Gomarus, who held it utterly unlawful for any to preach before they were
admited to the Ministry. First, because they had no Mission; and who can
preach except he be sent. Secondly, because they had not the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven. Thirdly, it was granted that they could not baptize: now
Christ has put Baptism and Preaching together, Go teach all Nations baptizing
them: and quae Deus conjunxit homo ne separet. Last of all, though there had
been a custom in some places to the contrary, yet fitter it was that custom
should conform it self to Truth, than Truth to custom. With Gomarus agreed
Thysius, and thought his argument drawn from Mission to be unanswerable; and
for my own part I thought so to. D. Gomarus is a man of great note; but I never
heard him speak with any strength of reason in the Synod till now. What
Sibrandus his opinion was concerning the point I know not; for he does so
favor his voice, that I can never tell what he says: and I imagine I have no
great loss of it. After the Professors was there little said, which was not
said before, only Lydius of South-Holland thought certainly to confute Gomarus,
and told us, that such men might preach, and that they had Vocation so to do.
For first that inward Vocation which they had from the Spirit, and then their
Examination and Admission by the Classes was warrant for them sufficient to
preach, though they had no particular charge. For this good News did Mr. Dean
of Worcester publicly applaud D. Lydius in the Synod. I marvail'd much with my
self to see Mr. Dean and Lydius so wide of the mark. For there was no question
of those who were admitted by the Classes, but only of such who fitted
themselves to be admitted. The Examination and Admission by the Classes is the
very form of their Ministry, and not their being placed over a particular
Church. And thus much at length did the Praeses tell us. When all had spoken,
Mr. Praeses pronounced that it was concluded by the Synod, that it should not
be lawful for them to baptize: but for the matter of Sermons, it was thought
good by the Synod, that it should be left to the Judgment and Discretion of
the particular Classes. In the third question concerning the Admission of the
Proponentes, (as they call them) to the Consistories, little was said, and so
in the fourth, concerning the public reading of Scripture in the Church; Some
thought fit that the ancient custom of Anagnostae in the Church should be
revived: others thought it some disparagement to public Reading, that it was
committed to Tradesmen, and many times to men unskilful, that knew not well to
read: In both these the Synod determined nothing, but left them free to the
discretion of the Classes, and the latter was to be left to the Liberty of the
Proponentes, whether they would read or no; and that they were not to be
enforced to it, if they would not. In the last question whether they should
make any necessary Decree binding all, or only by way of Counsel, my Lord
Bishop being asked what he thought fit, made answer, that they were to
distinguish betwixt things necessary, and not necessary. Things absolutely
necessary should be absolutely decreed: other things should be left arbitrary.
Which sentence passed by the major part of Voices, and was Synodically
concluded. Here the Deputies for the Remonstrants of Vtrecht exhibited to the
Synod in writing a Bill, containing some exceptions against what hitherto had
passed in the matter of the Catechism. First they misliked that any such form
should be forced upon them. Secondly, that all Schole-masters should be so
strictly bound to that form, as that it should not be lawful to recede from it.
For this did prejudice all other forms now current, and might discontent the
Lutherans and others, who had admitted of another form. Thirdly, they charged
the Praeses with some indirect dealing. For whereas he had, whilst the business
was in fieri, solemnly protested, that there was no intent concerning the
matter, but only concerning the form of Catechizing, yet in the issue they had
confirmed the Palatine Catechism, which contained as well matter as form.
Fourthly, they misliked the Decree concerning the not premising of a Text of
Scripture before catechetical Sermons. Lastly, they required that this their
dissent might be registered. To this the Praeses replied, that the Synod had
only expressed it self what it thought fittest to be done. As for the necessity
of Execution, that was not in the power of the Synod, but of the States
General, who when all was done, might either pass or recall what they thought
good. Secondly to the point concerning himself, he answered, he had done so,
and thought it fittest so to do (but the Synod thought otherwise) and since
there was a matter of Catechism to be concluded, they thought they might
confirm this as well as any other: and this was not so confirmed, but that it
was in the power of the Synod to alter what they please. To the point of
premising a Text of Scripture before the Catechetical Sermon, he answered that
the determination of the Synod was not to take that custom away there where it
was in use, but only to prohibit the urging of it there where it had a long
time been disused. To the last, concerning the Registring of this their
dissent, he answered, he saw not how this could be granted them; since the
States General had concluded, that what passed by a major part of voices,
should alone be accounted the Act of the Synod: and by the same proportion
every one that passes not his voice with the major part might require his
dissent to be registered. After this the Praeses signified that concerning the
question of the baptizing of Ethnic children put up by the Church of
Amsterdam, he required yet farther respite, because of the opinion of some of
the Synod, which was somewhat ambiguous and obscure. He was therefore to confer
with the Authors of it, and therefore desired that the resolution might be put
off till the next Session: and withal he commended to the Synod the
consideration how the liberty of Printing so promiscuously all kind of
scandalous and libellous Pamphlets might be represt, and so he dismissed the
Synod.

The Remonstrants are in Town, but because they keep themselves private, and
have not presented themselves unto the States and Deputies, there is no notice
taken of it. And so commending your Honor to Gods good Protection I humbly
take my leave.

Dort this 4. of December. 1618. stylo novo. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden
in all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Wednesday the 5. of December, stylo novo, the Deputies being met in the
morning, the first thing which was done, was the admission of a Senior or Elder
for those of Groninga, whose number as it seems was not yet full. The thing was
transacted in Dutch, and yet the consent of the English was asked: at which I
did not a little muse. Next followed the advice of the Helvetians, what course
was to be taken with those, who are to enter the Ministry; in which there was
no great matter from what before was intimated. The Pala^ini promised the like,
and therefore the Praeses required yet farther respite before they did conceive
any form of Decree in this behalf. Then followed the Decree of the Synod
concerning the question moved by those of Amsterdam, about the Baptism of
children born of Ethnic, Parents. The Decision consisted of two parts. The
first concerned the Adulti, and it was this; That such as were of years and
capacity should be diligently taught and catechized, and then, if they did
desire it, they should be baptized. The second concerned Infants, and it was,
That till they came to years of Discretion, they should by no means be
baptized. A strange decision, and such as, if my memory or reading fails me
not, no Church either Ancient or Modern ever gave. When it was objected, what
if they were in danger of death? their answer was, that the want of Baptism
would not prejudice them with God, except we would determine as the Papists do,
that Baptism is necessary to salvation. Which is as much to undervalue the
necessity of Baptism as the Church of Rome does overvalue it. Here followed a
recitation of all that had been done since the business of the Catechism had
been set on foot: amongst the rest was registered the exceptions of the
Remonstrants of Vtrecht, and it was added, atque iis est a Praeside
satisfactum. Those of Vtrecht excepted against that word satisfactum: they had,
said they, an answer given them, but no satisfaction. For they persisted in
their former opinion: and forthwith that word was altered. Here was a doubt
moved, whether it were not fit that some of the especial Reasons brought by the
Synod in the Question of the Baptism of Infants should not be added to the
Decree. It was answered, That Reasons were obnoxious to cavil and exceptions,
and it was not for the Authority of the Synod to Reason, but to Decree. After
this the Praeses signified to the Synod that the time prefixed for the
appearance of the Remonstrants was now expiring, and yet nothing was signified
concerning their appearance neither to the Secular President, nor
Ecclesiastical. Wherefore naming them all, he thought good to cite them to
appear. It was answered by those of Vtrecht, that they did provide and would
shortly be forth coming. In the mean while to take up the time, Mr. Praeses
thought good to commend to the Synod the consideration and redress of those
abuses which were in Printing. Every man was suffered to print what he listed,
whence came abundance of blasphemous, heretical, obscene and scandalous
Pamphlets. Many here delivered their opinions, others required farther time to
think of it. The English first thought fit that the States General should be
requested to take the care of this into their hands. That there should be
Censors to approve all such Books as should go to the Press. That no man should
print, but such as were known to be of the Reformed Religion. Unto this advice
diverse things were added by others; as that there should be a set number of
Printers: that they should be sworn: that there should be certain Laws
prescribed unto them: that they should print no Heretical Books, especially the
Books of David Georgius, H. Nicolaus Socinus: that no Libels, no unlawful
Pictures, either obscene, or made to any man's disgrace, should be permitted:
that no Book should be Printed without the names of the Author, Printer, Place,
except the Synod or the Magistrates did in some cases otherwise think good:
that there should be care that the Correctors for the Press were good Scholars:
and many other things of the like nature. Then were there read certain Canons
made in some Synods before, concerning this business. Theodatus of Geneva told
us, that in his travails, at Venice he had observed that there was a College
of sundry persons, secular and spiritual, to whose care was committed all the
business of Printing. He thought it fit there should be such Colleges here
erected. When all had spoken that would, the Praeses told them that Adrian
Smoutius had written a little Book in the Belgic Tongue unto the Synod, and
sent the Copies of it to him to be distributed. And so requesting them to take
in good part the good will of the man, for want of more business the Synod
brake up.

At length are we coming to the main battle. The Armies have been in sight one
of another, and have had some parley. The manner was this. Upon Thursday the 6.
of December. stylo novo, The Synod being set in the morning, the Praeses
signified, that there had come unto him in the name of the Remonstrants, these
four, H. Leo, Niellius, Matthisius, and Pinakerus, to give notice that the
Remonstrants were ready according to their Citation; but because they had but
lately come unto the Town, that yet convenient lodgings were not provided,
their papers, books and stuff were confused, therefore they required respite
either till Saturday, or at least Friday morning. The President of the
Politics replied, that they should come, and personally make appearance before
the Synod, and there propose their mind, and if the Synod approved their
causes, they might be deferred. Upon this were two of the Deputies of Vtrecht
sent forth, to give them warning to provide for their present appearance. In
the mean while, till they came, the Praeses thought fit, that such as in the
former Session delivered not themselves concerning the Reformation of abuses in
Printing, should now do it. Here was little delivered, besides what was said
the day before, only some few particulars, as that order should be taken to
repress this longing humor in many men of coming to the Press: that there
should be no impression of the Bible at any time without leave had: Foreign
Books brought out of other Countries should not be distracted here without
peculiar leave, after their being perused by the Censurers: to ease the
Censurers that they might not be troubled with reading too great a multitude of
unprofitable Books, it was thought fit that the Books should first be brought
to the Classes, and what they approved should be brought to the Censurers, etc.
In the men while the Remonstrants came, all that were cited by Letters, and
were admitted into the Synod. There is in the midst of the Synod-House a long
Table, set, as it seems, for them; for it has hitherto been void, no man
sitting at it: here Chairs and Forms being set, they were willed to sit down.
The Praeses told them, that he had commended to the Synod their suit of being a
little respited: but it was the will of the Deputies for the States, that they
should come before the Synod, and propose their cause themselves. Episcopius
standing up, spoke to this effect. First he prayed God to give a blessing to
this meeting and to pour into their minds such conceits, as best fitted men
come together for such ends: then he signified, that according to their
Citation they were now come ad collationem instituendam, concerning that cause,
which hitherto with a good Conscience they had maintained. As for the point of
delay, true it is they spoke to the Praeses concerning a respite until Saturday
or Friday, by reason of that great distraction of their Books and Papers, and
want of convenient lodging, but not as a petition to be moved in that behalf
unto the Synod; but only as a thing which out of common equity they might have
presumed on without acquainting the Synod with it. For they were ready, even at
that present to begin the business they came for, without any farther delay.
But this they left to the Deputies Secular and Ecclesiastical to determine of.
Then were they requested to withdraw a little into a chamber near the Synod
House; and immediately was it proposed unto the Synod, what time was to be set
for to begin. The time prefixed was the morrow after. Io. Polyander took hold of
those words, ad Collationem, and told the Synod, that it was fit the
Remonstrants were told the end of their coming, and the manner of proceeding
which should be taken with them, that they might know what they were to look
for, and so provide. They were to be informed, that they came not to
conference, neither did the Synod profess themselves an adverse party against
them. Conferences had been heretofore held to no purpose. They ought to have
heeded the words of the Letters by which they were cited. They were called, not
to conference, but to propose their Opinions with their Reasons, and leave it
to the Synod to judge of them. The Synod would be a judge and not a party. Then
were they called in again, and all this was told them. Episcopius answered,
that for the word Collatio he stood not on it, and how they would carry
themselves it should appear the day following. Mean while one thing they would
request of the Synod: that is, that Grevinchovius and Goulartius should be sent
for to the Synod as Patrons of this cause. That they had this last week
exhibited a Supplication to the States General to this purpose, and received
this answer, that they should put this matter to the Synod, and if the Synod
thought it fit to be granted, they would not be against it. Neither did they
propose this to seek delays. For they were ready, whilst these men should be
sent for to proceed to the action. Only they thought fit, that to maintain
their cause they should be sent for, who could best do it. Then were they again
dismissed: and one was sent to them, to call for their Supplication to the Lords,
and the Lords Answer. To this they returned, that the Lords gave this answer,
not in writing, but by word of mouth: and for the copy of their Supplication,
they called not for it any more. Then was the thing proposed unto the Synod,
and the Secular Deputies replied, that they would return their answer on the
morrow: and the same was the answer of the Synod. Mr Praeses thought that
Grevinchovius might be admitted salvis censuris Ecclesiasticis: yet
notwithstanding he thought good to acquaint the Synod with the quality of this
man, and thereupon he produced the Act of the Provincial Synod, of
South-Holland, wherein it was witnessed, that the Synod, because he did refuse
to appear when they cited him, and because of many Blasphemies in his Book, and
of many reproachful speeches against the Magistrates and against the Ministers,
had suspended him ab omni munere Ecclesiastico. From this Grevinchovius had not
appealed to the National Synod to do what they thought fit. Then were the
Remonstrants again called in, and it was signified unto them, that on the
morrow they should understand the will of the Synod concerning their motion
made, and so were they again dismissed; and the Session ended, the Praeses having
first premised, that all other things yet depending, as the Decree concerning
the Proponentes, together with the Remedies concerning the abuses in Printing,
and what else soever, must be deferred, and the business in hand alone attended.

My Lord Bishop was desirous that Mr. Carleton should stay this day, to see the
coming of the Remonstrants. I would have had him stay to morrow likewise, that
he might have seen the manner of proceeding with them; but he would not. Here
is speech that Scultetus is to make the next Latin Sermon; but when we know
not. There is a rumor that Vorstius is gone from Tergone, but of this I
suppose your Honor may have better information than I can give; therefore
ceasing to trouble your Honor any longer I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 6. of November. 1618. Stylo novo. Your Lordships Chaplain, and bounden
in all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
IN my last Letters to your Honor, I related a doubt concering the Deputies
for the Remonstrants of Vtrecht; whether they were to be a part of the Synod,
or in the number of the Remonstrants, who were cited to appear before the
Synod. The reasons of that doubt, which then I understood not, were these.
First, because in their Credential Letters they were charged to defend the
cause of the Remonstrants. Now it could not be that they should be both
Defendants and Judges in the same cause. Secondly, it was objected that their
case was the same per omnia with Episcopius, who was to have been of the Synod,
if he would have brought his Credential Letters, as the rest of the professors
were. But he refused it, because in the Remonstrants cause he was to be a
party, except he would have laid by the defense of that cause. Thirdly, when
the question was of citing the Remonstrants out of each Province, it was then
concluded in the Synod, that out of the Province of Vtrecht none should be
cited to appear, because of that Province there were some already, and
therefore it was superfluous to oite any more. In the judgment of the Synod
therefore they were in numero citatorum, as far as concerned that cause, and
not in the number of the Members of the Synod. Unto these Reasons were they
charged to give their answer upon Saturday, and then to resolve whether they
would forsake the words of their Credential Letters, and so remain Judges, or
else stand unto them, and become in the number of the citati. Wherefore upon
Saturday, the 8. of December, stylo novo, The Synod being met in the morning,
the Deputies for Remonstrants gave up their Answer in scripto to these Reasons.
And to the first concerning the Clause in their Credential Letters, they
answered, that they were not so limited, but that in their private instructions
they had leave to do otherwise, if they thought good. To the second, concerning
the Parity of their case with Episcopius they answered, that their case was
quite another; for they were sent from their Provinces as Members of the Synod,
which plea Episcopius could not make. To the third, concerning the intent of
the Synod at the Citation they answered, that they never so understood the
words of the Synod, neither did they know but that they might show themselves
for the cause of the Remonstrants, and yet sit as Judges, since they were there
to defend their opinion no otherwise than the Contra-Remonstrants were to
defend theirs: and therefore they were purposed to take theoath, and to keep
their places. The Praeses then required them to show that clause in their
private instructions, wherein that reservation was which they pretended. They
stuck a little at first to bring forth their instructions-but at length seeing
there was no other remedy they consentted to do it, provided that no more
should be read than what they would suffer: which was granted them. In the mean
time whilst they were providing to produce their instructions, there were read
in the Synod the letters of the provincial Synod of South Holland, directed to
the National, to this purpose: that whereas Theophilus Ryckwaerdius, one of
those who was cited among the Remonstrants, had lately been by them convented
for certain misdemeanors, the Synod would be pleased to give him leave to
return and make his answer to such objections as they had to charge him with.
The thing was put to the determination of the Synod. The Deputies of the States
thought fit it should be left to his own discretion to do as he thought good.
Others thought it not fit he should be sent from the greater Synod to a lesser.
Others thought it was necessary he should immediately be sent away to make his
answer, since it was question of behavior and manners only, and not of
doctrine. In the end it was concluded it should be left to his own discretion,
to do as he thought good. By this time were the Remonstrants of Vtrecht ready
to show their instructions, which they there openly produced, but to no purpose
at all. For all they could show was this, that they had commission to defend
their cause, or to labor at least for an accommodation or toleration of it:
but that they had power to pronounce decisively de veritate aut falsitate
sententiae, that did not as yet appear. The thing was acted with much
altercation on both sides. At length it was agreed, with some reluctance on the
Remonstrants party, that it should be put to the determination of the Synod;
whether they were to be accounted as Judges, or only as citati. Some favorably
thought that their private instructions were not too narrowly to be sifted, but
if they would suo periculo take the oath, it should be sufficient. Others
thought that an Oath was a greater matter than should so easily be permitted,
although men did offer to take it, there being so good cause of doubt, as now
there was. Others examining there Credential letters, and the words of their
private Commission, and finding no authority given them to define de falsitate
sententiae if it should appear to be false; and that the lowest point they
could descend unto, was a Toleration, concluded they could be no other than
citati. As for their plea, that they came to defend their opinion no otherwise
than the Contra-Remonstrants did for theirs, it was replied, first that they
did the Synod wrong to make this distinction of Contra-Remonstrants and
Remonstrants: for in the Synod there was no Contra-Remonstrant, and no man was
called thither under the name, whereas they in their letters came under the
name of Remonstrants. Again, No man came with charge to defend any opinion, but
were free to pronounce according to truth wheresoever it should be, which was
not their case. In the end the judgment of the Synod was given up, that they
could not be of the members of the Synod in this cause (for in any other they
might) but only as citati. Yet notwithstanding that they might see the equity
of the Synod toward them, it was permitted them to keep their places upon these
conditions: first if they would quit their defense of the cause; Secondly if
they would give no advice or counsel directly or indirectly to the citati, and
by no means meddle with them in their cause: Thirdly, that they did not divulge
any of the Acts and Secrets of the Synod, (which Clause was a mere Formality.
For who can expect that that should not be divulged, which is done in the sight
of so many Spectators?) Fourthly, that they should not be troublesome to the
Synod, by any intempestive interpellations. This if, they would promise, they
should take the Oath, and sit as Judges; otherwise, not. Unto this were they
charged immediately to give their answer. They again required respite. It was
answered, that this request was needless, the case being so plain, and
injurious to the Synod in detaining them from their business by frivolous
delays. They persisting still in their Suit, the thing again was devolved unto
the Synod, whether they should give their Answer presently, or have farther
respite. It was concluded that they should repair to Mr. Praeses the same day
at five a clock in the Evening, there without farther delay, roundly to deliver
their resolution. Which thing yet they did not. They came indeed at the time
appointed, but gave no Resolution, neither yet have done, for any thing I can
hear. And this was all was done that Session. I marvail much that the Province
of Vtrecht, being the strength of the Remonstrants, could find no wiser men to
handle their Cause. For as they did very foolishly in bewraying their private
instructions, so in this whole altercation did they not speak one wise word.
This Session the Remonstrants that were cited appeared not all.

Episcopius is reported to have put a trick upon the Seculars. For whereas in
his speech he had said some things concerning them, in that Copy which was
exhibited, signed with all their hands, there is no such thing appears. He had
committed it only to his Memory, as forseeing the Copy might be called for.

Mr. Praeses remembers his love and service to your Lordship, and has sent you
a Copy of the Book which Adrian Smoutius dedicated to the Synod. The greatest
News, for ought I perceive, is, that it is dedicated to the Synod; for else
there is little that concerns them. I have troubled your Lordship with very
long repetition of a petit matter: but it was all the Argument of the Session.
I trow, to morrow we shall have other manner of stuff. And so ceasing to
trouble your Lordship, I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 9. of December. 1618. Style novo. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden
in all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
ON Monday the 10. of December, stylo novo, the Deputies met in the morning,
where the first thing determined, was the question as yet depending concerning
the Remonstrants of Vtrecht. They had according to their appointment come to
the Praeses and Assessors to give their Answer, which was merely dilatory,
containing their answers to such reasons as the Synod on the Saturday Session
had brought to prove them in the number of the Citati. But having better
bethought themselves, upon the Monday a little before the Morning Session, they
delivered their Resolution to the Praeses, to this effect, That since nothing
else would content the Synod, they had resolved to leave their place of Judges,
and to adjoyn themselves to the other Remonstrants which were cited: and so
they did. After this fell in some speech concerning a supplication lately
exhibited by the Remonstrants unto the Exteri: and because it seemed to contein
some aspersions against the Synod, there was question made whether or not it
should be publicly read, and stand: but this motion died, and there was
nothing done in it. A Copy of this Supplication; I think, my Lord Bissiop
lately sent your Honor. Then Mr. Praeses signified unto the Synod, that
without farther delay he thought it fit. The Remonstrants should put in mind of
the end of their coming, and that they should put up their minds in writing,
concerning the five points in question, and that forthwith. For he doubted it
not, but they came very well provided to do it: and more, that some years past,
they had provided certain considerations to be at hand, whenever they should
be called for, with which the World was not yet acquainted. This thing he
remembered Monsieur Barnevolt sometime told him in private conference, and the
Remonstrants themselves have told the world as much in their pressior
declaratio, which they joined to their addition of the conference at the Hague.
Then were the Remonstrants called in, and told, First of their indirect
dealing, in pretending themselves to have but one Copy of their Oration,
whereas it was known they had another, and in delivering up a broken Copy: then
of the end of their being convented by the Synod. But by the way one thing was
urged somewhat unnecessarily. The Remonstrants had given up, (as I told your
Honor) their seech signed with all their hands. When those of Vtrecht had
joined themselves unto them, they were urged to put to their hands also: to
which they replied, they had not as yet read it. Here Episcopius took occasion
to clear himself of that imputation lately fastened upon him, that he had
abused the Delegates, in giving them a counterfeit Copy of his speech:
protesting he was not so ill qualitied, as that in so great a matter, and that
before God and so grave a Congregation he would deal doubly, and dishonestly:
that he never affirmed that he had one only Copy, but that he had none fairly
written; for he confessed he had another, and that the reason why he requested
either the same Copy again, or at least a Transcript of it, was, because there
was some difference betwixt the two Copies, and they had not yet perfectly
compared them together. The Praeses answered, that what was laid to their
Charge, was nothing else but that which the Synod verily understood to have
been done, and he thinks, that if the Memories of those in the Synod were
consulted with, they would all confirm it. About this was there likely to have
been some altercation farther, but the Secular Praeses willed them to leave
that and pass to their business. Here Episcopius besought the Synod that he
might have leave to speak some things by way of Proeme ere they came to the
Action. It was at first denied him, but he did so earnestly entreat, that at
length he had leave to speak his mind: and so forthwith there was recited e
Scripto a long and tedious speech of two hours, at the least: consisting of two
general heads; First of Exceptions they had against the Synod Tanquam in
judicem incompetentem: Secondly of a conceit of their own, what manner of Synod
they thought fit it should be, which was to compose these controversies in
hand. Their reasons of Exceptions were many, and manifoldly amplified and
confirmed: but amongst them all there were two especially insisted upon. First,
it was against all equity and nature that the adverse party should be judge:
the Synod was here the adverse party, and therefore they could not be Judges.
Secondly, those who had made an open Schism and Faction in the Church, and had
separated themselves from their brethren, could not be their Judges: but of
this Synod a great part were Authors of Schism, and the rest Favorers and
Abetters of it: they could not therefore be their judges. In the Prosecution of
which Reason they did not spare very liberally to bestow on the Synod the name
of Schismatici and Novatores, and schismatum Fautores, and other goodly titles
of the same nature. The second part of their Oration was a mere Chimaera
saltans in vacuo; a strange fancy of such a Synod as never was, nor can be. I
had thought to have taken an abstract of it, but the tediousness of it deterred
me. I will give your Honor a taste or two of it. There were but two ways of
instituting a Synod for the ending of these quarrels. The first was, by
seeking out every where certain select men, who all this time of contention had
taken part with neither side; but kept themselves unpartial. Secondly, if a
Synod of such could not be found (as I think it could scarcely be found in the
Netherlands, though the Sun it self should seek it) then such a Synod should be
framed, as in which should be an equal number of both parties, each with their
several Praeses and Assessors; and they should debate the matter betwixt
themselves: and if they could not agree, (as it is likely they would not) what
then, thought I? shall they part as they came? No forsooth. The Civil
Magistrate, tanquam Deus e machina, he must come in, and prescribe the
Moderamen from which neither party must appeal. Provided always, that he
labored only for Accommodation, and not to determine decisively for one part,
(...). And so I awoke. Of the same thread was the whole piece of their speech.
When they had well and thoroughly wearied their Auditory, they did that which we
much desired; they made an end. The Praeses made a brief Answer to this effect.
For the point of Schism says he, it is not yet fit time to discuss. But when
it should in the Synod be made plain what had been the received Doctrine of the
Church, then it would appear who they were that had made secession from it, and
so were guilty of Schism. If you refuse us because we are your adversaries,
whom would you have deputed as Judges? your selves, or the Papists, or the
Anabaptists, or the Libertines, or some other faction in these Countries? Let
us be Scismaticks, let us be Scribes and Pharisees, and worse; yet you may not
deny this Synod to be a lawful Synod. For first it was done by the Civil
Magistrate, who had Authority to do it. Secondly, such as were there were
deputed by the consent of the Provinces. Thirdly, they had all taken their
Oaths to judge uprightly. This is enough to make us your Judges, and common
Charity should make you to hope we would judge upright: at least it should make
you resolve thus far, if we should decide truly, you would subscribe unto it,
if otherwise you would patiently bear it. If you were in our places, so
Deputed, so sworn, and we were to be judged by you, we were to do the like.
Here followed some wrangling to no great purpose, and so the Session ended.

The same day after dinner the Deputies met again; where first the Praeses
commended to the Synod the consideration of that reproachful Name of Schism,
which the Remonstrants did so openly and so often brand them with. For it was
Episcopius his palmarium argumentum, the Synod was all either Schismatics or
favorers of them, and therefore could not be their Judges. It was much that
they should grow to that boldness, as that openly they should call the Synod,
the Seculars, the chief Magistrates, yea the Prince of Orange himself,
Schismatics. For what had formerly been done in the matter of Secession and
division of Churches was done by their consent and approbation. He required
therefore the Synod to deliver themselves what was to be done. Diverse spoke
diversely. Lydius of South Holland relating the story of what had been done in
the time of separation, cleared them of Schism; and showed first, that the name
of Schism was used craftily by them; as for a reproach, so likewise for a
farther end they had for themselves. For a Schism is only a breach of Charity
and peace of the Church, the Doctrine remaining entire. If there were a
separation by reason of Doctrine Heretical (as here he thought there was) it
was not to be called a Schism. Now the Remonstrants did therefore use the name
of Schism, that they might persuade the world, that the difference was only in
certain points indifferent, in which it mattered not which end went forward, by
this means to make their way open to a toleration. Again, the separation which
was made, was made upon good reason. For they were forced unto it by the
Remonstrants violence, as in particular he did show. At length he and the rest
of the Synod concluded, that they should roundly be put in mind of their duty,
and to speak more respectively to the Synod. Upon this the Remonstrants being
called in, the Praeses signified what the Synod disliked in them, and what
behavior it expected at their hands: and withal willed them to attend the
Decree of the States. Episcopius would have answered, but he was prohibited.
Then immediately followed a decree of the States to this purpose; that whereas
the Remonstrants had hitherto made many dilatory answers, to the injury both of
the Ecclesiastics and Seculars, it was decreed by them, that they should lay
by all frivolous Exceptions, and dilatory answers, and forthwith proceed to set
down their mind concerning the Five Articles, for which end they were come
together. Then began Episcopius to purge himself, and declare, that in the
imputation of Schism they included not the Seculars, they only charged the
Ecclesiastics: and if the Seculars had a hand in it, they meddled not with
that. The Praeses urged them to give their answer, whether or no they would set
down their minds concerning the points in controversy: they still excepted,
that the Synod were not their competent Judges. The Praeses asked by whom they
would be judged? they replied, they would not answer this, it was sufficient
that the Synod could not be their Judges. They were willed to remember they
were Citati: they replied, Citatorum est excipere de competentia judicis. The
Praeses of the Seculars willed them to remember that they were Subjects; they
replied, the Magistrate could not command their Consciences: being again willed
to give their answer, whether or no they would exhibit their minds concerning
the five Articles, they required first to have their exceptions answered; when
no other answer would be given, they dismissed them, and appointed that of the
Synod two should be chosen Delegates, who should immediately go to them, and in
the name of the Synod warn them to lay by all other answers, and at the next
Session Categorically answer, whether they would exhibit their minds concerning
the points in Controversy, or no: that so the Synod might know what they had to
do: and so they brake up: this morning therefore we look what will be done. And
so for this time I humbly take my leave, commending your Honor to Gods good
Protection.

Dort, 1/^1. December. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in all Duty, Jo.
Hales.
Of the Remonstrants of Vtrecht, two only have joined themselves to the Citati:
the third which is an Elder, professes to submit himself to the judgment of
the Synod, if they shall decide according to his Conscience; and that if it
please the Synod to give him his Oath, he is ready to judge neither as
Remonstrant nor Contra-Remonstrant, but accordingly as it shall please God to
open him the truth in the Synod.



Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
ON Thursday the 4/14. of December. the Synod being sat, and repetition made,
according to the custom, of what had past in the former Session, the
Remonstrants being called in were asked, whether or no they had set down in
writing their opinion concerning the first Article. Forthwith they exhibited to
the Synod their opinion subscribed with all their hands. The Copy of this your
Lordship shall receive here with these letters. The paper being read, the
Praeses asked them all one by one whether this were their opinion, to which each
man answered affirmatively. The Remonstrants being dismissed the Praeses proposed
to the Synod, whether it were not fit that they should be sent for one by one
and examined singly as concerning their tenent. His reason was, because he
understood that they made themselves an Antisynod, and had among themselves
ordained a Praeses, two Assessours, and two Scribes according to the form of
the Synod, and so they did all things communi consensu like a little Synod: to
this some answered that they thought it fit: some that those only should be
singled out who were carried away with respect to their company, and if they
were alone would think and do otherwise: others thought it utterly unfit
because it might seem olere artificium aliquod, to savor of a trick, whereas
it best became the Synod to do all things candide and sincere: others would
have no man examined alone but when all the rest were by: others left it to the
judgment of the Praeses to do as he thought good when occasion served: which
last sentence as it seemed stood good. After this was there a general exception
against the manner in which they had proposed their sentence: that they had
done it confuse, distracte, and obscure: that they had intermingled things
impertinent and belonging to other questions: that the most of their proposals
were negatives, what they did not hold, and not affirmatives what they did;
whereas their appearance there was to show what they did hold, not what they
did not hold. And it was discovered that this their proceeding by negatives
was, that they might take occasions to refute other opinions, and not to
confirm their own; whereas by the decree of the States they were called thither
ut sententium SVAM dilucide, perspicue etc. exponerent and defenderent, not
that they should oppugn others. That it had been their custom very liberally
to examine other men's opinions and to be sparing in confirming their own. That
if they did refuse to deal more plainly in expounding their mind, the Synod
should take order that the state of the question should be taken out of their
Books, especially out of the Hague conference, and so they should be questioned
whether they would stand to it or no: that they did maintain amongst them an
implicit faith, and it was usual with some of them, when they were pressed with
any reason they could not put by, to answer that though themselves could say
little to it, yet such and such could say much, which was enough for them. When
all had spoken their pleasure, the conclusion of the Synod was, that they must
reform the manner of propounding their mind: that they must give up their
answer in affirmatives, as much as was possible: that this form of answer was
not according to the Decree of the States; and this was the effect of that
Session.

On Friday, the 5/15 of December. there was a short Session in the morning. The
matter propounded was, whether it were not fit that the Remonstrants should be
required to give up their minds concerning all the five points, before the
Synod proceeded to examine or determine any thing. The reason was, the
connection of the points mutually one with another, for which cause it was hard
to determine of one, except their mind in the rest were known. The Secular
Lords and the Synod liked well of the proposal. Those of Geneva thought it best
to take their opinions out of their books: to which the Praeses answered, that
it could not be, because they were called thither by their citatory Letters to
propose and defend their own opinions. That they could not complain of the
Synod for calling on them thus at once to deliver themselves. For the Synod
doubts not that they were provided, since themselves had long since given it
out in their books and private speeches that they were provided. The
Remonstrants then being called in, were told that it was the determination of
the Synod that they should deliver their opinions at once concerning the five
points; and for this they had given them time till Monday. For this would prove
better for the Synod and for themselves. Then that they should deliver
themselves in affirmatives as much as possibly might be. For by their negatives
they delivered not their own opinions, but diverted upon other. The Confessions
and Creeds had always been framed by affirmatives; thus or thus we do believe;
not by negatives. To this they replied, Attendemus ad ea quae a Domino Praeside
dict a sunt and considerabimus. Then did the Praeses signify that on the
morrow there should be a Latin Sermon in the Synod house. Scultetus is the man
that makes it. And this is the effect of what was done at that time, and so
ceasing to trouble your Lordship any farther at this time, I humbly take my
leave, resting

Dort this 15. of December. 1618. stylo novo. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden
in all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
THe seventh of December. stylo novo, being Friday, in the morning the Synod met;
the first thing that was done, was the pronouncing the Decree of the States
concerning Grevinchovius and Goulartius to this effect, That whereas the
Remonstrants had petitioned to the States, that Grevinchovius and Goulartius
might be admitted into the Synod, there to defend the Remonstrants Cause, the
Lords for good causes thought they neither ought, nor could grant it; yet thus
much did they graciously permit, that they might freely come in private, and do
them what help they could; and if they thought, that in any thing they saw
further into the Cause than their brethren, they might have leave to exhibit
their mind in writing to the Synod. Provided, First, that they had leave of the
Synod so to do. Secondly, that they did not seek any frivolous delays:
Thirdly, that they promised to submit themselves to the Decree of the Synod:
and last of all, that the Church Censures respectively passed on Grevinchovius
and Goulartius be not prejudiced; but stand still in their full force and
virtue. This Decree was consented unto by the whole Synod. Here the Praeses
admonisht those of Vtrecht to provide themselves, and resolve what they would
do; whether they would profess themselves parties for the Remonstrants, or keep
their places, and sit as Judges; if they would express as parties, then must
they cease to be accounted part of the Synod, and be accounted as Episcopius
and the rest that were cited. They required that time might be given them to
deliberate. The Praeses eagerly urged them to give their resolute answer. They
replied it was a greater matter than might so soon be dispatched. So far they
went, that at length they fell on some warm words. For when two of the
Remonstrants Deputies by chance ^pake both at once, the Praeses admonisht them
to speak modestius and ornatius. For men here speak one by one, and not by
pairs. But here the Secular Deputies struck in, and thought fit they should
have time of respite till the morrow: yet so that in the mean time the Synod
should proceed: Then were the Remonstrants called in, and the Decree of the
States concerning Grevinchovius and Goulartius read unto them: Episcopius
standing up required that a little time might be granted to them to speak, and
forthwith uttered an Oration, acrem sane and animosam, and about which, by
reason of some particulars in it, there will grow some stir. The effect of the
Oration was this.

THat Religion was the chiefest note of a man; and we were more distinguished
by it from other Creatures, than by our Reason. That their appearance before
the Synod was, ut illam etiam Spartam ornarent, that they might endeavor
something for the preservation of the Purity of Religion: That Religion was
nothing else but a right Conceit and Worship of God: That the Conceits
concerning God are of two sorts; some absolutely necessary, which were the
grounds of all true Worship, in these to err might finally endanger a man;
Some not absolutely necessary; and in these sometimes without great danger men
might mistake; That they descryed many conceits passing in our Churches which
could not stand with the Goodness and Justice of God, with the use of the
Sacraments, with the Duties of Christian men; These had given occasion to the
Adversaries abroad to accuse our Churches, and lay upon them many strange
imputations, That therefore their endeavor had been none other but to remove
these imputations, and to provide as much as in them lay, that the Conceits of
some few might not pass for the general Doctrine of our Churches; But this
their endeavor had hitherunto had but ill success; And as in a diseased body
many times when Physic is administered, the humors which before were quiet are
now stirred, and hence the body proves more distempered: so their endeavors to
cure the Church had caused greater disorder, yet in this had they not offended.
For they labored to none other end, but that the Church might not be traduced
by reason of the private conceits of some of her Ministers. That in this behalf
the world had been exceedingly incensed against them: but this Envy they
esteeemed their Gloriam and Palmarium; That for this they did not mean to
forsake their Cause, and were it so that they should lose the day, yet would
they joy in it, and think it glory enough magnis ausis excidisse. That this
their stirring was not de lana caprina, of small, frivolous, and worthless
matters, of mere quirks of Wit, as many of the common sort were persuaded; that
out of this conceit it was that they had been so exceedingly roughly dealt
withal, yea they might say saevitum fuisse against them, as against
unnecessary Innovators in the Church: First matters were handled against them
clanculary, and by stealth, after this they brake out into open but false
accusations, and after this into wrath, into scoffing and bitterness, till at
length effractis moderationis repagulis, every one came with open mouth against
them, tanquam in publici odii victimas [Here followed a grave and serious
invocation of Christ as a witness to the truth of what they said]. True indeed
it was, that in their Books many things were to be found amiss. For a very hard
matter they thought it for minds exasperated semper rectum clavem tenere. That
for the settling of these things, there could but three courses be thought of;
either ^ National Synod, or a mutual Toleration of each others Opinions, or the
Cession and Resignation of their Calling and place in the Church. To quit them
of their calling and to fly, this were a note of the Hireling: as for a Synod,
which they much desired, remorabantur qui minime debebant, and it was pretended
that the condition of the Times would not suffer it. There remains only a
mutual Toleration, of the possibility of which alone they had hope. And for
this end they did exceedingly approve of the Decree of the States of Holland,
and West-fryzeland, which they thought confirmed by the examples of Beza's
dealing with some, of their own dealing with the Lutherans, of the Advice of
the King of Great Britain: But all this was labor lost; for there was a buzze
and jealousy spread in the heads of men, that under this larve, this whifling
Suit of Toleration there lay personated more dangerous designs: that behind
this, tanquam post siparium, there lay intents of opening a way to the
Profession of all the ancient Heresies: and that the Remonstrants could pro
tempore, Conscientiae suae imperare quod volunt, upon this began men's minds to
be alienated from them: which thing at length brake forth into Schism and open
separation. Now began their Books to be more narrowly inquired into, every
line, every phrase, every word and tittle to be stretched to the uttermost, to
prove them Heretics. Witness that late work, entitled Specimen
Controversiarum Belgicarum, whose Authors credit and good dealing had already
in part appeared, and hereafter farther would appear. That all Fundamental
points of Divinity they had preserved untouched. For they knew that there were
many things of which it is not lawful to dispute, and they abhorred from that
conceit of many men, who would believe nothing but what they were able to give
a Reason of. That what they questioned was only such a matter, which for a long
time had been, without danger, both pro and contra disputed of. They thought it
sufficient if the chief points of Religion remains unshaken. That there had
been always sundry Opinions even amongst the Fathers themselves, which yet had
not broken out into separation of minds, and breach of Charity. That it was
impossible for all wits to jump in one point. It was the Judgment of Paraeus a
great Divine, that the greatest cause of Contentions in the Church was this,
that the Scholemens Conclusions, and Cathedral Decisions had been received as
Oracles, and Articles of Faith. That they were therefore unjustly charged with
the bringing in of a Sceptick Theology: They sought for nothing else but for
that liberty which is the mean betwixt servitude and License. That now they
appeared before they Synod, whether as cited, or otherwise, they were not
careful. They had been present howsoever had it been lawful. They required the
Foreigners not to judge of them as they had heard abroad, but as they now
should find them. That they profess they oppose themselves, first against those
Conclusions concerning Predestination, which the Authors themselves have called
Horrida Decreta. Secondly, against those who for the Five Articles so called
have made a Separation, never expecting any Synodical Sentence: Thirdly,
against those who cast from them all those who in some things dissent from
them. And yet to raise the controversy greater, is the question of the right of
Magistrates added above all the rest, which they maintained against those, who
taught the Magistrate should with a hoodwinkt obedience accept of what the
Divines taught, without farther inquiry. These are the points, for which we
have contended. Give unto us that respect which your selves would look for at
our hands, if you were in our case; we have not ambitiously sued to any: the
Favor of God alone it is which we have sought; Look not upon this small number
which you see, Unus Patronus bonae causae satis est. It Is not the smaller
number that makes the Schism. If a major part carry the right, what think you
then of the Province of Utrecht, where the greater parts are Remonstrants? From
you does the Schism proceed, First here in this Synod, by making so an unequal
a choice of Deputies with so small a number of Remonstrants. Secondly by
proceeding against us abroad, not expecting a Synodal Decree, by cashiering and
subjecting unto Censures the chief Patrons of our Cause, eos apud quos sunt
aquilae nostrae: and peradventure, even at this very hour you proceed against
some of ours by suspending, discommuning, by expelling them from their
Churches, etc. But yet we cast not away our Swords; The Scriptures and solid
Reason shall be to us instead of multitudes. The Conscience rests not it self
upon the number of Suffrages, but upon the strength of Reason. Tam parati sumus
vinci, quam vincere. He gets a great Victory, that being conquered gains the
Truth. A^^cus Socrates, amicus Plato, amica Synodus, sed magis an^ca Veritas.

THese are the Fragments of Episcopius his speech, as far as my Memory and
broken notes could supply me; I suppose what Errors I have committed by leaving
out, misplacing, misrelating, Mr. Ames, when he comes to your Honor will
rectify: this and much more for an hours space, he delivered with great grace
of speech and Oratorial gesture: The Praeses signified unto him, that because
there were in his speech many things considerable, he was therefore to deliver
the Copy of it: Episcopius replied, that he had none handsomely written; if the
Synod would have patience, he would cause a fair Transcript to be drawn for
them; But this excuse would not serve. Fair or foul deliver it up he must, and
so he did: The Deputies for the Politics signified, that since there were many
things in it, which did as well concern the Seculars, as Ecclesiastics, they
were to give it up subscribed with all their hands: which forthwith was done.
Then did the Praeses tell them how much they were beholding to the Synod, that
had so patiently heard them, notwithstanding that they had no leave granted
them to speak, and that they ought to have expected the Mandate of the Synod.
To this Episcopius replies, that he had required leave before he began to
speak; True, said the Praeses, but you stayed not till leave was granted you;
besides, says he, you are to know that no man may, no not of those that are
the members of the Synod, offer to declaim without leave first had, and without
manifesting the Argument and drift of his speech. After this followed a Form of
Oath prescribed by the States, which all the Members of the Synod were to take,
the Articles of it were these two, That only the Word of God should be taken
for their rule to end their questions, and that they had no other purpose but
the peace of the Church. First the Praeses took his Oath in this order,
standing up in his place, he said, Ego promitto coram Deo, (thus, and thus) ita
propitius mihi sit Servator Christus. Then the Provincials took every one in
his order, standing in his place, and pronouncing these words, Idem promitto
coram Deo and sancto Servatore, only the Remonstrants Deputies of Vtrecht took
not the Oath, because as yet they had not determined, whether they would make
themselves parties or Judges; After the Provincials did the Foreigners in
order do the like, and so the Session ended. And with it I think it is time for
me to end, and commend your Lordship to Gods good Protection.

Dort this 7. of December. 1618. Stylo novo. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden
in all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Saturday 5/^^ of this present, the Synod being sat in the Morning,
Scultetus made unto them a pious, and pathetical Sermon. In the beginning he
signified, first how it joyed him to speak unto them Post eruditissimum virum
Iosephum Hallum, Decanum Wigorniae meritissimum. Secondly that he saw that day,
that which his Majesty of Great Britain, and the Prince Elector his Master had
so long desired to see, namely a Synod gathered for the settling of the Churches
peace in these Countries. He took for his Theme the 122. Psalm, I rejoiced when
they said unto me, Let us go up unto the house of the Lord, and so forth unto
the end of the Psalm. Where first having showed the occasion of this Psalm,
that it was the Removal and bringing of the Ark unto Jerusalem, he considered
in the whole Psalm three things. First, that it was Summum hominis gaudium, to
see the Peace and flourishing of the Church; which he showed by many Reasons,
and confirmed by the examples of the Duke of Wittemberg, who at the Council
held at Worms a hundred and twenty years since, when others discoursed of many
Privileges and conveniences of their Lordships and Territories, openly
protested it to be his greatest felicity, that he could in aperto campo, and in
sinu Subditorum suorum dormire: and of Theodosius the Emperor, who at his
death did more comfort himself that he had been a Son of the Church, than the
Emperor of the World. Secondly, that it was Summum hominis Votum to pray for
the peace and ^lourishing of the Church: which he confirmed by the examples of
the Apostles and of Christ himself. Thirdly, that it was Summum hominis studium
to procure the peace of the Church. Where speaking of the present occasion, I
am no Prophet (says he) yet I think I foresee, that the peace of the Belgic
Churches would be a means to settle the peace of other Churches. He therefore
wished that the States, the Prince, the Delegates, would all propose unto
themselves as their end, the peace and flourishing of the Churches amongst
them, as he doubted not they did in calling this Synod. There was not in this
Sermon any Doctrinal point discust, nor any particular touched, which might
minister News. It was only a Pathetical exhortation to all sorts, as much as
in them lay to procure the Churches peace. When he had done, the Praeses
publicly in the name of the Synod gave him thanks, and protested himself to
have been very much moved with his speeches. Besides this there was nothing
done that Session.

Upon Monday ^ of this present, the Synod coming together in the Forenoon,
there were two out of Wetteraw from the Counties of Nassau, Bisterfeldius a
Preacher, and Io. Henricus Alstedius, Professor of Divinity in Herborne came as
Deputies from the Churches in those parts, to be admitted as parts of the
Synod. The Letters from the States General, and then their Credential Letters
from their Churches first being read, the Oath was read unto them, and they
took it. Then did the Praeses in the Name of the Synod welcome them, and told
them the end of their coming, and what these Churches expected at their hands.
Then were the Remonstrants called in, and willed to declare their opinion
concerning the rest of the Articles: which they did at large, and added some
Apologies for their proceeding by Negatives (which I told your Lordship
formerly had been the Exception of the Synod against the manner held by them in
the first Article.) I will not give a brief of what they then delivered,
because I resolve to send your Lordship the perfect Copy of it, as soon as I
can come to copy it out. When they had done the Praeses asked them, whether
they were provided to deliver up their considerations concerning the Confession
and Catechism, for the Synod expected it. They answered that they expected not
the Synod should call for them. The Praeses replied, this could not excuse
them, for they had often told the World in their Books, that they had paratam
sylvam considerationum in that kind: and that the Synod should better judge of
each part, when it had learned their opinion of the whole. They required leave
to withdraw a little, and think of an answer. In the mean time the Praeses
proposed to the Synod, to consider how well the Remonstrants had stood to the
Decree of the Synod, concerning the proposal of the Tenants in affirmatives, he
thought that they had offended more against it, and that purposely in bringing
their Apology for so doing: in censuring the opinions of other Churches for
blasphemous, etc. Howsoever it was their judgment that they should propose
their sentence in Negatives, yet they ought not to have proposed, but to have
submitted their judgment to the judgment of the Synod. The Remonstrants
returning, gave answer to this effect: that though they might require time to
give up their Considerations, yet they thought they were not bound to give them
up, till the five Articles were discust; since their Citatory Letters so ran,
that first the Articles, then their Considerations should come in place: that
they thought it some wrong done them to have this order now perverted. The
Praeses answered, that no wrong was done them; for their Considerations should
not yet be sifted, till the five Articles were concluded. And so the order in
their Citatory Letters should be kept. That long since in a Synod at Delpht
they had promised to deliver them up in a Provincial Synod there, and therefore
now after so many years they could not be unprovided. Here the Praeses
Politicus charged them to obey their Decree, and to do as the Praeses and the
Synod required. The Praeses Ecclesiasticus then admonisht them, that they were
not to account of themselves as a College, and so still to give answers in
commune, but they must answer particularly every one for himself: and thereupon
he asked every of them in order, whether they had any such Consideration or no:
some answered they had, some that they had some few of no great moment, some
that their Considerations were not written down, some that they had none at
all. When the Praeses had said, jactatum suisse by them long since, that they
had sundry Considerations ready ^ Corvinus excepted against the word jactatum;
the Praeses replied, He used not the word to disgrace them, but only as a
Frequentative, to signify that they had often boasted of it. When some
Litigation was here fallen, Martinus Gregorii (one that sits close upon the
Remonstrants skirts) cut it off, and commanded them to be quiet. The
Remonstrants here signified, that such Considerations as they had were only in
the Dutch tongue. The Praeses replied, they should have leisure to translate
them. Then did the Seculars pronounce a Decree charging them to provide
themselves singly one by one, he that had many to give up many, he that had few
to give up few, he that had none to give up none, and that whether it were in
Dutch or Latin. The Remonstrants required some time; for, says Episcopius, we
came imparatissimi ad hanc rem. First there were given them to two days, then
three, then four: within which space every man alone by himself, was to give up
his Considerations: and this was the effect of the Session.

The answer of the English Divines to the Remonstrants exception against the
Synod, I will send your Lordship in my next Letters, together with the
Remonstrants answer upon the later Articles. Harman the Post came to Dort on
Sunday about three of the clock, and went for England on Monday about ten of
the clock, in the morning. Mr. Dean of Worcester is very crazy and sickly of
late, and keeps his Chamber, neither has he been in the Synod some of these
last Sessions. I hear he purposes to come to the Hague, to see if he shall have
his health better there. Here is a Rumor that the Remonstrants are a little
divided amongst themselves; and that Corvinus complains that what he has done,
was because he suffered himself to be drawn on by others, how true this is I
know not; I heard Scultetus tell my Lord Bishop so much, and that Meierus of
Basil, should say that Carvinus had signified so much to him. My Lord Bishop is
a little displeased with Mr. Amyes for putting into his hand Grevinchovius his
Book, in the Preface of which there are cited out of a Writing of Mr. Amyes
certain words very reproachful unto Bishops. Other News here is none, and
therefore for this time ceasing any further to trouble your Honor; I humbly
take my leave, resting

Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
ON Thursday 10/^0 of this present, in the morning the Synod being met, the
first thing done was the Admission of the Scottish Deputy in this manner. He
was brought to the Synod House by the two Scribes, and met at the door by two
of the Deputies for the States, and by them conducted to his Seat, which is a
little seat made under the English Seats, where he sits alone; when he was
sat, the Praeses welcomed him in the Name of the Synod. Then were the Leters
from the States read, which were to stand instead of Synodical Letters; for
otherwise the custom is here, that he that comes to be a Member of the Synod
brings Letters of Credence from the Church that deputes him. After this he
delivered himself in a short speech to this effect. That the reason of his
coming he had delivered unto the States at the Hague, namely the Kings
pleasure: that he therefore once minded to have said nothing, but he could not
obtain so much of himself, especially when he heard what gentle Welcome the
Praeses gave him, and he was desirous to show himself thankful for such great
Courtesy; That the Scotch Nation had evermore so linkt it self to this people,
that it has always labored to endeavor the peace of this State, and now it
was ready to do as much for the peace of the Churches amongst them. That they
had very straightly bound unto them the Scottish Church ( demeruistis Ecclesiam
Scoticanam) by this so kindly welcoming him. That his years were not many, but
he hoped ere he departed to make amends for that; That the King at his coming
away did charge him, verbis sublimibus, above all sphere of Conceit and
apprehension to exhort them unto peace, and with a short passage to that
purpose he ended. The Praeses thanking him for his good Counsel gave him his
Oath. And so they past away to other business.

To morrow I trow we shall have more matter, for then the Remonstrants are to
give in their Exceptions, against the Catechism and Confession, and so at
length we shall come to the Question. For this time therefore I humbly take my
leave of your Honor, resting

Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in all Duty and Service, Jo. hales.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
UPon Thursday the, 17/27 of this present, the Deputies being met in the
morning, the Remonstrants were called in, and willed to give up their
Considerations upon the Catechism, according to to the injunction laid on them
on Friday last. Episcopius, Corvinus, Duinghonius, Poppius, Pinakerus and Sapma
gave up all together in common, and excused themselves, for not giving up one
by one, as was enjoined them, because their Considerations being altogether the
same, they thought they might exhibit them all together; Niellius, Goswinus,
Matthisius, and Isaacus Frederici, gave up singly, every one by himself, the
rest gave up none at all. What these Considerations were I know not; for they
were not published. Then did the Praeses require them coram Deo to answer
directly and truly, First whether or no these were the Observations which they
gave up to the States of Holland; to which was answered, that as far as they
could remember they were, and some others besides. Secondly, whether they had
any more Considerations besides these; to which they all answered, No. Here
Scultetus stood up, and in the name of the Palatine Churches, required a Copy
of these considerations upon the Catechism. We have, says he, a command from
our Prince to see that nothing be done in prejudice of our Churches. The
Catechism is ours known by the name of the Palatine Catechism, and from us you
received it. The Observations therefore upon it concern us, we require
therefore a draught of them, with purpose to answer them, and submit our answer
to the judgment of the Synod. This request of the Palatines was thought very
reasonable. These Considerations (I speak of those on the Confession; for those
others I saw not) are nothing else but Queries upon some passages of the
Confession, of little or no moment: so^ that it seems a wonder unto many, how
these men, which for so many years past, in so many of their Books, have
threatened the Churches with such wonderful discoveries of falsehood and error in
their Confession and Catechism, should at last produce such poor impertinent
stuff. There is not, I persuade my self, any writing in the world, against
which wits disposed to wrangle cannot take abundance of such exceptions. After
this did the Praeses put the Remonstrants in mind of the judgment of the Synod
past upon the manner of propounding their Theses on the Articles. Two things
there were misliked. First their propounding so many Negatives. Secondly, their
urging so much to handle the point of Reprobation, and that in the first place;
whereas the Synod required they should deliver themselves, as much as was
possible in Affirmatives, and begin first from Election, and from thence come
to the point of Reprobation in its due place. He required them therefore to
signify whether they would follow the Judgment of the Synod, or their own.
They answered, that they had given up their reasons to justify their
Proceeding, and otherwise to proceed their Consciences would not permit them.
For, says Episcopius, the point of Reprobation is that quod maxim nos aegre
habet: that he could not endure that Doctrine concerning the absolute Decree of
God; that God should peremptorily decree to cast the greatest part of mankind
away, only because he would. Corvinus answered that he could not salva
Conscientia versari in. Ministerio, till that point were cleared. Isaacus
Frederici, that praecipuum momentum was in that question: others, that in the
question of Election they had no scruple; all their doubt was in the point of
Reprobation: and therefore their Conscience would not suffer them to proceed
farther in disputation, till that matter were discust. To this answer was made,
that the Synod did not refuse to handle the matter of Reprobation, but thought
it not fit to have it done in the first place. But when this would not content
them, the Praeses proposed unto them, whether they were resolved so to proceed,
or else to relinquish all farther disputation. They replied, they resolved to
break off all farther Treaty if that matter might not be handled. It was told
them that it should be treated of in its due place, but the question was only
de modo procedendi, whether they should handle that first or no. Episcopius and
some others of them gave answer, that for the order they did not precisely
stand upon, modo de tota re agatur: but this answer they stood not unto. For
when the Praeses told them again, that it was the pleasure of the Synod, first
to handle of Election, and then of Reprobation as much as should seem
necessary, and for the Churches good, and withal charged them to answer roundly
and Categorically whether they would proceed according to this order: they
answered, No. Then did the Praeses require them to withdraw, and give the Synod
leave to advise of this: The sum of that which past in the mean time was this:
That their pretense of Conscience was vain, since it was not of any thing which
concerned Faith and good manners, but only of order and method in disputing,
which could not at all concern the Conscience; that the Disputation must begin
from Election. First because the order of Nature so required, to deal of the
Affirmative before the Negative; and again, because that all Divines, who ever
handled this Question did hold the same order; and the Holy Ghost in Scripture
had taken the same course. That they should be assured in the name of the
Synod, that they should have liberty to discuss the question of Predestination
throughout. That whatsoever they pretended, yet the true end of their so hotly
urging the question of Reprobation, was only to exagitate the
Contra-Remonstrants Doctrine, and to make way for their own Doctrine in point
of Election: Lydius observed, that it had been the custom of all those who
favored Pelagianism, to trouble the Church with the question of Reprobation.
D. Gomarus that saw that his Iron was in the fire, (for I persuade my self that
the Remonstrants spleen is chiefly against him) began to tell us, that
Episcopius had falsified the Tenent of Reprobation: that no man taught that God
absolutely decreed to cast man away without sin: but as he did decree the end,
so he did decree the means: that is, as he predestined man to death, so he
predestined him to sin, the only way to death ^ and so he mended the
question, as Tinkers mend Kettles, and made it worse than it was before. In
sum, the Synod caused a Decree to be penned to this purpose. That it should
be lawful for the Remonstrants to propose their Doubts, both in the Question of
Election, and Reprobation: but for the order in disputation, which of the two
should come first, they should leave that to the Synod, who thought it fitter
to give, than to riceive Laws; and that whereas they pretended Conscience, it
was but vain, since there was nothing in Scripture against this Command of the
Synod; nay that it was more agreeable with Conscience to obey than to
withstand. Then were the Remonstrants called in, and after a short admonition
better to advise themselves, the Decree of the Synod was read unto them. And
when they began to urge their Conscience, the Praeses Politicus spoke to this
purpose: that there had heretofore been many Decrees made by the Delegates, but
they had been all neglected, he therefore strictly warned them, that no man
should dare to withstand any Decrees either of the Magistrate, or of the Synod,
either by open opposing against it, of by sullen silence, under pain of penalty
according to the will of the Lords. When Episcopius had said aegerrime ferimus,
and would have said somewhat more, he was enjoined silence, and so the Session
ended, Mr. Praeses telling us, that the next Session we should come to the
question, si per Remonstrantes liceret.

Now concerning Monsieur Moulins Proposals, of which your Lordship required to
know what I thought, I will deliver my self in my next Letter to your Honor.
In the mean time commending your Honor to Gods good protection I humbly take
my leave.

Dort, this 17/27. of December. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in all
Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Friday 18/^^ of December, in the morning it was long ere the Synod met.
At length being come together, there were read the two Decrees; one of the
States, another of the Synod, made the former Session: the reason of the
repeating was the absence of some the day before. Then did the Praeses signify,
that that very morning, immediately before the time of the Synod, he had
received from the Remonstrants Letters satis prolixas, which concerned himself
and the whole Synod; the perusal of which Letters was the cause of his long
stay. The Letters were sent to the Delegates to know whether or no they would
have them read. Whilst the Seculars were advising of this point, there were
brought in a great heap of the Remonstrants Books, and laid upon the Table
before the Praeses: for what end it will appear by and by. The Secular
Delegates signify, that they think not fit that the Letters should be
publicly read, and that the Remonstrants should immediately be called in. They
being entered, the Praeses asked them whether they were ready to obey the Orders
set down by the States and the Synod: They require to have their Letters read:
but the Seculars willed them, instead of reading their Letters, to hearken to a
Decree of the States, and forthwith was read a Decree sounding to this purpose:
that the States strictly commanded, that nothing should be read or spoken in
the Synod in prejudice of the Decree made yesterday; but that they should
without any further delay come to the business in hand. The Remonstrants reply,
that except they may most freely propose their minds in both the parts of
Predestination, both Election and Reprobation, they refused to go further in
Conference, for that their Conscience would not permit them. The Praeses
replied, that for liberty of proposal of their opinions they could not
complain; for the Synod had given them Libertatem Christianam, aequam, justam:
but such an absolute Liberty^ as they seemed to require, of going as far as
they list, of oppugning before the Synod what opinions they pleased of learned
men, this they thought unfit. And as for Conscience, they knew that the Word of
God was the rule of it. Now what part of Scripture had they that favored them
in this behalf, or that did take any order and prescribe a Method in
Disputation. By thus stiffely urging their Conscience they did exceedingly
wrong the Decree of the States and Synod, as if by them something against the
word of God, some impiety were commanded. When the Praeses had thus said, he
began to propose unto them certain Interrogatories concerning the Five
Articles. Your honor may be pleased to call to mind, that in one of my former
Letters I showed, that because the Remonstrants had given up their opinions
very perplexedly and imperfectly, the Synod had thought good that the Praeses
should propose them certain questious out of their own Writings; so the better
to wrest their meaning from them. This was the Praeses now beginning to do; and
this was the cause of the bringing in of the Books. The Interrogatory proposed
was this, Whether or no they did acknowledge that the Articles exhibited in the
Hague Conference did contein their opinions? Episcopius stepped up, and required
that it might be lawful for them to set down their own Tenants, and not be
forced to answer thus to other men's Writings. H. Leo in choler told the
Praeses, that he did evidently see, that it was the drift of the Synod, to
discredit them with the Magistrate, and that for his own part he would rather
leave his Ministry, than make any answer to these Interrogatories. The Praeses
here advised him to bethink himself seriously, whether his Conscience could
assure him that this was a good cause of leaving his Ministry; because he
might not proceed in Disputation according as he thought fit. Wezekius
answered, that he would not submit to this examen, and nisi posset liberrime
agi, he would not answer at all. The same was the sense of Hollingerus his
answer. Episcopius plainly told them nisi in omnibus liberum esset to do as
they thought good, they would go no farther. For we are resolved, says he,
agere pro judicio nostro, non pro judicio Synodi: then one of the Seculars
stepped up, and willed those words should be noted. The Praeses then told them,
that the true cause of all this their indisposition was, that they forgot
themselves to be Citati, and that they were not acquainted with being
commanded. They were to remember, that they stood before God, before their
Magistrate, and that their cause was the cause of the Church, whose peace would
not be procured by this behavior. They might remember what they told the
Foreign Divines in their Letters to them, that there was of late a great
Metamorphosis in the State. Non estis nunc judices and Domini rerum, sed
Citati: but at it seemed, they were resolved to suffer, omnino nullum judicium
de iis fieri. Episcopius here urged his Conscience. Add Verbum Dei then says
the Praeses, show us upon what Text of Scripture you ground your Conscience,
otherwise you wrong both the Magistrate and the Synod. Corvinus answered, that
that scantling of Liberty, which the Synod gave them, did not suffice their
Consciences. Poppius likewise required larger Liberty, and that he might not be
dealt withal by Authority, but by Reason, The Praeses answered, that in
Conscience he could not give them greater Liberty, than they had already given
them, and therefore asked him if he would answer to the Interrogatories. He
stoutly replied, Malo quidvis pati. Sapma replied to the same purpose, and over
and above added, Vt nostrum judicium non satisfacit Synodo, ita nec Synodi
Iudicium nostro. Rickwardius told the Synod, that they dealt not charitably
with them, and openly protested, as Episcopius had before done, non agemus pro
judicio Synodi, sed pro judicio nostro. The Praeses replied, vocem hanc esse
intolerandam. Niellius excepted against this proceeding with them capitatim,
and required that they might consult in common what answer to give. For my self
says he, I am a man of no ready speech, and unfit for sudden disputation. Too
great advantage is taken against men, by this kind of proceeding. Many members
of the Synod, were they thus singled out to give a sudden answer, might easily
peradventure be put to some distress. Nullam esse causam tam justam, de qua non
facile possit triumphari, si de ea agatur tantum pro arbitrio adversarii. The
Praeses told them that here was nothing required, but that they would give a
reason of their Faith, which they had for this many years taught in their
Pulpits, and in their Writings, and therefore they could not be unprovided to
give an answer; and for that they mentioned the Synod as an Adversary, they had
been already taught sufficiently by the Foreign Divines that the Synod could
not be counted pars adversa: they answered, that they required a Copy of the
reasons given by the Foreign Divines, that they might consider of them; but
they were denied it. Here was by one of them, I know not whom a reply made,
that the Remonstrants in refusing to proceed except they might freely handle
the point of Reprobation, did no other than the Contra-Remonstrants had
formerly done in the Hague Conference, who there openly refused to proceed, if
they were urged to have the same point handled; notwithstanding the command of
the Magistrate. Festus Hommius replied, that the narration was falsified; for
the Contra-Remonstrants did not simply refuse to deal in the point of
Reprobation; neither did the Magistrate command them to do it; as now he had
commanded them. And thus much did some of the Secular Deputies stand up and
give witness unto. Episcopius here urged some words out of the Conference, to
prove what was said; but what these words were I could not take. The Praeses
went forward to propose the Interrogatories: Goswinus and Neranus answered as
their fellows had formerly done. Isaacus Frederici urged for himself, that when
he was removed from being a Member of the Synod, he was commanded coujungere se
Citatis: this he could not do, if thus he was commanded to answer for himself
alone. The Praeses answered, that by the Decree of the States they were
accounted no College; but only as they were cited, so were they to answer
Capitatim and by Poll. And as for Isaacus since he knew that the Synod
accounted of him as of one of the Citati, he could not be ignorant that his
quality was the same with theirs. Isaacus answered that he had evermore been
averse from sudden disputations, and therefore he meant not to answer. Here it
was denied by some of the Remonstrants, that the States had made any Decree
that they should thus give answer capitatim. The Delegates for the Seculars
stood up, and signified viva voce, that they had decreed it. Episcopius
answered, that the Scribe ( Heinsius) used some such words, but he took it to
have been only some phrase of Heinsius, not any Decree of the Lords. Heinsius
replied that he did nothing but what he was commanded. Episcopius protested,
that till that hour he never heard that by any Decree of the States they were
enjoined to answer thus singly, and by Poll. Poppius signified that he thought
it a thing very unbefitting both his age and his Ministry, to submit himself
to such a Paedagogica collatio, as sometimes by Martinus Gregorii it had been
styled. The Praeses then asked them all in general, whether they did persist in
this their answer. They all replied, Yea. The Remonstrants therefore being
dismissed, the Praeses required the Synod to think what course they would take to
proceed, protesting that he thought that all Liberty befitting was granted unto
them: and calling in the Remonstrants again, and advising them to consider what
they did: they all replied, that they were resolved, non capitatim; sed
conjunctim respondere. The President of the Politics commanded them, that
without peculiar leave granted, none of them should go out of the Town. The
Praeses Ecclesiasticus advising the Synod to think of some course of gathering
the Remonstrants opinions out of their Books, since they could not get them
from themselves, dismissed the Company.

The same day after dinner was there a Session, but very private, neither was
any stranger permitted to be there. Wherefore a Relation of that Session I must
give only upon hearsay. Which I would now have done, but that I hasten to the
Session this morning. And I understand that the Synod will dispatch some of
their Company to the States General, to signify how matters stand, and to know
their further pleasure. I will here therefore shut up my Letters, reserving the
rest of the News till the next occasion, and commending your Honor to Gods
good Protection I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 17/2^. of December. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in all
Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
THe State of our Synod now suffers a great crisis, and one way or other there
must be an alteration. For either the Remonstrant must yield, and submit
himself to the Synod, of which I see no great probability: or else, the Synod
must vail to them, which to do, farther than it has already done, I see not
how it can stand with their Honor. How the case stood at the last Friday
Session, your Honor may perceive by my Letters written upon Saturday. Three
things there were mainly urged by the Synod, and as mainly withstood by the
Remonstrants. The first was the point of order to be held in discussing the
Articles: whether the question of Reprobation were to be handled after the five
Articles, as the Synod would have had it, because it is none of the five
points, and by order from the States nothing ought to be determined of till the
five be discust: or whether it should be handled in the first place, as the
Remonstrants would have it; because, as they pretended, their doubts lay
especially there, and that being cleared, they thought they should show good
conformity in the rest. The second thing, was the putting of Interrogatories,
which thing they much disdained as Pedagogical. The Third was the liberty of
Disputation which was to be given the Remonstrants, whether it were to be
limited and circumscribed by the discretion of the Synod, or large and
unlimited, accordingly as it pleased the Remonstrants. So strongly in these
points did the Remonstrants withstand the Synod, that on Friday last it was
verily thought they would have gone their way, and left the Commissioners to
determine without them. But the Synod bearing an inclination to peace, and
wisely considering the nature of their people, resolved yet farther, though
they had yielded sufficiently unto them already, yet to try a little more, the
rather to stay the clamor of the Country, and cut off all suspicion of Partial
dealing. And for this purpose called a private Session on Friday in the
Evening, to mollify some things in their Decrees and Proceedings. From that
Session all strangers were excluded, and what I write I do only upon Relation.
The sum of it was this. The Praeses much complained him of the perplexity he
was in, by reason of the pertinacy of the Remonstrants. For, says he, if we
labor to keep them here, they will be but a hindrance to us, as hitherto they
have been, if we dismiss them, we shall hazard our credit among the people, as
if we purposed only to do what we please. Whatsoever it is that here we do, is
by some that come hither and write all they hear, presently eliminated, and
carried to them, which has caused many hard reports to pass of us, both with
them and otherwhere. He therefore commended to the Synod to consider whether
there might not be found some means of accommodation, which might somewhat
mollify the Remonstrant, and yet stand well with the Honor of the Synod. And
first, to make way, they read the Letters which in the morning by public
Decree of the States were forbidden to read ( a pretty matter in so grave a
place, to break those edicts in the Evening, which but in the Morning had been
so solemnly proclaimed) and to speak truth, their Decrees have hitherto been
mere matter of formality to affright them a little, for none of them have been
kept; (as being found to be Powder without Shot, and give a clap, but do no
harm.) The Letters being read they began to deliver their minds. Some thought
the Synod had been too favorable to the Remonstrants already, and that it were
best now not to hold them if they would he going, since hitherto they had been,
and for any thing appeared to the contrary, meant hereafter to be a hindrance
to all Peaceable and orderly proceedings. Others on the contrary thought fit
that all should be granted them which they required, to surcease the
Interrogatories, to let them speak of Reprobation in what place, in what
manner, and how much they pleased, since this took from them all pretense of
exception, and prejudiced not the Synods power of determining what they
pleased. A third sort thought it better to hold a middle course and under
color of Explanation, to mollify some of their Decrees. This sort prevailed,
and accordingly it was concluded that the Decree of the Synod (of this decree I
gave your Honor the sum in my Saturday Letters) made in the morning, should be
more largely and Significantly drawn, and withal in it should be expressed how
far it pleased the Synod to be indulgent unto the Remonstrants in the points in
Question. The Foreign Divines were requested, that they would conceive some
Reasons by way of Answer to these late exceptions of the Remonstrants, and give
them up in writing the next Session, to try whether by these means they might
make them a little to relent. This is all was done that Session, which though
it seem but little, yet being handled with much and long Speaking among so many,
took up a long time.

On Monday the 21/^^ of December, in the Morning the Synod being set, Johannes
Polyander made a Latin Sermon. His Theme was the seventh verse of the two and
fiftieth of Isaiah. O quam speciosi in montibus, etc. he spoke much of the
greatness of Ecclesiastical Function; First in regard of their dignity in the
word Speciosi; Secondly of their industry, in the word Montibus, which argues
them either to be Pastores or Speculatores; Thirdly of the suavity of their
Doctrine in the word Peace and Good things; After this he fell Pathetically to
bewail the torn State of the Belgic Churches: and to commend the diligence of
the Synod in endavouring to establish their Churches Peace. This was the sum of
his Sermon, it being only a passionate strain, and containing nothing much
Remarkable either for Doctrine or News. The Praeses in the Name of the Synod
gave him great thanks: and signified that he had many causes Sperare optima
quaeque de Synodo: but that Gods good Spirit was indeed amongst them, he
gathered especially by this Argument, that so many Learned and Pious Sermons
had in this place been lately made: and so he dismissed the Company.

Concerning Monsieur Moulins proposition, of which your Honor required my
opinion, thus I think. His project consists of two heads, of a General
Confession, and of a peaceable treaty for Union with the Lutheran Churches. I
imagine that the Generality of the Confessions must not include the Lutheran.
For if it does, then are both parts of his proposition the same: it being the
same thing to procure one general Confession of Faith and a Union. Supposing
then that this Confession stretches not to them, I will do as Jupiter does in
Homer, (...). I will grant him one part, and deny him the other. For a general
Confession of Faith, at least so far as those Churches stretch who have
Delegates here in the Synod, I think his project very possible, there being no
point of Faith in which they differ. If therefore the Churches shall give power
to their Delegates, to propose it to the Synod, I see no reason but it should
pass. But I did not like the intimation concerning Church Government. It had I
think been better not mentioned: not that I think it possible that all Churches
can be Governed alike (for the French Church being sub cruce cannot well set up
Episcopal jurisdiction) but because it may seem to his Majesty of Great
Britain, that his excepting the point of Government might not proceed so much
from the consideration of the Impossibility of the thing, as from want of love
and liking of it in the Person. Now for that part of the proposition which
concerns the Lutheran, either it aims at a Union in Opinion or a mutual
toleration. The first is without all question impossible. For in the point of
the Sacrament and the dependences from it, as the ubiquity of Christ's manhood,
the Person of Christ, the Communicatio idiomatum, etc. Either they must yield
to us, or we to them, neither of which probable. Their opinions have now
obtained for a Hundred years, ever since the beginning of the Reformation, and
are derived from the chief Author of the Reformation. It is not likely
therefore that they will easily fall, that have such Authority and so many
years to uphold them. But I suppose, Monsieur Moulins intended only a mutual
toleration; and be it no more, yet if we consider the indisposition of the
persons with whom we are to deal, I take this likewise to be impossible. The
Lutherans are divided into two sorts, either they are Molliores, as they call
them, or Rigidi. What hope there may be of moderation in the first I know not,
but in the second we may well despair of. For they so bear themselves, as that
it is evident they would rather agree with the Church of Rome, than with the
Calvinist. He that is conversant in the writings of Hunnius and Grawerus, will
quickly think as I do. The first of which has so bitterly written against
Calvin, that Parsons the Jesuit furnished himself by compiling Hunnius his
Books. If the whole lump be Leavened, as those two pieces, which I but now
named, they are certainly too sour for Moderate men to deal with. The French
wits are naturally active and projecting: and withal carry evermore a
favorable conceit to the Possibility of their projects. Out of this French
conceit I suppose proceeded this of M. Moulins.

Mr. Dean went away to the Hague, giving notice to no man. I understood not
till dinner that day, of any intent he had to go. I wished him an ill journey
for this discourtesy; but I hope he had a good one. I fear I well wearied your
Honor with these my long Letters, I will therefore take my leave, commending
your Lordship to Gods good protection.

Dort, 1. of January, Style novo. 1619. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in
all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
WHat has lately been done at the Hague in the business concerning our Synod,
and what Decree the States have made to restrain the exorbitancy of the
Remonstrants, I suppose is sufficiently know unto your Lordship, as a thing
done in your presence. So much therefore of it as shall serve the present
purpose I will take, and leave the rest to your Honors better knowledge. Upon
Thursday the third of January stylo novo, the Commissioners being met, and the
Delegates ready to declare the pleasure of the States, the Remonstrants being
called in, two of them were found wanting, Isaacus Friderici, and Henricus Leo:
for Isaacus it was answered, that he had leave on Friday last, of the Praetor
of the Town to go abroad: for Leo it was answered, that they knew not where he
was. Having sent for Leo, and while in vain expected him the Delegates
proceeded to declare the will of the Lords, and signified that the States
allowed the Proceedings of the Synod, and commanded the Remonstrants to obey
for the present, and whatsoever Decrees hereafter the Delegates and Synod
should enact; and if they refused to obey, they should expect, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical censure. If this served not yet the Synod should go forward, and
gather their opinions out of their Books and writings; That the Remonstrants
should be commanded to remain in the Town, and be ready to appear whenever
the Synod should summon them, and answer plainly and directly to such
Interrogatories as it should please the Synod to propose them. This first was
read in Dutch, and afterward for the information of the Foreigners it was put
into Latin. The Praeses then put to them that Question, which in one of the
former Sessions he had proposed, viz. Whether or no they did acknowledge the
Articles set down in the Hague Conference to contain their opinions, and
amongst the rest, that first concerning Election, which by the Scribe was read
unto them out of the Book. Episcopius beginning to make answer, Martinus
Gregorii commanded that their answers should be taken and set down in their own
words. Episcopius his answer was this. Omnibus in timore Domini expensis, and
adjunctis etiam ad Deum precibus, non possum impetrare ab anima mea, ut aliam
agendi rationem sequar, quam eam quae ultimo responso meo exhibita est. This
their answer, of which he speaks, was given on Saturday last, as I have
informed your Honor, and it was this, That except the Synod in antecessum, as
they spoke, would beforehand promise them that they should have free Liberty to
propose their own opinion of Reprobation, and refute the Contra-Remonstrants
Doctrine in that point, together with the Doctrine of all those whom the
Contra-Remonstrants held for Orthodox, and that as far as they pleased without
receiving any check from the Synod, they were resolved to go no further. The
same was the answer of the rest, with some alteration of Words; for they were
questioned one by one, every one by himself. Hollingerius answered, that he
could not eant recipere legem, eamque ingredi viam, which tended openly to the
ruin and oppression of the better cause. For by so doing he should grievously
wound his Conscience before God, and cast irreparabile scandalum before the
true worshippers of God. Imitabor itaque exemplum Christi: Silebo and omnem
eventum commendabo illi qui venturus est ad judicandum vivos and mortuos.
Neranus spoke after the same manner, and added, that the Reasons why they thus
thought themselves bound to answer, they had exhibited this Morning to the
Secular Delegates. Poppius gave answer thus, Respondeo, cum debita erga jummas
Potestates reverentia, me invocato sanctissimo Dei nomine, and re tota etiam
atque etiam expensa apud animum meum, non posse desistere ab ultimo meo
responso. Exhibuimus rations Dominis Delegatis in quibus etiamnam acquiesco,
certo persuasus id quod facio Deo Optimo maximo and Christo Jesus probatum iri.
Martinus Gregorii advised him here to bethink himself a little whether or no he
spoke not these words in Passion (for he seemed to be somewhat Choleric) He
replied, that he spoke them with his best advice. The Praeses perceiving that
they were resolved not to Answer, concluding the questions which he had
proposed, thought that the Synod might without scruple accept of the first
Article in their Remonstrance at the Hague, for their proper tenent. He
proceeded therefore to propose unto them another Interrogatory: Whether or no
that Decree which they spoke of in that first Article, did contain the whole
Decree of Election, and so were the main ground of Christianity; or whether
there were not some Decree besides this. The behavior and answers of the
Remonstrants carried the same Copy of Countenance with the former, and Poppius
plainly answered, Quia conscientiae meae a Synodo non habetur ratio, non
expecto ab ea instructionem in veritate: ideoque consultum non est respondere.
The Praeses then citing some Texts out of Johannes Arnoldi, and Arminius, and
the Hague Conference, concluded that it was their opinion, that besides that
Decree mentioned in the Conference, they acknowledged no farther Decree of
Election. In the third place this question was put to the Remonstrants: whether
when they taught, that God chose Man propter fidem praevisam, this were not
rather to be called an Election of ( Faith) than of the person; since the
person was chosen for the qualities sake. But they were still the same. Neranus
was the man that gave it, but it was the common answer of them all: Si liceat
nobis de Reprobatione, and Contra-Remonstrantium sententia super ea agere
quantum nobis conscientia nostra and Ecclesiarum nostrarum aedificatio
persuadebit sufficere, and hoc nobis in antecessum promittatur, libenter ad
quaesita respondebimus: si minus, silere malumus. Now because they had often
appealed to their Reasons exhibited in Scripto to the Secular Delegates that
Morning, the Delegates thought good to read the writing in the Audience of the
Synod. It contained almost no new thing, but was repetition of their old
exceptions, that their Liberty was prejudiced, that the Synod was pars adversa
(and for farther illustration of this, they reckoned up all the sharp speeches
that either Scultetus or the Divines of Geneva, or any other had used against
them) that their Consciences would not allow of this manner of proceeding, etc.

This last Night was there a private meeting, not by way of Session, but only
it was a Conference to which some of the Graver and Discreeter of the Synod
were called. The end was only to advise what course is best to be holden in the
following disputations. It was thought fit that the Remonstrants should always
be present at their meetings; and questions should be proposed them: but the
Synod should proceed whether they answered or no: and so they concluded of a
course to gather their opinions out of their Books. Mr. Amyes will inform your
Lordship more largely peradventure in some farther circumstances. His sudden
and unexpected departure has made me scrible up this, more rudely and
concisely than I had intended, because I was loath to miss of so good a
Messenger. Wherefore I cease any further to trouble your Honor, and remit you
to Mr. Amyes larger Relation.

Dort this Fourth of January, stylo novo. 1619. Your Honors Chaplain, and
Bounden in all Duty and Service, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Wednesday the ninth of January, Stylo novo, the Synod met not at all.
Time was given the Deputies to advise of the Theses which were to be handled:
only at Night the English went in private to the Praeses to consult what manner
of proceeding were fittest to be used. What counsel they gave him I know not:
but this I see, that the course he takes is not altogether so well approved by
them. Upon Thursday the tenth of January the Commissioners met in the morning
in private, where Mr. Praeses proposed unto them four things to be considered
of. First whether or no the Theses proposed by him formerly did not perfectly
contain the opinion of the Remonstrants. Secondly, An electio sit una an
Multiplex, that so he might exclude the Remonstrants Division of Election in
Revocabilem and irrevocabilem; completam and incompletam, etc. Thirdly, An
electio sit ex fide and obedientia, au potius ad fidem and obedientiam. For
this is one main point of difference: the Remonstrant teaches that God foresaw
only who would believe, and so ordained and Elected only to Glory: The
Contra-Remonstrant teaches, that God ordained who should believe, and so
Predestined and Elected both to Grace and Glory. The fourth thing proposed
was concerning the means how true believers become sure of their Salvation.
After this the Synod was requested to deliver themselves concerning a Method or
proposing and examining the Theses proposed. The greatest part of them liked
well of that form which the Praeses proposed. The English, the South-Hollanders
and Festus Hommius conceived severally a form of Theses, every man according to
his discretion, and exhibited them to the judgment of the Synod, and had them
publicly read: this was the sum of that meeting. A Copy of the Theses drawn
by our Englishmen I will send your Honor, as soon as I can procure the sight
of them.

The same day at Evening the Deputies met in private as before. They continued
yet their consultation upon the point of manner of proceeding. The Praeses
invented certain new Interrogatories and propounded them to the Synod, to know
their minds whether it were not fit to propose them to the Remonstrants. There
was great doubt whether this were a thing fit to be done, since it is not
likely that the Remonstrants behavior in this behalf will be any other than
hitherto it had been. This question, as it seems, was the greatest part of
their consultation. It was at length Concluded that the Remonstrants should be
called in, and the Interrogatories put to them, the next Session. This Morning
therefore we look for an open Session, where we shall understand the last
nights Interrogatories, and the whole business of that Session. For I must
confess I do not well conceive what was then done, or to what purpose. I
perceive there is some variance about their form of proceeding: Mr. Praeses is
desirous that the course he has thought of may take place; the English and
others, that some more ready and compendious way may be taken. What will be the
Issue of it, I cannot yet conjecture; as soon as I can understand any thing, I
will acquaint your Honor, till when I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 1/^1 of January: 1619. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in all
Duty, and service, Jo. Hales.
I suppose Mr. Amyes can better inform your Honor of this last nights
business. He has been much with the Praeses, and I imagine understands most of
his intent.



Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
YOur Lordship by your kind Letters does engage me so far, as I should think it
not the least part of my happiness, if I could but hit on any way whereby I
might express, in any proportion, my thankfulness for the same; but since that
cannot be, acknowledgement of non solvendo must pass for satisfaction. In that
Letter which I wrote to my Lord of Buckingham, (wherein I mentioned your
Lordships wonderful kindness to me) I entreated his Lordship to move his
Majesty, that either by my Lord of Canterbury his Letters, or Mr. Secretaries,
I being joined with the English, we might make up one Collegium Theologorum
Magnae Britanniae: Now this last week my Lord sent me word, that he gave my
Letter to the King, who did read it over, and liked the motion well, and so
accordingly gave order for it: he sent me word likewise that the King had the
Episcopii Theses which I sent, and that he was mightily incensed at them. So my
very good Lord, I am well satisfied in that point; for we have now divided the
business among us. D. Ward his part assigned to him is, Impugnatio Decreti de
salvandis fidelibus, and unico Decreto praedestinationis: My Lord of Landaff
his part is, Respons^o ad Argumenta Remonstrantium, quibus prins illud decretum
conantur stabilire: D. Goad his part, Impugnatio Electionis peremptoriae ex
fide praevisa: and demonstratio bujus Propositionis, quod fides sit fructus
Electionis, which does coincidere with the other. D. Davenant his part is,
Orthodoxae sententiae assertio, and vindicatio rationunt Contra-Remonstrantium
ab objectionibus Remonstrantium in utroque membro. My part is, Solutio omnium
argumentorum quae afferunt Remonstrantes contra Orthodoxam sententiam. The
confusion here in handling of business is very great; they do not know how to
put any thing to Committees to agree of business, and then afterward to
propound it to the Synod to be approved or disproved; which has been the
custom observed in all Councils and Synods: but nothing is known till it be
propounded in the Synod, and then there are almost as many several voices as
heads; if your Lordship would give your advice to some of the Estates in this
kind, it may be they would apprehend it, and we should bring business to some
issue. The Palatine Divines and we have met now three times, and we have agreed
on the same Propositions, and have resolved to call one of every College of
the Foreign Divines, and communicate the same with them; that so, if it be
possible, all we strangers may set up, and throw down the same Conclusions. For
the Provincials, for any thing I can see, they are so far set against the
Remonstrants, I wish not their persons as well as their opinions, that I am
afraid they will not like well of our Moderation. For the Dismission of the
Remonstrants, since your Lordship is pleased to take notice of it, I hope I may
without offense say that it was such, as certainly did the Synod much wrong. On
Friday when they seemed to yield, then the Exteri Theologi could not be heard
for the continuing of them in the Synod. Nay the trick which was put upon them
was a little too palpable; For the Delegates had their Decree of Dismission
written before they came into the Synod, yet our voices were asked, hoping it
should have been answerable to their Decree: but finding it was otherwise,
without so much as laying their heads together for consultation, they published
a Decree which they brought written with them into the Synod. On Monday the
late Acts of the Remonstrants incredible obstinacy being read; the Theologi
exteri gave suffrages for their dismission; only one to wit Steinius gave a
bitter sentence; their voices being asked only, who are not above a third part
of the Synod, they were called in and dismissed with such a powdering speech as I
doubt not but your Lordship has heard with grief enough, I protest I am much
afflicted when I think of it. For if the Remonstrants should write, that the
President pronounced a sentence, which was not the sentence of the Synod, they
should not lie. The Civil Lawyers and Cannon of France, who write much about
the formalities omitted in the Council of Trent, urge Exceptions of less moment
than these; so neither was there above a Third part of the voices asked, ex
quibus sententia ferri nequit: neither was the sentence conceived in writ, and
approved by the Synod, and the bitter words in the Sentence were not the words
of any of the suffrages, unless that some of them were spoken by one man only.
Your Lordships Censure of that Sentence is just and honorable. Mr. Dean of
Worcester at his going from hence, with the Remembrance of his service to your
Lordship, desired me to signify to your Lordship, that he could not possibly
meet with Deodatus. The Remonstrants, (as Heinsius but now told me) have sent a
very virulent and bitter writing to Mr. Bogarmanne, it may be now we shall hear
of it at the Synod, whither we are going: so with the remembrance of my
humblest Duty and service to your Lordship and your worthy Lady, I must
conclude a Petitioner, that your Lordship would ever be pleased to reckon among
your true observers.

Dort, this 13 of Febr. 1618. Your very dutiful, and faithful Servant, W.
Belcanqual.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
IT has pleased the Synod at length finally to discharge themselves of the
Remonstrants, and to proceed according as they had projected by gathering their
opinions out of their Books. The manner of their dismission was this. Upon
Monday the 1 4/4 of January the Commissioners being set, the Praeses Politicus
made a short speech to this purpose. That they had hitherto labored as much as
in them lay to have the Decree of the Estates to be kept, and to bring the
Remonstrants to some reasonable resolution. And for this purpose had upon
Saturday last in the afternoon, covented them and advised them to give up their
opinions, quietly, orderly, freely, and to refute the contrary as much as they
thought fit, reserving always to the Synod Authority to judge of what was
convenient, what was sufficient, without which it could be no Synod. That they
had undertaken in their behalf, that the Synod should so manage the business,
that they should have no just cause to complain. But all this labor was lost,
neither would they be brought to relinquish their former plea; for in a writing
exhibited unto them they signified so much in effect, in which writing they
referred themselves to such conditions as had been by them partly scripto,
partly viva voce formerly required. Wherefore they thought fit that it should
be proposed to the Synod to judge whether or no there had not been sufficient
order taken to give contentment to the Remonstrants, if at least any thing
could content them. Yet they thought it convenient once more to call the
Remonstrants before them, to see whether they would leave their holdfast and
submit to the Synod. If no, then they should without any farther delay proceed
to judge of their opinions by collecting them out of their Writings. This was
the sum of that speech. The writing mentioned by the Praeses Politicus in his
speech was then read first in Dutch, then in Latin, in which the Remonstrants,
declared that they would submit themselves to the Synod upon such conditions as
had been formerly required, otherwise no. After this was the Synod requested to
deliver their opinions, whether order sufficient to content the Remonstrants
had not been taken. It was judged generally that more could not be granted them
than had already been, which was they thought abundantly sufficient. S^ultetus
did in brief give as it were a History or rather an Inventory of the
Remonstrants behavior since their first appearance before the Synod, and
showed how contumeliously they had handled it, how they had contemned the
Decrees of the Seculars and of the Synod, that they had abused them with lies,
deceitful speeches, etc. And concluded that it was unfit the Synod should
farther condescend unto them. When the Foreigners had spoken, it was thought
sufficient, neither did the Praeses proceed to ask the judgment of the
Provincials, knowing belike before what it was. The Remonstrants then being
called in, the Praeses signified to them that upon Friday Morning they had
given good hope of peaceable dealing, and at least in show seemed to forgo
such conditions as they had formerly claimed, he was now in the name of the
Synod to require them to answer Categorically, yea or no, an voluit simpliciter
and sine condition parere Decreto Ordinum and Synodi and ita simpliciter
venire in rem praesentem. The Remonstrants for answer require that they may be
permitted to road a short writing which they had conceived, it was answered
that it needed not, there was no more required, but their yea or no, but they
persisted in their proposal, the Writing was taken and delivered to the
Seculars to be perused, and they commanded to withdraw. Their writing was read,
wherein having signified, how welcome the moderation held by the Foreigners
lately was unto them; whereas they were enjoined to obey the Synodical Decree,
or look for punishment, their answer was that it could not stand with their
Conscience to promise Obedience to all Synodical Decrees, since many of them
stood not with common Equity, and as for Mulct and punishment, they left it to
the Discretion of those to whose Government they were subject; they would
provide their patience. That they intend not to contest with the Synod
concerning order: that they promised to submit: but with such conditions as
they had heretofore mentioned. Thus as the Praeses said, what they gave with
the one hand, with the other they took away again. The Remonstrants being again
called in, they were asked every man whether thy acknowledged this answer, they
all replied they did, and so were commanded to subscribe their Names to it,
which forthwith was done. The Praeses then bespake them on this manner. The
moderation of the Foreigners which you so much extolled, proceeded out of
their Error which to day having understood, they have pronounced concerning
you another sentence.

Upon Friday last when you seemed to disclaim all illimited Liberty, and gave
hope of some Conformity, they dealt with the Synod in favor of you: but to day
understanding you to abuse the Synod, and fly back again to your former claim,
they all with one consent think you indignos esse quibuscum diutius res agatur.
One amongst them there is who has taken the pains to Map out your behavior
since your first footing in the Synod. Pretend you what you will, the true
cause of this your indisposition is this, that you take the Synod for the
Adverse part, and account your selves in Equal place with them, this conceit
has manifested it self in all your actions. Theses upon the question in
controversy you gave up, but so confused, so nothing to the purpose that no use
can be made of them. The Decrees of the Synod you have openly contemned. The
Interrogatories put you, you have refused to answer. Your Citatory Letters
notwithstanding the sense of them was expounded by those who gave them, and
therefore best knew it, you have interpreted as you list, and professed that you
will proceed according to your own judgment, and not according to the judgment
of the Synod. At length on Friday last you seemed to lay by your claim of
illimited Liberty and give some hope of some conformity; but all this in your
writing now exhibited you have retracted. The Synod has dealt mildly, gently
and favorably with you, but sinceritat^, lenitati, mansuetudini Synodi,
frauds, arts and mendacia opposuistis. I will dismiss you with no other
Elogie than one of the Foreigners gave you, quo caepistis pede eodem cedite,
with a lie you made your entrance into the Synod, with a lie you take your
leave of it, in denying lately that ever you protested your selves provided to
give answer on the Articles, or to have had any such writing ready, which all
the Synod knows to be false. Your actions all have been full of fraud,
equivocations and deceit. That therefore the Synod may at length piously and
peaceably proceed to the perfecting of that business for which it is come
together, you are dismissed. But assure you the Synod shall make known your
pertinacy, to all the Christian World, and know that the Belgic Churches want
not arma Spiritualia, with which in time convenient they will proceed against
you. Quamobrem vos Delegatorum and Synodi nomine dimitto, Exite. So with much
muttering the Remonstrants went out; and Episcopius going away said, Dominus
Deus judicabit de fraudibus and mendaciis: Sapma, Exeo ex ecclesia
malignantium: and so the Synod brake up.

The same day at night there was a private Session; what was done in it I
understand not yet. I conjecture it was concerning the order of proceeding. As
soon as I shall understand what was done I will acquaint Your Lordship with it,
and till then I humbly take my leave.

Dort this ^^ of January. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain and bounden in all Duty,
Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord.
SInce the Dismission of the Remonstrants there has not been any public
Session, and as I conjecture for a while will not be. They are altogether in
Consultation concerning their order of proceeding, and in gathering materials
out of the Remonstrants Books, whence they may Frame their Theses and
propositions which must be the subject of their disputation. This they purpose,
as I conceive, to do throughout all the five Articles, before they come to the
open discussing of any one, for they are past from the first, and gone on to
the second. So that till this Consultation be ended there will not be any great
occasion o^ news.

Against Mr. Praeses so rough handling the Remonstrants at their Dismission,
there are some exceptions taken by the Deputies themselves. The Foreigners
think themselves a little indirectly dealt withal, in that it being proposed to
the whole Synod to pass their judgment concerning the behavior of the
Remonstrants, the Provincials were not at all required to speak, and by these
means the envy of the whole business was derived upon the Foreigners. Whereas
on the contrary when the like question was proposed formerly, and the
Foreigners had spoken very favorably in the Remonstrants behalf, the
Provincials struck in, and established a rigid sentence against the Foreigners
liking. So that there is little regard given to the judgment of the
Foreigners, except they speak as the Provincials would have them. Again, upon
the Tuesday Session in the morning, there being a repetition made, according to
the custom of the late Synodical acts, when they came to the act of the
Remonstrants Dismission, Lud. Crosius of Breme signified that he perceived that
Mr. Praeses in that business had been paulo commotior, and had let slip, verba
quaedam acerba, which might well have been spared; that in so great an act, as
that was, a little more advice and consideration might have been used. The
Synod ought to have been consulted with, and a form of Dismission conceived and
approved of by all, which should in the name of the Synod have been pronounced,
and registered; whereas now the Synod stands indicted of all that unnecessary
roughness which then was practiced. It had stood better with the Honor of the
Synod to have held a more peaceable and passionless order. The Praeses replied,
That for Dismissing the Remonstrants without a Synodical form, it was from the
Secular Lords, who willed him immediately to proceed. What his apology was for
his passionate speeches I know not. The Session was in private, and I have
nothing but by relation. I hear nothing yet from Mr. Praeses concerning the
French project: as soon as I shall hear ought, I will not fail to acquaint your
Honor, till when I humbly take my leave.

Dort, ^/^^ January, 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and Bounden in all Duty Jo.
Hales.
The bringer of this Letter is Sir John Berks Son.



Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
YOur Honor shall here receive the Decree of the Synod mentioned in my last
Letters, containing the form of proceeding which they will hold in discussing
the Articles. The morning they mean the Deputies shall spend in private, after
dinner in open Synod the chief places of Scripture upon which the Remonstrant
grounds himself shall be opened, and answers framed to the Arguments drawn from
thence. According to which resolution they began to proceed upon Thursday the
7/17 of Ianu. in the Evening. The question proposed then was, An praeter
Decretum de salvandis fidelibus, nullum sit aliud Decretum Electionis. The
Remonstrant affirms there is none, and for this produces certain places of
Scripture. The Contra-Remonstrant grants that there is such a Decree, but
withal contends that this is but a Secondary Decree. For God (says he) first
resolved upon the Salvation of some certain singular persons, and in the second
place decreed to give them Faith as a means to bring the former Decree to pass.
But before this question came on the stage, other things were done at that
time. The Synod therefore being met, at the time mentioned, First the Letters
from the States concerning D. Goads Admission were read, and after that, some
were sent to his Lodging to conduct him to the Synod. In the mean time were
there Letters from Mr. Dean to the Synod produced and read, together with a
form of Valediction and farewell, by him conceived. I suppose Mr. Dean
acquainted your Honor with the thing whilst he was with you, which is the cause
I have not sent a transcript of it: as soon as I understand your Lordship has
not seen it, I will cause a Copy of it to be taken. It was then concluded by
the Synod that the Praeses, and Assessors, together with the Seculars Scribe,
should, after the Synod was ended, repair to Mr. Dean, and take their leave of
him in the name of all the rest, and by him commend their love and service unto
his Majesty, and render him humble thanks for his prinely care. All which the
same night was done. Now was Dr. Goade come to the Synod, and according to the
manner, conducted to his seat, where being sat, he made a short speech, which
being ended, the Synod proceeded to discuss the question above mentioned. The
Decree is, that the Professors shall expound those places of Scripture, on
which the Remonstrant builds. Wherefore Io. Polyander, who is the Senior
Professor, being absent, Sibrandus Lubbertus, who is the next in order, took
the question, and answered such Texts as were urged by the Adversary, one out
of Joh. 3.36. Qui credit in filium habot vitam aeternam: qui non credit non
videbit vitam, sed ira Dei manet super eo: Another out of Ephesians. 1.4. Elegit
nos in Christo ante jacta mundi fundamenta: A third out of Heb. 11. Impossible
est sine fide placere Deo. The sum of Sibrandus his answer at that time I
cannot give. For being misinformed that it would be but a private Session, I
was not at it. Besides Sibrandus no man spoke any thing that night. As soon as
he had done, it was signified by the Praeses that the Campenses, who were
lately cited, were now ready to make their appearance. It was concluded, that
because the business of the Synod should not be interrupted, certain out of the
company should be appointed to hear the cause, and make relation of it to the
Synod: so the Praeses concluded the Session with a prayer, in which he prayed
for Mr. Dean's Health, and for the good success of his journey. This was the
sum of what was then done, and so I end, committing your Honor to Gods good
protection.

Dort, this 8/^^ of January. Your Honors Chaplain and bounden in all Duty and
Service, Jo. Hales.

The Synodical Decree of the sixth of January, concerning the manner of handling
the five Articles.
COllatis diligenter per D. Praesidem, Assessores and Scribas ex praescripto
illustrium D D. Delegatorum suffragiis omnibus, tum Scripto tum viva voce heri
ac nudiustertius in veneranda hac Synodo dictis super modo agendi circa examen
and judicium quinque Articulorum: compertum est plurimis placere, ut singula
quamprimum Collegia ad examen illud instituendum judiciumque formandum serio se
accingant. Ac primo quidem loco in manus sumant primum Articulum. In cujus
examine, ut and deinceps in caeterorum, ad interrogatoria and Theses a D.
Praeside dictata, ut and postea dictanda, quilibet in primis attendat. Si quis
tamen plura, quae ad sententiam Remonstrantium proponendam and explicandam
facere possunt, quae forte in Thesibus and interrogatoriis istis indicata non
sunt, addere velit and possit, id cuique liberum relinquatur: and ut privatim
singula collegia ante Meridiem de hoc examine cogitabunt; ita post Meridiem ne
Synodus intermissa, ac nulla auditorum Spectatorumque ex omnibus passim oris
quotidie accurrentium ratio haberi videatur, publicus, nisi omnino res ipsa
aliud postulaverit, conventus celebrabitur: in quo potissima Remonstrantium
argumenta maxim ex Scripturis desumpta, ipsorumque adeo ad contrariae
sententiae argumenta maxim ex Scripturis desumpta responsiones proponentur and
excutientur, praeeuntibus D D. Doctoribus ac Professoribus nunc nostratibus,
nunc exteris ad Arbitrium D. Praesidis: relicta interim singulis liberate
dictis addendi, and suam etiam de praepositis argumentis sententiam dicendi.
Quare necesse quoque erit ut quilibit serio de argumentis istis and
responsionibus apud se cogitet ac meditetur. Dabit autem operam D. Praeses
singulis Sessionibus, ut ea de quibus proxima Sessione erit agendum universae
Synodo fignificet. Ac si quis fuerit, qui de quoquam, quod forte a D. Praeside
monitum non fuerat, judicium Synodi audire sua vel aliorum causa desideret,
ejus, si privatim D. Praesidem appellaverit, ratio habebitur, prout ipse
adhibito consilio Assessorum and Scribarum, ac si opus fuerit plurium, ex usu
Synodi, aut rei de qua agitur, esse existimaverit. Iudicium formatum de
quolibet Articulo, additis rationibus quibus subnixum est, Praesidi privatim
exhibebitur asservandum, donec de omnibus judicium Articulis judicium formatum
and similiter exhibitum fuerit.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
UPon Wednesday the 6/1^ of January there was no Session at all in the morning,
in the evening there was one, but in private. In this they have concluded the
question about their manner of proceeding. There was a form conceived and
concluded upon, and transcribed by all the Deputies. They concluded likewise
their Theses upon the first Article, which they purpose publicly to discuss.
It was late in the evening ere this Session was done, so that I could not get
the Copies of either of these, but in my morrow Letters I will not fail, by
Gods grace, to send your Honor the transcripts of them. Besides, there were
some things of smaller weight advised of. First, whether in delivering of their
judgments upon the Articles in Controversy, the Foreigners should begin as
hitherto they had done. The Provincials at first strained courtesy, and
thought it no point of good manners, to take Precedence of the Foreigners: but
it is concluded, they must, as being better tried in these Controversies than
the Foreigners are, and therefore meet it was they should give them more time
to advise. The second thing proposed was concerning their Auditory. For they
questioned whether they should admit of hearers, or do all in private. Old
Sibrandus was very hot against the Auditory, and thought it not fit that any
care should be had of them, as being only Mulierculae, and pauculi juvenes
incauti. There is some reason of this complaint of his, for many youths, yea
and Artificers, and I know not what rabble besides thrust in, and trouble the
place. As for women whole troops of them have been seen there, and the best
places for spectators reserved for them. Which thing must needs expose the
Synod to the scorn of those, who lie in wait to take exception against it. But
the Synod has determined in favor of their Auditory, that Sessions
consultatory and Provisional shall be private, but Sessions wherein they
discuss and conclude shall be public. Meetings hereafter will not be so
frequent, for men will take more time to advise. This is the sum, as far as I
can learn, of what was done at that time. To morrow your Lordship shall receive
farther information, till which time I humbly take my leave.

Dort, this 7/17 of January. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in all Duty,
Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
UPon Friday the ^8/18 of January in the Evening, the Synod being met. Doctor
Gomarus answered some parts of Scripture, laid hold of by the Remonstrants,
after the same manner as Dr. Sibrandus had done the night before, the places by
him discust were for the more part the same which in the former Session had
been handled. The order of discussing these arguments is by continued discourse
after the manner of Latin Sermons, or rather of Divinity Lectures, such as are
read in our Schools. In one thing the Discretion of both these Doctors was much
approved. For both of them holding that extreme and rigid tenent, which Beza
and Perkins first of all acquainted the World with, yet notwithstanding they
held an unpartial and even course and never struck upon it. When Gomarus had
spoken toward an hour and half, my Lord Bishop delivered himself concerning
the meaning of the same places of Scripture, and after him certain other of the
foreign Divines. After this same Copy will all the news be yet this ten days
or more, and these evening Sessions are only to entertain the Auditory, not to
determine any thing at all. Each company must in private conceive and set down
in writing their opinion concerning the Articles; and when they have so done
the Writings must be exhibited to the Synod, and out of them must be gathered
the Conclusion which must stand for good. This is a thing which will require
some good time, and in the mean while besides these Theological Lectures, there
shall be nothing done publicly in the Synod. The same day at night
Bisterfieldius, one of the Deputies lately come out of Nassau died. When his
Funeral will be I know not. Upon Friday Morning Mr. Dean took his journey
toward Middlebourgh. Upon Saturday their was no Session at all. Mr. Balcanqual
commends his Service unto your Honor, and required me to signify to you thus
much, that he had lately spoken with Musius, but understood nothing by him
concerning the matter which your Lordship is privy too. He willed me moreover
to inform your Honor, That whereas you lately spoke to Mr. Dean to deal with
Deodati, Mr. Dean by reason of his indisposition of Body, and sudden departure,
found no means to talk with him. Thus with humble recommendation of my Service
to your Honor, I take my leave.

Dort, this 11/21 of January. Your Honors Chaplain and bounden in all Duty and
Service, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
THe Errors of public actions (if they be not very gross) are with less
inconvenience tolerated than amended. For the danger of alteration, of
disgracing and disabling Authority, makes that the fortune of such proceedings
admits no regress, but being once howsoever well or ill done, they must for
ever after be upheld. The most partial spectator of our Synodal acts cannot but
confess, that in the late dismission of the Remonstrants, with so much choler
and heat, there was a great oversight committed, and that whether we respect
our common profession of Christianity, Quae nil nisi justum suadet and lene; or
the quality of this people apt to mutine by Reason of long Liberty, and not
having learnt to be imperiously commanded, in which argument the Clergy above
all men ought not to have read their first Lesson. The Synod therefore to whom
it is not now in integro to look back, and rectify what is amiss without
disparagement, must now go forward and leave events to God, and for the
Countenance of their action do the best they may. For this purpose have they
lately by Deputies appointed for that end, made a Declaration of all their
procedings unto the States General, from whom they have procured a Decree for
Confirmation of them, which Decree upon Monday the 11/21 of January was
publicly, first in Dutch, then in Latin, read at the Synod in the Evening. The
particulars of it I shall not need relate, as being sufficiently known to your
Honor. The Decree being pronounced, Heinsius first signified that it had been
before in private made known to the Remonstrants, and then in the name of the
Delegates warned the Commissioners of the Synod, Vt quam maturime and celerrime
de istis controversiis statuant, ut possint tandem afflictis ecclesiis Belgicis
subvenire. I was very glad to hear that admonition, and it gives me hope that
our Synod shall have end not long after Easter at the farthest. After this did
Tysius, another of the Professors, discuss three other of the Remonstrants
arguments taken out of the Hague Conference, according to the same form as
Sibrandus and Gomarus had done before. This being done, the Praeses required
Io. Polyander and Wallaeus to provide to do the like upon Thursday next in the
Evening (for before that time there is to be no public Session) and requesting
the Company the next Day to accompany Bisterfieldius to his Grave (which
accordingly was done at the time appointed) he dismissed the meeting. So that
till Thursday next we are likely to understand no no more news of the Synod.

I spoke upon Tuesday with Mr. Praeses concerning Moulins project. His answer
to me was this, That he communicated the thing with some of the discreeter of
the Synod, and that he had required my Lord Bishop and Soultetus to conceive a
form of public Confession. Which as soon as it should be conceived and allowed
of by those, who should in that behalf be consulted withal, he would send a
Copy of it to your Honor, to be sent to his Majesty, by him to be revised and
altered according to his pleasure, and so from him to be commended unto the
Synod publicly. Which course he thinks will take good success. As touching the
point concerning the Lutherans, he thinks it not fit that any word at all be
made. I dealt with Mr. Praeses concerning a Copy of Mr. Deans Valediction to
the Synod; he answered me that he had delivered it to Dammannus the Scribe to
be Copied out, and as soon as it was done, I should have it to transcribe, so
soon therefore as I can procure the Copy of it, I will not fail to send it to
your Lordship. Mr. Dean at his departure had an Honorarium bestowed on him by
the States. Heinsius the Scribe came to his lodging to him, and making a short
speech unto him, presented him in the Name of the States with munusculum as he
called it. What or how much it was no man knows. Thus commending your Honor to
Gods good protection, I humbly take my leave.

Dort, this 12/22 of January, 1619. Your Honors Chaplain, and Bounden in all
Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
UPon Tuesday the 12/22 of this present in the Fvening, for the debating of
certain particular points of controversy belonging to the first Article, the
Synod came together in private. It has been lately questioned, how Christ is
said to be Fundamentum Electionis. The Doctrine generally received by the
Contra-Remonstrant in this point is, That God first of all Resolved upon the
Salvation of some singular persons, and in the second place upon Christ as a
mean to bring this Decree to pass. So that with them God the Father alone is
the Author of our Election, and Christ only the Executioner. Others on the
contrary teach, that^ Christ is so to be held Fundamentum Electionis, as that
he is not only the Executioner of Election, but the Author and the procurer of
it: for proof of which they bring the words of the Apostle to the Ephesians,
the first Chapter, elegit nos in Christo ante jacta mundi fundamenta. The
Exposition of this Text was the especial thing discust at this meeting: and
some taught, that Christ was Fundamentum Electionis, because he was primus
Electorum, or because he is Fundamentum Electorum, but not Electionis, or
because he is Fundamentum beneficiorum, which descend upon us; others brookt
none of those Restraints. D. Gomarus stands for the former sentence, and in
defense of it had said many things on Friday. This night Martinius of Breme
being required to speak his mind, signified to the Synod, that he made some
scruple concerning the Doctrine passant about the manner of Christ's being
Fundamentum Electionis, and that he thought Christ not only the Effector of our
Election, but also the Author and procurer thereof. Gomarus who owes the Synod
a shrewd turn, and then I fear me began to come out of debt; presently, as soon
as Martinius had spoken, starts up, and tells the Synod, ego hanc rem in me
recipio, and therewithal casts his Glove, and challenges Martinius with this
Proverb, Ecce Rhodum, ecce saltum, and requires the Synod to grant them a Duel,
adding that he knew Martinius could say nothing in refutation of that Doctrine.
Martinius who goes in aequipace with Gomorus in Learning, and a little before
him for his Discretion, easily digested this affront, and after some few words
of course, by the wisdom of the Praeses matters seemed to be a little pacified,
and so according to the custom, the Synod with Prayer concluded. Zeal and
Devotion had not so well allayed Gomarus his choler, but immediately after
Prayers he renewed his Challenge and required Combat with Martinius again; but
they parted for that night without blows. Martinius, as it seems, is somewhat
favorable to some Tenants of the Remonstrants concerning Reprobation, the
latitude of Christ's merit, the Salvation of Infants, etc. and to bring him to
some conformity was there a private meeting of the Foreign Divines upon
Wednesday morning in my Lord Bishops Lodging, in which thus much was obtained,
that though he would not leave his Conclusions, yet he promised moderation and
temper in such manner, that there should be no dissension in the Synod by
reason of any opinion of his.

Upon Thursday the 14/^4 of this present, the Synod being met in the Evening,
Io. Polyander and Walaeus undertook the defense of some places of Scripture
brought by the Contra-Remonstrants against the exceptions of the Remonstrants:
the places of Scripture were, Luke 10. 20. Gaudete quia nomina vestra scripta
sunt in Coelis. Apocal. 21. 27. inscripti in libro vitae. Romans 9. 11. Vt
propositum Dei secundum Electionem maneret, and 11. 5. Reservatio secundum
Electionem: and Romans 8. 13. Quos praedestinavit ut conformes fiant imagini
Filii sui, cos etiam vocavit. Act. 13. 48. Crediderunt quotquot erant ordinati
ad vitam aeternam. Upon these places these two spoke almost three hours.

It was expected that as the rest of the Professors hitherto have done, so
Doctor Davenant the next Professor should speak in public: It is said that
he shall do it this day in a private Session (for there is no public till
Monday, and what will then be done I know not.) What the meaning is of this
Audience only in private, I know not. But of this I will say more in my next
Letters to your Honor, till when I leave your Lordship to Gods good protection.

Dort this 15/^5 of January, 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in all
Duty, Jo. Hales.
Your Honor shall here receive a Copy of Mr. Deans farewell, I fear me it is a
little imperfect, for I understand it not in some places. If I can hear of
another Copy from Mr. Praeses who promised me one at the beginning of this week,
and find it to be perfecter, I will again transcribe it.

The Dean of Worcesters Valediction to the Synod.
NOn facile mecum in gratiam redierit cadaverosa haec moles, quam aegre usque
circumgest^, quae mihi sacri hujus Conventus celebritatem toties inviderit,
jamque me prorsus invitissimum, a vobis importune a vocat and divellit. Neque
enim ullus est profecto sub Coelo locus aeque Coeli aemulus, and in quo
tentorium mihi figi maluerim, cujusque adeo gestiet mihi animus meminisse.
Beatos vero vos quibus hoc frui datum! Non dignus eram ego ut fidelissimi
Romani Querimoniam imitari liceat, qui pro Christi and Ecclesiae suae nomine
sanctam hanc provinciam diutius sustinerem. Illud vero (...): nempe audito quod
res erat, non alia me quam adversissima hic usum valetu dine, serenissimus Rex
meus, misertus miselli famuli sui revocat me domum, quippe quod cineres meos
ant sandapilam vobis nihil quicquam prodesse posse norit, succenturiavitque
mihi virum e suis selectissimum, quantum Theologum! De me profecto, (mero jam
silicernio) quicquid fiat, viderit ille Deus meus, cujus ego totus sum. Vobis
quidem ita feliciter prospectumest, ut sit cur infirmitati meae haud parum
gratulamini, quae hujusmodi instructissimo succedaneo coetum hunc vestrum
beaverit. Neque tamen committam, (si Deus vitam mihi ac vires indulserit) ut et
corpore simul et animo abesse videar. Interea sane huic Synodo ubicunque
terrarum sim, votis, consiliis, conatibusque meis quibuscunque res vestras me
pro virili serio ac sedulo promoturum sancte voveo. Interim vobis omnibus ac
singulis Honoratissimi Domini Delegati, Revererdissime Domine Praeses,
Gravissimi Assessores, Symmystae Colendissimi, tibique Venerandissima Synodus
Vniversa, aegro animo ac corpore aeternum valedico: rogoque vos omnes obnixius
ut precibus vestris imbecillem reducem facere, comitari, et prosequi velitis.



Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Tuesday the 19/^^ of January, at the Evening Session, the point of
Reprobation was Scholastically and learnedly discust by Altingius, one of the
Palatine Professors. His discourse was the most sufficient of any that yet I
heard. He began from the Definition, and proceeded to how far God had a hand in
it, and how far man is the Author of his own Destruction, and lastly answered
the Remonstrants arguments. He spoke about an hour and a half. I would
willingly have given your Honor an acount of his speech, but it was in the
Evening, and the Auditory are allowed no candles, so that I could not use my
Tables. And thus have they discust the first Article; though I could have
wished that the question of Reprobation had been yet farther opened and stood
upon, it being a point of large extent, and especially insisted on by the
Remonstrant. As for Synodical Resolution in this first Article, that we must
yet expect, till all the rest be examined as this has been. There is no open
Session till Friday next after dinner; and then is it their purpose to enter
upon the Second Article, of Universal Grace: at which time Mr. Balcanqual, and
Cruciger of Hassia are appointed to speak, according as the rest have done
before, to this question, Whether the death of Christ were intended
indifferently for all, or only for the Elect? Upon Wednesday the 20/^0 of
January, in the evening was there a private Session, wherein, belike for the
making of better speed, they consulted whether they should go on to examine the
rest of the Articles after the same manner they had done the first, or else
bethink them of some more speedy order. After a long disceptation, even so long
that Polyander put the Praeses in mind of the exceeding sharpness of the
Weather, they at length concluded, that they would go on in the same course
they had begun. And this as yet is all the News that is passant, wherefore
ceasing farther to trouble your Honor, I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 21/31 of January. 1619. Your Honors Chaplain and bounden in all
Duty and Service, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
UPon Friday the 15/^5 of January, there was a meeting of the Synod partly
public, partly private. As the Provincial Professors had done, so was D.
Davenant, who is the first Professor of the Forraigners, enjoined by the
Praeses to do. The intent of his discourse at that time, was to overthrow
certain distinctions framed by the Remonstrants for the maintenance of their
positions, and evasion from the Contra-Remonstrants Arguments. The Remonstrants
usually distinguish upon Election, and divide it, into definitam and
indefinitam, revocabilem and irrevocabilem, peremptoriam and non peremptoriam,
mutabilem and immutabilem, and the like. For the refutation of which
distinctions he first set down the definition of election brought by the
Contra-Remo^strant, and at large confirmed it: secondly he brought the
definition of election agreed on by the Remonstrant, and Argued against it: and
thirdly he directly oppugned these forecited distinctions; all which he did
learnedly and fully. When Dr. Davenant had spoken, the Auditory was commanded
to depart. For having a purpose that others should speak at the same time, and
fearing that some diversity of opinion might rise, and occasion some
dissension, it was thought fit that things should be transacted as privately as
might be. Many more of the Foreigners delivered themselves that night, and
amongst the rest Martinius of Breme proposed again his former doubts unto the
Synod, concerning the sense in which Christ is said to be fundamentum
electionis, and requested to be resolved. But D. Gomarus at this time, was
somewhat better advised, and thought it best to hold his peace. This day will
there be a private meeting wherein every company will give up their judgments
in writing upon the first Article: and to morrow I understand they will go on
unto the second, and proceed in it, accordingly as they have in the former. As
for any Decisive Sentence they will give none, till they have thus gone through
all the five. In this I suppose they do very discreetly. For since the
Articles are mutually linked together, it is most convenient they should first
go through them all, since a predetermination in the former might bind them to
some inconvenience in the latter, there being no place left to look back, but
stand they must to what they have once concluded. For avoiding of this it is
thought best to determine of all at once. And this is all the news that here is
current: wherefore commending Your Honor to Gods good protection, I humbly
take my leave.

Dort, this ^^/^^ of January. 1619. Your Honors Chaplain and Bounden in all
Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
UPon Monday the ^8/27 of January in the Evening, the Synod being met,
Scultetus spoke at large de Certitudine gratiae and salutis, that it was
necessary for every man to be assured of his Salvation. The manner of his
discourse was oratorial, the same that he uses in his Sermons, not scholastical
and according to the fashion of disputation and Schools. For this cause the
question was neither deeply searched into, nor strongly proved. And this is all
was done that night.

I spoke with Dr. Goad concerning Mr. Brent, who answered me that he heard
nothing at all of him, and that he will shortly write unto my Lord Archbishops
Secretary to be informed farther concerning him. My Lord Bishop of late has
taken some pains with Martinius of Breme, to bring him from his opinion of
Universal Grace. By chance I came to see his Letter written to Martinius in
which he expounded that place in the third of John, So God loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. which is the strongest ground upon
which Martinius rests himself. Beyond this here is no news worth the relating,
and therefore till farther occasion offer it self, I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 19/29 of January. 1618. Yours Honors Chaplain and bounden in all
Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Thursday the 21/^^ of January in the Evening the Synod met privately, and
as they had done in the first, so did they in the second Article. For the
speedier Direction to find the places in the Remonstrants Books, where the
particulars concerning Universal Grace are discust, there was a kind of Index
or Concordance drawn of the several passages in their writings touching that
subject. The next Day following, that is the first of February Stylo novo, Mr.
Balcanqual, and Cruciger of Hassia made entrance upon the second Article. Mr.
Balcanqual spoke above an hour, and did very well acquit himself. When they had
done the Praeses enjoined Steinius of Hassia upon Tuesday next in the Evening
(at what time will be the next open Session) to speak of the fourth Article
(for of the third there is no question) and to sound whether the Grace of God
converting us be resistible, as the Remonstrants would have it. This have that
is made in this sudden passing from one Article to another is much marvail'd
at by our English Divines: for the Colleges yet have not all given up their
opinion upon the first, and besides that the Remonstrants upon Wednesday last
were willed to give in their Arguments upon the first Article. For
notwithstanding they be excluded from personal appearance in the Synod, yet are
they commanded to exhibit to the Synod whatsoever they shall please to command.
Now some time will be required for the examining of those reasons, if they be
of late invention, and such as yet have had nothing said to them. But what the
reason of this haste is, will appear hereafter.

I lately writ unto Mr. Collwall to know what Order was to be taken for the
discharge of my Lodging, whether your Honor were to answer it, or the public
purse. I would willingly be resolved of it, because I have a desire to return
to the Hague; first, because the Synod proceeding as it does, I do not see that
it is operae pretium for me here to abide: and then because I have sundry
private occasions that call upon me to return. For notwithstanding this haste,
of which I but now spoke, it will be long ere the Synod will come to determine
any thing, and about that time, if your Honor shall be so pleased. I shall be
ready to come back to Dort. And so remembering my service unto your Honor, I
humbly take my leave.

Dort, this first of Febr. 1619. Stylo novo. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden
in all Duty and Service, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
OUr Synod goes on like a watch, the main Wheels upon which the whole business
turns are least in sight. For all things of moment are acted in private
Sessions, what is done in public is only for show and entertainment. Upon
Monday last the fourth of February, stylo novo, the Deputies met privately in
the Evening, where the first thing that came upon the Stage was the old
impertinent business concerning the Campenses, at what time Scotlerus a
Remonstrant Minister, who had been formerly cited to appear before the Synod,
having not appeared at time apppointed, pretended sickness, and for that cause
he required the Synods patient forbearance. After this they entered into
consultation concerning certain Books and Writings to be conceived partly for
declaration of the Synods meaning in the Doctrine of the five Articles, partly
in Apology for it. And first it was proposed that there should be scriptum
didacticum a plain and familiar writing drawn, wherein the Doctrine of the five
Articles according to the intent and meaning of the Synod should be
perspicuously expressed for the Capacity of the common sort, and that in Dutch
and Latin. The Apological Writings were of two sorts, first Scriptum
Elenchicum, wherein there were to be refuted such Errors as had been lately
broached in prejudice of the received Doctrine: secondly Scriptum Historicum,
which was to consist of two parts, first, a narration of the Synods procedings
with the Remonstrant, from the day of his first appearance till the time of his
Ejection: for the refutation of many bitter invectives which lately had been
written against the Synod in that behalf. Secondly, a Relation de causis
turbarum, who were the Authors of the late Stirs in time of the separation; for
answer of Episcopius his Orations, and other Writings of the Remonstrants, in
which the whole misorder in turned upon the Contra Remonstrant. For the
Scriptum didacticum the English were altogether against it: and so was
Vosbergius. Their Reason was, because it seemed incongruous that any writing
concerning the Doctrine of the Articles should be set forth before the Synod
had given Sentence. And indeed I must confess I see no great congruity in the
proposal, whilst matters are in controversy: Judges walk suspensly, and are
indifferent for either party, and whatsoever their intent be, yet they make no
overture of it till time of sentence come. All this business of citing,
inquiring, examining must needs seem only as acted on a stage, if the Synod
intempestively before hand bewray a resolution. But notwithstanding any reason
alleadgable against it, the thing is concluded, and Wallaeus, Vdemannus, and
Triglandius are deputed to write a discourse to that purpose, with the
inspection and supervision of my Lord Bishop, Scultetus, Brittingerus, and
Deodatus. For the Scriptum Historicum in the first part concerning the
proceeding of the Synod with the Remonstrant, there is required the pains of
Scultetus and Triglandius: in the second part de causis turbarum, Latius must
bestow his labor, with the help of Festus Hommius, of the South-Hollanders and
North-Hollanders, who best of any know the whole carriage of that matter. To
the composing of the Scriptum Elenchicum there are deputed four of the
Provincials Professors, Io. Polyander, Lubbertus, Gomarus and Thysius, to whom
are adjoined as helpers and Supervisors D. Davenant, Altingius and Martinius.
But the business of this writing past not without some opposition, Deodat.
altogether misliked it, Polyander requested that his pains might be spared:
Novi, says he, quam sit mihi curta supellex. But above all D. Gomarus was most
offended at the Proposal. Bella mihi video, bella parantur ait. And therefore
quite refusing to consent to any Polemical writing, he advised that the
Scriptum didacticum should abstain, a non necessariis and privatis, and contein
only necessary points such as by common consent. That they should expect till
the Remonstrant had set forth some adversary writing, and then would be a
fitter time to think of somewhat in this kind. I blame not D. Gomarus, if he a
little recoil. For being of the Supralapsarii, as they term them, of those who
bring the Decree of Gods Election from before the fall, and seeing the Synod
not willing to move that way, but to subside in a lower sphere, he is to be
pardoned, if he deny his hand to that writing, which he supposes cannot be so
warily indicted, but he must be forced with his own pen to let fall somewhat
prejudicial to his own opinion. The Praeses answered that it was not his drift
to force the Synod against their minds to set out such a Book; but only to take
hold of the present occasion whilst the Foreign Divines were here, and have
such a Book in readiness for use hereafter, though it were not now set forth.
He farther advised that those who were to undertake this, should have an eye to
the inclination of the Synod, and beware as much as might be, that they touched
not there where any man was sore. Whatsoever the pretense is, the mentioning of
these Books, before the determination of the Synod be formally set down, must
needs be very unseasonable. It will make the world to think they came resolved
what to do, which though perchance they did, yet it is no wisdom to confess it.
After this did they advise concerning the Exceptions against the Confession and
Catechism, and of such as should answer them. For the Catechism, the Palatine
Divines undertook it: for the Confession some of the Provincials were
appointed, whose names I have not learnt. The Praeses then by the advice of the
Secular Delegates, advised the Synod to think of gathering a Synopsis and brief
of all the Synodical Proceedings, to be sent to the King of England, and other
Foreign Princes and States, who had sent Deputies to the Synod, that so they
may understand what has been done. For this were there appointed Altingius
Steinius, the Assessors and Scribes; and for Supervisors were named D.
Davenant, Praeses. This is the sum of that Session.

On Tuesday at Even they met again in private, where every one spoke in order
what they had furher to say concerning the second Article. Upon some occasion,
I know not what, the Praeses mentioned Negotium Vorstianum, Bertianum, and
Venatorianum, which I note because this is the first time that Vorstius his
cause was named in the Synod. There has not been any stay made amongst the
Foreign Divines but only in this second Article, out of which if they can well
and clearly wrest themselves, their passage out of the rest will be more
smooth. I lately told your Honor that Martinius of Breme made some doubts
amongst the rest concerning Universal Grace. Not Martinius only, but Dr. Ward
in this point. For the composing the doubts of both these, that they brake not
out to any public inconvenience, there has been of late many private meetings
in my Lord Bishops Lodging; where upon Wednesday Morning were drawn certain
Theses in very suspense and wary terms: to what end, whether to give content to
all parties, or to exhibit to the Synod, or what else I know not, by chance I
had a view of them, but no opportunity to transcribe them.

On Wednesday the sixth of February, there was a public Session in the
Evening, at what time Steinius of Hassia spoke to the fourth Article concerning
the resistibility of Grace, in the same manner as others had done before him.
He spoke about an hour and a half, and when he had done, the Praeses gave
warning of a public Session to be upon Monday next in the Evening, and so
dismissed the Auditory, but not the Synod, who after this sat a good space in
private consultation.

7 Febr. 1619. Your Honors Chaplain and bounden in all Duty and Service, Jo.
Hales.

FINIS.
Dr. BALCANQVALS LETTERS From the SYNOD of DORT TO THE Right Honorable Sr.
DVDLEY CARLTON, Lord Ambassador, etc.
My very Good Lord,
MY business is now effected by your L^care to my contentment; since the first
day of my coming to Dort, they have made me an allowance equal with our English
Divines, which is twenty Florens a day; a less allowance might very well have
served me, if I had not been joined with them, but being joined, it was not fit
that for matter of maintenance I should be in their debts: I am exceedingly
beholden to Mr. Musius his kindness, not only upon this, but upon all
occasions: It does proceed I suppose from your L. to whom as I must ever stand
bound for the return of perpetual thanks and service, so I would be a suitor to
your L. that your L. would be pleased to give Mr. Musius thanks for his
kindness. For our Synod business, as we went too slow before, so now they would
have us go too fast, they would have us to dispatch one Article a week; which
is too little time for so weighty questions. But I hope they shall be done to
some purpose. With the remembrance of my faithfullest duty and service to your
L. and your worthy Lady, and my best wishes for both your health and happiness,
I take my leave, and rest

Dordretch this 2d. of Febuary, Stylo novo. Your L. in all true respects of
service, Walter Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
SInce Mr. Hales his going, here has been nothing done in the Synod of any
note. On the seventh of February now still was held the 76. Session; in which
nothing was done, but that they which before had not spoken in the second
Article did speak what they thought fit: there was nothing of note spoken, save
that one of the Transisulani took it evil that we took the Remonstrants meaning
in their opinions, where they speak best and soundest; but he would have their
meaning to be gathered out of all places in their Books, where they speak most
absurdly, which we thought was very far besides the rule of charity: so in that
Session the Synodical diquisition for the second Article was ended. The
President told us, moreover, that the Delegates had sent to the Remonstrants,
and had demanded of them, if they had any thing in writ, which might serve for
the explication of their opinion concerning the five Articles; and that they
had given to them their confirmation of their opinion concerning the first
Article, as likeways a confutation of that which they held for the Heterodox
opinion, and a beginning of their explication of the second Article: now he
showed us the Book, of which in good faith I was ashamed to think that men of
judgment could imagine that the Synod could have time to peruse it; for it is
a little Book of Martyrs, it does exceed two hundred folia in folio; moreover
he told, us that the Delegates had commanded them within eight days to bring in
all they would or could say as necessary for the understanding of their minds
concerning the whole five Articles. On the 8. of February Stylo novo, was held
the 77. Session, in which was nothing done but that the President did dictate
to us, these drawn out of the Remonstrants writings concerning the third and
fourth Articles, which I hold not expedient to send to your L. but if I shall
understand that your L. do desire them, I can easily send them: It was
appointed we should this Morning send our Amanuenses to write out so much of
the Remonstrants big Book, as did concern the second Article, which we did, and
that against Monday we should consult what we would have done with the great
volumn it self; this day the President sent to our particular College some
particular strange points which he had drawn out of their late explication of
the second Article, and in very pathetical terms did by his Letter entreat us
to have a care of condemning them in our judgment of the same Article.
Concerning this second Article I beseech your L. give me leave to express my
grief, as there is difference touching it in the Synod, so there is much
difference about it in our own College: will your L. be pleased to give me
leave to say something of it; it is fit your L. should take notice of it, but
no ways as from me; the question amongst us is whether the words of the
Scripture, which are likewise the words of our confession, ( Christus oblatus
est aut mortuus pro toto humano genere, seu pro peccatis totius mundi) be to be
understood of all particular men, or only of the elect who consist of all sorts
of men; Dr. Davenant and Dr. Ward are of Martinius of Breme his mind, that it
is to be understood of all particular men: the other three take the other
exposition, which is of the writers of the reformed Churches, and namely of my
late Lord of Sarisbury, both sides think they are right, and therefore cannot
yield one unto another with a safe conscience: It is, my Lord, a matter of
great consequence for us to set down the exposition of one Article of our
Church confession: will your L. therefore be pleased to think of this
proposition, since our judgment of none of the five Articles is to be known,
till we have done with them all; what if we should desire the President to take
no notice, but to let us go on to the rest of the Articles, and in mean time we
should send into England the true state of our controversy, and have advice
there from some of the chief of the Church what exposition they would have to
be given of that Article of their confession, which we may safely follow, for
it is no matter of salvation in which we differ; before we have done with the
rest of the Articles we may easily have one answer from England; if your L.
like this motion or any other, your L. should do well by your Letters to us to
desire it; if not, I beseech your L. pardon my error which proceeds only from
my fear of distraction among our selves, and from my obedience to his Majesty's
charge, who commanded me in all such cases to have recourse to your L. for
counsel: so with my best prayers to God for your L. health and happiness, with
the remembrance of my best service to your L. and your worthy Lady, I take my
leave and rest.

Dordretch this 9 of February, Stylo novo. Your L. in all true respect and
service, Walter Balcanqual.

My very good Lord,
THough your L. Letters caused some anger here with the informer, who was
unknown to them, yet believe it, your L. has done a work worthy of your
Honor, and such a one as if it had been left undone, would when it could not
have been helped; have made us all heartily wish that it had been done: your L.
Letters have taken the true effect with your L. in your advice intended, we all
acknowledge your L. counsel to be not only good but necessary, and yet we are
displeased your L. should be informed of the variance; without which we must
have been deprived of this your L. wholesome and necessary direction. Since my
last Letters to your L. it is true that we agreed upon some propositions, which
are without question true, but they were such as did no ways decide the
question controverted in the Synod; we retained the words of Scripture and our
own confessions, but all the difference is in the interpretation of these
words. When the Canons of the second Article come to be made, it will be
determined whether Christ did really persolvere pretium^ redemptionis pro
omnibus ac singulis hominibus, an pro solis electis, in the Synod then should
we have differed in voices: because I know your L. will write to my L. Grace, I
beseech your L. require a speedy answer: in our Letters to my L. Grace, we have
but a little noted the difference which is like to be. I have here in ** this
paper sent to your L. the true state of the difference, which will be
concerning this proposition. Christus obtulit se pro peccatis totius mundi, I
dare engage my credit with your L. that it is truly set down, and more fully
than in our Letters to my L. Grace; your L. may take so much of it as you shall
think fit, and make his Grace acquainted with it; and write that this is like
to be the difference not in (as your L. is informed) our College, but in the
Synod about the second Article, and therefore desire his Grace to send us some
good counsel for our carriage in it; for certainly most voices in the Synod
will follow the received exposition of the reformed Doctors, confirmed much by
my late L. of Sarisbury his G. brother, who was thought to understand the
meaning of our confession as well as any man. I doubt not but that your L. will
crown your own work with following of it; when your L. shall find the fruit of
peace in the Synod among us proceed by your L. your L. will find great matter
of joy, arising from the conscience of this Christian counsel. Our controversy
among our selves, I must needs say, was with much love and amity, no man
desiring any thing to be put in our Articles, but that we should all approve
of; but so the question had never been decided: I beseech your L. pardon this
my liberty to your L. it is the love of peace, and my respect to your L. Honor
does procure it.

Since my last to your L. there has been three Sessions: first the 78. Session
held on the 2. February, Novo Stylo, in which Dr. Beckins one of the Helvetian
Divines at the President his entreaty did publicly discuss the seven Arguments
of the Remonstrants in Collat. Hag. whereby they prove Gratiam regenerationis
esse resistibilem. That being done, all Auditors were removed, and it was
inquired what order the Synod thought fittest to be taken with the Remonstrants
huge volume, the transcription whereof was impossible: the President told us he
had cast a general glance over it all, and did find that a few of the first
leaves did contain a confirmation of their opinion of the first Article, but
all the rest did contain nothing but a confutation of the contra R. opinion,
and an exagitation of their persons: we desired some part of it to be read; I
must needs say the Remonstrants had no favor, for I will assure your L. that
the President picked out the worst part of it; there were some five leaves
read, which contained nothing but a bitter Satyr against Calvin, Beza, Pareus,
Piscator, Whittaker, Perkins, Bogorman, Festus, and twenty more, but in truth
though unhappily, yet finely penned, me thought it was Episcopius his tongue;
about the taking notice of this book the suffrages of the Synod did vary much;
yet most voices were, that it should be committed to some deputed by the Synod,
who should dilgently peruse it, and relate unto the Synod if they found any new
thing in it, which was not contained in their former writings, but yet so that
any member of the Synod that would, might be present with the perusers. The
Delegates gave this mediatory sentence, because they had observed that both the
parts of it were desired by many: they desired there might be a forenoon
Session or two kept for the nonce, in which that small part of the book which
contained the confirmation of their opinion might be read; and every man take
with his pen, what he should think fit, the rest to be put over to perusers,
who should make relation to the Synod of any thing they found new or fit: and
therefore the Assessors, and D. Dammannus the Scribe were entreated to run over
the book, and make choice of what things they thought fit to be read in the
Synod, which when they have done we shall hear more of it.

The President tells us that the Campenses Remonstrants, who had been lately
peremptorily cited to compeir before the Synod were not come, but that they had
sent three others in their place to plead their cause: and that he had likewise
received a supplication to the Synod from the Campenses contra-Remon. The Synod
referred the hearing of the whole cause to deputies, one out of every College.

Sessio 79. 12. Feb.] The Synodical disquisition concerning the third and
fourth article began, many Divines spoke diverse things, the disquisition came
down to D. Grocius of Breme, and so the Synod was dismissed.

Sessio 82. 12. Feb.] We went on in the Synodical disquisition of the third and
fourth article, where many men spoke their opinions freely, when it came to
Sibrandus he spoke at least an hour, in his speech he took exceptions at some
things that D. Martinius of Breme had spoken the day before, especially that he
had said God was causa physica conversionis; he delivered some reasons against
it, and desired Martinius to give satsfaction to them, and to instruct him in
that which he knew not before Martinius answered for himself, but between them
both there were more words than sense, for they made it a mere philosophical
speculation, like to keeping a philosophy act, much against the gravity of
questions to be discussed in a Synod: Martinius for the truth of his assertion
appealed to Goclenius there present, as being princeps philosophorum, who were
not wont to be appealed to in Synodical questions, and Goclenius took the
moderator his place bravely upon him; told us that Themistius, Averores,
Alexander Aphrodisaeus, and many more were of Martinius his opinion; and his
opinion true in Philosophy, but yet he would not have it to prescribe in
Divinity; Sibrandus fell upon Goclenius too, so after many words lost on all
sides, the President cut them off, and so that act ended, and so the
disquisition ended. Yesterday we had no Session, this day we have one, of which
your Lordship by God's grace shall be advertised in my next. So with the
remembrance of my best service to your Lordship, and your virtuous Lady I rest

Dordrecht this 15. of February. Your L. in all faithful service, Walter
Balcanqual.

OBlatio Christi fact a in cruce perfect a est redemptio, propitiatio et
satisfactio pro omnibus peccatis totius mundi tam originalibus quam actualibus.
Contravertitur an per totum mundum intelligatur mundus electorum, an mundus
omnium particularium hominum: ubi de his tribus ambigitur.

Primo. An retinenda sit illa distinctio quae receptissima est apud Reformatos
Doctores, quemque Episcopus Sarisburiensis astruit page 35. et sequentibus,
mortuus est pro omnibus secundum sufficientiam seu magnitudinem pretii, non
secundum proprietatem redemptionis, quidam putant non retinendum esse quia
putant sic sufficienter dici posse mortuum pro Diabolis.

Secundo. Contravertitur de hac propositione. Christus obtulit se pro omnibus,
seu persolvit pretium redemptionis pro omnibus: quidam putant sensum esse,
persolvit pretium quod sufficit pro omnibus, non autem actu solvit pretium
illud nisi pro redimendis electis: alii putant hanc expositionem incommodam,
quia putant commentarium hunc verba ipsa destruere. Ea etenim putant sequi
Christum quidem habuisse pretium in numerato, quod persolutum suffecisset
omnibus redimendis; verum Christum non persolvisse actu pretium illud, aut
factum esse propitiationem pro peccatis totius mundi.

Tertio. Contravertitur de sensu horum verborum, totius mundi: quidam putant
intelligi de singuliis hominibus: alii de solis electis, (hic est sanguis novi
testamenti qui funditur pro multis in remissionem peccatorum) exponunt que haec
vocabula (totius mundi) sicut Augustinus exponit, epist. 48. Totus mundus est
in maligno positus propter zizania quae sunt per totum mundum, et Christus
propitiator est peccatorum totius mundi propter testicum quod est per totum
mundum.

Quaeritur ergo an per totum mundum debeamus intelligere singulos homines, an
solos electos; an vero nulla sit danda explicatio; sed retinenda sint verba
confessionis absque ullo commentario.

My very good Lord,
SInce my last unto your Lordship there has been nothing of any moment done in
the Synod; but what was done, the sum of it is this.

Sessio 81. 13. Feb. Stylo novo.] Credential letters were read from the
Frisians, by which Dacon ab Aisma, was deputed in the College of the Frisians
as a member of the Synod in the place of Meinhardus a senior Ecclesiae
Leowardensis, who lately died here; he took the oath of the Synod, and so was
admitted. Alstedius the only Nassovical Divine now left, by appointment of the
President publicly, all auditors being admitted, did vindicate the 10.
arguments which the Contra-Remonstrants used in Collat. Hag. for proving of
irresistibility of grace, from the objections, exceptions, and instances of the
Remonstrants: and so the auditory was dismissed. The President gives us
warning, that on Monday at 9. of the clock there should be a Session, in which
they would begin to read the great volume of the Remonstrants, lately given in;
and tells us moreover, that now they had given in their explication of the
third, fourth and fifth articles, but no confirmation of them: yet that the
Delegates had commanded them within eight days to bring in all they would or
could say concerning the five articles. Because the two Campenses Remonstrants
being peremptorily cited had not compeired, the president desired the Synod to
think of some fit punishment for this their contumacy. First we read letters
from Fosculius, one of these two Remonstrants; in which he excuses his absence
by these three reasons: first, that the Church could not bear their absence;
because if they should both come, there was none to preach: Secondly, that he
himself was making ready for the journey, but that he was stopped, by the
tears, howlings, sighs, outcries, lamentations, and prayers of all sexes, and
ages, and conditions of people, boys, girls, masters, servants, mistresses,
and maids, young and old, and many more such specifications there were:
thirdly, that they had sent two to the Synod to answer for them; and therefore
do humbly entreat, that they by these their procurators may causam dicere:
After these were read other Latin Letters from the Seniors of that same Church,
wonderful long, but so extremely foolish and idle, that one might see they were
written by some indiscreet pedant, who had run himself out of breath with
trotting through all the topic places of school boys Rhetoric; they
contained in them the same reasons for their ministers non-comparence, which
the former: and moreover did protest that their ministers were ready for their
journey, but that the importunity of their roarings, houlings, hindered them:
and therefore in a most furious strain did desire the Synod to conceit with
themselves, that they did but now with their eyes behold this ruthful
spectacle: to wit, The whole City of Camps male and female, young and old lying
before them, tearing their hair, knocking their breasts, piercing the air with
their sighs and Heaven with their lamentable howlings, having their eyes sunk
in their heads with tears, and their hearts ready to burst out at their sides
for anguish; with such a deal of female foolish Rhetoric, as no masculine
pencan relate, they desire the non-comparence of their Pastors, of whose
doctrines they might take sufficient notice without their personal presence,
^ince it was the same which the Remonstrants had maintained in Collat. Hag. It
is to be noted that the Magistrates of Camps, who before had written in these
citati their favor, did not now write.

Thirdly, there was read the Contra-Remonstrant Campenses, who were come to
accuse the citati, their answer to the reasons contained in the citati letters:
to the first, that the Church could not want their presence; it was answered,
that the Classis Campensis would look to that, as other Classes now did to the
charges of all the rest, who were present at the Synod; besides that no man's
charge in private can excuse him for non-comparence before a judge, when he is
cited. To the second, that they were coming, but were hindered by the people, it
was answered that a seditious tumultuary concourse of^ people, ought not to
hinder any man from comparence before a judge, especially since it is known
that this seditious conflux was procured by the citati, as is evident by the
confessions of many, (whose names were there expressed,) who who being called
to be present at that tumultuary assembly refused; who did testify moreover,
that the citati went about begging hands to subscribe those foolish letters to
the Synod. To the third, that they had sent procurators to answer for them; it
was answered that it was a thing not heard of, that another man should give
account of those things which they themselves had taught. These things being
read, the Synod was required to give sentence: the Delegates sentence was this:
that notwithstanding all these idle excuses the citati were to be condemned of
contumacy, to be suspended from their Ministry, but with this provision, that
if within fourteen days after the receipt of new Letters from the Synod, they
did personally compeire, they should be absolved from this sentence of
suspension; if they did not, this sentence should stand firm pro nunc and tunc
and omni tempore: the rest of the Synod were entreated that against Monday they
would deliberate of this business, and so give in their judgments of it.

Sessio 82. 18. Feb.] There were read publicly 47. pages of the Remonst. Book;
all which did contain only one answer to the first four places produced by the
contra-Remonstrants, in collatione Hag. whereby they prove that ( velle Deum
solos fideles salvos facere; and infideles in ira relinquere) is not totum and
integrum praedestinationis decretum; the like tedious prolixity, sometimes
racking of Scripture, sometimes paring and chipping of it has not been heard;
there was nothing in it which did not rather make men out of love with their
cause than affect it.

Sessio 83. eodem die post meridiem.] The sentence of the Synod was asked
concerning the Remonstrant Campenses, all agreed with the sentence of the
Delegates given at the end of the 81. Session: except only the Divines of
Breme, who delivered their opinion at large in writing; it was to persuade a
milder course, the reasons were many and well penned: when it came to the
College of the Professors, notwithstanding that D. Polyander had delivered
their Collegiat sentence; yet D. Gomarus, Martinius his professed enemy, asks
leave to speak; and so enters into a confutation of that which they of Breme
had delivered, so that he and Martinius fell foul in the Synod, very much
against the dignity of such an assembly. In truth I I must needs say, that some
of the Provincials do use Martinius very uncivilly, and all the Foreign
Divines begin to take it evil at their hands; he is a man very learned, and
very honest, sound in all the five Articles, as any man in the Synod, except
the Second, in which when the Canons come to be made, your Lordship shall hear
there will be more of his opinion besides himself: notwithstanding of all this,
because he does mislike many of the Contra-Remonstrants broad speeches in many
points, which I think every learned and godly man will do; they use him with so
much discourtesie, as I will assure your Lordship he has been very near
leaving of the Synod, and his Colleagues were half purposed to go with him:
what a blow this would give to the credit of the Synod, any man may easily
perceive; the Provincials in this take not the right course. Though one be
against the Remonstrants in all the five Articles in substance; yet if he
differ from them but in manner of speaking, they hold him as not sound. If by
your Lordships means the President were advertised of these things, it might do
much good. What farther passes in the Synod your Lordship by God's grace shall
hear, in mean time with the remembrance of my best service to your good
Lordship, I take my leave and rest

Dordreht this 18. of February, Stylo novo. Your Lordships in all true respects
of service, Walter Balcanqual.

My very good Lord,
SInce my last Letters to your Lordship there has been no business of any
great note in the Synod, but that which I am sure your Lordship will be sorry
to hear, contention like to come to some head, if it be not prevented in time:
for there has been such a plot laid ex composito for disgracing of the
Bremenses, as I think the Synod shall receive small grace by it.

Sessio 84. 19. Feb. Stylo Novo.] That part of the Remonstrants big Book was
read, which concerned the third and fourth Articles; because these two Articles
were now in deliberation: there were read fifty seven pages, which for the most
part did contain nothing but an exagitation of some hard phrases collected out
of Calvin, Beza, Zanchius, Piscator, many Contra-Remonstrants.

Sessio 85. die 19. Feb. eodem die post meridiem.] Acronius and another of the
Church of Camps, who had compeired in the cause against the Remonstrants there,
were called in, and the decree of the Synod made against them whom they accused
was read; [the tenor whereof your Lordship may see in my last Letters.] D.
Gomarus being he at whom the last disquisition of the third and fourth Article
ended, was entreated by the President to speak his mind of the said Articles,
but Sibrandus desires the President first to give him leave to add some few
things to that he had spoken the day before: now what he added was nothing but
a renewing of that strife, which was between him and Martinius in the last
Session: two things he alleged, first that he had been at Goclenius his
lodging, conferring with him about that proposition, whether God might be
called causa physica of humane actions, and delivered certain affirmations
pronounced by Goclenius tending to the negative; for the truth of his relation
he appealed to Goclenius there present, who testified that it was so: next,
whereas Martinius had alleged a place out of Pareus for the affirmative in
opere conversionis, Sibrandus read a great many places out of Pareus tending to
the contrary; and (no question it being plotted before) he entreats that some
of the Palatines (naming them all severally) who were Pareus his colleagues,
would speak what they did know of Pareus his mind concerning the said
proposition. Sculteius begins with a set speech which he had in writ lying
before him; but such a speech it was, as I, and I think all the exteri were
exceedingly grieved it should have come from a man of so good worth. The sum
of it was this, that he did know upon his own knowledge, that Pareus did hold
the contrary of that which had been falsely fathered upon him in the Synod,
that he could not endure to hear his dearest colleague so much abused, as he
had been by some men in the Synod; moreover that he could not now dissemble the
great grief he had conceived, that some in the Synod went about to trouble
sound Divinity with bringing in tricas Scholasticas, such as was to make God
causam Physicam conversionis; (that was for Martinius;) such portenta
vocabulorum, as determinare and non determinare voluntatem; that some men durst
say that there were some doubts in the fourth Article, which Calvin himself had
not thoroughly satisfied, nor other learned reformed Doctors; that it was to be
feared that they intended to bring in Jesuits Divinity in the reformed
Churches, and to corrupt the youth committed to their charge, with a strange
kind of Divinity: this last speech concerned D. Croci^s. Scultetus delivered
his mind in exceeding bitter and disgraceful words, and repeated his bitterest
sentences twice over: he having ended, Martinius with great modesty answered,
first that he would read Pareus his own words, which he did; next that for
Sibrandus, he wondered that he would now in public bring these things up since
out of his love to peace, that very day he had sent his Colleague Crocius to
Sibrandus, with a large explication of that sense in which he had delivered
that proposition, with which explication Sibrandus himself had sent him word
that he was fully satisfied, and so he made account that that business had been
peaceably transacted: all this while Crocius spoke nothing. Gomarus begins
to go on in the disquisition, but I think he delivered a speech against the
Bremenses, which none but a mad man would have uttered. First, whereas
Martinius had said that he did desire the resolution of this doubt, qui Deus
possit ab homine, cujus potentia est finita, fidem, quae est opus
omnipotentiae, exigere, and that neither Calvin nor any of our Divines had yet
plainly enough untyed that knot, he replied first, that he that had said so was
not dignus qui solveret Calvino corrigiam; and that for the doubt it self it
was such a silly one that ipsi pueri in trivio could ipsius solutionem
decantare; at which speech every body smiled: Moreover, whereas Martinius in
his answer to Sculteius had not spoken one word against him, but only this,
that he was sorry that one who had now 25. years been a professor of Divinity
should be thus used for u^ing a School term; Gomarus very wisely had a fling at
that too, and tells the Synod that since some men thought to carry it away
annorum un wero, he himself had been a Professor not only 25. but thirty five
years; next he falls upon Crocius, and bids the Synod take heed of these
men that brought in these monstra, portentae vocabulorum the barbarisms of the
Schools of the Jesuits, determinare and non determinare voluntatem, with many
such speeches, delivered with such sparkling of his eyes, and fierceness of
pronunciation, as every man wondered the President did not cut him off; at last
he cut off himself I think for want of breath, and the President gives
Celeberrimo Doctori Gomaro many thanks for that his learned, grave and accurate
speech; the exteri wondered at it, at last my L. of Landaffe, in good faith in
a very grave, short, sweet speech, (for which as for one of the best I am
persuaded he ever delivered, we and all the Exteri thought he deserved infinite
commendations:) he spoke to the President to this purpose, that this Synodical
disquisition was instituted for edification, not for any men to show studium
contentionis: and therefore did desire him to look that the knot of unity were
not broken: in this his Lordships speech he named no man. The last word was
hardly out of my L. lips, but furious Gomarus knowing himself guilty,
delivers this wise speech: Reverendissime D. Praesul agendum est hic in
Synodo non authoritate sed ratione: that it was free for him to speak in his
own place, which no man must think to abridge him of by their authority: my
Lord replied nothing; but the President told my Lord that celeberrimus D.
Gomarus had said nothing against men's persons, but their opinions, and
therefore that he had said nothing worthy of reprehension: this gave every man
just occasion to think the President was on the plot: Martinius against this
speech of Gomarus said nothing, but that he was sorry that he should have this
reward for his far journey. The disquisition went on to Thysius, who very
discreetly told the Synod he was sorry Martinius should be so exagitated, for a
speech which according to Martinius his explication was true. Just as Thysius
was thus speaking, Gomarus and Sibrandus, who sat next him, pulls him by the
sleeve, talks to him with a confused angry noise in the hearing and seeing of
all the Synod, chiding him that he would say so; afterward Thysius with great
modesty desired Martinius to give him satisfaction of one or two doubtful
sentences he had delivered, which Martinius thanking him for his courtesy
fully did: the President was certainly on this plot against Martinius, for at
that same time he did read out of a Paper publicly a note of all the hard
speeches Martinius had used: all this while Doctor Crocius his patience was
admired by all men, who being so grossly abused and disgraced could get leave
of his affections to hold his peace. What this is like to come to I will tell
your Lordship after I have set down the Sessions.

Sessio 86. 20. Feb.] There were read 63. pages of the Remonstrants book, which
concerned the fifth Article, it was for most part a confutation of the Doctors
above named.

Sessio 87. eodem die post meridiem.] Dr. Mayerus one of the Helvetians,
publicly all auditors being admitted, discussed the fifth Article de
perseverantia Sanctorum: he did rather like an Orator than a School-man.

Sessio 88. 21. Feb.] There were read publicly 60. pages of the Remonstrants
book, which concerned the first Article: they were of the same stuff with the
former, a confutation of the same men.

Sessio 89. 22. Feb.] There were read 57. pages of the Remonstrants book, which
concerned their opinion of Reprobation, in which they did lay open the harsh
opinions of many of our men, which unless the Synod do condemn, as well as the
opinion of the Remonstrants, I see not how they can give the world satisfaction
touching their indifferency: among the rest which was read, this was one if
your Lordship can endure the smell of it, instant Contra-Remon. nos sumus
patroni reproborum, Resp. justitiae divinae patroni sumus non reproborum; sicut
dicendum est D. Sibrandum inscripto suo adversus Vorstium non suscepisse
defensionem latrinarum dum defendit deum esse in foetidissimis latrinis, sed
tan^um suscepisse defensionem omnipraesentiae divinae, quemadmodum nos
justitiae, this is all was worthy the noting in that lecture.

Sessio 90. eodem die post meridiem.] Deodatus was appointed to discourse of
the first Article, but being sick, the five Belgic professors discussed it.

Sessio 91. 23. Feb.] There were read some 35. pages of the Remonstrants Book,
concerning Reprobation, and so the whole book is ended.

Now, my Lord, concerning this matter of the Bremenses, it came to this height,
that they thought to have gone home, and withal were ready to have printed an
Apology for themselves, and a narration of their heard usage in the Synod: but
some of the Exteri Theologi came to the English College, and desired them to
help to quench this fire. All the Exteri take to heart these two things, first
that strangers should be used so disgracefully, for using two School terms,
which are both very common; next that Gomarus durst openly in the Synod give
such an irreverend answer to my Lord of Landaffe, for which unless all the
exteri may have satisfaction, (except the Palatines) I believe there will be a
shameful stir in the Synod. They desired the English to labor the Bremenses to
reconciliation with Scultetus, which this night they are doing; what becomes
of it your Lordship shall hear; but I have small hope, for the Bremenses will
take no satisfaction but public, because it was a public imputation upon
their Professions and School, as if that were a place for corrupting of youth:
and I think Scultetus will be loath to give public satisfaction; yet my Lord
Bishop of Landaffe, Dr. Goad and my self have dealt with Scultetus, and find
him tractable. Dr. Davenant, and Dr. Ward have dealt with the Bremenses, and
find them mightily incensed. Martinius has never come to the Synod ^ince, but
with the rest of his Colleagues they have complained to the Delegates, who I
think will take order with Gomarus. We the English are purposed (but I know not
whether that purpose shall hold) to desire the Delegates to take notice of the
wrong offered by Gomarus to my L. of Landaeffe. My Lord, all I will say is
this, there are two men in the Synod, Sibrandus, but especially Gomarus, who
are able to set it on fire, unless they be looked too; I think there is no man
will say, but that Gomarus has wronged the Bremenses infinitely, has wronged
exceedingly my Lord of Landaffe, and in him all the English College: your
Lordships counsel to the President may bring much water to this fire.

There is here a little Pamphlet to be sold in the Synod, Iambi de concordia
and pace, written by Petrus Bertius the Author of Apostasia sanctorum: they say
it has been out a great while; if any of the States have seen it, I wonder he
is not severely punished: it is the most seditious Satyr against this State
that ever I read. Here is all, and I am sorry I had so much to write to your
Lordship: so with the remembrance of my humblest duty to your Lordship and your
worthy Lady, I take my leave and rest

Dordretch this 23. of February, Stylo novo. Your L. faithful and respectful
servant, Water Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
FOr your L. last letters to my self, and the news in the letters enclosed, as
I stand much obliged to your H. so much more I with all others, who love peace,
and long for the happy success of this Synod, must ever stand much obliged to
your L. for your Letters to the President; so full of sober, good, and
necessary counsel, the happy fruit whereof I hope during your being there we
shall not cease to find, as we have already begun to taste a little of the
sweetness of it; for the very next Session after the President had received
your L. letters, at the beginning in very mild and discreet words he entreated
all the members of the Synod, that in their disquisition of the fifth Article,
they should abstain from all bitterness, and personal opposition, and follow
meekness and brotherly kindness, which in that disquisition was observed by the
two Belgic professors, very strictly, and their phrase and style tempered
otherwise than heretofore it has been; so as one might see they had been
acquainted with the good counsel of your L. letters, for I will assure you they
followed it: your L. joy cannot choose but be great when you remember the great
peace procured by your L. I should hold my self an enemy to the weal-publick,
if I should not particularly inform your L. of all the passages here, by whom
if any of them go amiss, they may so happily be corrected. The reason why I
have been so long a writing is, because I wanted news of which our Synod now is
very barren, and will be so till toward the latter end of the next week; at
which time all Colleges judgments of the five Articles will begin to be read.
The matters now in hand are matters of knowledge not of action: yet I will be
bold for fashions sake to send your L. a note of such Sessions as have been
since my last letters to your L.

Sessio 92. 25. Feb. Stylo Novo.] We bent on in the Synodical disquisition of
the third and fourth Article, which at that Session was made an end of, after
that the President did dictate to us, and all we did write large Theses
collected out of the Remonstrants books upon the five Articles.

Sessio 93. 26. Feb.] Since the Remonstrants by commandment from the Delegates,
had given up the defense of their opinion touching the second Article, there
were read 56. pages of this their other new volume, in which they studied to
overthrow that distinction, sufficientiae and efficaciae mortis-Christi, and go
about to prove that those places of Scripture, which say that Christ dyed pro
peccatis totius mundi, are to be enlarged to all particular men, not to be
restrained ad mundum electorum.

Sessio 94. 27. Feb.] There were read publicly 53. pages more of this volume
of the Remonst. upon the second Article, in which they did vindicate their own
arguments propounded in Collat. Hag. from the instances and exceptions of the
Contra-Remonst. in the same Conference.

Sessio 95. eodem die post meridiem.] Deodatus was this Session appointed to
discuss the first Article; but because of the continuance of his sickness, his
colleague Tronchinus did perform that task for him, publicly all Auditors
being admitted, who with good commendation did establish Sanctorum
perseverantiam.

Sessio 96. 28. Feb.] There was an end made of the reading the Remonst. volume
on the second Article: there were read some 54. pages, which were spent in the
vindicating the rest of their own arguments from the exceptions of the
Contra-Remonst. in Collat. Hag.

Sessio 97. eodem die post meridiem.] We begun the Synodical disquisition upon
the third Article, where every one of our College spoke at large, but
especially my L. of Landaffe, who I will assure your L. has by his most
accurate and excellent speech at that Session gained unto himself wonderful
great reputation; I doubt not but he will send a Copy of it to your L. and then
it will speak for it self; believe me I never heard him do any thing like it,
and so thinks every one in the Synod; it was learned, devout, and the style
masculous; quicquid dixero minus erit: the disquisition came to the Helvetian
Divines.

Sessio 98. 1. March.] We went on in our Synodical disquisition of the fifth
Article, where my L. of Landaffe his yesterday speech was cited by two or three
several Divines with great Honor and Commendation: the disquisition came to
the College of the Geldrians.

This, my Lord, is all we have done; when there is any thing worthy the
relating, I shall not fail to advertise your L. hoping your L. in this time of
my other business, which must not be neglected, will pardon both the rudeness
of the hand and style; for both which my necessary plea is want of time. The
matter between the Bremenses and Scultetus, with the other two professors is
taken up by the Praeses, and the Delegates; the Bremenses have shown their
inclination to peace, and were contented with private satisfaction, the other
three did protest they had no hard opinion of them, but acounted them learned,
religious, orthodoxal, were sorry they had done that which was done, and would
do so no more: the Bremenses desired that one of our College might be present
at this satisfaction, but the other three would no way yield to it. Gomarus was
there admonished to repair to my L. of Landaffe, and to testify unto him his
sorrow for the word which unawares had proceeded from him to his L. in the
Synod; but yet the old tuffe man is not come to his L. I hope after this we
shall live in peace; which I must needs confess for the greatest part of it, we
are debtors to your Lordship. Notwithstanding the late Proclamation set out by
the States General, for restraining the Printing of all seditious Books during
the time of the Synod, yet even now in the Belgic tongue, there is come forth
a seditious pamphlet with no name of Author or Printer, containing all the Acts
which have been made against the Remonstrants in this Synod, especially by the
Delegates; a book made only to incite the common people to a dislike of the
Synod, they are not to be sold, but they send them abroad among their
favorites: I have all this day been using means for compassing one of them to
send to your Lordship, but cannot, yet there is one of them promised me, but it
may be your Lordship by this time has seen some of them. By my Letters from
England, from one who I believe knows it, it will light heavy upon the party
your Lordship names in the end of your Letter; as much I mean as his place in
the State is worth; there is scuffling for to be his successor. What is
reported of Mr. Parker is but guessing, your Lordship is in name for it at
Court, but upon what ground I know not, I would it were as sure as my wishes
are strong. So with the remembrance of my best service to your Lordship and
your worthy Lady, I take my leave and rest.

Dordrecht this 2. of March. Your Lordships in all true respect and service,
Walter Balcanqual.

My very good Lord,
THough our Synod yields no great argument of writing, for now we are taken
up in hearing altogether, yet I cannot omit my duty in letting your Lordship
know how we spend the time.

Sessio 99. 4. March Stylo Novo.] The President did invite the whole Synod to
the Funeral of an Helvetian Gentleman, one Mr. Staffurins who came hither, as
comes itineris with the Helvetian Divines, the invitation was against the
morrow at eleven of the clock. The President moreover with great joy told the
Synod that he had received news from the Magistrates of Camps; whereby they
signify that they rest well satisfied in the last Decree of the Synod
concerning the suspension of their cited Ministers, and continuance of the same
suspension in case of their not comparence within fourteen days after new
advertisment, that they would do what i^ them lies to persuade them to
comparence, which if they refused, that they would not give them any more
countenance or protection, as heretofore they had done; moreover that they did
with all due respect expect the resolutions of the Synod, concerning the points
of Religion now in question, to which they mean to submit themselves wholly,
and by their own example of obedience, encourage and persuade as much as in
them lies their distracted people to yield the like obedience, and that in the
mean time the care of their Ministers Flocks should be no pretense to their
cited Ministers for not comparence, because that during their absence, they
themselves would undertake to see their cures sufficiently discharged both for
reading and preaching of the Word: I must needs say this message was much
unlike their former Letters, which they were wont to write in favor of their
Remonstrant Ministers. Moreover the President told us that Doctor Altingius one
of the Palatine Divines, had brought him Letters to the Synod from old Dr.
Pareus of Heidelberge, together with his judgment in a written Book of the
five Articles in controversy, which he told us should presently after the
Synodical disquisition be read. We go on in the Synodical disquisition of the
fifth Article, where some of the Provincials observed some things, some
nothing, and so at this Session quickly our disquisition upon the first Article
was ended; then Pareus Letters to the Synod were read; the sum whereof was
this: I am not so good an English man as to adventure to translate, I will
therefore give you the Latin:

Quantum doloris and lachrymarum sentiebamus hic omnes jam per aliquot annos
ex^flendo illo schismate and dissidio quod Ecclesiam Vestram Florentissimam
laceravit, tantum etiam and nunc gaudii. and gratulationum experimur ex
coactione Celeberrimae hujus Synodi, cujus open and saluberrimis consiliis
speramus altissimum hoc vulnus sanatum iri. Quantum gloriandi materiam dederit
Pontificiis Vestrum schisma palam est omnibus: illis ut Synodus obstruat os,
possitque hoc Ecclesia Vestra incendium restinguere, pacemque vestram nimis
collapsam restituere, illud est quod sicut expectant a vobis boni omnes, ita
and a Deo Opt. Max. omnibus precibus expetunt. O utinam daretur mihi in ultima
jam senectute venerandam hanc Synodum conspicari! Verum cum illud aetas mea
mihi deneget, tametsi Doctissimi mei Collegae meas vices supplebunt, visum
tamen fuit mihi meam quoque de famosis illis 5. Articulis ad Reverentias
Vestras sententiam Praescribere, and una cum Ecclesia Reformata meam quoque
(...) testatam facere; Videbitis me hic conditionatam Electionem rejicere,
Reprobationem una cum D. Calvino passim, praesertim Institutionum lib. 3. ad
vitiositatem refer, si minus fortassis quam par est Praedestinationis mysteri
a pertract avero, illud putate consultofactum esse, sunt enim illa adoranda
magis quam discutienda: solitam and receptam de merito mortis Christi
distinctionem, puta Sufficientiae and Efficientiae, videbitis me retinere;
Distinctionem illam, de Resistibilitate and Irresistibilitate Gratiae Divinae
velim ad authors suos, puta Iesuitas relegari; Heterodoxa illa de Apostasia
sanctorum sententia, se ipsam jugulat. Det Deus, ut in omnibus orthodoxam
doctrinam retincatis, and pacem unice sectemini. The subscription was, Rever.
Vest. Observantissimus David Pareus Septuagenarius Scribebam m^nu propria: This
mas the sum of this Letter, and of the Session too.

Sessio 100. 5. of March.] There was read publicly so much of Pareus his
sentence as concerned the first and second Article, in which he did accurately
dispute against the Remonstrants opinion in both, and spent a great many pages
in expounding and confirming the received distinction of the Sufficiency and
Efficiency of the merit of Christ's death.

Sessio 101. codem die post meridiem.] Dr. Martinius of Breme appointed by the
President publicly, all Auditors admitted, did very accurately and soundly
discourse of the true Deity of Christ, and especially labored to prove his
Omnipraesentia, opposing and answering all those places of Vorstius in which in
his disputation de Deo he calls the Omnipraesentia of Christ into question.

Sessio 102. 6. March.] We went on in the public reading of Dr. Pareus his
judgment upon the third, fourth and fifth Articles; where I must needs say
that he did most accurately, and soundly, and methodically, with great subtilty
and variety of reasons overthrow the Remonstants opinions of Resistibility of
Grace, and the Apostasy of the saints: one would little think that that wit
and judgment could be so young in so great age: the President told us that
after the Collegial judgment were read, that the Synod by their public
Letters must needs give him many thanks for these his great and good pains, as
he did not doubt but that the Estates General would take order for doing of the
like. So one of the Scribes by the President his appointment, was beginning to
read our College his judgment, but Dr. Davenant told the President, that he
thought it greatly concerned the dignity of the Synod, that the Collegial
suffrages should not be read thus privately, but that they should be read as
publicly as might be, all Auditors being admitted; both because it might be
that the Remonstrants being moved by force of their reasons, might relent
something in their opinions; and all other auditors be edified and confirmed
in the truth; as likewise, because all auditors should perceive the consent of
so many several learned men's judgments, who by the more perverse sort might
otherwise be thought to use some plot and conspiracy to make their opinions
meet together. This unexpected motion did not a little trouble the President,
who was altogether set against any such course; which made all, especially the
exteri wonder that he should offer to pass over a matter of so great
consequence without asking the Synods advice for the manner of reading their
own judgments: the reason why this motion was made by our College was this; in
forming of our judgments, as we have studied to condemn all in the
Remonstrants, which can justly be taxed; so we took pains to condemn no more
but that which must be condemned, and to condemn too some hard phrases of the
Contra-Remonstrants, especially in the matter of Reprobation; but they are only
phrases: now we know that in the making of the Canons no words of ours, which
sound any thing that way shall be expressed, because the Provincials in forming
of the Canons will carry us down by voices; and therefore we desired that in
the reading of our judgments, at least our ingenuity might be taken notice of
by all the auditors. Well, to this motion the President made this answer, that
within these few days he himself was in that same opinion which now was
propounded; but having with more mature deliberation thought upon it, and asked
the advice of his Assessours, that he had now thought it fit, the judgments
should be read, no auditors being admitted, unless it were some few choice
Ministers of good worth, who did here attend about the Synod, the reasons
moving them thereunto were these: First, because this course seems to come
nearer the intent of the Commission of the Estates General than the other, in
which they were appointed to enquire after Synodical suffrages privately among
themselves without other auditors, unless the Synod should think it fit to
admit auditors. Secondly, because it had been a custom hitherto observed in
all Synods and councils to take the suffrages, all auditors being excluded.
Thirdly because, though the suffrages of all Colleges do agree (as he perceived
by reading of them) in the thing it self; yet because there was some
disagreement in phrases and forms of speaking, it was to be feared that the
Remonstrants and other Jesuits and Dominicans present, would make great matter
of these verbal differences, that they would cast abroad among the people
strange reports of the dissensions of the Synod; and in another case, that the
Remonstrants no question (as lately they had done) would put out in print the
opinion of the Synod concerning the Articles before the Canons were formed by
the Synod, and in their pamphlet no doubt they would oppose sentence to
sentence, wheresoever they might take hold of the least suspicion of
difference. Fourthly, and chiefly, because by this course the judgment of the
Synod concerning the five Articles should go abroad among the people, before
either the Synod it self had determined what should be their judgments, or the
Estates General could be made acquainted with the judgments of the Colleges
and Synod, who notwithstanding in all reasons and good manners ought next to
the Synod it self, to know what is likely to be the event of all business in
it: the President added, that since this was but a matter of order, he hoped
the Synod would trust him and the Assessours with the managing of it; but
perceiving that a great many were not content with it, he was glad to put the
matter to voices; the Delegates being asked their voice, they desired the
matter might be deferred till the afternoon, and so the Synod was dismissed.

The President in mean time sent Dammanus one of the Scribes, to entreat us to
give way to the President's motion; and no question, they labored other
Colleges as well as us; but certainly all the President's reasons above
mentioned might easily have been answered; for my part I think his course was
tutior, but ours honestior.

Sessio 103. eodem die post meridiem.] Voices were asked concerning the manner
of reading the Collegial judgments. The Delegates suffrage pronounced by
Heinsius was, that in reading of the judgments, all auditors whatsoever,
as well Contra-Remonstrants as Remonstrants, should be excluded; and besides they
entreat all the members of the Synod, that they would conceal as much as might
be the things that were done in the Synod. The whole members of the Synod
without exception according to the judgment of the Delegates. So ( Q. F. F. of
the first Article, que sit) we began to read the Colleges judgments, at this
Session were read the judgments of our College, and the College of the
Palatines, both of a just length, and agreeable in all things; except that the
Palatines had added to the end of theirs a very good and necessary counsel for
the sober and wholesome manner of propounding to the people the Doctrine of and
Election Reprobation; we purpose after our judgment on the fifth Article, to
give in such a counsel for the sober propounding of the whole five Articles to
the people.

Sessio 104. 7. March.] There were publicly read the judgments of the College
of the Hassians who were exceeding long; of the Helvetians who were but short
and grave; of Alstedius, he who is only superstes of the Nassovians, who was
but short, there was no difference between their judgments, and the others
which were read before them.

Sessio 105. eodem die post meridiem.] There were read publicly first, the
judgment of the Genevenses, who were pretty long; they kept a form by
themselves, for where the confirmations of other Colleges Theses consisted of
reasons, places of Scriptures and Fathers, their confirmations were nothing but
places of Scripture, barely propounded in great number, and in a very fine
contexture and frame; at the end they used this short peroration, that they had
simply out of the Scripture delivered; that concerning the first Article, which
they knew to be agreeable with the Church of Geneva, nay, and beside of all the
Churches of France which did stick to the French Confession. Next was read the
judgment of the Bremenses, which was of a just length very sound and accurate,
in all things agreeable to the other judgments read before, except only with
this difference; whereas other judgments had said either nothing of the
election and salvation of Infants begotten of faithful parents, and dying in
their Infancy, or they which had touched it, had determined that faithful
parents had no reason to doubt of it; but might very well for any thing they
did know hope and persuade themselves of it: the Bremenses did absolutely
determine that all such Infants dying in their infancy if they were baptized
were certainly saved, concluding it not only ex judicio charitatis as others
had done, but ex judicio certitudinis too: Next begun to be read the judgment
of the Divines of Embdane; from whom (as Mr. Hales well knows) extraordinary
prolixty was to be expected; after it had been read half an hour the President
told us, that because the hour was past, the rest must be left till the morrow.

Sessio 106. 8. Martii] We went on in reading the judgment of the Embdanes,
which at this Session continued yet full two hours, in the coldest weather that
we have felt. So now the judgments of all the Exteri Theologi concerning the
first Article were read, among whom there was nothing to be seen but full and
orthodoxal consent, for which the President told us God was to be praised, and
he prayed God that the like Harmony might be found among the Provincials. My
Lord, this is worth the observing, that there is no College yet which has not
overthrown Gomarus his opinion of the subject of Predestination; for though
none of them did directly dispute against it, yet all of them expressly took it
as granted, that not homo creabilis, but homo lapsus was subjectum both of
Election and Reprobation, which I think does trouble Gomarus not a little. Now
the Embdanes judgment being ended, we begun to read the judgment of the
College of the Belgic professors, where at the very first to our grief we
observed the Belgic humor of particular opinions; for there are but five of
that College as we are of ours, and yet they are divided into three parts, and
have given in three distinct and several judgments. Dr. Polyander, Dr.
Thysius, and Doctor Wallaeus have given in and subscribed one judgment, Dr.
Sibrandus has given in another judgment by himself; and Dr. Gomarus a third
judgment by himself; at the latter end of this Session the first three their
judgments began to be read, but by that time two pages were read the hour was
passed, and so the rest of it was continued till the next occasion: only, my
Lord, I must tell you that so much as was read, gives us little hope of
agreement among them, for whereas other Colleges had taken it as granted only,
that homo lapsus was subjectum Praedestinationis, they in these two pages did
only dispute by many arguments against Gomarus his opinion, and proved that
largely, which others had only taken as a ground; their arguments Gomarus I see
him note; what difference shall further happen in their judgments, your L.
shall understand by my next.

Sessio 107. eodem die post meridiem.] This Session was public, all auditors
being admitted, in which D. Deodatus did at great length handle these two
questions. 1. Quantum differat fides (...) seu temporaneorum, a vera et
justificante Regenitorum fide. 2. Quousque conceditur Diabolo progredi in
oppugnanda justificatorum fide; he did very sweetly, just as he uses to
preach, not as Doctors use to do in Schools.

This is all which is done this week; for this day being Saturday we have no
Session. The last Sunday I (in which I returned the Letter your L. was pleased
to send me) sent to your Lordship all which had passed the week before, which I
hope your Lordship had: your Lordship sees there are but ordinary passages yet
in the Synod, if there were any thing worthy of extraordinary note, I should
not fail with all diligence to give your Lordship notice of it: in mean time
with many thanks to your Lordship for all your Lordships courtesies, and the
remembrance of my humblest service to your L. and your worthy Lady, I take my
leave, ever entreating your Lordship that I may be accounted by your Lordship
as I am

I doubt not but your Lordship has seen this pamphlet, yet if you have not,
here it is.

Dordrecht this 9. of March, 1619. Your L. in all true respect and service,
Walter Balcanqual.

My very good Lord,
SUch things as have passed in our Synod, since my last Letters unto your
Lordship I here send your Lordship as briefly as I can: I hope now at length
toward the latter end of the next week, we shall come to the making of the
Canons.

Sessio 108. 11. Martii. Stylo Novo.] Georgius Fabricius a Nassovian Divine;
substituted in the place of Dr. Bisterfield, who died here, was with the
accustomed solemnity admitted into the Synod^ We go on in reading the judgment
of the three Belgic professors, which was very sound and of a just length; it
was subscribed by their three names, Johannes Polyander, Antonius Thysius,
Anthonius Wallaeus; and a little beneath that it was thus written, Ego
Sibrandus Lubertus hoc collegarum meorum judicium perlegi, and per omnia probo;
Gomarus his name was not at it; but he presently rose and testified viva voce,
that he had read it, and did in all things approve the judgment of his
Colleagues, excepting only that part of it, which did determine hominem lapsum
to be the object of Predestination, which he said had not as yet been
determined in the Belgic Churches, in the French nor English Churches, and
many others. Next was read the judgment of Dr. Sibrandus upon the same
Article, which differed nothing from that former of his Colleagues, but that it
was longer, it was subscribed with his own name, and a little beneath the
former three Professors by their subscriptions testified, that they had read
it, and did approve it. Gomarus stood up, and viva voce gave this same
testimony to this judgment which he had given to the former making the same
exceeption. Next was Gomarus his judgment read upon the same Article; he said
nothing of that question of the object of Predestination, whether it was homo
lapsus or not, which silence in that point being excepted, his judgment in all
points agreed with the former judgments of his Colleagues, it was only
subscribed with his own name; but D. Polyander did viva voce testify in the
name of himself and his Colleagues, that they did approve all things in Gomarus
his judgment, excepting only that opinion of the object, the contrary whereof
they professed themselves to hold: the President instructed us concerning some
particulars of the business of Camps, and desired us against three of the clock
in the afternoon to consult about it; the particulars whereof your L. shall see
in the next Session.

Sessio 109. eodem die post meridiem.] The president told us first, that the
time of fourteen days granted to the two suspended Ministers of Camps for their
comparence was now passed, and so that they contemned this favorable respite
granted by the Synod, and persisted in their contumacy. Next that the other two
Ministers of Camps, who were here among the cited Remonstrants, had been
appointed by the Synod to give in within fourteen days an answer to the
accusations laid against them by the Deputies of the Reformed-Church of Camps;
the Copy of which accusations at their own earnest request had been delivered
to them by one of the servants of the Synod, but that now in place of their
answer which was expected, they had sent to him a Letter which was read unto
the Synod; it had two great faults, it was exceeding long, and exceeding
foolish; to this sense, or rather nonsense, they did show that they could not
at the day appointed give in their answer to the accusations; and why they
could no more go on in this Synodical action which was commenced against them,
for many causes, such as were, first, because they were wholly taken up making
ready some writings for the Synod concerning the five Articles, which were
imposed on them by the commandment of the Delegates. 2. Because the Copy of the
accusations brought unto them by one of the Synod officers, was not subscribed
by the President, nor by either of the Scribes of the Synod; and therefore they
thought it not an authentic Copy or of any Credit. 3. Because crimes in it
were objected to them both promiscuously, and that laid to both their charge,
which only one of them had delivered; and therefore their accusation was not
exact according to form of law. 4. That there were many things in it objected
to them; not warranted by any witness, unless it were by some proofs taken out
of their Colleague Foskculius late book, which they christened with the name of
stultum and tenebricosum scriptum. 5. Because it was full of false spellings
and writing, and therefore they thought it was but negligently slubbered over;
for these and many more such causes as idle as these, (with which I hold it not
fit to detain your L.) though they might decline the judgment of the Synod,
especially since against the practice of the Belgic Church, their own
Consistory, Classis, and Provincial Synod being skipped over, they were
immediately accused before the Synod; yet notwithstanding after they had done
with all they had to say upon the five Articles, they promise that they will
give in their answer to this bill of accusations; but upon this condition,
(which I beseech your Lordship to observe,) that first the Synod would declare
them to be free from these false and malicious slanders, wherewith they and the
rest of their brethren Remonstrants cited to the Synod, had been most
injuriously and falsely charged in that Session of the Synod, in which they
were dismissed by the President, with this elogium, to wit, that they had
refused to go on in the Synodical action that they had shown themselves
unworthy with whom the Synod should have any further dealing; and that as they
had begun this business and continued it with lying and equivocations, so now
they had ended it. But yet that notwithstanding of all this they were contented
to go on in this action before the College of the Delegates of the Estates
General, but not before the Synod. These long Letters being read, next was read
an answer to these Letters penned by the Deputies of the Reformed Church of
Camps; to whom the President had given these Letters that they might answer
them; they did meet particularly with every thing alleged in the other
Letters, which was needless and therefore I omit all their answers, save only
to that one thing which seemed to require one, that was, that against the
custom of their Church they were immediately brought before the Synod; to which
it was answered, that both the Consistory and Classis of Camps were altogether
Remonstrantical, and that therefore they were both of them such as ought rather
to be abrogated than appealed unto; but for their Provincial Synod, they
wondered with what face they durst affirm they had not been cited thither,
since the Synod had dealt with them oftener than once, though to no purpose.
Next was read a supplication penned and subscribed by Acronius in name of the
Reformed Church of Camps, in which they relate how Foskculius one of the two
suspended at Camps, while he was rehearsing unto his flock the sentence of his
own suspension, that he had stirred up the people ad tumultuariaem infamam:
next they humbly beseech the Synod, that now for the two suspended, their
sentence of suspension might be ratified by the Synod, and for the other two
here present at Dort, to wit Mathisius, and Gosuinus, since they had refused to
give in their answer at the time appointed, that the Synod would pronounce the
like sentence of suspension against them: the President propounded this to the
Synod, whether they thought it fit that the sentence already given against the
former two should be ratified? and that the other two should be cited to give
in their answer to the bill of accusations within fourteen days, in which if
they failed, the like sentence of suspension should be given against them,
which had been given against their Colleagues? the whole Synod approved it, and
so it was decreed.

We beginning to go on in reading the Collegiat judgments, my Lord of Landaffe
(according as we at home had deliberated among our selves) desired leave to
speak, which being granted he spoke to this purpose. Dr. Gomarus in the
forenoon delivered, that this question, whether homo lapsus be subjectum
Praedestinationis, had not been determined, by the confession of the Church of
France; and as I and my Colleagues conceived he delivered the like for the
confession of the Church of England; and therefore I do entreat Dr. Gomarus in
my own name, and the name of my Colleagues to declare before the Synod, whether
he did say so or not? Dr. Gomarus with good modesty answered that indeed he did
say so, but he protested it was not out of any evil meaning, but only to show
that as other Churches, so the Church of England had left that undetermined,
since the words of the confession determined no farther of the subject, than (
quosdam ex humano genere:) my Lord of Landaffe replied, that he himself and the
rest of his Colleagues could not choose but think themselves by that speech
touched for temerity or ignorance; for since they in their judgment delivered
the contrary for homo lapsus, it was as much to say as that they had delivered
that in the Synod, which was not according to the judgment of the Church of
England, but to let the Synod know that they had said nothing in their
judgment, which was not the judgment of their Church, they desired the Synod
to hear the words of their confession; so Dr. Goad read publicly the
seventeenth Article of the confession, where the words are quosdam ex humano
genere, in exitio and maledicto, which last words Gomarus had left out: Gomarus
answered, that if he had understood the words of the confession amiss, he would
submit himself to the judgment of the Synod. The President told Gomarus
roundly enough, that it was free for every member of the Synod to deliver his
own judgment concerning any point or question; but that men ought to be very
careful that they do not rashly meddle with the judgments of other Churches.
My Lord of Landaffe desired further leave to add this; Since all the foreign
Divines, without exception, and likewise all the Belgic professors, except
Gomarus, had already delivered their judgments for homo lapsus, and that he
doubted not but the Provincials would determine the same; it were very fit that
the Synod should likewise determine so of it; neither was it any reason that
for the particular opinion of one professor, who in this did disassent from
the judgment of all the Reformed Churches, the Synod should abstain from
determination of the question. Gomarus answered, that the University of Leyden
had never yet determined for homo lapsus, and that both Dr. Whitakers, and Mr.
Perkins had determined the contrary, whom he took to be such men as would not
disassent from the Confession of the Church of England: that the matter ought
first to be discussed with arguments on both sides, before any thing should be
determined on either side; to whom the President returned this answer, that
after the judgments of all the Colleges were read, the Synod would decree of
the question what they shall think best; after the Canon is conceived it shall
be read, if then you can show that any thing contained in that Canon is against
the word of God; The Synod shall with all dutiful patience hear what you can
say.

There were read the judgments of the Geldri; the South- Hollandi, (who in
their judgment wished that the question of homo lapsus might be left
undetermined) the North- Hollandi, the Zelandi, who were all not long; and
agreed in all things with the former judgments delivered, and so this long
Session ended.

Sessio 110. 12. Martii.] There were read the Collegiat Judgments of the
Vltrajectini, the Fristi, the Transisulani, the Groninganii and Omlandii, all
which four were of a good length, and in all things consonant to the former
judgments.

Sessio 111. eodem die post meridiem.] There were read the Collegiat judgments
of the Drentani and Gallo-belgici, which were brief, and agreeable to the
former judgments, and so was ended the Reading of the judgments of all
Colleges; in which (God be praised for it) there was not the least suspicion of
dissension of any thing, and it is to be noted that all of them determined homo
lapsus to be the subject of Predestination; except Gomarus, whom all men know
to be against it; and the South- Hollandi, who only said they would determine
nothing of it.

There was read the judgment of the Divines of great Britain upon the second
Article; they were briefer than upon the first Article, they left the received
distinction of sufficientia and efficacia mortis Christi untouched; as likewise
they did not touch that received restriction of those places which make Christ's
suffering general to the world, only ad mundum Electorum.

There were read the judgments of the Palatines, of the Haessians, of the
Helvetians, who all did maintain the received distinction, to wit, that Christ
his death was only sufficient for all men, not efficient or impetrative, and
did restrain all the general propositions which are in Scripture to that
purpose only ad mundum Electorum, concluding that Christ was no ways expiatio
pro peccatis singulorum.

Sessio 112. 13. Martii.] There was read publicly the judgment of the
Nassovici, after them the judgment of the Genevenses, both of which defended
the received distinction and restriction; after were read the judgments of the
Bremenses, who according to the number of their persons had three several
judgments. Martinius his judgment was first read, who did stand in effect to
the tenants of the Remonstrants in the second Article, he mainly overthrew the
received distinction and restriction, and did determine that Christ did truly
die for all and every man, that he was made a Propitiation both for the godly
and the wicked, and that by his death he did impetrate reconciliation with God
for them all; at the latter end he condemned many things both in the
Remonstrants and in the Contra-Remonstrants opinion, but more in the
Contra-Remonstrants. Next Dr. Isselburgius the second Bremensis his judgment
was read, who was directly against Martinius defending both the received
distinction and restriction. Thirdly, was read the judgment of Dr. Crocius the
third Bremensis, who propounded a middle way between his two Colleagues;
granting (which We also in our College did,) that Christ did merit by his death
some supernatural things for the wicked; as the word preached, and all such
good graces as are common both to the godly and wicked; but nothing belonging
to remission of sin or reconciliation with God, and so indeed for any thing I
could perceive his judgment was directly against that of Martinius, and in
effect all one with that of Isselburgius. Next was read the judgment of the
Embdani, who were exceeding long, and agreed in all things with the
Contra-Remonstrants, as they do express themselves in the Collat. Hagiensis.

Sessio 113. eodem die post meridiem.] Dr. Isselburgius one of the Bremenses,
at the President his appointment publicly, all auditors being admitted, did
at very great length prove, that God his vindicative justice is natural and
necessary unto him, and that therefore that satisfaction which Christ made for
the sins of the world was simpliciter necessaria; proving withal by many
arguments the fullness and sufficiency of Christ his satisfaction; answering the
arguments of Socinus and Vorstius against both the former conclusions.

Sessio 114. 14. die Martii.] There was read the judgment of four of the
Belgic Professors subscribed by Polyander, Gomarus, Thysius, Waellaeus; and a
little beneath was written, Ego Sibrandus Lubertus hoc Collegarum meorum
judicium per omnia probo: next was read Sibrandus his judgment who differed
nothing from his Colleagues, save that he was shorter, it was subscribed first
by himself, amd then approved by the subscriptions of the rest of his
Colleagues: all five of them did stand mainly for the above named distinction
and restriction. Next was read the judgment of the Geldri, who were too-too
rigid in many things; next them the judgment of the South- Hollandi; next them
the judgment of the North- Hollandi, who had many things which we thought not
only to be rigid but false; all these three Colleges at great length disputed
for the received distinction and restriction.

Sessio 115. eodem die post meridiem.] There were read the judgments first of
the Zelandi, next of the Vltrajectini, next of the Fris^i, next of the
Transisulani, next of the Groninganii and Omlandii: all of them stood for the
same distinction and restriction.

Sessio 116. 15. die Martii.] There were read the judgments first of the
Drentani, who delivered many false and absurd propositions; next of the
Gallo-belgici, who were moderate enough, both of them did maintain the former
distinction and restriction; and so was ended the Reading of all Collegial
judgments upon the second Article, in which there was not altogether so
uniform a consent both in regard of phrases and forms of speaking, and in
regard of some propositions, as was in the first Article: yet certainly there
was very great, more than could well have been expected from so great a number
of learned men in so hard and controverted an Article.

There was read the judgment of our College upon the third and fourth Article,
which was most just and equal, condemning the rigidity of some of the
Contra-Remonstrants opinion, though not by that name, as well as the errors of
the Pelagians, Semipelagians, and Remonstrants.

There was read the judgment of the Palatines, who in all things agreed with
the judgment of the Contra-Remonstrants, as it is set down in Collatio
Hagiensis.

Sessio 117. eodem die post meridiem.] There were read the judgments of the
Hassiaci, the Helvetians, the Nassovici, who agreed in all points with the
Contra-Remonstrants of the Genevenses, who carried a very eaven hand in this
Article; their Theses, as before, were confirmed only by places of Scripture,
but finely digested; of the Bremenses who handled the head de gratia, and
libero arbitrio in general, and in particular overthrew resistibility of Grace.
Of the Embdani, whose judgment after an hours reading was not near half done,
and therefore we were glad to make an intercession of their discourse of Grace
till the morrow.

Sessio 118. 16. Martii.] We went on in reading the judgment of the Embdani,
which yet continued above an hour and an half; they discussed 34. questions,
and to speak truth they were long above the strength of patience. There was
read the judgment of the four Belgic Professors subscribed by themselves,
and afterward approved by the subscription of Sibrandus; next was read the
judgment of Sibrandus subscribed by himself, and approved by the subscriptions
of his Colleagues; next was read the judgment of the Geldri.

So my very good Lord; here is the sum of all has passed this week; I hope
your Lordship has received the letters I sent these last two weeks; what
follows I shall not fail to advertise your Lordship. So with the remembrance
of my most observant duty to your Lordship and your worthy Lady, I take my
leave and rest

Dordrecht this 26. of March, Stylo Novo, 1619. Your Lordships in all true
respect and service, Walter Balcanqual.

My very good Lord,
AFter I had written these yesternight, I received your Lordships letters, for
which I stand much obliged to your Lordship. I had before them received very
particularly news from England, but especially of the Star Chamber sentence,
from a gentleman of good worth, who was present; many memorable sentences his
Majesty delivered, such as were these, He said this sin was like the first sin
committed in the world, that my Lady Lake was the Serpent, my Lady Rosseas Eve,
and Sir Thomas Lake the man. He desired the Noblemen to take heed of their
wives, for he had now known five of his Council who had been overthrown by
their wives, and especially bid such look to themselves, who had Popish wives;
if for no other thing, yet for this, that a Whore and a Papist were termini
convertibiles. Moreover speaking publicly of the Navy, he gave in the
Star Chamber three reasons why he had made my Lord of Buckingham Admiral; one
was, because the other was exceeding old; second, because this was young and
fit for service; third, because of his love to this and his being near about
him. I am sure your Lordship has the Kings meditation upon the Lords Prayer
dedicated to my Lord of Buckingham, else I would have sent your Lordship one.
Yesternight there landed here one English Gentleman of good worth, who assures
us that on Tuesday last the Queen died; and it may be true, for I had a letter
written the first of March, assuring me that my Lord of Canterbury was sent for
in have to Hampton Court, as was thought, to see her die. I hear likewise but
cannot believe it, that Mr. Dean of Worcester comes this journey over with my
Lord Hayes in his Embassage to the Emperor.

Now for your Lordships directions in our Synod business, our thanks is but a
small recompense, your Lordship may justly look for your reward in heaven; I
pray God send us out of the second Article well, and I shall be persuaded of
Harmony in all the rest: for in good faith some of the Provincials, especially
the Geldri and the North- Hollandi, who are of all in the Synod, greatest in
the President his books, have delivered such propositions in that Article, as I
dare say, never any Divine in the world dreamed of but themselves: for my own
part, I had rather lose mine hand, than subscribe them. For that your Lordship
advises from the King about the Palatines, it is a thing absolutely necessary,
for they are the only Magistrales Doctores, next to Gomarus, in all the Synod,
and think every thing they speak should be taken for Text: in good faith, in
their judgment upon the second Article, they did gird most bitterly at some
things which Dr. Ward had delivered in the Synod of that same Article, with
which Dr. Ward is very much moved. Our judgment in the second Article is
already read in the Synod, so we must study to frame our selves to our
directions from England, in making of the Canons: my Lord his Grace's Letter is
to have us conform our selves to the received distinction and restriction, with
which his Grace acquainted his Majesty and received approbation from him: but I
must needs say, that the directions which your Lordship has sent from
Secretary Na^ton do seem to will us to be as favorable to the general
propositions as may be, giving as little offense to the Lutherans as we can;
which counsel in my poor judgment we have in our Theses already followed.

Frequent admonitions and exhortations rather from your Lordship or by your
Lordships means procured to the President, for prudence and wariness, and
keeping the bond of peace, may hinder much indiscretion in this Synod, in which
as I hope your Lordship will not be wanting; so by God's grace I shall not be
wanting to give your L. all convenient information, nor be wanting in my
prayers to the God of peace that your Lordship may still go on, in procuring
the peace of our assembly. So once again with the remembrance of my most
sincere Duty I rest

This Sunday morning 17. March. Your Lordships faithful and respectful servant,
Walter Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
SInce my last unto your Lordship there have been but three Sessions; no matter
of moment has been done in them, and therefore I will defer the relation of
them to my next Letters: only I thought good to let your Lordship know that
yesterday after the forenoon Session the President called Me into his lodging,
and told me he would show me a miracle, which in truth he did; for there he
showed me a Volume which the Remonstrants that morning had given into the
Delegates upon the third, fourth and fifth Articles. I was I confess,
astonished when I looked on it; for I could not with mine own hand lift it from
the table, it is above twice as much as all they have given in yet: in good
faith, my Lord, I think it is fully as big as one of our Church great Bibles;
which I would have your Lordship think I speak without any figure, trope, or
Rhetorical lie, for it is so big, I told the President, that it was a thing
impossible the Synod could take notice of the Contents of that Volume under six
months, he answered me, that for my comfort he would show me two lines in the
Preface, which would rid me of that fear, and so he did; for in these lines
they do protest that they do not offer this Volume to the Synod; for they
profess, that they have nothing,, nor will have nothing to do with the Synod,
since the Synod has refused to have any doings with their living persons, but
only their dead books, and therefore they do only offer this book to the
Delegates, but will not have it thought by any man that they offer it to the
Synod. Heinsius dyned with us yesterday, and I asked him when they had given in
this Book, he told me that morning; but with such impudence, as is almost
incredible; for when one of the Delegates told them that he wondered why they
would give in so much paper as was impossible it should ever be read in the
Synod, Episcopius answered, they had nothing to do with the Synod, they
offered it only to them who were the Delegates: the former Delegate replied,
that the Delegats were not to judge of their opinions, but the Synod; and that
in their Letters Citatory they were warned to come and give an account to the
Synod of the doctrine which they had delivered in their Schools and pulpits.
Episcopius most impudently answered thus briefly: we here delivered to you the
Delegates this book and to none else, if you be pleased to take it from us, we
will leave it with you, if not, we pray you give it us again, and we will keep
it; one of the Delegates commanded Heinsius to write down that their peremptory
and saucy answer, Episcopius very bravely told Heinsius that they would save
him that labor, for they had set down the same words already in their Preface,
and pointed out to him the place where he might find them: so that, my Lord,
they were never since the beginning of the Synod so lusty as now, so as none
can choose but think that they yet have some secret and sure hopes. I forget to
tell your Lordship that the President told me he had been glancing at this
volume, and he finds it to be in many parts a confutation of the several
discourses which have been had publicly in the Synod upon the ^ive Articles.
There is some talk ^here about the citation of Vorstius; and Festius Hommius
yesternight told me he had some talk with your Lordship about it. If he be
cited your Lordships credit with the Prince of Orange and Count William must
help us for discretion in dealing with him, else he will keep the Synod as long
as the Remonstrants did; your Lordship I hope will give counsel to them, that
if Vorstius should desire to have time to give in apologies and explications,
for the hard speeches in his book De Deo; and should desire to be convinced
with Reason, and satisfaction of his arguments; all which would take up a long
time, that the Synod would talk of no such matter with him, but in plain terms
tell him that all the members of the Synod had read his Book, and found many
things in it very near unto open blasphemy, and scandalous without all question
to the Reformed Religion: that explications of things, which are not once to be
called in question, is no satisfaction; and they therefore only desire to know
whether he will make a plain recantation and denial of it, and publicly ask
God forgivenss for it, and his Church likewise there assembled, whom by that
Book he has scandalized: if he do this we gain him; if not, then without any
more ado, let the Synod censure him as they shall think fit; I wish that to the
terror of others he might solemnly be excommunicated in the Synod; in this and
all other businesses we do and must rely upon your Lordships care, for the
handsome carriage of them; which as your Lordship has hitherto done, so that
your Lordship may still continue to the good of God's Church, and your own
immortal credit, it is no small part of the prayers of

Dordrecht this 20. of March, Stylo novo. Your Lordships humble and faithful
servant, Walter Balcanqual.

My very good Lord,
THis week has been a very barren one for news, for we have been taken up
wholly with hearing, yet such Sessions as we had your Lordship shall here have
a note of them.

Sessio 119. 18. Martii, Stylo novo.] There were read Letters from the Marquis
of Brandeburgh in Dutch, containing (as the President told us) an excuse why he
deputed none to the Synod; the President told us they should be turned into
Latin, and after read again unto the whole Synod: there were read the
judgments of the South- Hollandi, the North- Hollandi, the Zelandi, the
Vltrajectini upon the third and fourth Articles.

Sessio 120. eodem die post meridiem.] There were read upon the same Articles
the judgments of the Frisii, the Transisulani, the Groninganii, and Omlandii,
the Gallo-belgici, the Drentani; And so was ended the reading of all the
Collegial judgments, upon the third and fourth Articles; in which there was
wonderful great consent, both in the things themselves, as likewise in the
phrases and forms of speaking.

Sessio 121. 19. Martii.] There were read the judgment of our College upon the
fifth Article; Which was far longer than any which we gave in before; At the
end of it we annexed an adhortation to the Delegates, for the defense, in their
Provinces, of the Doctrine received in the Reformed Churches; Likewise an
Exhortation to all the Members of the Synod for avoiding harshness and
rigidity, and embracing of all moderation in making the Canons, especially upon
the second Article; as likewise an admonition to the Provincials, for great
wariness and discretion, in propounding to the common People the Doctrine of
Predestination, and especially Reprobation: these things we told his Majesty
desired us to observe, and so with a Prayer we wished both we and all the Synod
might be careful in the observing of them. There was read the judgment of the
Palatines, at the end whereof they annexed an Epilogue much to the same purpose
with ours; In all the judgments that were read upon this Article, it is to be
observed that every College concluded with such an Epilogue and a Prayer.

Sessio 122. eodem die post meridiem] There were read the judgments of the
Hassiaci, of the Helvetici, of the Nassovici, of the Genevenses, who used, as
in their former judgments, no confirmations, besides plain citations of places
of Scripture, of the Bremenses.

Sessio 123.20. Martii.] There were read the judgment of the Embdani who were
exceeding long, of the four Professores Belgici, which was subscribed as with
their own hands, so a little beneath with the hand of Sibrandus; next the
judgment of Sibrandus, subscribed likewise by the other four Professors;
there were read likewise the judgment of the Geldri, of the South- Hollandi,
all these except the Embdani were exceeding short.

Sessio 124. eodem die post meridiem.] D. Crocius one of the Bremenses
appointed by the President, publicly, all Auditors being admitted, did
discuss at great length these two questions; First, An fides justificans, per
Dei accepti lationem, reputetur a Deo pro omni illa legis justitia quam nos
praestare tenebamur? The second, An ipsa fides, seu (...) credere, id est actus
credendi, imputetur homini a Deo ad justitiam; he held the Negative of both
against Socinus, the Remonstrants, but namely Bertius.

Sessio 125. 21. Martii.] There were read the judgments of the North-
Hollandi, the Zelandi, the Vltrajectini, the Fristi.

Sessio 126. eodem die post meridiem.] There were read the judgments of the
Transisulani, the Groninganii and Omlandii, the Drentani, the Gollo-belgici.
And so was happily ended the reading of all the Collegial judgments upon the
five Articles, in which praised be God for it, there was seen an incredible
harmon far greater than almost could be hoped for in so great an Assembly of so
many learned men. The President told us that the Estates General between this
and Easter did expect that the Canons should be made, and therefore did desire
that against the morrow at ten of the Clock every College would depute one, who
might meet about the conceiving of the Canons, that one should relate to the
rest of their College, what Articles they agreed upon, and accordingly consult
with them to know what they would have added, paired, or changed, so after
these deputed and had agreed, the Canons should be publicly read and approved.

This is all, but that I think our President has need of your Lordships good
counsel, for carrying himself in making the Canons; I find every man murmuring
already that he would make them, and does but only dictate them to the rest.
With the remembrance of my best service to your Lordship and my Lady, I take my
leave and am

Dordrecht this 23. of March, New style. Your Lordships in all true respects
and service, Walter Balcanqual.

My very good Lord,
WHat stir we have had about the making of our Canons your Lordship shall
understand by Letters from our whole College: if we had not written a common
Letter, and then your Lordship should have taken some particular notice of the
contents of mine, the rest of my Colleagues must needs have suspected that your
Lordship had had intelligence from me; And therefore I did presently deal with
my Lord and the rest of our Society, that they would write a common Letter to
your Lordship concerning the particular passages of this troublesome business.
These three things I may say in it; First, that the President would take upon
him more than ever any President did, to make Canons and ^ass them by placet or
non placet, and then he has so many of the Provincials at command to pass what
he will; I cannot, I consess, yet see, how it can consist with the dignity of
any, much more of some of the Members of the Synod, that the President should
dictate Canons and the rest especially a Bishop write after him; so that he
makes the Canons, and the whole Synod are called non ad consilium, sed tantum
consensum. Next I think, my Lord, that if the Synod had wanted but two men
which are of it, we had wanted a great deal of contention, which I perceive
will not forsake the Synod, so long as they are in it; I mean Sibrandus and
Gomarus; they keep their fits of madness by course; the last fit before this
came to Gomarus his turn, and this day Sibrandus flew out, but with such Raving
and sierceness of countenance, such unheard bitterness against our College, as
I desire no other revenge on him than the very speaking of the words, which
while they were in his mouth were checked by both Presidents Politic and
Ecclesiastical; Dr. Davenant who is a very moderate man, would have answered
him much against my will, and no man could blame him, for Sibrandus his words
against our College, if they had come from a wise man his lips, had been above
the strength of patience; I was glad the President gave not way to Dr.
Davenants speech, which notwithstanding I am sure would have been full of
discretion; and for Sibrandus I blame him and Gomarus no more for these
ecstasies, than I do a stone for going downward, since it is both their natural
constitution. Thirdly, if your Lordships care do not now most of all show it
self for procuring of good counsel to be sent hither for the constitution of
the Canons, we are like to make the Synod a thing to be laughed at in after
ages. The President and his Provincials have no care of the credit of
strangers, nor of that account which we must yield at our return unto all men
that shall be pleased to call for it; their Canons they would have them so full
charged with Catechetical speculations, as they will be ready to burst; and I
perceive it plainly that there is never a Contra-Remonstrant Minister in the
Synod, that has delivered any Doctrine which has been excepted against by the
Remonstrants, but they would have it in by head and shoulders in some Canon,
that so they might have something to show for that which they have said: God
his goodness toward his Church, and your Lordships vigilant constancy in
perfecting this good course, which you were so careful to procure, I hope will
teach us to overcome all these difficulties.

In my last letter I wrote as I suspect, that the Palatines inveighed against
some things delivered by Dr. Ward in the third and fourth Articles; If I had
so, I was mistaken, I should have said the second Article. We shall have no
more Sessions till all be agreed upon in private Colleges; and therefore I
thought to have come over to have done my duty to your Lordship this Easter,
but I understand by a Letter from Sir Thomas Iermyn that my Lord Hayes had
warning to make himself ready for his Embassage against the tenth of Marcb; I
think he will come by the Hague; if I understand of his coming I must likewise
do my duty to him, and I can hardly make two journies; and so with my humblest
service for your Lordships kind invitation, and for all the rest of your
Lordships most undeserved favors to a stranger, which since my fortune is not
likely ever to give me leave to requite, I must take leave to acknowldge, and
with my best prayers for your Lordships and my Ladies happiness, I take my
leave and am as I ever shall be

Dordrecht this 25. of March. Your Lordships in all true respect and service,
Walter Balcanqual.

My very good Lord,
ALL my answer to your Lordships arguments is my acknowledgement of your
Lordships extraordinary courtesy in your kind invitations. I could not be so
fitted in my mourning apparel as I would before Saturday at night: besides we
must now narrowly look to the Canons which are sent to us by the Deputies of
the Synod; for we are required upon Tuesday next to give in our observations
upon them; my Lord of Landaffe being one of the Deputies, has already
delivered his opinion of them; and therefore his Lordship may here be spared
till Wednesday next, the rest of us have not, and it being the main business of
our coming hither, we must plie it so as it may be done to some good purpose.
My Lord of Landaffe his coming to your Lordship tells me that the writing of
any occurrences here are needless; so with the continuance of my best wishes
for your Lordships health and happiness, I take my leave; and shall ever
account it a great part of my temporal happiness if your Lordship shall be
pleased to account me as I am

Dordrecht this 29. of March, Stylo loci.] Your Lordships in all dutiful
respect and service, Walter Balcanqual.

My very good Lord,
THis Place is yet still barren of News, but I make no question but my next
Letters shall send your Lordship some. The Deputies appointed by the Synod have
taken pains I must needs confess to give our College all satisfaction; besides
the second Article, some of our College have been earnest to have this
Proposition out; ( Infideles damnabuntur, non solum ob infidelitatem; sed
etiam, ob omnia alia peccata sua: tam originalia, quam actualia:) Because they
say that from thence may be inferred that original sin is not remitted to all
who are baptized, which opinion has been by more than one Council condemned as
heretical: they have therefore at their request put it out; so I know now of no
matter of disagreement among us worthy the speaking of. To morrow there is a
Synod, one way or other we shall determine what shall become of the Canons,
what we do your Lordship by God's grace with the first occasion shall
understand. I have here sent your Lordship my Speech made in the Synod; I know
your Lordships experience will pardon the imperfections of a discourse
delivered upon less than two days warning. Now my Lord, to write a History of
Dr. Goad his journey and mine own, between Roterdam and Dort that night, on
which we came from your Lordship would move too much pity, especially if you
should make relation of the same to my Lady: the compend of it is this; that a
little after five a clock in the afternoon we took Ship at Roterdam, and about
a little after one of the clock in the night we arrived at Dort, but could get
no entrance; and therefore until half an hour past five in the Morning, we
sometimes lay in the Ship, sometime walked on the Bulwark: if we were not
sufficiently assaulted with cold and watching we know our selves. Mr. Downs's
wooing in Greek was never so cold as we were that night. Letters I have
received from England: the sum of the news are, that the Spanish Navy is
dissipated, and that it never exceeded 60. sayls. The King of Spain has
written large Letters with his own hand to our King; in which he protests,
that he never intended any thing against England, nor any Christian Kingdom.
The talk of the Spanish match has of late been very fresh again in England,
but this is certain that the other day at Theobalds the King asking a Gentleman
of good note what the people talked of the Spanish Navy, received of him this
answer: Sir, the people is nothing so much afraid of the Spaniard' s powder as
of their match. My Lord, I can but thank your Lordship for all your courtesies,
especially your Lordships great kindness at my last being with you, which since
my fortune will not give me leave to requite, I must take leave to acknowledge.
With the remembrance of my best duty and service to your Lordship and your
worthy Lady, and my faithful wishes for both your happiness, I take my leave,
hoping your Lordship will believe that there lives no man of whom you may more
freely dispose, than of

Dort this 4/1^ of April. Your Lordships most faithful and respectful in all
true service, Walter Balcanqual.

My very good Lord,
DOctor Davenant his coming to your Lordship saves me the writing of any News
here: for he will perfectly relate them to your Lordship. We are full of
trouble about things altogether unnecessary, they are so eager to kill the
Remonstrants, that they would make their words have that sense which no Grammar
can find in them: upon Tuesday in the Afternoon we had a Session, in which were
read the Canons of the first and second Article, and were approved, except the
last of the second Article, which we never heard of till that hour, and the
second heterodox in that same Article; what they were Dr. Davenant will inform
your Lordship; The last was such as I think no man of understanding would ever
assent unto. On Thursday Morning we had another Session, in which was nothing
done, but that it was reasoned whether that last heterodox should be retained;
our College in that whole Session maintained dispute against the whole Synod;
they condemned the thing it self as a thing most curious, and yet would have it
retained only to make the Remonstrants odious, though they find the very
contrary of that they would father upon them in their words. That day in the
Afternoon was another Session, in which were read the Canons of the third,
fourth and fifth Articles, and were approved, the particular passages of these
Sessions I will send your Lordship by the next occasion, there were no great
matters in them, yet when I send your Lordship the next Sessions, in which it
is like that something will be done, I will send a note of them too: yesterday
there was no Session, but the Deputies met for taking order about the Preface
and Epilogue of the Canons, and mending those things in the Canons which were
thought fit to be amended, and have sent them worse than they were; in case we
stand, and what need of counsel we have, this worthy Doctor will sufficiently
inform your Lordship. My Lord, I have had a great deal of talk with Mr. Douglas
about the Controversies in this Church, and find him unquestionably sound in
them, also that there is no fear of his Opinions, if otherwise he be found
sufficient: I much wonder that we do not hear of my Lord of Doncaster. There is
here in the Synod a report of our King his mortal disease, it comes from
Scultetus, but I hope it is but the Gout. With the remembrance of my best duty
and service to your good Lordship and my Lady, I take my leave and rest ever,

Dort this 9/1^ of April. Your Lordships in all true respect and service,
Walter Balcanqual.

My very good Lord,
NOw at last we have made an end of our business of the five Articles; what
trouble we have had in these last Sessions none can conceive but those who were
present at them: and what strange carriage has been in them, especially on the
President his part, it is too palpable, he has deceived all men's hope of him
very far. This matter of the personal censure which was a thing of great
consequence, we were never made acquainted with before the very instant in
which it came to be read; and because the Delegates must not be stayed from
their going to the Hague, therefore all the Synod must say Amen to it; between
the Forenoon and the Afternoon Session, there was strange laboring with the
Exteri for getting their consent to it; yet we meddled not with it; all I can
say is, me thinks it is hard, that every man should be deposed from his
Ministry, who will not hold every particular Canon; never did any Church of
old, nor any Reformed Church propose so many Articles to be held sub poena
excommunicationis; but had it not been then cruel, if all had gone for Canons,
which they would have had gone, v. g. that of an absolute necessity of
similitude of nature for working our redemption. None of us have the Canons
yet, neither shall till the Estates have approved them: a note of such Sessions
as have passed since my last notes which your Lordship had I do now send your
Lordship: our Sessions have been so long and late as I had no time to write
them: I was therefore bold to send them to your Lordship, as my Scribe
transcribed them out of my Notes which I took in the Synod, hoping your
Lordship will have regard of our perpetual business here: with the remembrance
of my best service to your Lordship and my Lady, I take my leave, remaining
always,

Dort this 25. of April, Stylo loci. Your Lordships in all true respects and
service, Walter Balcanqual.

SEssio 127. 26. Martii Stylo novo.] Praeses D. Delegatorum, oratione brevi
monet Synodicos, D. Delegatis omnino videri futurum e re and dignitate Synodi,
si domino Praesidi, and D. assessoribus pauci aliquot a Synodo tum ex exteris
tum ex provincialibus adjungantur, in quos authoritate publica, cura
concipiendi, and concinnandi canones devolvatur; publicis ita gratiis ab ipso
nomine Delegatorum D. Praesidi Ecclesiastico act is ob gratissimum laborem
bactenus in canonibus concipiendis susceptum, eorundem nomine rogat, ut quam
viam ingressus esset in primo, eandem quoque in reliquis articulis viam
insisteret: rogat porro ut statim aliquot nominet Synodus qui cum D. Praeside
in idem negotium incumbant; utque velint ^otum hoc negotium quam fieri possit
citissime maturare, cum id praesertim ab ipsis D. ordines generales vehementer
contendant: Rogantur de Deputatis hisce Synodicorum sententiae, in quibus
ferendis fuit magna admodum varietas; multi volebant Praesidem eodem quo
^oeperat pede pergere in canonibus Dictandis, inter Exteros isthoc consilium
vehementius urgebat D. Scultetus; inter Provinciales D. Sibrandus, sed
immodeste and imprudenter satis, adversus enim illos qui hoc consilii
suggesserant fervide admodum de^lamabat seu potius exclamabat; dicebat enim
quosdam esse qui huc illuc cursitaverant, ut alios in suas parts pertraherent;
quos putabat omnino censura ecclesiastica notandos, neque hic debere Exteros
nimium laborare, utpote quibus non tam constaret de ratione Ecclesiarum
Belgicarum, quam provincialibus: eo demum ferebatur, ut D. Praeses politicus,
itidem and D. Praeses Ecclesiasticus, eum graviter monerent, suaderentque ipsi
majorem modestiam; D. Davenantius cum se and collegas suos hic sugillari
putaret, petiit a D. Praeside ut liceret sibi a se and suis calumnias istas
depellere; verum rogatu D. Praesidis a responsa abstinuit. Cum vero
deposceretur South-Hollandorum suffragium, D. Latius, (is est qui historiam
Pelagianorum scripsit) eo quod putaret se and collegas suos nomine cursitantium
a Sibrando impetitos fuisse, modeste certe in suffragio suo D. Sibrandum
perstringebat; aiebat enim omnino sibi videri e dignitate Synodi, ut Canones
authoritate publica non privata conciperentur; posseque se facillime illi
respondere qui hoc suum and collegarum consilium perstrinxerat, nisi charitati
aliquid dandum esset, neque hic sicut dicebatur consilium consilio opponi,
inconsul^e admodum hoc dictum esse, eumque non minus Ecclesiasticam censuram
mereri qui tam inconsulto locutus sit, quam illos qui authors fuerant consilii
istius de nominandis deputatis. Tandem post lata omnium suffragia potioribus
sententiis nominati sunt inter Exteros, D. Episcopus Landavensis, D. Scultetus,
D. Deodatus; inter provinciales D. Polyander, D. Wallaeus, D. Triglandius, qui
una cum D. Praeside and assessoribus canonibus concinnandis incumberent, quos
concinnatos ad singula collegia mitti curarent, si quid forte additum, demptum,
mutatum cupiant, deinde a collegiis remissos limarent manu ultima, ut sic
tandem toti Synodo propositi ad eandem approbentur.

Sessio 128. 16. Aprilis stylo novo post meridiem.] D. Praeses narrat jam
tandem post aliquot septimanarum laborem assiduum, indulsisse Synodo Deum
consensum illum suavissimum quem omnes tanto opere exoptaverant: moram monebat
nemini debere esse gravem; sed gratam potius, quia ut ut in fundamentalibus
optime inter omnes and singulos (si^^t patebat in judiciis) convenerat: sperari
tamen non poterat s^ngulos in ipsis loquendi formulis conspiraturos: monebat
porro dictam fuisse hanc sessionem, ut D. Delegati omnium and singulorum
consensum observarent: Rogantur singuli Synodici, ut diligenter attendant
lectioni articulorum, and moneant si quid for^e mutatum velint, nec aegre
ferant si mute^ur fortassis verbulum aliquod aliter quam se habeat in
exemplaribus quibus her^ singuli subscripserant; cum in reipsa nihil plane sit
mutatum.

Leguntur itaque articuli Synodici, seu canones de 1. articulo contra-verso:
singuli Synodici post ipsorum lectionem viritim rogati de consensu, singuli
solenniter profitebantur se articulos Orthodoxiam complectentes probare, ^^pote
consentientes cum sacra scriptura and confessionibus Reformatarum Ecclesiarum;
articulos vero Heterodoxiam complectentes improbare ut ab iisdem dissentientes;
Deo agebant singuli gratias de tam suavi consensu, votoque deum rogabant ut
vellet parem semper harmoniam Ecclesiis suis Reformatis largiri: observandum
autem est hic singulos significasse, quod heri illis articulis subscripserant;
exceptis solis Theologis Britannis qui subscriptiones suas differebant, donec
posset exemplar aliquod nitide describi.

Leguntur articuli Synodici seu canones de secundo articulo contra-verso: in
iis antem articulis praelectis, fuerant quaedam verba mutata and aliter
disposita, quam fuerant in articulis quibus heri Synodici omnes, exceptis
Britannis, subscripserant: Britanni eandem sententiam quoad consensum de hisce
articulis, quam de prioribus serebant; nisi quod secundum Heterodoxam putarent
magis clare and perspicue proponi posse, and ultimam Heterodoxam, quae est de
potentia dei, an potuerit alium reconciliationis modum, quam per Christum
acceptasse? dicerent jam primum ipsos observasse, and videri sibi esse eam
magis scholasticae speculationis, quam disquisitionis Synodicae, itaque
petebant deliberandi tempus: petebant p^rro ut quae in illis articulis
damnarentur pro Socinianismo, possent ipsis ostendi e^^ Socino deprompta; rem
ipsam damnabant, sed an a Socino profectum esset isthoc dogma nesciebant, cum
scriptorum Socinianorum nondum facta esset ipsis copia: Hassiaci eundem testati
sunt consensum quem in priori articulo, nisi quod in articulo octavo orthodoxo
vox illa ( Singulari) non addita esset ad isthaec verba ( liberrimo consilio)
pro^t in observationibus suis ad canones de secundo articulo anno^^verant;
verum cum persuasum fit illis omissionem istius vocabuli facere ad pacem
Ecclesiarum Belgicarum, se acquiescere, and semper exposituros canonem illum
secundum suum sensum, id est quem possit habere verbo illo addito: verum ne
fratres putarent ipsos in suis observationibus aliquid posuisse quod in rei
ipsius substantia aut fundamento a canone jam praelecto discreparet, paratos se
esse qui cum fratribus, si modo id cupiant, observationes suas communicent:
Helvetii testabantur consensum suum cum illis articulis quibus heri
subscripserant; verum cum nunc videant aliqua verba immutata esse, rogant ut
articulos relegant, ut sic ad conscientiae consensum possit quoque oris
consensus accedere: Bremenses consensum quoque suum testabantur, sed addita
eadem illa ad eundem articulum cautione quam adhibuerant fratres Hassiaci;
reliqui omnes Synodici plenum suum consensum sicut in primo articulo testati
sunt; Annotarunt solum Goclenius, Sibrandus, Gomarus, and fortassis unus adhuc
aut alter, quaedam, sed quae plane Grammatica erant: aberant ex Synodicis pauci
aliquot sed quos Praeses ^arrabat singulos articulos suis syngraphis
comprobasse: propter publicum quod die crastino celebrandum est jejunium, monet
Praeses non habendam esse Sessionem ante diem Iovis.

Sessio 129. 18. Aprilis stylo novo.] Quaesitum fuit fusius de ultimo
Heterodoxo canone in articulo secundo, qui rejicit eorum opinionem qui statu^^t
ad sufficientiam Pretii Redemptionis nostrae, non fuisse necessariam naturae
nostrae similitudinem in Christo: Quaerebatur an deberet hic retineri tanquam
error Remonstrantium, an vero hic omitti, and numerari postea inter errores
Vorstianos: Theologi Britanni pluribus rem disceptabant, contendebant enim si
Canon intelligendus esset de absoluta necessitate, id est tali, quae removeret
a Deo omnem potentiam aliter statuendi, ante suppositionem omnis decreti and
voluntatis certae, temere nihil definiendum esse de absoluta Dei potentia, esse
hanc speculationem magis Scholasticam, ideoque Canones Synodicos non debere
ingredi, praesertim cum quidam Patres, and nonnulli Doctores reformati putent
illam naturae similitudinem hoc sensu, non fuisse simpliciter and absolute
necessariam; si vero Canon sit intelligendus, de necessitate hypothetica, id
est ex suppositione decreti and voluntatis certo nobis in Scriptura Revelatae,
(quo sensu putant vocabulum necessitatis in hoc negotio in sacra Scriptura
accipi) Canonem verum esse putant; sed nullo modo ferire Remonstrantes, qui
absolutam tantum necessitatem rejiciunt, ut patet ex ipsorum verbis in nupera
declaratione exhibita, ideoque putant consultius hunc Canonem pass omitti; a
pluribus multa de has quaestione dicta sunt; quibus omnibus Britanni
Responderunt; Potiora tamen suffragia vol^erunt Canonem illum retineri, Praeses
monuit sic concipiendum esse ut possit omnibus satisfieri.

Sessio 130. eodem die post meridiem] Leguntur Canones Synodici de 3. and 4.
Articulis ubi omnes ac singuli Synodici post ipsorum praelectionem viritim
consensum suum solennibus verbis testabantur; Varii Theologi tamen varia
annotabant: sed quaeta n^um perspicuitatem in verbis spectabant; in re ipsa
nihil desiderantes.

Leguntur Canones Synodici de 5. Articulo: post ipsorum Lectioneus singuli
porro (ut in prioribus) ipsos solenni consensu comprobabant: D. Goadus
recitavit catalogum duriorum phrasium quas Theologi Britanni cupiebant a Synodo
rejici, eo quod ex ipsis, tum Remonstrantes tum Pontificii, doctrinam
Reformatam calumniandi magnam ansam sumerent; D. Scultetus etiam suadebat ut
usus aliquis a Synodo deligeretur qui ultimam manum canonibus imponeret,
daretque operam ut stylus canonum ubique par esset and limatus ^atis and
perspicuus: aliqui nec dictionem nec stylum mutari voluerunt: quidam quoque
putabant non sore e re Synodi ut duriores illae phrases rejiceruntur a Synodo,
quia sic laederetur fama excellentissimorum virorum quorundam; Praeses movet
die crastino mane Deputatos Synodicos conventuros esse, capturosque consilium
de mutandis illis aut delendis quae observata sunt a quibusdam fratribus, atque
etiam de rejiciendis phrasibus durioribus, idque ea ratione qua possit magis
commode omnibus satisfieri; porroque de praesatione, and Epilogo canonum
prospecturos; Rogatque ut singula collegia unum aliquem ad horam quartam
pomeridianam mittant; qui describant ea quae conceperunt deputari, and ad
collegia sua referant, ut sic de omnium consensu constare possit ante proximam
Sessionem.

Sessio 131. 20. Aprilis stylo novo] Legitur Epilogus post Canones conceptus a
deputatis, in quo etiam continebatur abstersio calumniarum quarundam, quibus
doctrinam Ecclesiarum Belgicarum Remonstrantes gravare conantur; Quaeritur an
omnes Synodici in forma praelecta acquiescant: Britanni voluerunt quaedam alia
rejectanea addita qualia erant illa duo praecipue [Deum movere Hominum linguas
ad blasphemandum] and [Hominem non posse plus boni facere quam facit.] Hassiaci
legerunt scriptum prolixum and been concinnatum, in quo pluribus rationibus
ostendebant necessarium esse ut plures duriores locutiones quae apud privatos
scriptores reperiuntur, rejicerentur a Synodo, ut sic Ecclesiae reformatae a
gravissimis calumniis circa Reprobationis doctrinam liberari possi^t: Bremenses
itidem scripto been prolixo idem contendebant: Reliqui Theologi Exteri formam
jam praelectam probabant: D. Praeses movebat non roganda esse Provincialium
suffragia ante Sessionem pomeridianam; quia videbat Theologos Exteros hic non
idem sentire, and movet professores Belgicos ut in horam quartam pensitent
rations quae untrinque fuerunt allatae.

Sessio 132. eodem die post meridiem] D. Praeses antequam pergat in rogandis
suffragiis de quaesito antemeridiano, rogat Synodum ut velit audire quae ipse
una cum D. assessoribus tempore intermedio de rejectione duriorum locutionum
conceperant: and rogat Synodum ut velit haec duo perpendere, primo neminem ex
Theologis Belgis istiusmodi unquam scripsisse aut docuisse; ac proinde non
spectare illa ad hanc Synodum quae tantum Belgica esset: Secundo doctores illos
apud quos isthaec duriora dicta comperiuntur, fuisse and esse vel Theologos
Anglos, vel Gallos, vel Germanos; qui cum a suis principibus and Ecclesiis ob
illas duriores loquendi formas non essent notati, verisimile aiebat esse
principes illos and Ecclesias Exteras aegre laturas si Synodus haec nationalis
Ipsos ob isthaec dicta aliqua censura notaret.

Legitur forma Epilogi jam de novo concepta, in qua plures aliquot incomnodae
locutiones rejiciebantur quam in priori, sed nullae ex iis quas Theologi Exteri
addi cupiebant: Quaeritur Synodicorum de hoc Epilogo sententia: Britanni serio
urgent additionem, plurium praesertim little quae Sessione antemerdiana
memoraverant: ad duas Rations a D. Praeside allatas Respondebant, ad primam
Remonstrantes in declarationibus suis ad Synodum exhibitis, multa loca
Contra-Remonstrantium, ipsos libros and paginas citare in quibus istjusmodi
scripserint; nisi itaque Synodus istiusmodi dicta improbet, non posse Belgas ab
istiusmodi calumniis liberari; ad secundam Theologos Exteros non debere quidem
in Synodo notari, verum si quid dixerint aut scripserint quod cedat Reformatae
Ecclesiae in contumeliam, illud posse Synodum cujuscunque demum sit rejicere,
neque hoc debere Synodum morari. Quod fortassis non sint Belgae, hac enim
ratione Synodo nihil permitti in Socinum, cujus tamen dogmata saepius quam
semel in, canonibus damnat; neque debuisse Regem Magnae Britanniae aliquid
adversus Vorstium statuere qui ipsius subditus non erat; optare se ut fiat
summus delectus eorum quae rejiciuntur, nec posse aliquam Reformatam Ecclesiam
hoc agree far, cum nihil cupiant rejici quod a consensu alicujus Reformatae
Ecclesiae comprobatum sit: cupere se praesertim ut illa sententia rejiciatur,
[Neminem posse plus boni facere quam facit] cum exinde nulli Reformato doctori
defuncto aliqua contumelia inferatur; cum sit sententia heri tantum nata, quae
vix septimum aetatis suae numeraret annum: Reliqui omnes Theologi exteri quia
cupiebant (ut aiebant ipsi) multum paci dare, in forma praelecta acquiescebant;
optabant tamen illi qui antemeridiem rations su^s attulissent ut possint plura
rejici. Provinciales omnes formam praelect am probabant: and professores Belgae
multis rationibus contendebant non debere Synodum dicta virorum alioqui optime
de Ecclesia Reformata meritorum aliqua censura notare; D. Sibrandus tamen
aiebat negari non potuisse quin aliqui in Belgio duriora quaedam docuerint,
quam essent illa quae Theologi Britanni in catalogo suorum rejectaneorum
recitaverant: sub finem Praeses monet cum haec sit res ordinis, non doctrinae
solius, consulendos esse de hoc negotio Dominos Delegatos: qui rogati,
deliberaturos se de re praesenti in Sessionem crastinam matutinam pollicentur.

Sessio 133. 22. Aprilis, stylo novo.] D. Praeses rogat D. Delegatos ut velint
Synodo exponere quid ipsi de Epilogo proxima Sessione praelecto statuant: D.
Delegati cupiunt ipsum denuo Relegi; Religitur: D. Delegati illum probant, and
rogant Synodicos ut si id fieri possit velint in ipso acquiescere: Orant porro
ut jam tandem quam fieri possit maturime negotium hoc. 5. articulorum semel
absolvant; quippe quod ipsi jam denuo iteratis Iussionibus urgeantur a D. Suis
ordinibus Generalibus ad hoc serio flagitandum: Rogantur Synodici de hac
formula prael^cta; Britanni omnibus modis urgebant ut aliqua reject anea porro
adderentur, hoc praecipue, [Hominem non plus boni facere quam facit:] verum si
hoc obtineri nequiret, ut darent multum paci non-nemo ex ipsis monebat,
ampliandam esse illam sententiam [Et quae alia sunt hujus generis plurima] ut
si quando exprobaretur ipsis aliqua horriblis sententia quam non rejecerant,
possent se excusare per illam parenthesin, and asserere omnia istiusmodi in
illa sententia rejecta fuisse a Synodo: Itaque ut paci and tempori consulant,
acquiescunt; monentes tamen illud omnino mutandum esse quod habetur in Epilogo;
doctrinam Reformatarum Ecclesiarum censendam esse Eam quae hisce canonibus
continetur, se enim profitebantur deputatos a serenissima Regia majestate non
ab Ecclesiis suis, nullam sibi commissam authoritatem qua possent Ecclesiarum
suarum confessiones explicare, tulisse se tantum privata sua judicia quae ipsi
putarent vera esse; multa se in canonibus tanquam vera conslusisse, de quibus
ne verbum quidem habetur in Ecclesiarum suarum confessionibus, verum quodsciant
nihil in illis contineri quod istis confessionibus repugnaret: Reliqui Synodo
praelectum Epilogum probabant, and complurimi censebant reliquas duriores
loquendi formulas deberi in scripto Elenchico quod adornatur, discuti; atque
illic calumnias quibus ob ipsas gravatur reformata Ecclesia, debere depelli. D.
Praeses it aque monet Deputatos Synodi a meridie conventuros, ut quam fieri
possit, canones illos duos Heterodoxos in primo Articulo de quibus tantopere in
Synodo non ita pridem disceptabatur, ita componant ut singuli facile in
consensum adduci possent. Interea monet jam describi nitidum omnium Canonum
exemplar, quibus public in Synodo a singulis sessione crastinae antemeridiana
subscribendum esset, ut sic Canones -- absoluti codem die possunt Hagam ad D.
Ord. Generales transmitti. Sub initium enim hujus Sessionis, narrabat D.
Gregor. Martinii, D. Delegatos quosdam ex ipsorum numero delegisse qui die
Crastino Canones ad D. Ordines essent delaturi, hoc enim aiebat D. Ordines, and
cum Ecclesiae, tum Reipublicae Belgicae statum deposcere.

Sessio 134. 33. Aprillis stylo novo.] Leguntur Articuli de primo articulo
contraverso quibus omnes and singuli solenniter subscribunt, in tribus
exemplaribus, Praeses monet a singulis collegiis unum exemplar describendum
esse, cui etiam singuli Synodici subscripturi essent: loca Scripturae narrat
postea describenda esse and addenda fusius, quae jam per temporis angustias
describi non potnerunt: Narrat jam inter deputatos convenisse de mutatione
secundi articuli Heterodoxi, in secundo Articulo, in tres Articulos, and
deletione ultimi Heterodoxi in eodem Articulo qui erat de absoluta necessitate
similitudinis naturae in mediatore nostro: quae mutata erant, in secundo
Heterodoxo leguntur; and rogat D. Praeses singulos ut in sessionem pomeridianam
deliberent number possint in mutatis acquiescere.

Sessio 135. oedem die post meridiem.] Rogantur Synodicorum suffragia number
placeat ipsis ut ultimus ille Heterodoxus Canon in secundo Articulo deleatur,
and secundus ille in tres praelectos Canones mutetur, placuit omnibus and
singulis. Leguntur itaque Canones de secundo, tertio, quarto, quinto,
Articulis, quibus etiam singuli solenniter subscribunt: duravit haec sessio in
horam 10. vespertinam.

Sessio 136.24. Aprilis stylo novo.] D. Praeses monet D. Deputatos a Synodo,
mandesse uni, ut conciperet formam personalis censurae quam Synodus exerceret
adversus citatos, and quoscunque alios qui recusarent doctrinam Synodicam,
varios quoque Synodicos Deputatis formulas obtulisse, eos tandem in unam
convenisse, quae nunc praeleganda esset Synodo ut came probet, vel corrigat:
legitur, fuit autem in hanc sententiam, Synodum censere Remonstrantes esse
novatores, and perturbatores partriae, Reipub. praesertim Ecclesiae Belgicae,
ejusmodi docuisse dogmata quae a verbo dei, and confessionibus Reformatarum
Ecclesiarum dissentirent, praeterea citatos ad hanc Synodum teneri reos
contumaciae adversum cum supremum Magistratum cujus decreta spreverint, tum
ipsam Synodum quam pro legitimo judice nunquam voluerunt agnoscere, ideoque
Synodum omnes ad praesentem Synodum abdicare ab omnibus suis muneribus tum
Ecclesiasticis tum Academicis, eo usque dum poenitentiam agant de falsis
dogmatibus a se scriptis, praelectis, and doctis, and possint hanc suam
poenitentiam indubitatis studiis and signis Ecclesiis Belgicis testatam facere,
reliquos vero Remonstrantes in Belgio ad Synodos provinciales remittit, quibus
mandat ut ductores and pertinaces continuo omnibus suis muneribus abdicent,
reliquos vero vitio temporis lapsos, and a seductoribus abreptos omni lenitate
and patientia co^entur in viam reducere, quos si lucri^acere possint omni
conatu id agant, sin minus pariter and cum ipsis agant: Porro Synodus
illustrissimos ord. Generales obnixe rogat ut hanc suam sententiam de quinque
Articulis, atque etiam de Remonstrantibus abdicandis firmam and ratam esse
velint and jubeant; gratiasque ipsorum Dominationibus cum omni debito obsequio
defert propter ipsorum de reformandis Ecclesiis suis studium singular:
Quaeritur Synodicorum judicium de censura hac personali: Theologi Britanni
omnes ac singuli respondebant, doctrinam Ecclesiarum Belgicarum hic in Synodo
assertam suam fuisse, ac proinde ipsos vocatos sententiam suam de illo
exposuisse, personas vero qui contrariam sententiam docuerint esse cives
Belgas; Ideoque de aliorum subditis nolle se ullo modo personalem sententiam
far, ideoque se censuram omnino provincialibus relinquere, quibus integrum
esset de suis ministris statuere: idem sentiebant omnes Theologi exteri,
exceptis Genevensibus and Embdanis qui sententiam praelectam probabant, and
Bremensibus qui tempus deliberandi poscebant: Provinciales quaedam in forma
praelecta observabant: Cujusmodi fuit illud, non esse fori Ecclesiastici eos
damnare, tanquam perturbatorespatriae and pacis Reip. hoc spectare ad civilem
Magistratum: magna fuit disceptatio inter provinciales an tolerandi essent illi
qui utcunque nollent subscribere Articulis Synodicis, tamen reciparent se nihil
unquam vel public vel privatim adversus ipsos dicturos aut docturos? quidamex
provincialibus pe^ebant ut Theologi Exteri de hac re suam sententiam aperirent;
sed D. Praeses respondebat ista particularia omnino oportere relinqui Synodorum
provincialium pruden^ae, and nescire se adhuc quam tolerantiam permissuri
essent D. Ord. Generales, itaque forma praelecta, si paucula quaedam
mutarenter, ab omnibus provincialibus probata est, exceptis Zelandis and
Gallobelgicis qui spatium deliberandi de re gravissima petiverunt.

Sessio 137.] Relegitur censura personalis emendata in qua illud de
perturbatione patriae and Reip. omittebatur: quaeritur Synodicorum sententia de
ipsa jam correcta, Britanni and Hassiaci eam nec probabant nec improbabant,
noluerunt enim se personalibus immiscere; reliqui omnes Exteri, ut aiebant, re
ipsa melius perpensa quam ante meridiem eam probabant, exceptis Bremensibus,
quorum duo priores mitius quoddam consilium suggerebant, tertius vero D.
Crocius rem putabat esse maximi momenti, ideoque nihil posse se de ea statuere
nisi apographum formulae praelectae and tempus deliberandi concedatur:
provinciales omnes eam probabant, Gomarus autem and alii petebant ut Synodus
apud ord. Generales intercederet pro largiendo Remonstrantibus minus
pertinacibus trimestri stipendio, fortassis enim possent cupere illo tempore
cum viris doctis confer, suisque conscientiis de canonibus Synodicis
satisfacere; sed voluit ipsos primo quoque tempore a ministerii sui exercitio
supendi. D. Praeses Respondebat non esse e dignitate Synodi tam Augustae, ut
intercedat apud D. Ordines prore stipendiaria, verum non dubitare se quin D.
Ordines benign satis and ^lementer cum ipsis acturi essent: rogatur D:
Delegatorum de hac praelecta censura judicium, qui respondebant se nolle tantum
sibi assumere ut ipsam probent, sed delaturos se ipsam D. Ord. generalibus, a
quibus solis comprobatio expectanda esset: Theologi Britanni monebant in hac
censura dici Synodicos Articulos conclusos esse secundum sententiam omnium
Reformatarum Ecclesiarum, quo dicto innuebatur Ecclesias Lutheranas, quae
a^iter sentire^t, non habendas esse pro Reformatis, quod ipsis durum admodum
videbatur; D. Scultetus, and Polyander reponebant, ipsos Lutheranos nomen hoc
deprecari, and nostris Ecclesiis ex hoc nomine ( Reformatarum) solere invidiam
constare, and D. Praeses addebat hic in Belgio soleres nostra Ecclesias per
illud nomen ( Reformatas) non solum a Pontificiis verum etiam a Lutheranis
distingui; Britanni respondebant in suis Ecclesiis Lutheranos haberi pro
Reformatis, ut pote a quibus Religionis Reformatio primum tentata est,
habereque se porro in mandatis a ser^nissimo D. Rege ut quantum fieri possent
despicerent ne osfenderentur Ecclesiae Lutheranae, itaque addita est isthaec
vox Nostrarum.

Leguntur blasphemae opiniones duorum fratrum Thomae, and Petri Gesterranorum,
qui Remonstrantes erant, and ab Ordinibus Hollandiae and West-Frisiae suspensi
a ministeriis dum Synodus possit de ipsorum opinionibus cognoscere.

Sessio 138. 25. Aprilis stylo novo.] Legitur supplex libellus Johannis Macovii
Theologiae professoris in Academia Franekerana, quo gravissime queritur se apud
Ordines Frisiae insimula^um fuisse hereseos a D. Sibrando Luberto, petit itaque
suppliciter ut Synodus velit de tota causa cognoscere, ut audito Sibrando ipse
possit dicere pro se saltem; ut Sibrandus, and ipse ex Synodicis arbitros
deligant, qui totum hoc negotium diligenter examinent and ad Synodum referant.
Praeses rogat D. Sibrandum ut exponat coram Synodo sententiam ^uam de ^ota hac
lite. Sibrandus negat se unquam fuisse Macovii accusatorem; verum testimonio
duorum fratrum Frisiorum probat ipsum a class Franekerana fuisse accusatum, se
autem jussu D. Ordinum Frisiae, and rogatu praedictae classis, solum Classis os
pro illo tempore fuisse, itaque sicut antehac in li^e pars non fuerat, sic and
nunc nullo modo se velle haberi pro part protestatur: D. Praeses narrat
conveniens esse ut Synodus de hac causa cognoscat, quia id serio petunt D.
Ordines Frisiae per literas suas ad D. Delegatos, atque etiam huc ad Synodum
omnia acta in lite hac apud ipsos contestata transmiserint. Quaeritur itaque a
Synodo cum Sibrandus non sit pars, an debeat ipse Macovius primum audiri, an
vero ipso s^moto ex actis ordinum Frisiae de causa cognosci: placuit Synodo ut
primum act a praelegerentur, deinde si opus esset, ut audiretur coram Marcovius.

Legitur Prooemium been longum quod praefigendum esset Canonibus Synodicis,
quaeritur de illo judicium Synodi, quod sic se habebat: esse putabat is it hoc
Prooemium nimis longum, porroque styli sublimis admodum, adeoque a stylo
canonum admodum disparis, Ideoque omnino brevius conficiendum esse putat,
succinctum and nervosum, exponens occasionem and finem convocatae Synodi, quod
praemittendum esset Canonibus, si fortassis ab actis Synodicis scorsim
excudantur: Praeses itaque monet deputatos Synodicos ut ante meridiem
conveniant, ut ex pluribus brevioribus formulis, quae sibi a variis Synodicis
essent oblatae, unum aliquod succinctum prooemium possent consicere.

Sessio 139. eodem die post meridiem.] Legitur aliud novum brevius prooemium a
deputatis Synodicis ex variis formulis sibi oblatis confectum: quod totum
Synodo placuit si paucula quaedaem mutarentur: Britanni putabant pro
[Anti-Christi tyrannide] magis commode dici posse [Anti-Christiana tyrannide]
quia ut ut fortassis verum putarent pontificem Romanum esse magnum illum
Antichristum, tamen-sine justo examine praemisso vix putarent debere hoc a
Synodo determinari, quod a nulla Reformata Ecclesia adhuc, excepta Gallicana
quae and jam ariculum illum ex confessione sua retraxit, factum esset; quidam
ex Synodicis aegre serebant hoc vocari in quaestionem; quibus reponebant
Britanni, non vocari nunc rem ipsam, nimirum an pontifex Romanus esset ille
antichristus in quaestionem: sed hoc, an debeat hoc a Synodo determinari nulla
deliberatione praemissa?.

Sessio 140. 26. Aprilis stylo novo.] Legitur alter supplex, libellus Marcovii,
quo petit ut arbitri deligantur, and ut responsum suum ad errores sibi objectos
ipsiusque explicatio legi possit. D. Scribae and porro D. Thysius and D. Lydius
publica fide testantur se quaedam exemplaria canonum Synodicorum cum originali
fideliter con^ulisse, eaque cum ipso per omnia convenire, quibus singuli
Synodici subscribunt.

Leguntur acta in lite Macovii ad Synodum ab Ordinibus Frisiae transmissa; and
primum legebantur 50. errores objecti D. Macovio in class Franekerana, quos
videre poteris in altero meo libro Synodico: qui revera primo quoque auditu
videbantur, exceptis uno aut altero, non fuisse tanti momenti ut homo doctus de
illis ^oram Synodo accusaretur: complurimi ipsorum erant ex ista receptissima
distincione agentis Physice and moraliter, ab accusatore male intellecta.

Sessio 141. eodem die post meridiem.] Legitur una D. Macovii Responsio ad
errores sibi objectos; deinde alia brevior: in utraque satisfaciebat criminibus
sibi object is abunde satis, alios negando, alios explicando.

Legitur Epistola facultatis Theologiae Heidelbergensis ad Ordines Frisiae, in
qua facultas Theologica mo^et dominos ordines Frisiae ne patiantur Theses tam
otiosos, metaphysicas, obscuras, falsas in suis Scholis disputari, quales
fuerant nuper in Academia Franekerana Theses de traductione sub Macovio
disputatae.

D. Praeses quaerit a Synodo an uberior Macovii explicatio quam hic ossert
Synodo, deberet etiam in Synodo legi, and qua ratione pergendum sit in hac
causa: Quidam ex Exteris Theologis dicebant potuisse illos 50. er^res, ad
quinque vel etiam quatuor reduci: nec ullum crimen haereseos sicut objectum
fuerat in illis deprehendi; Omnes exteri per deputatos remputant agendam, and
cupiunt duos exteros nominari and totidem professores Belgicos, quibus adjungi
possent duo pastores qui de tota causa cognoscant, and referant ad Synodum:
plerique ipsorum explicationem prolixam Macovii putant non audiendam in Synodo,
sed referendam etiam ad deputatos: Genevenses soli hoc consilium non probabant:
Deodatus rem ad solos provinciales voluit deferri post exterorum discessum;
Tronchinus vero oratione vehementissima contendebat nullo modo Macovium
audiendum esse coram; sed debere agi cum illo tanquam cum Remonstrantibus and
Episcopio: Illum judicandum ex scriptis: quod Iudicium in hominem nullo modo
heterodoxias suspectum mirabantur omnes: dum suffragium dandum esset a D.
Sibrando, immodeste satis invehebatur in Festum, exprobrans ei summam in se
ingratitudinem: recitabatque porro novum catalogum opinionum D. Macovii quae
ejusdem erant farinae cum prioribus: Festus venia fandi a praeside impetrat^
modeste satis D. Sibrandum excipiebat, narrabat theses illas compositas fuisse
non a D. Macovio sed a quodam Parkero juvene Doctissimo, and ab omnis
heterodoxias suspicione long remotissimo; and licet nunc Sibrandus sustinere
partem accusatoris recuset, tamen se a quibusdam fide diguis accepisse, omnes
illos errores Macovio objectos, D. Sibrandum ex Thesibus illis and aliis ipsius
praelectionibus compilasse: quod ut audiebat D. Sibrandus vehementissime
commotus bis Deum vindicem in animam suam precabatur si istaec vera essent;
adeo ut D. Praeses eum saepius modestiae sanctae and Reverentiae Synodo debitae
jusserit meminisse.

Sessio 142. 27. Aprilis stylo novo] Pergitur in rogandis suffragiis de causa
Macovii: plures mirabantur cum ob illas Theses posse haereseos insimulari,
praesertim cum unus ex South-Hollandis testatus sit D. Aimesium illas theses
primum vidisse and approbasse, and jam paratum esse qui ipsas defendat: tandem
potioribus suffragiis, statutum est tertium scriptum Macovii legendum ass
public in Synodo, and tres ex Theologis Exteris, totidem ex provincialibus
deputandos esse qui rem totam cognos^ant and referant ad Synodum: verum quia D.
Praeses dicebat illud scriptum continere multa personalia praesertim in D.
Sibrandum compilata, Quidam ex Exteris ob pacem conservandam petierunt, ut
rogarentur de is it hoc denno Synodicorum suffragia, quod factum est: and plura
suffragia tum voluerunt legi tantum privatim apud Deputatos: Nominati itaque
sunt potioribus suffragiis deputati ad causam hanc audiendam, ex exteris
Scultetus, Sthenius, Britingerus: Ex provincialibus Gomarus, Thysius Menius:
certe Exteri mirabantur D. Scultetum nominatum fuisse a provincialibus, and
multo magis D. Scultetum id munus velle subire, cum facultas Theologica
Heidelbergensis, cujus ipse pars esset, theses illas quae examinandae sunt jam
hactenus tanquam otiosas, metaphysicas and falsas damnaverit.

Sessio 143. 29. Aprilis stylo novo] Leguntur literae Belgicae a Magistratu and
Presbyterio Campensi ad Synodum quibus rogant Synodum ut velit scribere ad
magistratum and presbyterium Arnemiense, ut velint dimittere D. D. Stephani,
quem pos^unt ipsis pastorem dari: Item ut velit ad magistratum and presbyterium
quoque scribere pro dimissione D. Plan^is: Synodus noluit se istiusmodi
negotiis immiscere, ne fortassis cederet in praejudicium classium and
presbyteriorum: Leguntur aliae literaea magistratu Campensi, quibus petunt ut
per Synodum liccat Ecclesiae Remonstranticae Campensi in templis suis habere
lectionem sacrae Scripturae per lectores suos, eo usque dum posset ipsi
prospici de pastoribus: D. Praeses monet perscriptum esse Campis lectores illos
solere attexere capitibus praelectis lougas enarrationes subministratas sibi a
duobus ministris suis jam a Synodo suspensis, quibus doctrina Remonstrantium
asserebant, and in Orthodoxam invehebantur: porro duos ipsorum ministros qui
sunt ex numero citatorum hic ad Synodum, m^s^sse hinc literas ad Ecclesiam
Remonstrantium quae est Campis: quibus plebem animabant ad constantiam in
Remonstrantium doctrina, jubebant que brevi certissimam liberationem ab hac
persecutione expectare; quae literae ante dies non ita multos a lectoribus
public in templo pro toto plebe recitabantur.

^eguntur aliae literae Belgicae a Domino Battenberg, quibus Belgio Synodum
gratulatur; promittitque se oraturum ut in ditione sua, obtineat illa doctrina
quae hic a Synodo stabilita esset.

Legitur Prooemium praefigendum Canonibus jam emendatum, ubi pro [ Antichristi]
ponebatur [ Romani-Antichristi] quo vocabulo addito satisfiebat illis qui
noluerunt sine deliberatione a Synodo scatim pontisicem Romanum esse insignem
illum Antichristum; sed Antichristum tamen, atque ita Prooemium sic emendatum
omnibus placuit.

Legitur confessio Petri Molinaei pastoris Ecclesiae Reformatae Parisiensis
super quinque Articulis in Belgio contra-versis; quam huc ad Synodum transmisit.

Sessio 144. eodem die post meridiem.] Pergitur in praelectione confessionis
Petri Molinaei: D. Praeses monet jam rediisse Haga D. Delegatos, qui Canones
Synodicos illuc ad illustriss. Ord. Generales detulerant: oratque ipsorum
Dominationes, ut velint coram Synodo exponere, Quid D. Ord. General. de ipsis
sentiant. D. Greg. Martinii oratione brevissima refert Ord. Generales summopere
gavisos esse de Synodico consensu, in canonibus; probare ipsorum dominationes,
eos universos and singulos, agereque de labor exan^lato Theologis tum Exteris
tum Provincialibus gratias maxim^s: rogare porro ut jam Synodus velit proximo
in loco confessionem Belgicam perlustrare, in qua nihil mutatum cupiunt sine
gravi and necessaria causa.

Dies Lunae proximus publicandis Canonibus omnium Synodicorum consensu
indieitur.

Praeses rogat Singulos ut velint diligenter attendere lectioni confessionis
Belgicae; incidit quaestio, quaenam editio confessionis Belgicae habenda esset
pro authentica, cum ipsae editiones multum discreparent? eam statuit Synodus
legendam, and perlustrandam quae inseritur Syntagmati confessionum Ecclesiarum
Reformatarum: Illa itaque public praelegitur: D. Praeses rogat singula
collegia ut in ^oram nonam crastini diei velint exhibere collegialia judicia de
confessione praelecta tota, exceptis tribus Articulis videlicet 30, 31, 32. qui
ordinem and Regimen Ecclesiae spectant: Rogat singulos ut non velint insistere
in latinitate, aut phraseologia, sed simpliciter far judicium number quicquid
illa contineatur, quod non sit verbo divine consentaneum.

Sessio 145. 30. Aprilis, stylo novo.] Quaeritur judicium Synodicum de
confessione Belgica: Britanni probant omnia dogmata ipsius, putant nihil in ea
quoad substantiam contineri, quod sacrae paginae repugnet, quaedam minutiora in
ea observabant, sed quae facillime ex collatis exemplaribus in correcta, and
nova quam parant editione emendari possent; moment de tribus capitibus, quae
ordinem Ecclesiasticum spectant, se nullam far sententiam, sed interim putare
se regimen Ecclesiarum suarum esse institutionis Apostolicae: Episcopus autem
Landavensis oratione brevissima contra illa tria praedicta capita perorabat;
contendebatque in Ecclesia neque Apostolorum temporibus, neque postea unquam
fuisse ministrorum aequalitatem: Itaque communi Britannorum consensu declaratum
est, nihil in confessione Belgica contineri, quod pugnaret cum sacra pagina,
aut analogia fidei. Eximus omnes ad funus D. Canteri Senioris Ultrajectini
unius ex deputatis Synodicis. Redimus. Legitur judicium deputatorum a Synodo in
causa Macoviana; cujus summa haec erat; D. Macovium nullius gentilismi,
judaismi, pelagianismi, socinianismi, aut alterius cujuscunque haereseos reum
teneri, immeritoque illum fuisse accusatum; peccasse eum, quod quibusdam
ambiguis, and obscuris Phrasibus scholasticis usus sit, quod scholasticum
docendi modum conetur in Belgicis Academiis introducere, quod eas selegerit
quaestiones disceptandas, quibus gravantur Ecclesiae Belgicae: Monendum esse
eum, ut cum Spiritu Sancto loquatur, non cum Bellarmino aut Suarezio: hoc vitio
vertendum ipsi, quod distinctionem sufficientiae and efficientiae mortis
Christi asseruerit esse futilem; quod negaverit, humanum genus lapsum, esse
objectum praedestinationis; quod dixerit, Deum velle, and decernere peccata;
quod dixerit, Deum nullo modo velle omnium hominum salutem; quod dixerit duas
esse electiones: Iudicant denique liticulam hanc inter D. Sibrandum, and D.
Macovium componendam esse, and deinceps neminem debere eum talium criminum
insimulare.

Sessio 146. eodem die post meridiem.] Pergitur in rogandis suffragiis de
confessione Belgica; an in eadem sint sententia cum Britannis? propter
editionum varietatem petunt, ut exaretur exemplar aliquod unum exactum, ord.
generalium authoritate confirmandum.

Sessio 147. calend. Maii, stylo novo.] D. Gregorius Martinii exponit mentem
Illustriss. ord. general. eandem esse de Catechesi, quae fuerat de confessione;
Rogat itaque Synodum ut de Catechesi quoque Palatino-Belgica velit sententiam
dicere, nec tam methodum, aut Phraseologiam spectare, quam dogmata doctrinalia.
Legitur totus catechismus: Rogantur Synodici, ut ad horam 4. Pomeridianam
parent se ad ferendum collegialia de catechesi perfecta judicia.

Sessio 148. eodem die post meridiem.] Omnium judiciis approbantur dogmata in
eo catechismo comprehensa, ut verbo Dei consentanea, ac pie prudenterque
conscripta; Britanni de interpretatione articuli, de descensu Christi ad
inferos, suam ab aliis Ecclesiam vindicat, aliter explicandi potestatem: Ac
demum propter gravem ab urbe Dordrechtana datam neglecti diei dominici
offensionem, rogant, ac monent Synodum, ut apud Magistratum intercedat, ne
forenses emptiones, apertis mercium officinis eo die exerceri permittant: ea
occasion a quodam ex provincialibus mota quaestio de observatione Sabbathi;
sed non discussa penitus, quia rejecta inter gravamina provincialia post ubi
tunc nostra tractanda.

Sessio 149. 2. Maii, stylo novo.] Gregor. Martinii unus ex politicis
delegatis, Synodo and ordinum mentem exponit de Vorstio, eos nempe mandare, ut
de Theologia ejus fiat summaria ex scriptis cognitio, ac ut eo respiciant
judicia Synodica, utrum doctrina Vorstiana ad Ecclesiae aedificationem faciat,
adeoque talis doctor dignus videatur, qui Cathedram teneat Theologicam:
Scripsit jam tum Vorstius eodem exemplo liter^s ad singula exterorum collegia,
simulque ad Synodum publicas, eaeque perleguntur, in quibus Synodi
aequanimitatem, and Christianam charitatem implorat, suum coram Synodo
comparendi desiderium insinuat, rogat, ut si quid ab ipso liberius fuit
disputatum, veritatis eruendae studio imputetur, ut rationibus ex verbo Dei
petitis convincatur; se paratum esse testatur ad collationem cum Exteris
Theologis in^undam, item ad heresin Socinianam refutandam, si ipsi ea ^andetur
Provincia. Nec posse sibi persuadere comburendos ipsius libros, cum quaedam
Piscatoris scripta long horridiora, and bonis moribus infensiora non sint rogo
addicta.

Lecta hac, epistol^ antiquae nonnullae Vorstii simulatoriae, and vulpinae
pr^sertim circa sui explicationem, ac palinodiam Heidelbergae praestitam
frauds in medium proferuntur; deinde errorum, and blasphemiarum Vorstii
catalogus a Belgicis professoribus collectus Synodo praelegitur ad capita
reductus de Dei attributis, Christique deitate, ab illo partim aperte, partim
clanculum imminutis.

Sessio 150. 3. Maii, stylo novo.] Collegia singula tam exterorum, quam
provincialium suum proferunt de Vorstio judicium scripto exaratum; Britanni
lecta a se collecta praecipuarum Vorstianarum contra divinam naturam
blasphemiarum Synopsi, monenti Vorstium dato hoc scandalo, nunquam tamen in
subsequentibns suis se^ explicationibus, sive defensionibus ullum in suo de Dei
attributis libro propositum errorem agnoscere, sed absurdissimis
distinctiunculis, and inanibus subterfugiis obvelare, imo etiam praecipua
orthodoxae doctrinae fundamenta callide pro viribus suffodere. Se itaque non
modo ipsum Vorstium orthodoxi professoris munere ac nomine indignum judicare,
sed etiam persuadere ne hujusmodi ejus libri in bibliopoliis prostare
permittantur. Denique rogare, ut in exemplum, and in sancti Dei causa zeli
testimonium Vorstii de Deo tractatus summi magistratus jussu, and Synodi
decreto, and palam solenniterque flammis absumatur, simulque hujusmodi infamis
holocausti specimen. A Britannis eorum Synodo legitur authenticum,
procancellarii Cantabrigiensis sigillo munitum, decretum 21. Septembris 1611.
Cujus vi, etiam Serenissimi Regis nostri judicio praeeunte, public flammis
ultricibus expurgatus est liber praedictus: ejusdemque decreti Cantabrigiensis
exemplar inter Synodi acta relatum. Serenissimi Regis, and Cantabrigiensis
intentio se examini subscribere testantur Palatini Theologi, ac Vorstii
palinodiam multis abhinc annis Heidelbergae praestitam, quam fuerat frandulenta
narrant.

Hassiaci etiam commemorant quam fuerat post-modum non modo parum grata, sed
etiam invisa illustrissimo suo domino Landigravio dedicatio sui de Deo libri,
eidem pio Principi nuncupata, quamque prudenter ipsum Vorstium Princeps ille ad
se commendatum ad Cathedram professoriam admittere recusaverat. De Vorstio ut
cathedra indigno exautorando reliqui tum exteri tum provinciales omnes
consentiant; quod autem se obtulerit jam pugilem evocandum contra Socinianos
responsum est, Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis,
Tempus egit --
Vtpote cum ipse Vorstius ad errorum, hereseon curriculum etiam Socianismi sit
suspectissimus, nec ex animo rem gesturus putetur: ac in eo negotio sibi dudum
commisso, nihil prorsus praestiterit.

Sessio 151.4. Maii, stylo novo.] Decretum quoddam Synodicum de Vorstii causa
conceptum legitur and approbandum proponitur: inde nonnulla interpellanda, alia
omittenda, alia explicanda, moventur presertim a Britannis, qui hic urgent
quaedam attribui^ Vorstio, de capite justificationis, de quibus nec dum satis
constat, quid asserat Vorstius, illinc autem omitti alia, aut non satis aperte
damnari, quae maxim blasphema sunt, and Ecclesiae quasi universae Christianae
gravissimum commoverunt offendiculum, ibidem multis agitalum, cum Vorstius
corporis ejusdem resurrectionem neget, aut Christi satisfactionem cum Socino
penitus tollat. Et rei probandae leguntur privatae Vorstii ad Dominum Tollanum
literae pluribus abhinc annis scriptae, in quibus aperte Socinianismum
profitetur. Sed a Britannis responsum judicandum reum ex libris a se agnitis
and publicatis, non ex epistola privata, de qua etiam non constat number ab ipso
conscripta fuerit, constet autem scriptum fuisse ante palinodiam ejus
Heidelbergensem. De libro Vorstii comburendo Synodus non vult statuere, sed ad
summum refert magistratum.

Sessio 152. eodem die post meridiem.] Decretum contra Vorstium denuo
proponitur paulo mutatum, in eo desiderant Britanni plura Dei attributa a
Vorstio impetita recenseri, ac Vorstii de Christi satisfactione and hominis
justificatione sententiam, vel in censura omitti, vel Synodo, ut de co melius
constet, explicari. De his aliisque Vorstianis dogmatibus diu multumque
disceptatur. Tandem consensum est in eam, quae sancita est formam, (quam vide
in altero meo libro Synodico,) qua Vorstius ob suam in suffodiendis praecipuis
fidei fundamentis audaciam and impietatem indignus Cathedra Theologica
judicatur. Optaturque ne ipsius libri de Deo passim volitare permittantur, and
nonnulla speciatim alia quae in codem decreto continentur. Antequam
dimitteretur hic consessus, qui in multam noctem duravit, legitur, and per
plura Synodi suffragia approbatur, sententia deputatorum in causa Macoviana qui
eum ab omni haeresi absolvendum censuerunt; sed monendum, ut Theologiam docendi
modum commodiorem sequatur, verborumque formis ex sacra scriptura petitis
utatur, etiam justam eum reprehensionem incurrere ob quasdam propositiones ab
ipso crudius and rigidius assertas. His itaque ^lam compos^tis, interpellat
Frisius quidam senex nomine Donia, se quod ad ipsum attinet Macovium (qui suum
passus est tacit obvolvi negotium) nihil velle commo^ere: se ipsum autem,
aliosque nonnullos hac in causa laesos, ideoque communi collegarum nomine coram
Synodo protestari salvo jure ut agant contra accusatores, parts autem
accusatorias domino, Sibrando esse demandatas, constare ex literis quibusdam
publicis, quas e sinu deprompsit, ac coram Synodo legi postulavit:
increbescenti hac in expostulatione plurium fervori, ac multiloquio, modum
imponunt Delegati politici malleo suo, quo mos est silentium obstrepentibus
imperare. Denique Praeses ad Synodum refert diem lunae proximum Canonibus in
majore urbis Templo publicandis destinatum esse, and sic conventus dimittitur.

Sessio 153. 6. Maii, stylo novo.] Convenimus primum in loco Synodali, ubi erat
spectatorum nobilium and aliorum, utriusque sexus maximus confluxus: Praeses
solennem precationem concipit, qua hodierno negotio faustum successum vovet:
auditorium dimittitur: paulo post, singuli Synodici non sine decora pompa a
loco Synodali ad magnum Templum per plateas Dordrechtanas pergunt, undique
cincti numerosis spectatoribus, incedebant autem Synodici bini, hoc ordine;
primo incedebant illustrissimi ordines Generales Delegati quos sequebatur
ipsorum Secretarius D. Heinsius: postea sequuti sunt D. Episcopus Landavensis,
and D. Praeses Synodi ipsi a sinistra, dein reliqui omnes Theologi Exteri,
secundum loca ipsis in Synodo designata; Exteros sequebantur D. assessores and
scribae; post illos D. professores Belgici, and post ipsos reliqui provinciales
Theologi, secundum illum quo in Synodi sedebant ordinem. In templum devenimus
capacissimum and splendidum, quod tamen nigenti auditorum numero fuit
repletissimum, inter quos fuerunt complurimi nobiles and Generosi, in utroque
sexu, cum ex Belgico, tum etiam ex aliis nationibus: occuparunt Synodici loca
sua in choro templi ubi tota haec solennitas peragebatur; a part dextra
considebant, primum D. Praeces Ecclesiasticus, post eum D. Assessores and
scribae, post illos D. Episcopus, reliquique deinceps secundum ordinem
Synodicum; Theol. Exteri, in loco editiori and satis commodo; in scamnis
inferioribus considebant illust. ord. Gener. delegati; post illos D.
Professores Belgici. D. Praeses singulis suo ordine jam collocatis, ex pulpito
ibi extructo commodissime sito ad partem chori occidentalem adeoque in ipsa
Templi medietate, ubi possit commodissime a confertissima corona exaudiri,
solennitatem auspicatus est precatione valde prolixa, sed pientissima and
appositissima, cujus prior pars and multo longior fuit ex solis scripturarum
sen^entiis, cum summa elegantia, and judicio contexta, planeque concinnata ad
venerandum antiquitatis stylum^ legebat eam ex Schedulis descriptis, duravitque
per horae dimidium, postea sine ullo praefamine narrat quam brevissime
auditorio indictum fuisse hunc solennem conventum, ut omnes jam tandem fructum
laborum Synodicorum perciperent, audirentque praelectos illos canones, quos tot
tantisque laboribus exantlatis, immenso Dei beneficio, and suavissima omnium ac
singulorum conspiratione, veneranda Synodus conceperat, ac efformaverit.

Itaque D. Dammannus unus ex scribis Synodicis, in idem pulpitum ascendit, ac
primum praelegit prooemium quod canonibus praefigitur: quo praelecto, D.
Praeses monet omnes auditores ut ex more recepto, singuli velint hodiernam
laetitiam, and suam divinae majestati gratitudinem testari erogando eleemosynam
pauperibus: quam diaconi quidam Ecclesiae Dordrechtanae ad id muneris designati
colligebant, proculdubio satis amplam: neminem enim observavimus qui manum suam
front hilari non porrigebat. Redit ad pulpitum D. Dammannus and aggreditur
ipsorum Canonum praelectionem: lectis articulis primi capitis contraversi,
propter templi magnitudinem, and spissas frequentissimi auditorii animas,
deficere incipiebat ipsum vox, itaque D. Festus Hommius alter scriba Synodicus
pulpitum conscendit, legitque Canones de secundo, tertio and quarto articulis;
and voce ipsum quoque ob praedictas causas deficiente, rediit D. Dammannus,
legitque canones de quinto articulo, and Epilogum Synodicum, quibus finitis
legit quoque singulorum subscriptiones, singuli ad nomina sua audita fidem
canonum apertione capitis testabantur; postea legit quoque idem scriba Synodi
censuram personalem de Remonstrantibus, cui non additae erant singulorum
Syngraphae, eo quod quidam ex Exteris noluerint de hominum personis sed tantum
de ipsorum doctrina aliquid statuere.

Post omnia lecta, legebatur quoque testimonium D. Delegatorum, quo testantur
se interfuisse dum isthaec agerentur, omniaque quae jam praelecta fuerant
optima side relata fuisse; quod singuli una cum D. Heinsio ipsorum secretario,
suis Syngraphis comprobant: monet porr^ D. Praeses, confessionem and catechesin
Belgicam esse quoque a Synodo comprobatas; and sic concludit cum precatione and
gratiarum action; ejusdem plane styli cum priori and fere paris prolixitatis.
Post absolutam totam solennitatem pulsantur Organa, and sic omnes Synodici
domum redeunt ad locum Synodicum eodem plane ordine quo venerant; Ibi dominus
Praeses monet jam omnia negotia Synodica, quae poscerent opem Exterorum
Theologorum, absoluta esse; Ideoque monet ut singula collegia duos mittant qui
ad horam quartam pomeridianam incipiant describere canones, quibus postea
subscribant ipse cum Assessoribus and scribis, ut sic singula collegia habeant
exemplar authenticum asservandum in perpetuam rei memoriam: brevi precatione
Synodum dimittit.

Sessio 154. and ultima, 9. Maii, stylo vovo.] D. Praeses movet hunc ultimum
Synodi conventum celebrari ad agendum Deo gratias pro exoptatissimo Synodi
exitu, porroque ad agendas gratias Theologis Exteris pro gravissimis laboribus
susceptis: Gregorius Martini unus ex Delegatis primo precationem habet
suavissimam and justae prolixitatis qua Deo gratias agit pro asserenda
religionis puritate in Ecclesiis Belgicis, opera and consiliis hujus Synodi,
precaturque iisdem Ecclesiis in veritate hic asserta invictam constantiam.
Precatione finita, oratione eleganti Theologos Exteros compellat, nomine
Illustriss. ord. genesis singulis gratias rependit pro saluberrimis ipsorum
consiliis, and gravissimis laboribus quibus hoc tempore Ecclesias Belgicas
sublevassent, itidem and ingentibus illis principibus, Rebus-publicis,
Magistratibus qui ipsos delegassent, nominatim ipsos cum summa observantia
recensendo; rogatque ut Ecclesias Belgicas ipsorum celsitudinibus curarent fore
commendatissimas: rogat ut singuli praesentes persuadeant sibi de prolixissimo
ord. genesis erga ipso animo, utque ante discessum Hagam comitis petant,
referantque ab illustriss. ord. genesis gratias, and porro ad principes and
Respublicas suas literas dimissorias.

D. Praeses Ecclesiasticus oratione pia commemorat Dei beneficia in Ecclesiam
suam saepius lapsentem, applicatione facta ad Ecclesias Belgicas praedicat
mediata illa instrumenta quibus Deus ad hanc rem usus fuerat, cum primis Regem
magnae Britanniae, deinde reliquos principes and Magistratus nominatim, qui huc
Theologos ^uos misissent: deinde omnes and singulos Theologos Exteros hic
praesentes, quibus omnia fausta and coelestes benedictiones comprecatur,
Iubetque ipsos esse persuafissimos eorum memoriam fore hic in aeternum
suavissimam; primum Theologi Britanni singuli orationibus brevibus and
succinctis, Deo agunt gratias de Synodi tam foelici successu, D. Delegatis and
fratribus Belgis ob singularem humanitatem, Deum rogant ut velit Ecclesias
Belgicas semper foelices esse and pacatas: Idem praestiterunt palatini per
dominum Scultetum; Idem Ha^^^aci per D. Crucigerum; Idem Helvetii per D.
Brittingerum; Idem Nassovici per D. Alstedium; Idem Genevenses singuli; Idem
Bremenses, per D. Martinium; Idem Embdani singuli, sed uterque prolixissime,
itaque omnes Exteri vota sua nuncupassent. Praeses Synodo piissima and
Gratulatoria precatione sinem imposuit; Tum, primum D. Delegati, dein D.
Praeses, dein D. Assessores and scribae, dein singuli Synodici Belgae loca suae
relinquentes singulos Theologos Exteros ordine datis dextris and adjunctis
votis humanissime salutant; atque sic Sessio haec auditoribus frequentissima,
adeoque ipsa Synodus Dordrechtana, cum summis gratulationibus, and maxima
animorum laetitiae ob speratum finem, and moerore ob corporum divulstonem Q. F.
F. Q. sic dimissa est.

Nomina Remonstrantium Citatorum ad Synodum Dordrechtanam.
Ex Geldria;
HEnricus Leo, Pastor Bommeliensis. Bernezus Wezekius, Pastor Echteltanus.
Henricus Holdingerus, Pastor Graviensis.
Ex Hollandia Australi;
Simon Episcopius, Professor Theologiae in Academia Leydensi. Adrianus Bozzius,
Pastor Leydensis. Joannes Arnoldi, Pastor Leydensis. Nicolaus Grevinchovius,
Pastor Roterodamensis. Edvardus Poppius, Pastor Gaudensis. Theophilus
Ryckwardus, Pastor Brielanus.
Ex Hollandia Boreali;
Joannes Geysteranus, Pastor Al'mazianus. Dominicus Sapma, Pastor Hornanus.
Ex Provincia Transisulana;
Thomas Goswinius, Pastor Campensis. Assuerus Mathisius, Pastor Campensis.
Ex Ecclesiis Gallo-belgicis;
Carolus Niellius, Pastor Ultrajectinus. Simon Goulartius, Pastor
Amstelodamensis. Utenbogardus, Vltra-ject. Corvinus, Vltra-ject. Duinghonius,
Vltra-ject. Pinakerus, Vltra-ject. Neranus, Vltra-ject. Isaacus Frederici,
Vltra-ject.
Errores Arminii contra receptam Protestantium doctrinam, ex ejus declaratione
ad Ordines, Apologia adversus quosdam Articulos, Responsione ad novem
quaestiones, examine Perkinsii, excerpti.
1. PRimum, in genere, quod Arminius in negotio Religionis quaedam innovare,
and receptam Protestantium doctrinam impugnare molitus sit, ipse satis clare
indicat in Declaratione suae sententiae ad Ordines. Nam ipse sibi, libro citato
p. 14. Orthodoxorum nomine objiciens, Potuisses (antehac) turbarum evitandarum
causa, partimque ut quam plurimis Ministris satisfaceres, quicquid in toto
Religionis negotio sentires, aperte atque nude profiteri apud confratres tuos,
ut aut tu mature institui rectius potuisses, aut illi ad collationem mutuam
tempestive se parare potuissent; Respondet p. 15. Metuebam ut talis mea
sententia pro suggestu in Templis atque Academicis disputationibus
exagitaretur, atque refutaretur -- and ad exteras Ecclesias atque Academias
transmitteretur, spe sententiae condemnatoriae adversus eam obtinendae.

Quare metuebas haec, nisi sententia tua nova esset, and receptae in vestris
and exteris Ecclesiis atque Academiis doctrinae adversaretur? Porro p. 66.
ejusdem Declarationis, putat, aequum esse, and in hoc rerum statu ( nempe
Belgicis Ecclesiis per ipsum turbatis) etiam necessarium plane -- ut in Synodo
nationali Confessio Belgica, Harmoniae confessionum, publico consensu a
Belgicis and Gallicanis Ecclesiis approbatae insertae, and Catechismus
Heidelbergensis ab iisdem and aliis reformatis Ecclesiis receptus, examini
subjiciatur. Et Orthodoxis p. 72. excipientibus, ex eo confusiones, scandala,
destructiones conscientiarum, in Ecclesiis irrisiones, calumnias, and
criminationes exorituras: Respondet p. 73. Committi non debet, quo minus
Doctrina semel recepta examini subjiciatur, ut ut etiam vel maxim metus esset,
turbas inde extituras, malevolos id ludificaturos, quinimo vero in rem suam
quam maxim versuros.

2. Secundo, Particularia capita Doctrinae Fidei, quae innovare studuit, haec
fere sunt. 1. De statu bonorum Angelorum, eorumque in bono confimatione. 2.
Perseverantia sanctorum. 3. Providentia Dein in genere. 4. Praedestinatione and
Reprobatione. 5. Gratiae amplitudine. 6. Gratiae efficacia. 7. De viribus
Liberi Arbitrii. 8. Peccato Originali. 9. De Fidelibus veteris Testamenti.

1. De Angelis.] In dubium vocat, an Angeli sint nunc beati, and in bono
confirmati? in Apologia ad quosdam Articulos p. 135. ubi asserit, Patrum and
Scholasticorum Argumenta -- non sibi videri illud robur habere, ut aliis id
credendum tanquam Articulum Fidei praescribere jure possint. Deinde ista
argumenta sigillatim solvit. 2. De perseverantia sanctorum.] Fideles nonnulli
deficiunt a fide finaliter -- ergo etiam deficiunt illi a salute. In Apologia
ad quosd. Artic. page 86. De side vero, quae qualitas est and potentia
credendi, dicit Apostolus, nonnullos amissa bona conscientia circa Fidem
nausragium secisse. In Respons. ad 9. quaest. page 176. 3. De providentia Dei
in gen.] 3. Quod vero res, quae respectu secundarum causarum contingenter fit,
necessario sieri dicitur respectu Decreti divini, id non modo perperam, sed and
imperite dicitur. In Apolog. p. 94. assignat rationem in examine p. 138. Fieri
nequit, ut unus idemque effectus partim contingenter, partimque necessario
existat, qu^^unque tandem respectu. Ex quibus necessario inferatur, omnia, quae
contingenter accidunt respectu causarum secundarum, contingenter quoque evenire
respectu primae causae Dei Opt. Max. 4. De Praedestinatione and Reprobatione.]
In Responsione ad 9. quaestiones page 173. docet, Fidem priorem esse electione,
qua decretum aliqnom solvendi significat. Hinc in exam. page 32. electionem sic
definit; Electio est decretum Dei, quo apud se ab aeterno statuit fideles in
Christo justificare, and ad vitam aeternam acceptare, ad laudem gloriosae
gratiae suae. Et in Apolog. p. 89, 90. Statuit Fidem non esse hujus electionis
effectum, sed necessarium requisitum in iis, qui salutis secundum Dei
electionem participes sunt.

P. Martyr in cap. 9. ad Roman. ex Protestantium sententia docet, in Decreto
Reprobationis duo esse proposita: propositum non miserendi, and quosdam homines
in statu peccati deserendi; and propositum ordinandi hominem peccatorem ad
poenam, illudque nullam causam habere praeter merum Dei beneplacitum. Contra,
Arminius, page 85. exam. repetens ex Perkinsio definitionem Decreti
Reprobationis, his verbis: Decretum Reprobationis est opus Divinae
providentiae, quo Deus decrevit certos homines praeterire quoad gratiam
supernaturalem, etc. Mox subjicit. Scriptura nulla agnoscit, hominum a Deo
factam Reprobationem, nisi cujus causa meritoria sit peccatum. Et rursum, page
205. Statum controversiae de Reprobatione inter se and Perkinsium his terminis
proponit. Quaeritur -- An Deus ullum hominem reprobaverit citra respectum
peccati tanquam causae meritoriae? An ulli homini gratiam remissionis and
renovationis negare statuerit citra considerationem indignitatis, qua se illa
indignum fecit: indignitatis ( inquam) non ex primo peccato existentis, sed ex
gratiae istius oblatae rejectione and contemptu.

5. De gratiae amplitudine.] Verbum praedicatum junctant semper sibi habet
Spiritus Sancti operationem (Examine. p. 57.) -- and Reprobationis decreto,
reprobis, qui externa praedicatione ad fidem^^ poenitentiam vocantur, Gratia
sufficiens ( qua possunt credere and converti page 57.) qua credere and
converti possunt si vellent p. 58.) non negatur, p. 58. Rationem reddit in
Respons. ad. 9. quaest. p. 175. Deus non potest ullo jure Fidem in Christum
postulare ab homine lapso, quam exse habere non potest, nisi aut dederit, aut
dare paratus sit Gratiam sufficientem, qua credere possit, si velit.

Praeterea eandem Doctrinam de-lege tradit; viz. aut sufficientem Gratiam
omnibus hominibus in statu peccati dari ad implendam legem; aut neminem ad
legem implendam obligari. Eum in hac haeresi esse indicat sequens ejus
raticcinatio, (p. 252. exam.) Duplex est postulatum legis; obedienta vel poena:
unde and duplex est satisfactio legis; una quae praestatur obedientia lege
praescripta; altera, qua solvitur poena a lege inobedientiae posita: qui
alterum solvit, ille a legis altero postulato immunis est: Qui itaque poenam
solvit lege positam, ille immunis ab obligatione obedientiae praestandae. Cum
igitur poena posita inobedientiae, ( in Adamo and primis parentibus, Exam. p.
251.) in se comprehendat privationem illius gratiae ( in ejus posteris Exam. p.
251.) sine qua lex praestari nequit; ejus posteri orbati gratia, sine qua lex
impleri non potest, duplici jure immunes sunt ab obligatione obedientiae; tum
quia poenam passi sunt debitam, tum quia destituti viribus ad legem implendam.
Quare, p. 253. concludit: Si vult Deus obedientiae actum postulare, tenetur
restituere gratiam, sinc qua actus non est praestabilis.

6. De Gratiae efficacia.] Protestantium sententiam de Gratiae efficacia a
Zanchio. lib. de Redemp. c. 7. habemus explicatam his verbis. Humana voluntas,
cum incipit regenerari, Gratiam sibi essicaciter oblatam, inque se immissam,
licet suapte natura possit rejicere, propter tamen efficaciam Spiritus, and
firmam Dei voluntatem non potest, Deoque regenerare volenti, non ita valet
reluctari, ut non regeneretur. Verum Arminii p. 133. assertio est, Quod manet
semper in potestate liberi Arbitrii Gratiam datam rejicere, and subsequentem
repudiare; quia Gratia non est Omnipotens Dei actio, cui resisti ab hominibus
libero arbitrio non possit. 7. De Viribus liberi Arbitrii.] Docet hominem been
utentem donis naturae posse consequi Gratiam. Quod aequivalet fer^
scholasticorum dogmati, Homo faciens, quod in se est, meretur primam Gratiam de
congruo. Verum ipsi Iesuitae agnoscunt, has assertiones errores esse Cassiani,
Fausti, Semipelagianorum, quos Prosper refutavit: and ideo Bellarminus nervosis
argume^^is demonstravit, Non posse hominem solis naturae viribus ad gra^^am
recipiendam se ullo modo praeparare. Tamen Arminius, Exam. p. 218. non veretur
affirmare, isto dicto Christi, Habenti dabitur, Promissionem contineri, qua
Deus spondet, se gratia supernaturali eum illuminaturum, qui lumine naturali
recte utitur, vel saltem utetur quantum poterit, minus male. Et rursum p. 259.
loquens de hominibus Christi cognitione destitutis, and tamen non sine naturali
testimonio de Deo, qualis est aliqua veritas illis patefacta de Dei potentia
and bonitate, lex naturae eorum mentibus insculpta, ait; his bonis si recte usi
fuissent, saltem ex conscientia, majorem ipsis gratiam concessurus fuisset,
secundum illud, Habenti dabitur. Et page eadem, docens omnes homines vocari per
naturalem Dei testificationem, per creaturas in quibus Deum palpamus, per
veritatem innatam, quam detinemus in injustitia, legis in mentes inscriptione,
secundum quam habent cogitationes ipsos accusantes; page 260. subjicit: Haec
vocatio, quanquam salutaris non est, utpote ex qua salus immediate obtinerie
non potest, tamen praecedanea potest dici salutari, quae ipsam recte usurpatam
ex Dei misericordia sit consecutura. Ex hoc errore Arminii Semipelagiano, alius
pullulat; viz. opera non-renatorum a viribus naturae profecta placere Deo, cum
illa gratia donat: non enim donat gratia opera sibi non placentia. Atque hoc
videtur Arminius in Resp. ad 9. quaest. p. 174. concedere cum ha^ limitatione.
Placent ex Dei benignitate, non sua excellentia. 8. De peccato originali.]
Cujusdam Ministri Belgici nomine, hoc dogmate proposito in Apolog. p. 117.
Peccatum originale neminem damnaturum, and tribus rationibus ejusdem Ministri
nomine, ad hoc probandum adjectis, fatetur has rations esse tanti momenti, ut
qui contrarium statuit, illas confutare debere, antequam possunt alicui notam
haerese^s impingere, p. 118. and deinde p. 119. respondet authoritatibus Patrum
contrarium asserentium. Verum, quod alterius nomine in Apolog. dubie proponit,
in Respon. ad 9. quaest. proprio nomine clare enunciat. Perverse dicitur (
inquit Arminius) Originale Peccatum reum mortis facere, quum peccatum illud sit
Poena peccati actualis Adami, quam poenam praecedit reatus mortis. Imo in
Apolog. p. 169. verba faciens de peccato originali, videtur negare peccatum
orig. in se esse peccatum. Non nego inquit peccatum esse, sed nego esse actuale
peccatum -- Nam distinguendum est inter peccatum actuale, and illud quod est
causa aliorum peccatorum, and eo ipso peccati nomine censetur. Quibus non
obscure inquit, peccatum originale, non tam in se, quam quod peccati causa sit,
peccatum dici. 9. De Fidelibus Vet. Testam.] In dubium vocat^, an fideles sub
Veteri Testamento intellexerint Ceremonias legales fuisse typos Christi, in
Apol. p. 113. Loca (inquit) quae id probare videntur, tam speciosa ab
adversariis ipsis eripiuntur, ut qui non solent assentiri, nisi been probatis,
facile ad dubitandum induci possint, An Fideles sub veteri Testamento rei
notitiam habuerint?

Hi sunt Arminii Errores, ex quibus plures alii veluti consectaria necessario
emergunt; Hunc tamen Remonstrantes pium and fidelem Christi Jesu servum
appelant.


Sententia Remonstrantium, quam in conscientia sua verbo Dei consentaneam esse
arbitrati sunt, and hactenus etiamnum arbitrantur circa primum de
Praedestinatinis Decreto articulum, haec est;
1. DEus non decrevit quenquam ad vitam aeternam eligere, aut ab eadem
reprobare, ordine priusquam eundem creare decreverit, citra illius vel
obedientiae vel inobedientiae antecedentis intuitum, pro beneplacito suo, ad
demonstrandam gloriam misericordiae and justitiae suae, vel potestatis and
dominii absoluti.

2. Quum decretum Dei de cujusque Hominis tum salute, tum exitio non sit
decretum finis absolute intenti; sequitur neque eidem decreto subordinata esse
media talia, per quae ad finem destinatum tum electi, tum reprobi efficaciter
and inevitabiliter perducantur.

3. Quare nec Deus hoc consilio creavit in uno Adamo omnes homines in recto
statu; non ordinavit lapsum, ejusque permissionem; non subtraxit Adamo gratiam
necessariam, and sufficientem; non procurat Evangelium praedicari, homines
externe vocari: non aufert illis ulla dona Spiritus Sancti ut ista media
essent, per quae eorum aliquos ad vitam perducat, alios vitae beneficio
destitueret: Christus Mediator non solum Executor electionis, sed ipsius
decreti electionis sundamentum: quod alii efficaciter vocantur, justificantur,
in fide perseverant, glorificatur, causa non est quod absolute ad vitam
aeternam sint electi; neque quod alii in lapsu deserantur, Christus iis non
detur prorsus, aut inefficaciter, indurentur, damnentur, causa non est quod a
salute aeterna absolute sint reprobati.

4. Deus non decrevit sine intervenientibus peccatis actualibus, multo maximam
partem hominum ab omni spe salutis seclusam in lapsu relinquere.

5. Deus ordinavit ut Christus sit Propitiatio pro totius mundi peccatis, and
vi istius decreti statuit credentes in ipsum justificare and salvare,
hominibusque media ad fidem necessaria administrare, ea ratione quam novit suam
sapientiam and justitiam decere. Nequaquam autem destinavit, ex vi Decreti,
solis electis Christum Mediatorem dare, eosdemque solos side per vocationem
efficacem donare, justificare, in fide conservare, and glorificare.

6. Nec a vita aeterna, nec a mediis ad eam sufficientibus ullus rejectus est
absoluto aliquo antecedente decreto, sed ut meritum Christi, vocatio, ominiaque
dona Spiritus prodesse ad salutem omnibus possint, and revera prosint, nisi ea
ipsi in exitium sibi eorundem abusu vertant: ad incredulitatem autem and
peccata tanquam media and causas Damnationis nemo destinatus est.

7. Electio singularium personarum peremptoria est ex consideratione Fidei in
Jesum Christum, and perseverantiae; non autem citra: considerationem fidei and
perseverantiae in vera fide, tanquam conditionis in eligendo praerequisitae.

8. Reprobatio a vita aeterna facta est secundum considerationem^ antecedaneae
infidelitatis and perseverantiae in infidelitate; non autem citra
considerationem antecedaneae infidelitaetis, and perseverantiae in infidelitate.

9. Omnes fidelium Liberi sunt in Christo sanctificati, ita ut nullus eorum
ante usum rationis ex hac vita decedens pereat; Nequaquam autem in reproborum
numero censentur etiam nonnulli fidelium Liberi in infantia sua ante ullum
actuale peccatum in propria persona commissum ex hac vita decedentes, adeo ut
nec sacrum Lavacrum baptismi, nec preces Ecclesiae ipsis ullo modo ad salutem
prodesse possint.

10. Nulli fidelium Liberi Baptisati in nomine Patris, Filii and Spiritus in
infantiae suae statu viventes absoluto decreto reprobatis ascribuntur.

Sententia Remonstrantium de secundo Articulo, qu^^ est, de Vniversalitate
meriti mortis Christi.
1. PRetium redemptionis, quod Christus Deo Patri suo obtuli^^ non tan^um in
se, and per se toti generi humano Redimendo sufficiens est, fed etiam pro
omnibus and singulis hominibus, ex decreto, voluntate, and gratia Dei Patris
persolutum est; eoque a participatione fructuum mortis Christi nemo absoluto
and antecedente decreto exclusus est.

2. Christus merito mortis suae Deum Patrem universo generi humano hactenus
Reconciliavit; ut Pater propter illius meritum, salva, justitia, and veritate
sua, novum gratiae foedus cum peccatoribus and damnationi obnoxiis inire and
sancire potuerit and voluerit.

3. Etsi Christus ominibus and singulis hominibus Reconciliationem cum Deo and
remissionem peccatorum promeruerit: nemo tamen secundum novi and gratiosi
foederis pactum aliter quam per fidem beneficiorum mortis Christi, reipsa fit
particeps; nec peccata peccatoribus remittuntur, antequam actu and vere in
Christum credant.

4. Credere Christum pro se mortuum esse ii soli tenentur, pro quibus Christus
mortuus est. Reprobi vero, (quos vocant) pro quibus Christus mortuus non sit,
nec ad istam fidem obligari, nec propter incredulitatem contrariam just
damnari possunt; quin si tales reprobi essent, ii credere tenerentur Christum
pro se mortuum non esse.

Sententia Remonstrantium circa tertium and quartum Articulos, de Gratia Dei,
and Conversione hominis.
1. HOmo salvisicam fidem non habet ex se nec ex liberi arbitrii viribus,
quandoquidem in statu peccati, nihil boni (quod quidem salutare bonum sit,
cujusmodi imprimis salvifica fides est) ex se, and a se potest cogitare, velle,
and facere; sed necesse est ut a Deo in Christo per Spiritum ipsius Sanctum
regeneretur, atque renovetur in intellectu, voluntate, affectu, omnibusque
viribus, ut salutaria bona recte possit intelligere, meditari, velle, atque
perficere.

2. Gratiam autem Dei statuimus non tantum esse principium, sed etiam
progressum and complementum omnis boni, adeo ut nec ipse quidem regenitus
absque praecedente, and praeveniente ista, excitante, prosequente, and
cooperante gratia bonum cogitare, velle, atque agere possit, ullisve ad malum
tentationibus resistere: ita ut omnia bona opera actionesque (quas quis
cogitando potest assequi) gratiae Dei ascribendae sint.

3. Nec tamen credimus zelum omnem, curam, and studium ad obtinendum salutem
adhibitum ante ipsam fidem, and Spiritum renovationis, vanum atque irritum;
quinimo noxium magis homini esse quam utile: sed contra statuimus, audire
verbum Dei, dolere de peccato commiss^, expetere gratiam salutarem, and
Spiritum Renovationis, (quorum tamen nihil citra gratiam homo potest) non modo
noxium non esse, and inutile: sed potius utilissimum, and quam maxim
necessarium ad obtinendam sidem, and Spiritum Renovationis.

4. Voluntas in statu lapsus, ante vacationem non habet potentiam and
libertatem ullum bonum, quod salutare sit volendi, ideoque libertatem volendi
tam bonum salutare quam malum, in omni statu voluntati adesse negamus.

5. Gratia. efficax, qua quis convertitur, non est irresistibilis; and ita
licet voluntatem afficiat verbo and Spiritus sui operatione interna, Deus, ut
and potentiam credendi sive vires supernaturales conferat, and hominem actu
credere faciat, tamen potuit homo ex se gratiam istam aspernari, and non
credere, eoque etiam sua culpa perire.

6. Quanquam pro liberrima Dei voluntate maxima sit Gratiae divinae disparitas,
tamen spiritus sanctus tantum gratiae omnibus and singulis, quibus verbum fidei
praedicatur, consert, aut confer paratus est, quanta ad promovendam suis
gradibus hominum conversionem sufficit, eoque gratia sufficiens ad fidem and
conversionem non tantum iis obtingit, quos juxta decretum absolutae electionis
salvare velle dicitur Deus, verum etiam iis, qui actu ipso non convertuntur.

7. Homo per gratiam spiritus sancti potest plus benefacere, quam reipsa facit,
and plus mali omittere quam reipsa omittit: Nec credimus Deum simpliciter
nolle, ut homo plus boni faciat, quam facit, and mali omittat, quam omittit,
ac, ut utrumque ab aeterno sic fiat praecise decrevisse.

8. Quoscunque Deus vocat ad salutem, serio vocat, hoc est eum sincera, and
minime simulata salvandi voluntate; nec eorum assentimur sententiae, qui
statuunt Deum externe quosdam vocare, quos interne vocare, hoc est vere
conversos nolit, etiam ante rejectam vocationis gratiam.

9. Non est in Deo voluntas istiusmodi arcana, quae revelatae ejusdem in verbo
voluntati sic contraveniat, ut secundum eam, arcanam scil. nolit conversionem,
and salutem maximae partis eorum, quos verbo Evangelii, and revelata voluntate
ad sidem and salutem serio vocat, neque hic ut quidam loquuntur, sanctam
simulationem, aut duplicem personam in Deo agnoscimus.

10. Nec credimus Deum Reprobos (quos vocant) hos in fines vocare, ut magis
induret, ut excusationem adimat, ut gravius puniat, ut (...) eorum ostendat;
non autem ut convertantur, credant, salventur.

11. Verum non est ex vi and efficacia arcanae voluntatis, sen decreti divini
omnia non bona tantum, sed and mala necessario fieri; adeo ut quicunque
peccant, respectu decreti divini non possint non peccare; Deum velle,
decernere, procurare hominum peccata, eorumque opera insana, stulta, crudelia,
and sacrilegam sui nominis blasphemiam, movere linguas hominum ad blasphemandum
se.

12. Falsum quoque et horrendum nobis est, Deum ad peccata, quae palam
prohibet, occulta ratione homines impellere; peccantes non agere contra
voluntatem Dei veram, and proprie dictam: Consentaneum esse voluntati Dei, quod
injustum est, hoc est, quod praecepto ejus contrarium est, quinimo veram and
capitalem culpam esse, facere Dei voluntatem.

Sententia Remonstrantium circa quintum Articulum De Perseverantia.
1. PErseverantia fidelium in fide non est effectum illius absoluti decreti quo
Deus singulares personas nulla condition obedientiae circumscriptas elegisse
dicitur.

2. Deus vere fideles grantia and viribus supernaturalibus instruit, quantum ad
perseverandum, and Diaboli, carnis ac mundi tentationes superandum pro infinita
sua sapientia sufficere judicat, nec per Deum unquam stat, quo minus
perseverent.

3. Vere fideles possunt a vera fide excidere, and in istiusmodi prolabi
pecoata, quae cum vera, and justisicante fide consistere non possint: nec
potest hoc tantum fieri, sed and non rare fit.

4. Vere fideles possunt sua culpa in scelera atrocia incidere, in visdem
perseverare, and mori, and proinde finaliter excidere and perire.

5. Neque tamen credimus vere fideles, etiamsi in gravia and conscientiam
vastantia peccata nonnunquam incidant, protinus omni spe resipiscentiae
excidere, sed fieri posse agnoscimus ut Deus fecundum multitudinem
misericordiarum suarum cos rursus per gratiam suam ad resipiscentiam revocet,
quinimo non infrequenter id evenisse credimus, etiamsi de eo, quod hoc certo
and indubie suturum persuasissimi esse nequeant.

6. Itaque haec sequentia dogmata, quae scriptis publicis in vulgus sparguntur
indies, ut pietati and bonis moribus noxia toto animo rejicimus. viz. 1. Vere
fideles non posse deliberato consilio peccare; sed tantum ex ignorantia and
insirmitate. 2. Vere fideles per nulla peccata a gratia Dei excidere posse. 3.
Mill peccata, etiam omnia peccata totius mundi, electionem irritam facere non
posse. Cui si addatur, omnes omnino homines teneri credere, se electos esse ad
salutem, and proinde ex electione illa excidere non posse; quantam illud
securitati carnali fenestram aperiat, cogitandum relinquimus. 4. Fidelibus and
electis, nulla peccata, ut ut magna and gravia esse possunt, imputari; quia
omnia praesentia and futura jam remissa sint. 5. Vere fideles in haereses
exitiales, in atrocissima peccata, uti sunt adulteria, and homicidia prolapsos,
propter quae ecclesia, juxta institutionem Christi, cogatur testari se ipsos in
externa sua communione non posse tolerare, illosque non habituros partem ullam
in regno Christi, nisi convertantur, non posse tamen a fide totaliter, nec
finaliter excidere.

7. Vere fidelis, uti pro tempore praesenti de fidei and conscientiae suae
integritate certus esse potest, ita and de salute sua, and salutiferae Dei erga
ipsum benevolentia pro illo tempore certus esse potest ac debet, and hic
pontificiorum sententiam improbamus.

8. Vere fidelis pro tempore futuro certus quidem esse potest, ac debet se
mediantibus vigiliis aliisque sanctis exercitiis in vera fide perseverare
posse, nec ad perseverandum unquam illi defuturam gratiam divinam. Sed quomodo
certus esse possit se officio suo in posterum nunquam defuturum, sed in fidei,
pietatis, and charitatis actionibus, uti fidelem decet, perseveraturum, in hac
militiae Christianae Schola, non videmus: nec ut hac de re certus sit fidelis
necessarium esse arbitramur.

Reverendissimi Patres ac Fratres, habetis sententiae nostrae quoad reliquos
quatuor articulos propositionem; quam propugnare, and ei contrariam, quae quoad
maximam Thesium supradictarum partem Contra-remonstrantium est, oppugnare
parati sumus: and isthac ratione, ut eam porro explicemus, and defendamus,
quantum possumus, and necessarium judicabimus, veritatis ipsius, gloriae
divinae, conscientiae nostrae, and aedisicationis ecclesiarum nostrarum
interesse putamus.

Most Reverend and very good Lord,
WE have sent to your Grace by this Bearer the things that have passed since
the 24. of November. We have been held here with matters which we looked not
for: long expecting the coming of the Remonstrants. They came to the Synod the
26. of November. we were in great expectation at their coming, to come to the
points in question. But many delays have been made by them, and in seeking
matters of delay, they moved two things: with the one they encumbered the Synod;
with the other they encumbered themselves. The first was, their protestation
against the Synod, holding it for no lawful judge of their controversies; for
which they gave two special reasons. First, because it was for the most part
Schismatical; secondly, it consisted of such as were their Adversaries, and
therefore ought to be no Judges. To these reasons the foreign Divines were
entreated to answer in writing. The answers which we gave, we have sent to your
Grace by this Bearer. The thing wherein they encumbered themselves, was, upon
the first speech of Episcopius in the Synod: which speech he was willed to
deliver to the Synod. The Delegates that were present, required also, that it
should be given with their names subscribed, which was done; but in delivering
of it, Episcopius required, that either the same (...), or at least the (...)
thereof might be restored to him, because he had not another copy. This was
generally taken to be his answer, but when it was found, that he had another
copy thereof, this was not well taken, and he was thereof admonished, which
bred some quesion. This being ended, they were brought with much ado to set
down their sentence of the first Article of the five; which sentence as they
have set it down, we have sent to your Grace. This is all that is yet done. The
French Divines have been long expected, and yet are expected. Thus with our
Prayers we commend your Grace to Gods blessed protection, and rest

Dordrecht December. 6. 1618. Your Graces bound in all Duties. George Landaven.
Ios. Hall. Ioh. Davenant. Samuel Ward.


Most Reverend and my very good Lord,
THe things which heretofore we have been encumbered with, did not yield me a
just occasion to write to your Grace. Of late more occasions have risen.
November. 26. the Remonstrants came first into the Synod, Episcopius made a long
speech, among other things he declared that they offered a Petition to the
States, entreating that they might have Grevinchovius and Gonlartius joined to
them, which the States denied. It was declared that day in the Synod that
Grevinchovius was deposed by the Church, that his Deposition was made known to
him by two sent from the States: that Grevinchovius his answer was that he
rested in that Sentence: only he entreated leave to stay at Rotterdam and there
practice Merchandise. The same day before night came to me Episcopius,
Corvinus, and Duingtonius, three chief Remonstrants, entreating me to mediate
for them, that Grevinchovius might be admitted to their Company. I told them
that the Church had deposed Grevinchovius, and the States had approved the
Deposition, and therefore I could not meddle in that thing. Yet they were very
earnest, I told them I would send for my Colleagues, and they should have a
common answer. Whilst we stayed for my fellows, I fell into some speech with
Corvinus concerning some things which he has written, and found him nothing
constant in those things which he has published. When the rest came, they
said, Grevinchovius was for present speech best able to deal in that cause. I
told them they must trust the goodness of the cause, and not to the present
abilities of any man, and so they departed. But before they went away, they
gave us a writing which they entreated us to read, which, they said, they
purposed to deliver to the other foreign Divines. The writing we sent to my
Lord Ambassador, purposing also to send, when the next opportunity served, to
your Grace. Since this time the Synod has been somewhat warmed: for before we
were held with small occasions. Three Speeches by them have been made in the
Synod before the 2. of December. one pronounced by Episcopius, two other made by
Duingtonius. In all which speeches they declared, that they held not this Synod
to be a competent Judge of their controversies. When the first Speech was made,
the President Ecclesiastical called for a copy thereof, or the Speech it self;
the President Political added, that the Copy should be signed by their hands;
which was done. In offering up the Copy Episcopius entreated, that he might
have it restored again, because (as he said) he had not another. But when
Heinsius was afterward sent to him from the Delegates, to require another Copy,
because they found that this copy which was exhibited, did not contain all that
Episcopius delivered; he showed him another Copy. Hereupon grew a business
which for some time troubled the Synod, whilst Episcopius cleared himself from
falsehood. He appealed against the President, who admonished him hereof, to the
testimony of the whole Synod. I declare to your Grace these things
particularly, because these two things; one, that they denied the words which
they spoke in the Synod; the other, that they held the Synod for no lawful
Judge of their controversies, giving these reasons; because it consisted for
the most part of Schismatics, and because they were adversaries to the other,
and therefore could not be their Judges: These things, as they handled them,
drew away the affections of men from them; in so much as some of our Friends
here in this Town, who were well affected to them, seemed to be much alienated,
because they accuse the Synod of Schism. For if they had taken exception
against some particular persons, and not accused the whole body, it might have
been better taken; but this course displeases their own friends. In some
things they erred greatly, for want of knowledge of what was done in the Synod,
which seemed strange that of 400 or 500 persons which are spectatours, not one
would tell them what was done; seeing that might so easily be done, because
they keep in a chamber that is hard by the door of the Synod-house. If they
shall proceed hereafter in Doctrinalibus, as hitherto they have done in
Agibilibus, it will appear that there is a great judgment of God upon their
judgments. They are mavelous loath to be brought to the point, wherefore they
and we meet. They have held the Synod with delays, stays, and evagations from
November. 26. until December. 3. with dilatory evasions exercising the Synod.
December. 4. they gave up their sentence of the first of the five Articles, but
so confusedly, that they have bred a greater dislike of their proceedings. They
declare most in Negatives, what they hold not. Of that one Article they have
made ten, and in some one of their ten, are twelve propositions contained. To
follow them would make a long work. Corvinus one of the Remonstrants, came to
Mr. Mayer, the Professor of Basil, and told him, that he was drawn into these
troublesome courses by others, and showed some dislike, as if he meant to
withdraw himself from them. I make your Grace acquainted with this. In your
wisdom you know, that if this were made known to some in England, he might have
notice thereof out of England, which might hinder his resolution, which I think
by all good means should be forwarded. For from England they have had no small
encouragements heretofore. We are in good hope that though there may be some
delays, yet the matter will have a good end. We hear that the Jesuits are much
offended at the Synod. It must be some great good that offends them. All things
are here carried with great honor to his Majesty; and hearty prayers are made
for him daily, as well by others as by his own Subjects. If things shall be
transacted with quietness, your Grace may think of it, whether it were not fit
that some motion might be made to the States for some consideration or stipend
to be given to the Remonstrants, if they shall be deposed, for they look for no
other than Deposition. Their Request in the Synod to the Delegates was, that
they would be means to the States, that they would impose no other punishment
upon them than Deposition. I must make your Grace acquainted with one thing
that was told me by Mr. Montgomery a Scottish Gentleman in these parts; He said
that he came to the sight of a Letter written to some of the Remonstrants, to
encourage them in their courses; promising that if they were deposed, they
should have honorable maintenance for themselves and their Families. This was
before the late times, which if it hold now, it may give warning to others not
to plead hastily for their maintenance. I crave pardon for this length. Mr.
Dean of Worcester has not had his health well these two or three days, the
rest are all well, God be thanked. Thus commending your Grace to Gods blessed
protection, I rest

Dordr. December. 6. 1618. Your Graces, in all Duties bound. George Landaven.

May it please your Grace.
DOctor Goade, of whose coming it pleased your Grace to advertise me by your
Letters of the 21. of the last, arrived here with your others of the 29. the 4.
of this present. The fifth I presented him to the States General, in whose
assembly by an extemporary Speech he very well acquitted himself, and left good
impressions of a conceit which he expressed very lively how this Church and
State like two inseparable Twins must live and die together; and how both have
been always, and are still cherished by his Majesty. The same day I brought
him to his Excellency, and Count William (as I had formerly done the rest of
the Divines) and there I took the boldness to read unto them out of your Graces
Letters his Majesty's and your Graces Judgment of the Remonstrants and their
opinions; which being so clearly set down, his Excellency said was bon
francois; and, if I be not deceived, in conformity to what your Grace does
wish: when the Synod has done with the Remonstrants opinions, this course will
be taken with their persons, that the chief Ringleaders (as Vterbogan,
Episcopius, Grevinchovius, and Vorstius, with some others) will be branded with
some note of infamy, and thrust out both of Church and State. Some others of
the chief will have their entertainments continued, but be suspended in their
functions. The rest, by reason of want of fit men to supply their charges, will
be continued in hope the example of others will keep them within their bounds.
This course is like to be taken rebus sic stantibus; but if the French
Embassador's endeavors for the delivery of our Prisoners, (about which they
have now had two public audiences) or their private practices in favor of the
Arminian party should take any place, we must then expect a mutation; mean time
things go on very well, both in Church and State, for even this day I am
advertised from Schonover, (which has been one of the hottest Arminian Towns)
there being at this present certain Deputies of the Provincial Synod to visit
that Cla^sis, within the space of these three days, three Remonstrant Preachers
of the Villages adjoining have renounced their Doctrine; acknowledging under
their hands that it is false, and contrary to the Doctrine of the Old and New
Testament; and that the Doctrine teached by the Contra-Remonstrants is the
Orthodox, from which they will never hereafter swerve.

We have here a persecuted man by Barneveld and his Faction ( Monsieur Arsens,
whom your Grace may remember by his quarrel with Vandermyle) advanced to the
Nobless of Holland: So is also Monsieur Marquett, the Lieutenant General of the
Horse; both men of good sufficiency, and well affected in Religion. They were
both admitted to their Seats in the Assembly of the States of Holland
yesterday. One of the Nobless in put is place of Vandermyle in the Council of
State, and another in the place of Matiness, in the Assembly of the States
General. These two last being Curators of the University of Leyden (out of
which charge they are likewise removed) brought in Vorstius, and he is thereby
in so much the worse case; in that they stand now in need of Patrons
themselves, which were his Protectors.

I shall not need to advertise your Grace what passes at the Synod, from
whence you will hear, how the Remonstrants being excluded from further
conference, by reason of their Opiniatrity; their Opinions are now collected
out of their Books. The course is approved by the States, yet the manner of
their dimission in very rough and uncivil terms, used by the President
Bogermannus (who before won much commendation of modesty and temper) is
generally disliked. Quanquam illi digni hac contumelia, the place and quality
of the Assembly required another manner of proceeding; which would have wrought
the same effect, and been less subject to censure; but it is not now in integr^
to look back, and rectify what is amiss without much disparagement. They must
therefore go forward, and for the countenance of their action do the best they
may, leaving the events to God.

There has been an overture made to His Majesty by Du Moulin the Minister at
Paris of a General Confession to be composed by this Synod for all the Reformed
Churches, a Form whereof is by His Majesty's Order privately conceived by some
select persons in the Synod, which when it is perfected, it will be then sent
to His Majesty to be by him governed as shall seem best to His Wisdom, either
by suffering the same to go no farther; or if he approve thereof, with such
change and alteration therein as he shall think fit, to recommend the same
publicly to the Synod, and by consequence to the several Churches which have
their Deputies there.

Du Moulin does recommend further a project of mutual toleration betwixt the
Calvinists and Lutherans; which does ill suit with our present business of
suppressing the Arminians; and therefore, I believe, it will not be thought fit
to make mention thereof in the Synod.

Our English Divines have from the first time of Mr. Balcanquall's arrival
there admitted him to their Consultations; and now they join likewise in
Suffrage, and in the distribution of the diverse parts of the business; as those
who all make but one College. I do not find by what I hear from Dort, or what I
observed here, that Mr. Balcanquall does give any just subject for the report
which is raised of undecencie in apparel, but on the contrary that in all
respects he gives much satisfaction.

Doctor Goad was well received at the Synod, as one who can better go through
this laboursom business than the Dean of Worcester was able to do by reason of
his languishing indisposition. The Dean went from Dort toward England the
Eighth of this present; but I doubt he is not yet arrived there by reason of
the contrariety of the Winds.

For conclusion, I will tell your Grace that which is no news unto you, that I
have ended the last year with the most angry message, and begun this with the
most agreeable that I ever yet delivered this State: And as the former was
interpreted by those who best understood the nature of those Provinces for the
greatest of all their present Calamities; so this later does give them heart
and life again; and as they may go on without arriere-pense in the course
wherewith His Majesty has so well and so constantly aided them by his
countenance; so my hope is that His Majesty will in time reap more assuredly
the fruits of these mutations, in that he is pleased to use Patience until they
be better ripened.

Thus I most humbly take leave, from the Haghe this 14. of January, 1618. Your
Graces most humbly to be commanded, Dudley Carleton.
POSTSCRIPT.
I do hear even now of a bitter writing the Remonstrants have presented to the
Synod in answer of Bogermannus for his sharp exit: wherein they for a
conclusion do optare Synodo meliorem mentem.



Lord Bishop of Landaff, to Sir Dudley Carleton Ambassador at the Haghe, Febr.
8. 1618.
Right Honorable my very good Lord,
BY my long silence in that particular whereof your Lordship wrote last to us
in general, you may perceive how unwilling I am to write thereof. Unto your
Lordship have I written nothing till now, which some of my Colleagues think
strange, though I suppose they do believe me upon my word. I should not as yet
have written hereof, but that I think my self bound to give an account to your
Lordship of these things, not only in respect of mine affection to your
Lordship, but in respect also of the place which you carry.

When we were to give up our sentence to the second Article, having first
thought of certain Theses, we parted our labor, so that each one had his part
of the Theses to confirm. When all was conferred together, it was found that
Dr. D. and Dr. W. had proceeded so far in declaring their parts, that the rest
could not follow them; whereupon we were at a stand for a time: They perceiving
that neither my self, nor the rest of my fellows could approve that which they
had set down; took occasion of diverse conferences, which did rather set us
farther asunder; yet this was private among our selves. They held, that the
Redemption of Christ, and the Grace thereof was general to all without
exception; which being put, I could not see, why we should not grant general
grace in the largest sense, that the Remonstrants would have it: Their answer
was, that it was so far to be granted, and we were to yield so much to them.
Upon this there was some difference, I took it neither to be a Truth of the
Scripture, nor the Doctrine of the Church of England; and they thought it was
both. After some time and discourses spent, I told them that there was a
necessity of our agreement, if we could not agree in all things, we must come
to such Points wherein all may agree; and willed them to give me liberty to
remove the things, wherein we could not agree, that we might all agree in the
rest: To this they yielded, and so we agreed in some things.

After this, we received your Lordship's Letters, for which all without
exception thought our selves much beholding to your Lordship. We sent your
Lordship an answer in common; which; I suppose, your Lordship sent to my Lord's
Grace; for there the question in controversy is set down.

Whether the Grace of Redemption is general to all men in the World without
exception; or to be Restrained only to the Church? I know, there be some
Bishops in England that are of opinion that it is general without exception to
all men; but I never thought that their Opinions were the Doctrine of the
Church of England. Dr. W. when in private conference we have occasion to speak
of these things; being driven by some evidences of Scripture, which prove that
wheresoever the Grace of Redemption goes, there goes also remission of sins;
So that if he admit the grace of Redemption common to all, he must admit also,
that all men have remission of sins: To avoid this, devises a word to express
the generality thus, not Redemptio, but Redimibilitas; and not Reconciliatio,
but Reconciliabilitas. Which devising of Words makes me more to suspect the
Doctrine; for I think a devised School term should not determine a Truth in
Divinity. I told him if this Opinion be granted, we must have new terms to
express it, for the old will not serve: He answers that it is good and fit to
make new terms, as this word was devised in the Council of Nice, (...). And, as
it seems, he could be well contented, that new words were devised in this
Synod to receive this Doctrine. As where the Remonstrants have a Doctrine from
Arminius, that, Redemptio impetrata is communis, but not applicata; Whereupon
it follows that impetratio is generalis; which thing sounds as unsound in
the ears of men: Dr. W. devises a word to help this: For he will not say that
impetratio is general, but impetrabilitas is general. Thus as if we wanted
matter, we are playing with words. And if this humor had stayed it self within
our private conferences, it would have been less offensive; but he has opened
himself to diverse of the Synod, which have told me of it. And that men should
not be ignorant, he has opened the same publicly in the Synod. This gave the
occasion of that report, which came to your Lordship of some dissent among us.
We keep peace and love among our selves notwithstanding some variety of
Opinions. We wrote to your Lordship that Mr. President was offended at some
things which we exhibited, and was desirous that we should write to know my
Lord's Grace his opinion therein. In moving of that to my company, I told them
that we might yet take such order as to quiet all things without troubling my
Lord's Grace: Namely, if we should recall our Theses, and alter them at our
pleasure; for that is the common liberty granted to all, to recall or add what
they think good, before the framing of the Canons. I told them it might be with
less trouble and speech, if we did it of our selves, rather than to refer it to
my Lord's Grace to do. To this Dr. D. answered that he would rather have his
right hand cut off, than recall or alter any thing. Thus were we driven to send
to his Grace. If I could have drawn them to another course, my Lord's Grace
should not have been troubled. Whatsoever will be done in this, if we should do
what we can, we cannot sway the Synod, for the Synod will ever have a major
part against these. Opinions, and we can do nothing herein but only show our
Devises, for we are sure before hand that this Devise of the Universal Grace of
Redemption will not be received in this Synod. Thus having given an account to
your Lordship of these things whereof you wrote, and which I thought my self
bound to do, commending your Lordship to the protection and blessing of God,
and my self to your Lordship, I rest

Dordr. Febr. 8. 1618. Your Lordships most affectionate to do you service,
George Landaven.

Lord Bishop of Landaff, Febr. 18. 1618. to the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Most Reverend my very good Lord,
WE have advertised your Grace of the occurrents in the Synod. Of late there
fell out an unreasonable contention between the Breme-Divines and some of the
Provincials, wherein by a combination the Provincials had wrapped in Scultetus;
there were some faults on both sides, but the greater fault was in the
Provincials. We have labored to take up that matter, and therein we have done
not unprofitable service: For those things which lately we wrote to your Grace,
we are desirous to compose them among our selves, if happily we can. We might
have done it before, if some of my fellows would have been persuaded to suffer
some things to be changed which we have exhibited; for we have that common
liberty to change what we think good. I pressed it to the company to change
some things, which offended the President, but one of our company answered that
he would rather have his right hand cut off, than change any thing. The
question that troubles us, is, whether we may admit the Grace of Redemption to
be general to all men without exception? Of which matters some of our company
had written much, and therein proceeded farther, than we could yield to. I cut
off all that discourse, which proved this General Grace, before our writings
were exhibited: This I did by their good wills and consent; yet if the matter
shall come to be disputed in the Synod, I fear that they will not be persuaded
to be silent in it; a private admonition from your Grace may quiet all. We will
be careful in the mean time to do what we can for Peace. We live together in
great love, and society notwithstanding some differences of Opinions. Thus with
my hearty prayers for your Graces long continuance to the comfort of his
Church, I rest

Dordr. Febr. 18. 1618. Still. vet. Your Graces most bounden in all duties,
George Landaven.

The British Divines, Febr. 18. 1618. Still. Vet. Their Agreement concerning the
Second Article.
Most Reverend,
OUr most humble duties premised. Whereas of late by the advice of some, whom
we have cause to respect, we so far troubled your Grace as by our joint Letters
to request your advice and direction concerning the authorized Doctrine of our
Church de generali pretio mortis Christi: We have since thought it more
agreeable to our duties not to press your Grace therein, nor to raise any
scruple or question on that Point, we having already resolved on that, which we
presume can incurr no exception in our Church, and tends, as we are
persuaded, to the advancing of the Peace of these Churches. May it please your
Grace therefore herein to leave us to our own defense and explication, without
any troubling your Grace otherwise, than what your Wisdom shall think fit in
private to advise; whereof we shall make such use as occasion shall require,
with due respect to your Graces intention and command.

The process and particular occurrences of our Synodical Affairs, since our
last narration, we have now sent, reserving our selves a while therein for the
convenience of this Messenger, who signified to us his intent of going
purposely to Lambeth.

But that we presume that by our intimation to your Grace His Majesty is
informed of the State of the Synodical proceedings, we should think it our duty
to take care for some such narration; which as we have hitherto, so will still
forbear, unless your Grace command us otherwise.

So with remembrance of our humble duties, and prayers for the peace of our and
their Churches, and for your Graces prosperity, we humbly take our leave this
28. of Febr. 1618. Stilo novo.

Dordr. Batavor. Your Graces to be commanded, George Landaven. John Davenant.
Samuel Ward. Thomas Goad. Walter Balcanquall.


The British Divines at Dort, March 11. 1618. To the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Reasons of enlarging Grace beyond Election.
Our most humble duty premised,
AS we are bound most thankfully to accept, and always ready observantly to
respect your Graces especial care, and judicious pains in explainig to us by
letter some difficulties concerning our Second Article: So we doubt not to
enjoy your Graces approbation of our cautelous moderation; both, in private
using only amongst our selves your Graces said Instructions, as also in
withholding our hand from pressing in public any rigorous exclusive
Propositions in the Doctrine of the extent of our Savior Christ's oblation.
Our tenderness herein hitherto used is the more awaked by late intimation given
us by my Lord Ambassador of His Majesty's strict charge; That before the
Synodical resolution concerning Christ's death, and the application of it to
us, we stand upon it, to have those conclusions couched, in manner, and terms,
as near as possibly may be, to those which were used in the Primitive Church by
the Fathers of that time against the Pelagians, and Semi-pelagians, and not in
any new phrase of the Modern age: and that the same may be as agreeable to the
Confessions of the Church of England, and other Reformed Churches, and with as
little distaste and umbrage to the Lutheran Churches as may be.

What hitherto we have resolved concerning this Article, may appear by our
Theses long since subscribed by every of us, and publicly among the rest read
in the Synod; a Copy whereof we now send, humbly submitting the same, and all
other our actions to your Graces judgment, and Authority. To every of them (as
in all other of the rest of the Articles) are annexed our brief Explications;
which we now spare to trouble your Grace withal; intending at our return to
exhibit to His Majesty, and to your Grace an entire Copy of our whole judgment
of the five Articles, as it was read in the Synod, unless your Grace command us
to send over the same before.

In our avouching and declaring in this and other Articles, some fruits of
Christ's death, not comprised in the Decree of Election, but afforded more
generally, yet confined to the Visible Church (as viz. true and spiritual
Graces accompanying the Gospel, and conferred upon some non-electi) we gain
ground of the Remonstrants, and thereby easily repel, not only their instances
of Apostasy, but also their odious imputation of illusion in the general
propounding of the Evangelical Promises, as we are ready more clearly to
demonstrate. Nor do we with the Remonstrants leave at large the benefit of our
Savior's death, as only propounded loosely to all ex aequo, and to be applied
by the arbitrary act of man's will: but we expressly avouch, for the behoof of
the Elect, a special intention both in Christ's offering, and God the Father
accepting, and from that intention a particular application of that sacrifice,
by conferring Faith and other Gifts infallibly bringing the Elect to Salvation.
And that our care in advancing this Doctrine might be the more remarkable, we
in these our Theses have set in the forefront our Propositions concerning
God's special Intention.

Our Synodical Proceedings (whereof we now send your Grace a brief narration
continued to our former) having passed through all our Collegiate Judgments of
the Five Articles, do show rather an essential consent in substance, than a
conspiring identity in every consectary; which we hope will approve even to our
Adversaries the sincerity of our hearts, and argue that we seek, rather the
Truth of God, than the Triumph of men.

So continuing our daily prayers for the peace of God's Church, our most
Religious King's prosperity, and your Graces preservation, we humbly crave
pardon and remain

Dort. this 21. of March 1619. Still. nov. Your Graces most humble to be
commanded, George Landaven. John Davenant. Samuel Ward. Thomas Goad. Walter
Balcanquall.

Doctor Davenant touching the Second Article, discussed at the conference at
the Haghe, of the Extent of Redemption.
1. WE undoubtedly hold these two ensuing Propositions, which are the two first
which we have exhibited, and in which we had the consent of the Foreign Divines.

1. Ex speciali amore and intention tum Dei Patris, tum ipsius Christi,
mortuus est Christus pro Electis, ut illis remissionem peccatorum, and salutem
aeternam reipsa obtineret, and infallibiliter conferret. 2. Ex hoc eodem amore
per and propter meritum and Intercessionem Christi, dantur iisdem Electis
fides, perseverantia, caeteraque omnia, per quae conditio Foederis impletur,
and beneficium promissum, i. e. vita aeterna infallibiliter obtinetur.
2. But we hold also these two ensuing Propositions, which we have also
exhibited, and were in like manner approved by the Exteri, 1. Deus lapsi humani
generis miseratus misit Filium suum, qui seipsum dedit pretium Redemptionis pro
peccatis totius mundi.] Which Proposition is equi-pollent to the express
Article of the Church of England, set forth by Authority Anno 1562. Oblatio
Christi semel facta, perfecta est Redemptio, propitiatio, and satisfactio pro
omnibus peccatis totius mundi tam originalibus, quam actualibus, Art. xxxi.
which also is delivered totidem verbis in the Consecratory Prayer before the
Receiving of the Holy Eucharist in the Book of Common Prayer. 2. In hoc merito
mortis Christi fundatur universale Promissum Evangelicum, juxta quod omnes in
Christum credentes, remissionem peccatorum, and vitam aeternam reipsa
consequantur.

According to these two last Propositions we do hold that our Blessed Savior
by God's Appointment did offer up himself to the Blessed Trinity for the
Redemption of mankind, and by this Oblation once made, did found, confirm, and
ratify the Evangelical Covenant, which may and ought to be preached seriously
to all mankind without exception. Quicunque credit salvabitur; si tu crederes,
salvaberis. And moreover we hold this ensuing Proposition, which we also have
exhibited, and which was in like sort approved as the rest.

3. In Ecclesia uti juxta hoc Promissum Evangelii salus omnibus offertur, ea
est administratio gratiae suae quae sufficit ad convincendos omnes
impoenitentes, and incredulos, quod sua culpa voluntaria and vel neglectu, vel
contemptu Evangelii perierint, and beneficia oblata amiserint.] And according
to this we hold, that there are sundry initial preparations tending to
Conversion, merited by Christ, and dispensed in the preaching of the Gospel,
and wrought by the Holy Ghost in the hearts of many that never attain to true
Regeneration or Justification, such are Illuminatio, and Notitia dogmatum
sidei, Fides Dogmatica, Sensus peccati, Timor poenae, Cogitatio de liberatione,
Spes veniae, etc. An evident example whereof may be seen in them that sin
against the Holy Ghost, Heb. VI. and X. And consequently we hold, that the
whole merit of Christ is not confined to the Elect only, as some here do hold,
and was held in Colloq. Hag. by the Contra-Remonstrants.


The Reasons which move us to hold these three latter Assertions, are
1. WE make no doubt, but this Doctrine of the Extent of Christ's Redemption is
the undoubted Doctrine of the holy Scriptures, and most consonant to Antiquity,
Fathers and Councils, to whom our Church will have all Preachers to have
special respect in doctrinal points. lib. quorund. Canon. Discip. Eccles.
Anglic. Edit. 1571. cap. de Concionatoribus. 2. First, The Church of England
besides the places alleged deliver the first of the three last Article,
touching the Universality of Redemption, as in our Confession set forth Anno
1562. Art. 2, 7, 15. and elsewhere in the Communion Book, and Homilies. 2. For
the Universality of the promises of the Gospel, which is the Second Article,
the Church of England does teach Artic. Relig. 7. de Praedestinatione, That we
must Receive God's Promises, in such wise, as they be generally set forth to us
in holy Scripture; where our Church does signify that the Promises of God in
the Gospel do appertain to all generally to whom they are published, and
according to this we hold, that the reason why the Promises of the Gospel are
not effectual to all to whom they are published, is not through any Defect in
Christ's death, as though he had not truly founded and ratified by his death
and passion the Evangelical Covenant or promise to all; or that this promise
pertained not to all; or, that God did not thereby seriously invite all, to
whom this Evangelical Promise is propounded in the Ministry of the word, to
repentance, and faith, and so consequently to the participation of the benefits
promised therein: but that the defect is inherent in man, who will not receive
that grace, that is truly and seriously offered on God's part. This Doctrine
must needs be maintained, otherwise we cannot see what ground God's Ministers
have seriously to exhort and invite all to repentance, and belief in Christ,
according to the mandate and promise of the Gospel. 3. For the Communication of
Grace in some measure and degree tending to Conversion, to all to whom the
Gospel is preached, there is no doubt, but it is conformable to the Doctrine of
our Church,
3. There is no Confession of any Reformed Church, that does restrain Christ's
death only to the Elect: Now we are by our Instructions from his Majesty to
advise the Belgicks to conform themselves to the public Confessions of the
Church of England, and the Neighbor Reformed Churches. 4. We observe that in
the Conference at the Haghe the Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants, being
pressed by Arguments on each side in this Second Article, they come to join
issue in that which we hold to be the very truth; for in Collat. Bertian. page
154. the words of the Contra-Remonstrants are these, lin. antepenult. Sed
infideles, etsi promeriti quidem illi sint condemnationem, tamen est adhuc via
aliqua and ratio (or as it is in Collat. Brandii p. 163. habent tamen medium)
per quam meritam condemnationem illam possint evadere, nimirum si credant;
neque enim resecta est omnis salutis spes quantisper in hac vita est, etc.

Now p. 186. Collat. Bertian. post medium; the words of the Remonstrants are
these. Experientiam hoc posse docere, non omnes and singulos reipsa a servitute
liberari: sed non docet liberationem, aut saltem jus and modum (or medium as
Brandius has it p. 197.) eo pertingendi omnibus non esse impetratum. In the
former place the Contra-Remonstrants make a great difference between the state
and condition of the wicked spirits, and men not-elect; for that men have a way
and means to avoid condemnation ( i. e.) by believing. But if the Promise of
the Gospel founded in Christ's merits, Quisquis crediderit, salvus erit, do
only belong to the Elect, then the non-elect, though they should believe,
should have no way or means of escaping condemnation. Because belief is not
available to salvation from the nature of the act, but from the Will of God
making the Promise, which according to the Contra-Remonstrants in this promise
is presumed to be confined only to the Elect. And so this Promise should no
more pertain to the non-elect than to the evil Angels, who, if they should
repent and believe (admitting this impossible supposition) yet could not be
saved, because this Promise was never made to them; but to mankind as the
Scripture speaks.

In the latter Passage the Remonstrants do explain themselves, that Christ by
his death obtained a means and way of deliverance to all. Both acknowledge that
a way and means of deliverance is impetrated by Christ, not for Believers only,
but for Infidels and unbelievers, though they accept not of it.

5. Notwithstanding this Tenent of Extending Christ's death to all, and the
Universality of the promise, we do firmly hold the main Points controverted not
only in the other Four Articles, but in this Second Article also, in our two
first Propositions touching God's and Christ's special intention to Redeem
effectually, and to merit effectual Grace only to the Elect. And so shall in
all the Five Articles define sufficiently against the Remonstrants. And by this
our distinction blunt their chief Arguments in all the Five Articles, which
otherwise, we cannot see how they can be sufficiently solved. 6. We consider,
that by this our delivery of the Points premised, we shall avoid all these
absurdities, which by unavoidable consequence will fall upon them which hold
the rigid Opinion of Piscator, and some in these Provinces, touching the
Doctrine of Reprobation, which are alleged by the Remonstrants in a large
Tract, which they have written upon the First Article, which was read in the
Synod; which Assertions we think no Divine can justify. 7. We know that sundry
of the most Learned Bishops, and others in England do hold the same; and we
doubt not but if the Tenants of sundry of the Contra-Remonstrants here, were
made known unto them, they would disclaim them. 8. We verily think that the
strictness of the Contra-Remonstrants in this Second Article is one chief
reason which keeps the Lutheran Churches from joining with us. And we think
that if way were given in this Synod herein, they would be the more easily
brought to hold the Doctrine of Predestination according to the Opinion of St.
Augustine, and the Church of England. 9. This is the Doctrine of sundry of the
famous and learned Writers of the Reformed Churches, as of Melancthon, of
Calvin in sundry places, of Musculus, Bullinger, Gualter, Aretius, Vrsinus,
Sohnius, Pezelius, Mollerus, Paraeus, and others. 10. We have had conference
with some of the Divines here, but cannot receive any due satisfaction. 11. We
had a special charge in our Instructions to endeavor that Positions be
moderately laid down, which may tend to the mitigation of heat on both parts,
which we judge to be most necessary in this Second Article.
FINIS.
The CONTENTS.
SERMONS. Abuses of hard places of Scripture. 2 Pet. 3. 16. WHich the unlearned
and unstable wrest, as they do the other Scriptures, unto their own
destruction, page 1. Of dealing with Erring Christians. Romans 14. 1. Him that is
weak in the Faith receive, but not to doubtful disputations. p. 24. The Rich
man's Recepisti, or the danger of receiving our good things in this Life.
Preached on Easter Day, at Eaton College. Luke 16.25. Son remember that thou
in thy life time receivdst thy good things. p. 56. Of Duels etc. Preached at the
Hague. Numb. 35.33. And the Land cannot be cleansed of blood, that is shed in
it; but by the blood of him that shed it. p. 68. Saint Peter's Fall. Mat. 26.75.
And he went forth and wept bitterly. p. 90. Christian Omnipotency. Philip.
4.13. I can do all things through Christ, that enableth or that strengthens
me. p. 114. Luke 18. 1. And he spoke a Parable unto them to this end, that men
ought always to pray and not to faint. p. 131. My kingdom is not of this World.
John. 18.36. Jesus answered, my kingdom is not of this world: If my kingdom
were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be
delivered to the Jews, etc. p. 146. 1 Samuel 24.5. And it came to pass afterward,
that David's heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul's Skirt. p. 161. John
14.27. Peace I leave unto you: My peace I give unto you. p. 177. The profit of
godliness. 1 Timothy 14.8. But Godliness is profitable unto all things. p. 193. A
Second Sermon on the same Text. p. 214. Jacobs Vow. Genesis 28.20. And Jacob vowed
a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and keep me in this way that I go, and
give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, etc. p. 228. Dixi, Custodiam.
Psalm. 36.1. I said (or resolved) I will take heed to my ways. p. 244.
MISCELLANIES. p. 257. Letters concerning the Synod of Dort.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and sold by Robert Pawlet, at the Bible
in Chancery Lane, near Fleetstreet.
EPiscopacy (as established by Law in England) not prejudicial to Regal Power,
written by the special command of the late King, by R. Sanderson late Lord
Bishop of Lincoln.

The Whole Duty of Man, laid down in a plain and familiar way for the use of
All, but especially the meanest Reader; Necessary for all Families; with
private Devotions for several Occasions.

The Gentleman's Calling, Written by the Author of The Whole Duty of Man.

The Causes of the Decay of Christian Piety; Or an Impartial Survey of the
Ruins of Christian Religion, Undermined by Unchristian Practice: By the Author
of The Whole Duty of Man.

A Scholastical History of the Canon of the Holy Scripture; Or the Certain and
Indubitate books thereof as they are received in the Church of England: By Dr.
Cousin, Lord Bishop of Durham.

Divine Breathings, or a Pious Soul thirsting after Christ, in an hundred
excellent Meditations.

Hugo Grotius de Robus Belgicis, Or the Annals and History of the Low Country
Wars in English, wherein is manifested, that the United Netherlands are
indebted for the glory of their Conquests to the Valor of the English.

A Treatise of the English Particles; showing much of the variety of their
significations and uses in English; and how to render them into Latin,
according to the propriety and elegancy of that language; with a Praxis upon
the same: By William Walker, B. D. Schoolmaster of Grantburn, with a Table
newly added.

The Royal Grammar, commonly called Lillies Grammar explained, opening the
meaning of the Rules with great plainness to the understanding of Children of
the meanest capacity, with choice observations on the same from the best
Authors: By W. Walker, B. D. Author of the Treatise of English Particles.

A Catalogue of the names of all the Parliaments or reputed Parliaments, from
the year 1640.

A Narrative of some Passages in or relating to the Long Parliament, by a
person of Honor.

Sober Inspections into the Long Parliament: By James Howel Esquire.

Dr. Sprackling against the Chemists.

Nem^sius's Nature of Man, in English: By G. Withers, Gent.

Inconveniences of Toleration.

A Letter about Comprehension.

A Collection of Canons, Articles and Injunctions of the Church of England: By
Anthony Sparrow, Lord Bishop of Exon.

The Bishop of Exons Caution to his Diocese against false doctrines: delivered
in a Sermon at his Primary Visitation.

The form of Consecration of a Church or Chapel, and of the place of Christian
Burial; by Bishop Andrews.

A Thanksgiving Sermon preached before the King. by I. Dolhen, D. D. Dean of
Westminster, and Clerk of the Closet.

Bishop Brownrigs Sermon on the Gunpowder Treason.

A Letter to a Person of Quality concerning the Fines received by the Church at
its Restoration, wherein by the Instance of one the richest Cathedrals, a fair
guess may be made at the receipts and disbursments of all the rest.

A Narrative or Journal of the Proceedings of the Lord Holles and the Lord
Coventry, Ambassadors Plenipotentiaries for the Treaty at Breda: Written by a
person of Quality concerned in that Ambassie.

A Narrative of the Burning of London 1666, with an account of the losses, and
a most remarkable Parallel between it and MOSCO, both as to the Plague and Fire.

Lluellyns three Sermons on the Kings Murder.

A Collection of the Rules and Orders now used in Chancery.

Iter Lucitanicum, Or the Portugal Voyage, with what memorable passages
intervened at the Shipping and in the Transportation of her Sacred Majesty
Katherine, Queen of Great Britain, from Lisbon to England: By Dr. Samuel Hynde.

All sorts of Law Books.

A TRACT CONCERNING SCHISM AND SCHISMATICS. WHEREIN Is briefly discovered,
The Original Causes of all Schism.
Heresy and Schism; as they are commonly used, are two Theological scar-crows,
with which they who use to uphold a party in Religion, use to fright away such,
as making inquiry into it, are ready to relinquish and oppose it, if it appear
either erroneous or suspicious; for, as Plutarch reports a Painter, who having
unskilfully painted a Cock, chased away all Cocks and Hens, that so the
imperfection of his Art might appear by comparison with Nature; so men willing
for ends to admit of no fancy but their own, endeavor to hinder an inquiry
into it by way of comparison of somewhat with it, peradventure truer, that so
the deformity of their own might not appear: but howsoever, in the common
manage, Heresy and Schism are but ridiculous terms yet the things in
themselves are of very considerable moment, the one offending against Truth,
the other against Charity, and therefore both deadly, when they are not by
imputation, but indeed.

It is then a matter of no small importance, truly to descry the nature of
them, and they on the contrary strengthen themselves, who through the iniquity
of men and times, are injuriously charged with them.

Schism (for of Heresy we shall not now treat, except it be by accident, and
that by occasion of a general mistake, spread through all the writings of the
Ancients, in which their names are familiarly confounded) Schism, I say upon
the very sound of the word imports Division; Division is not but where
Communion is or ought to be: Now Communion is the strength and ground of all
Society, whether Sacred or Civil; whosoever therefore they be that offend
against the common society and friendliness of men, if it be in civil
occasions, are guilty of Sedition and Rebellion; if it be by reason of
Ecclesiastical difference, they are guilty of Schism: So that Schism is an
Ecclesiastical Sedition, as Sedition is a lay Schism: yet the great benefits of
Communion, notwithstanding in regard of diverse distempers men are subject to
Dissension, and Disunion, are often necessary; For when, either false or
uncertain Conclusions are obtruded for truth, and Acts either unlawful, or
ministering just scruple, are required of us to be performed, in these cases,
consent were conspiracy, and open contestation is not faction or Schism, but
due Christian animosity.

For the opening therefore of the nature of Schism, something may be added by
way of difference to distinguish it from necessary Separation, and that is,
that the cause upon which Division is attempted, proceed not from Passion, or
from Distemper, or from Ambition, or Avarice, or such other ends, as humane
folly is apt to pursue, but from well weighed and necessary reasons, and that
when all other means having been tried, nothing will serve to save us from
guilt of Conscience, but open separation; so that Schism, if we would define
it, is nothing else but an unnecessary separation of Christians from that part
of the visible Church, of which they were once members. Now, As in Mutinies and
civil Dissentions, there are two Attendants in ordinary belonging unto them;
one the choice of one Elector or Guide, in place of the general or ordinary
Governor, to rule and Guide; the other the appointing of some public place or
Randezvous, where public Meetings must be celebrated: So in Church-dissentions
and quarrels, two appurtenances there are, which serve to make Schism complete.

First, in the choice of a Bishop, in opposition to the former, (a thing very
frequent amongst the Ancients, and which many times was the cause and effect of
Schism.)

Secondly, the erecting of a new Church and Oratory, for the dividing parts to
meet-in, publicly. For till this be done, the Schism is but yet in the womb.

In that late famous Controversy in Holland, De Praedestinatione and auxiliis,
as long as the disagreeing parties went no further than Disputes and
Pen-combates, the Schism was all that while unhatch'd; but as soon as one
party swept an old Cloister, and by a pretty Art suddenly made it a Church, by
putting a new Pulpit in it, for the separating party there to meet; now what
before was a Controversy became a formal Schism. To know no more than this,
if you take it to be true, had been enough to direct how you are to judge, and
what to think of Schism and Schismatics; yet, because of the Ancients, (by
whom many are more affrighted than hurt) much is said, and many fearful dooms
pronounced in this case. We will descend a little to consider of Schism, as it
were by way of Story, and that partly further to open that which we have said
in general by instancing in particulars, and partly to disabuse those who
reverencing Antiquity more then needs, have suffered themselves to be scared
with imputation of Schism, above due measure; for, what the Ancients spoke by
way of censure of Schism in general, is most true, for they saw (and it is no
great matter to see so much) that unadvised and open fancy to break the knot of
union, betwixt man and man (especially amongst Christians, upon whom above all
other kind of men, the tie of love, and Communion does most especially rest)
was a crime hardly pardonable, and that nothing absolves men from the guilt of
it, but true and unpretended conscience: yet when they came to pronounce of
Schism in particular (whether it was because of their own interest, or that
they saw not the Truth, or for what other cause God only does know) their
judgments many times (to speak most gently) were justly to be suspected. Which
that you may see, we will range all Schism into two ranks.

First is a Schism, in which only one party is the Schismatic; for where
cause of Schism is necessary, there not he that separates, but he that is the
cause of separation, is the Schismatics.

Secondly, there is a Schism in which both parties are the Schismatics; for,
where the occasion of separation is unncessary, neither side can be excused
from the guilt of Schism.

But you will ask, Who shall be the judge, what is necessary? Indeed, it is a
question which has been often made, but I think scarcely ever truly answered,
not because it is a point of great depth or difficulty truly to assoil it, but
because the true solution of it carries fire in the tail of it (for it brings
with it a piece of Doctrine which is seldom pleasing to Superiors:) to you for
the present this shall suffice.

If so be you be animo defaecato, if you have cleared your self from ^roath and
growns, if neither sloth, nor fear, nor ambition, nor any tempting spirit of
that nature abuse you (for these and such as these, are the true impediments,
why both that, and other questions of the like danger are not truly answered)
if all this be, and yet you know not how to frame your resolution, and settle
your self for that doubt; I will say no more of you than was said of Papias,
St. John's own Scholar, Your abilities are not so good as I presumed.

But to go on with what I intended, and from that that diverted me, that you
may the better judge of the nature of Schisms by their occasions, you shall find
that all Schisms have crept into the Church by one of these three ways, either
upon matter of Fact, or upon matter of Opinion, or point of Ambition; for the
first, I call that matter of fact, when something is required to be done by us,
which either we know, or strongly suspect to be unlawful; so the first notable
Schism of which we read in the Church, contained in it matter of fact; for, it
being upon error taken for necessary, that an Easter must be kept, and upon
worse than error (if I may so speak) for it was no less than a point of Judaism
forced upon the Church; upon worse than error, I say, thought further necessary
that the ground of the time for keeping of that Feast must be the rule left by
Moses to the Jews, there arose a stout question, Whether we were to celebrate
with the Jews on the fourteenth Moon, or the Sunday following? This matter
though most unnecessary, most vain; yet caused as great a combustion as ever
was in the Church; the West separating and refusing Communion with the East,
for many years together: In this fantastical hurry I cannot see but all the
world were Schismatics, neither can any thing excuse them from that
imputation, excepting only this, that we charitably suppose that all parties
did what they did out of conscience, a thing which befell them through the
ignorance of their Guides, (for I will not say through their malice) and that
through the just judgment of God, because through sloth and blind obedience,
men examined not the things which they were taught; but, like beasts of
burden, patiently couched down, and indifferently underwent whatsoever their
Superiors laid upon them. By the way, by this we may plainly see the danger of
our appeal to Antiquity, for resolution in controverted points of Faith, and
how small relief we are to expect from thence; for, if the considerable, so
mainly fail them, as not to see the truth in a subject, wherein it is the
greatest marvel, how they could avoid the sight of it; Can we without the
imputation of great grossness and folly, think so poor-spirited persons,
competent Judges of the questions now on foot betwixt the Churches; pardon me,
I know what temptation drew that note from me.

The next Schism which had in it matter of fact, is that of the Donatists, who
were persuaded (at least pretended so) that it was unlawful to converse or
communicate in holy duties with men stained with any notorious sin; for,
howsoever that Austin to specify only the Thurificati and Traditores and
Libellatici, etc. as if he separated only from those, whom he found to be such;
yet by necessary proportion, he must refer to all notorious sinners: upon
this, he taught that in all places, where good and bad were mixed together,
there could be no Church by reason of Pollution, cooperating a way from
sinners, which blasted righteous persons, which conversed with them, and made
all unclean: on this ground, separating himself from all that he list to
suspect, he gave out, that the Church was no where to be found but in him, and
his Associates, as being the only men among whom wicked persons found no
shelter, and by consequence the only clean and unpolluted company, and
therefore the only Church. Against this, Saint Augustine laid down this
Conclusion, Vnitatem Ecclesiae per totum mundum dispersae praeceptam non esse
disserendam, which is indeed the whole sum of that Father's disputation
against the Donatists. Now in one part of this Controversy, one thing is very
remarkable. The truth was there, where it was, by mere chance, and might have
been on either side, the reason brought by either party notwithstanding: for
though it were De facto, false, that pars Donati shut up in Africa was the only
Orthodox party; yet it might be true, notwithstanding any thing St. Augustine
brings to confute it; and on the contrary, though it were de facto true, that
the part of Christians dispersed over the whole earth were Orthodox, yet it
might have been false, notwithstanding any thing Saint Augustine brings to
confirm it. For where or amongst whom or how many the Church shall be, or is,
is a thing indifferent, it may be in any number more or less, it may be in any
Place, Country, or Nation, it may be in all, and for ought I know, it may be
in none, without the prejudice to the definition of a Church, or the truth of
the Gospel, North or South; many or few; dispersed in many Places, or confined
to one: None of these do either prove or disprove a Church.

Now this Schism, and likewise that former, to a wise man that well
understands the matter in Controversy, may afford perchance matter of pity, to
see men so strangely distracted upon fancy, but of doubt or trouble what to do,
it can yield none; for though in this Schism the Donatist be the Schismatic,
and in the former both parties be equally engaged in the Schism, yet you may
safely upon your occasions communicate with either, if so be you flatter
neither in their Schism: For why might not it be lawful to go to Church with
the Donatist, or to celebrate Easter with the Quartodeciman, if occasion so
require? since neither Nature, nor Religion, nor Reason does suggest any thing
of moment to the contrary? For in all public Meetings pretending holiness, so
there be nothing done, but what true Devotion and Piety brook, why may not I be
present in them, and use communion with them? Nay, what if those to whom the
execution of the public service is committed, do something either unseemly or
suspicious, or peradventure unlawful? what if the garments they wear be
censured, nay indeed be suspicious? what if the gesture or adoration to be used
to the Altars, as now we have learned to speak? What if the Homilist have
Preached, or delivered any Doctrine of the Truth, of which we are not well
persuaded? a thing which very often falls out; yet for all this we may not
separate, except we be constrained personally to bear part in them, our selves:
The Priests under Ely had so ill demeaned themselves about the daily
sacrifices, that the Scripture tells us, they made them to stink; yet the
People refused not to come to the Tabernacle, nor to bring their Sacrifice to
the Priest: for in those Schisms which concern fact, nothing can be a just
cause of refusing of Communion, but only to require the execution of some
unlawful or suspected act, for not only in reason, but in Religion too, that
Maxim admits of no release, Cautissimi cujusque Praeceptum quod dubitas ne
feceris. Long it was ere the Church fell upon Schism, upon this occasion,
though of late it has had very many; for until the second Council of Nice, in
which irreconcilable Superstition and Ignorance did conspire, I say, until the
Rout did set up Image Worship, there was not any remarkable Schism upon just
occasion of fact: all the rest of Schisms of that kind were but wantons, this
was truly serious; in this the Schismatical party was the Synod it self, and
such as conspired with it for, or concerning, the use of Images in Sacrifices.

First, it is acknowledged by all that it is a thing unnecessary.

Secondly, it is by most suspected.

Thirdly, it is by many held utterly unlawful; can then the enjoining of such a
thing be ought else but abuse? or can the refusal of Communion here be thought
any other thing than duty? Here or upon the like occasion to separate, may
peradventure bring personal trouble or danger (against which it concerns any
honest man, to have pectus Praeparatum;) further harm it cannot do, so that in
these cases you cannot be to seek what to think, or what you have to do.

Come we then to consider a little of the second sort of Schism, arising upon
occasion of variety of opinion: It has been the common disease of Christians
from the beginning, not to content themselves with that measure of faith which
God and Scriptures have expressly afforded us, but out of a vain desire to know
more than is revealed, they have attempted to devise things, of which we have
no light, neither from Reason nor Revelation; neither have they rested here,
but upon pretense of Church Authority (which is none,) or Tradition (which for
the most part is but feigned,) they have peremptorily concluded, and
confidently imposed upon others, a necessity of entertaining conclusions of
that nature; and, to strengthen themselves, have broken out into Divisions and
Factions, opposing man to man, Synod to Synod, till the peace of the Church
vanished, without all possibility of recall: hence arose those ancient, and
many separations amongst Christians, occasioned by Arianisme, Eutychianisme,
Nestorianisme, Photinianisme, Sabellianisme, and many more both ancient, and in
our own time: all which indeed are but names of Schism; howsoever in the
common language of the Fathers, they were called Heresies, for Heresy is an
act of the will, not of the reason, and is indeed a lie and not a mistake, else
how could that of Austin go for true, Errare possum, Haereticus esse nolo:
indeed Manichanisme, Valentinianisme, Macedonianisme, Mahometisme, are truly
and properly Heresies: For, we know that the Authors of them received them not,
but invented them themselves, and so knew what they taught, to be a lie; but
can any man avouch that Arius and Nestorius, and others that taught erroneously
concerning the Trinity, and the person of our Savior, did maliciously invent
what they taught, and not rather fall upon it by error and mistake? Till that
be done, and upon good evidence, we will think no worse of all parties than
needs we must, and take these Rents in the Church to be at the worst but
Schisms, upon matter of opinion. In which case what we are to do, is not a
point of any great depth of understanding to discover, if so be distemper and
partiality do not intervene: I do not see, that opinionum varietas and
opinantium unitas, are (...), or that men of different opinions in Christian
Religion, may not hold communion in Sacris, and both go to one Church. Why may
I not go, if occasion require, to an Arian Church; so there be no Arianisme
expressed in their Liturgy; and, were Liturgies and public Forms of Service so
framed, as that they admitted not of particular and private fancies, but
contained only such things, as in which all Christians do agree; Schisms on
opinion were utterly vanished: for consider of all the Liturgies that are and
ever have been, and remove from them whatsoever is scandalous to any party, and
leave nothing but what all agree on, and the evil shall be, that the public
Service and Honor of God shall no ways suffer. Whereas to load our public
Forms, with the private fancies upon which we differ, is the most sovereign way
to perpetuate Schism unto the worlds end; Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving,
Reading of Scriptures, Administration of Sacraments in the plainest and the
simplest manner, were matter enough to furnish out a sufficient Liturgy, though
nothing either of private opinion, or of Church-Pomp, of Garments, or
prescribed Gestures, of Imagery, of Music, of matter concerning the Dead, of
many superfluities which creep into the Church, under the name of Order and
Decency, did interpose it self.

To charge Churches and Liturgies with things unnecessary, was the first
beginning of all superstition, and when scruple of conscience began to be made
or pretended, there Schism began to break in; if the special Guides and Fathers
of the Church would be a little sparing of incumbring Churches with
superfluities, or not over-rigid either in reviving obsolete Customs, or
imposing new, there would be far less cause of Schism, or Superstition, and all
the inconvenience were likely to ensue would be but this, they should in so
doing yield a little to the imbecility of their Inferiors, a thing which St.
Paul would never have refused to do; mean while wheresoever false or suspected
opinions are made a piece of Church-Liturgy, he that separate; is not the
Schismatic, for it is alike unlawful to make profession of known or suspected
falsehood, as to put in practice unlawful or suspect actions.

The third thing I named for matter of Schism was Ambition, I mean Episcopal
Ambition, showing it self especially in two heads, one concerning pluralities
of Bishops in diverse Seas. Aristotle tells us, that necessity causes but small
faults, but Avarice and Ambition were the Mother of great Crimes; Episcopal
Ambition has made this true, for no occasion has produced more frequent, more
continuous, more sanguineous Schisms, than this has done. The Sees of
Alexandria, of Constantinople, of Antioch, and above all of Rome, do abundantly
show thus much, and all Ecclesiastical stories witness no less, of which the
greatest that consists of fanctionating and tumultuating of great and potent
Bishops.

Socrates Apologizing for himself, that professing to write an Ecclesiastical
story, he did ofttimes interlace the actions of secular Princes, and other
civil business, tells us that he did this to refresh his Reader, who otherwise
were in danger to be cloyd by reading so much of the Acts: of unquiet and
unruly Bishops, (...), in which as a man may say, they made butter and cheese
one of another, for (...) (that I may show you a cast of my old Office and open
you a mystery in Grammar) properly signifies to make butter and cheese, and
because these are not made without much agitation of the milk, hence (...), by
a borrowed and translated signification, signifies to do things with much
agitation and tumult.

But that I may a little consider of the two heads, I but now specified; the
first I mentioned was the Prelacies of Bishops in one Sea. For the general
practice of the Church, since the beginning at least since the original of
Episcopacy, as now it is, was never to admit at once more than one Bishop in
one Sea; and so far in this point have they been careful to preserve unity,
that they would not have a Bishop in his Sea to have two Cathedral Churches:
which thing lately brought us a Book out of France, De Monomachia Episcoporum,
written by occasion of the Bishops of Langres: who I know not upon what fancy
could not be content with one Cathedral Church in his Diocese, but would needs
have two, which to the Author of that work seems to be a kind of Spiritual
Polygamy. It fell out amongst the Ancients very often; sometimes upon occasion
of difference in opinions, sometimes because of those who were interessed in
the choice of Bishops; that two and sometimes more were set up, and all parties
striving to maintain their own Bishop, made themselves several Churches,
several Congregations, each refusing to participate with others, and many times
proceeding to mutual Excommunications; this is that which Cyprian calls Erigere
Altar contra Altar: to this does he impute the Original of all
Church-disorders; and if you read him, you would think, he thought no other
Church-tumult to be Schism but this: This perchance may plead some excuse;
for, though in regard of Religion it self, it matters not whether there be one
or more Bishops in one Diocese; for Epiphanius reckoning up the Bishops of
Rome, makes Peter and Paul the first; and St. Augustine acknowledges for a
time he sat fellow Bishop with his Predecessor, though he excused it, that he
did so being ignorant that the contrary had been decreed by the Council of
Nice: yet it being a thing very convenient for the peace of the Church to have
it so, neither does it any whit savor of their misdemeanor, their punishment
sleeps not, who unncessarily and wantonly go about to infringe it.

But that other head of Episcopal Ambition, concerning Supremacy of Bishops in
diverse Seas, one claiming Supremacy over another, as it has been from time to
time, a great trespass against the Churches Peace, so it is now the final ruin
of it. The East and West through the fury of the two prime Bishops, being
irremediably separated without all hope of Reconcilement. And besides all this
mischief, it is founded on a vice contrary to all Christian humility, without
which no man shall see his Savior; for they do but abuse themselves and
others, that would persuade us, that Bishops by Christ's institution have any
superiority over other men further than of Reverence, or that any Bishop is
Superior to another further than positive order, agreed upon amongst
Christians, has prescribed: for we have believed him that has told us, that
in Jesus Christ there is neither high nor low, and that in giving honor, every
man should be ready to prefer another before himself; which saying cuts off all
claim certainly of Superiority, by title of Christianity, except men think that
these things were spoken only to poor and private men. Nature and Religion
agree in this, that neither of them has an hand in this Heraldry of Secundum
sub and supra: All this comes from the Composition and Agreement of men amongst
themselves; wherefore this abuse of Christianity to make it Lacquey to
Ambition, is a vice for which I have no extraordinary name of Ignominy, and an
ordinary I will not give it, lest you should take so transcendent a vice to be
but trivial.

Now concerning Schism arising upon these heads, you cannot be for behavior
much to seek: for, you may safely communicate with all parties as occasion
shall call you, and the Schismatics here are all those who are head of the
faction, together with all those who foment it: for private and indifferent
persons, they may be spectators of these contentious as securely in regard of
any peril of Conscience (for of danger in Purse or Person, I keep no account)
as at a Cock-fight where Serpents fight, who cares who has the better? the
best wish is that both may perish in the fight.

And for Conventicles, of the nature of which we desire to be informed, thus
much in general evidently appears, that all Meetings upon an unnecessary
separation are to be so styled, so that in sense a Conventicle is nothing else
but a Congregation of Schismatics, yet time has taken leave sometimes to fix
this name upon good and honest Meetings, and that perchance not altogether
without good reason; for without public Religious Meetings thus it fares:
First, it has been at all times confessed necessary, that God requires not
only inward and private Devotion, when men either in their hearts and Closets,
or within their private walls, pray, praise, confess and acknowledge; but he
further requires all those things to be done in public, by troops and shoales
of men, and from hence have proceeded public Temples, Altars, forms of
service, appointed times, and the like, which are required for open Assemblies,
yet whilst men were truly pious, all Meetings of men for mutual help of piety
and devotion wheresoever and by whomsoever celebrated, were permitted, without
exception.

But when it was espied that ill-affected persons abused private Meetings,
whether Religious or Civil, to evil ends; Religiousness to cross impiety, as
appears in the Ethnic Elusinia, and Bacchanalia, and Christian Meetings under
the Pagan Princes, when for fear they durst not come together in open view,
were charged with foul imputations, as by the report of Christians themselves
plainly appears, and civil Meetings many times under pretense of friendly and
neighbourly visits, sheltered treasonable attempts against Princes and
Common-weals.

Hence both Church and State joined, and jointly gave order for Forms, Times,
Places of public Meetings, whether for Religious or Civil ends. And all other
Meetings whatsoever, besides those of which both Time and Place, are limited;
They censured for Routs and Riots, and unlawful Assemblies in the State, and in
the Church for Conventicles.

So that it is not lawful, no not for prayer, for hearing, for Conference, for
any other Religious Office whatsoever, for people to assemble otherwise, than
by public Order is allowed; neither may we complain of this in times of
corruption, for why should men desire to do that suspiciously in private which
warrantably may be performed in public.

But in times of manifest corruptions and persecutions, wherein Religious
assembling is dangerous, private Meetings howsoever, besides public order, are
not only lawful, but they are of necessity and duty: else how shall we excuse
Meetings of Christians for public Service, in time of danger and persecutions,
and of our selves in Queen Mary's days? And how will those of the Roman Church
amongst us, put off the imputation of Conventicling, who are known amongst us
privately to assemble for Religious exercises, against all established order,
both in State and Church? For indeed all pious Assemblies in times of
persecution and corruptions howsoever practiced, are indeed or rather alone the
lawful Congregations, and public Assemblies, though according to form of Law,
are indeed nothing else but Riots and Conventicles, if they be stained with
corruption and superstition.

FINIS.

