A Gracious Reproof TO PHARASAICAL SAINTS, Causlesly murmuring at GODS MERCIES
TOWARD PENITENT SINNERS.

In Explication of Luc. 15.30, 31.

Written by JOHN HORN sometimes Minister of Lin Allhallows.

Psalm. 119.1, 2, 3. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the Law
of the Lord.

Blessed are they that keep his Testimonies, and seek him with the whole heart.

They also do no iniquity, they walk in his ways.

Bat -- As for transgressors woe to them, for destruction shall be to the
workers of iniquity,

Psalm. 37.38. Prove. 20.29. Is thine eye evil because mine is good? Matthew 20.15.
London, Printed for Tho. Passenger at the three Bibles on London bridge, 1668.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
WHither thou be Saint or Sinner (and one of them assuredly thou art) thou
may through Gods blessing find something useful for thee, and I hope worthy
thy perusal, and serious consideration in this ensuing Treatise. If thou be
one that knowlest the grace of God in truth, and thereby art sanctified to God
and followest after holiness, here is that that may persuade thee, and show
thee caus^ to be holy still, and to go on in denying all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, to live soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present world;
abiding in Christ, and walking with God. Both as it sets before thee the good
and blessed state of those that so do, and as it shows the miserable and sad
state of those that do otherwise; and especially of such as having tasted the
graciousness of the Lord, withdraw from him again, and after they have begun to
be good, turn to do badly, forsaking the way of uprightness, to walk in the
ways of darkness, Prove. 2.13. of which therefore also it does admonish thee.
However strongly thou think thou stand, that thou take heed of falling, of
which there is need enough to be admonished in this back sliding (and truly,
and too shamefully) adulterous and sinful generation; Wherein they that depart
from iniquity make themselves a prey; and wherein men being frighted from, or
scoffed and derided at for nothing so much as truth and plety; there is too
general a temptation upon men be afraid, or ashamed to be (or however to
confess and show themselves to be) seriously holy and religious. Atheism,
Prophanes^, Popery, and all manner of debauchery growing into fashion, and
nothing (scarce) looked upon as more obsolete and antic, than soundness and
sincerity with true zeal and fervency in the exercise and practice of the truth
of Religion. And yet it also admonishes thee to beware of the leaven Pharasees
which is hypocrisy: of being too rash and censorious in judging those that
having been profane and evil livers, or abusers of God's grace and truth,
return therefrom to a better mind; or of judging God's, and Christ's, or his
Servants dealings with such, when by the profession of such persons, he, or
evidently and apparently they, are more gracious and ready to receive sinners
than thou would have them. There is nothing more eminently discovered in God,
than love and charity to the souls of men; whereof the whole Gospel, and all
the holy men in the Scriptures bear their testimony, especially in his
receiving repentant sinners. And therefore nothing should be more desired by
us, and rejoiced in on their behalf, than their conversion to him, and finding
his gracious acceptance. God's children should be (and are in some measure)
like to God himself, who is their Father, and therefore as his elect, holy, and
beloved, put on bowels of mercy, kindness, lowliness of mind, long-suffering --
and above all charity, which is the bond of all perfection, as the Apostle
exhorts, Col. 3.12.14. Nor does any thing (scarce) make men liker the Devil
than to endeavor to hinder or to repine at the conversion of sinners or God's
mercy to them, as that was one concomitant (or product rather) of the Pharasees
zeal and religion, their opposing Christ, and grudging at him, for his charity
to sinners; so, I suppose, it was none of the least of the ingredients of that
evil frame which occasioned his stiling them the children of the Devil, Joh.
8.44. Well may we be glad indeed, when we find any such thing as a sincere
convert in these evil days, and God gracious to sinners therein: When there are
so many Apostates from God, so few Converts to him.

Converts there may be some to this or that opinion or practice, from some open
prophanness, sometimes to thriftiness, and worldliness (and yet even such
conversions are not so frequent in these days, as from thriftiness to
prodagality and rudeness) sometimes possibly to some opinionative profession,
or zealous endeavor after righteousness, that is, not Gods, but men's own; but
few that when they return, return to the Lord, Jer. 4.1. to mind, and receive,
and walk in the knowledge and faith of him, and his great goodness to mankind in
Jesus Christ our Lord, and so to behold his glory, as thereby to be changed
into his image by the operation of his power and spirit, and so to worship God
in the spirit, as testifying of his grace in his Son. Phil. 3.3. Rejoice in
Jesus Christ, and have no confidence in the flesh. When we see any turning to
this we have cause to be glad and rejoice for them, for they turn from death to
life, from misery to salvation, and unspeakable felicity. But alas! more play
the Prodigals in going from Christ and God, and the living in the faith and
knowledge of him as the fountain of life and righteousness, to live upon either
their outward or inward receipts from him, their riches, friends, wit, parts, or
their righteous frames and endeavors, receipts, and seize, (which lived
upon will soon, with the Prodigals patrimony, be spent, and leave them to loss
and beggary, or ^ servile drudgery and desire of husks) then do imitate him in
returning to God and Christ, to live in his house, and upon him, and his
provision therein, the grace (not in us, but) in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.1.
which is, and may be, matter of great lamentation. Yet, if thou be a sinner,
walking in thy self, thine own will, wisdom, righteousness, lusts, affections
or appetites, and so not in Christ Jesus, not in the way of understanding, not
in the spirit, but in the flesh, and so in a state of sin, (as such there be
great store, both of persons in a sort zealous and of profane) here is that
that may move thee to repent and to turn to God therefrom. Both the evil and
dangerousness of the state of sin and sinners, and the acceptableness to God of
true and unfeined repentance in returning to Christ, and so to God in and by
him is here touched upon; and its largely evidenced, that God is ready to
embrace such as so do return, and to give them the most sure signs and pledges
of his mercy toward them, as having joy in their salvation. And indeed this is
the main scope of the Parable herein paraphrastically explicated, and of the
Text opened and applied, and by consequence (of a great part at least) of the
ensuing discourse, to commend to thee the great goodness of God (as to those
that walk with him in his ways, to which he invites thee in calling thee to
repentance, so also) to those that turn at his reproofs into his ways; in his
readiness to forgive sins past through his forbearance, and to testify his
gladness for their escape from the dangers of destruction they were in while
sinning; in his giving them the comforts of his grace in Christ, and taking
them under his most safe and satisfying protection and blessing. Surely, as its
better to be feasting and making merry at home with a rich, liberal, and loving
Father, than to be abroad among strangers (nay enemies) in a strange Country,
keeping swine in the cold fields, and ready there to perish with hunger: So
(and far more) better is it to be in God's fear, and in the faith of Jesus,
walking in the ways of righteousness, and enjoying the comforts of the Holy
Ghost, in the assured persuasions of God's favor toward us, and of eternal
life and happiness, than to be the drudges and sworn vassels of sin and Satan,
grapling with the stings of an accusing Conscience, and fears of God's most
dreadful and everlasting wrath and vengeance, and hurried on in the ways of sin
thereto by evil spirits, who rejoice so much in nothing as in bringing men unto
everlasting destruction. The assured hope of attaining which good things, and
escaping which evil things, is in this Parable and discourse set clearly before
thee, as to the good ground thereof, to be proved in an hearty turning to God
in Christ by thee: And verily, the certainty of speeding well in any course is
a marvailous great spur to the undertaking it; hope of profit and pleasure upon
uncertain grounds usually draw men to great adventures here, much more do
certain. Behold here certain grounds of hoping for and expecting the greatest
profits and pleasures that are possible, proposed to thee to move thee to
repentance. Even a certainty grounded upon God's word, who cannot lie; and
Christ's accustomed grace to repentant sinners, who being the Son of God,
neither can nor will deceive us. Oh then mind, and be moved by them to serious
and speedy repentance; thy time is short, thy life uncertain, if thou dye in
thy sins, all hope of mercy is for ever gone; lay hold therefore of the present
opportunity while it is afforded thee, lay hold on eternal life, enter the
strait gate, set upon the holy race, and so run therein as thou may obtain.
Men will diverse together run in an earthly race for an earthly prize of any
great value, though they know before hand that but one of them shall obtain it;
but in this heavenly race is a heavenly prize exceeding all earthly values, and
all that run for it aright are sure to obtain it; no ones getting it shall
hinder another that runs with him. Yea (as in the Parable of the laborers in
the Vineyard, Matthew. 20.) they that set out a great deal later than others, may
yet be at the race end as soon, and obtain it as fully and certainly as they
that set out before them. So that thou may run at a certainty and fight, not
as one that beats the Air, but to good purpose, if thou will but yet be
persuaded to set upon this heavenly race, and holy combat, against sin and
Satan. Let the greatness of the gain then proposed, of the pleasures promised,
of the satisfaction assured, and the greatness of the certainty of attaining
them in a serious turning to God in Christ to seek after and endeavor for
them, draw thee into a steadfast resolution of quitting thy ways of sin and
falsehood, and embracing, and walking on the ways of righteousness and
salvation: And do it betimes, and without delay, least thou defer too long, and
the Devil, and Sin draw thee on by little and little, till they bring thee
inevitably into Perdition.

But peradventure Satan will suggest unto thee, to hinder thee of the good both
of these my advices, and of the whole following Treatise, such thoughts as some
men harbor in their hearts (yea, and some fear not to utter with their
tongues) reasoning to this purpose. All men are under one or other of these two
absolute Decrees, either of Election unto life, or of Reprobation to
destruction, and therefore I must needs be under one of them also. If I be
Elect (as I hope I am) then to what purpose is all your cost and labor, for
its impossible for me to miscarry, what ever I do, and however I live at
present, my sins cannot frustrate God's decree and purpose, nor may you, or any
body else, lay any sin to my charge. For who shall lay any thing to the charge
of God's Elect? it is God that justifies; and if he justify me in my present
state, what need is there for me to repent that I may be justified? or who
shall condemn me, seeing Christ's death is for me, and shall secure me from all
my sins past, present, and to come, so as they cannot harm me? and whereas no
unclean thing may inherit God's kingdom, that cannot hurt me; for if I be
elected, I shall and must at one time or other be so effectually called as
against all my resistances, and notwithstanding all my present sinnings, I
shall obey, and so be washed and sanctified, and shall against all fallings, or
possibility of falling persevere in grace to the enjoyment of the inheritance:
And why then may I not take the pleasure of my sins while I may, seeing they
shall neither prejudice my conversion nor my salvation? and if it be not so
with me, but I am a reprebate, then I cannot be saved, though I should
endeavor to follow your advise and to repent. For then Christ dyed not for me,
nor has procured for me, at least, any effectual and saving grace; some common
gifts and graces indeed I may attain, some illuminations, good desires, and
half repentances, which can never translate me from under this sad Decree, but
only will serve to aggravate my future woe, while I shall sin against the
greater light and knowledge. And had I not better take my course then, and
continue as I am, than put my self upon bootless labor, to no purpose, rising
a little higher to fall the heavilier, and sink the deeper into misery?

Needful it is to endeavor the removal of these reasonings out of thy mind,
which retained will render all good advise to thee wholly ineffectual; and so

Answ. 1. Fabrit. Lac. Com. ex oper. Luth. clas. 2. p 93, 94.
I might say with Luther. Istae voces sunt sceleratae, si praedestinatus sum
sive been, sive male egero salvabor, etc. those are wicked sayings. If I be
praedestinate, live I how I will I shall be saved, they tend to harden thy
heart in thy sin, while it is called to day; whereas the Holy Ghost says, To
day if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts, Heb. 6.7, 8, 15.

2. They that maintain those premises as true, yet approve not thy inferences;
either therefore thou inferrest groundlesly, or else the premises themselves be
very faulty, that will bear such inferences as the owners of the premises be
almost all ashamed of. Sure, as no lie is of the truth, so that cannot be sound
doctrine that will support shameful and vicious inferences.

3. Thy conceptions of the business of election to life are evidently gross
mistakes, while thou supposest that any such as thou art may possibly be of
God's Elect in their present unconverted state; for the Elect in Scripture
language have such characters and descriptions as agree not to thee or to any
unconverted sinful livers. For to instance, they are such as,

1. Cry night and day to God, Luc. 18.7. so as neither thou, nor any such as
thou does.

2. They can scarcely (if possibly) be deceived by the most subtle seducers,
Mat. 24.24. but thou (and all unconverted sinners) are actually under the power
of the deceits of sin and Satan, and any of the Libertines that would entice
thee to sin, saying, it cannot hinder thee of salvation, may soon deceive thee,
being in such principles already snared.

3. The Elect are such as none can lay any thing to the charge of, or condemn,
being justified of God, and Christ's death, resurrection, ascension, and
intercession, being prevalent with God to present them acceptable to him, Romans
8.33, 34. which is the privilege of such as are in Christ Jesus, not walking
after the flesh (as thou and unregenerate sinners do) but after the spirit, and
not of any walking after the flesh, Romans 8.1, 13, 14. for God does, and men
with his allowance may lay sin to the charge of such, and so to thee, and
condemn both thee and them. For he that believes not in the Name of the Son of
God is condemned already, because he has not believed on him, Joh. 3.18, 19.
Yea, and

4. The Election has obtained (namely, to righteousness) when others are
hardened or blinded, Romans 11.7. with 9.30, 31. but thou, and all unconverted
impenitent sinners, are short of righteousness, and have not obtained it.

5. The Elect and Chosen to salvation, are chosen to it (in or) through the
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth, says 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. and
(in or) by the sanctification of the Spirit to obedience, and sprinkling of the
blood of Jesus Christ, says 1 Pet. 1.2. But thou that art an unconverted
sinner art a stranger to all those things, being not sanctified in thy spirit
by God's Spirit, but an unbeliever of, and disobedient to the truth, and
therefore also unsprinkled in thy mind and conscience with the precious blood
of Christ. These things show that thy supposition of being possibly one of the
elect, is very groundless, nor yet do I conclude thee a reprobate, and one that
may not in repenting be saved; for though no ungodly one can be called an
Elect one, yet for ungodly ones Christ has dyed, Romans 5.6. and God calls such
to repentance, and such repenting have been saved, Isa. 55.7. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10,
11.

4. I might add with Luther. Deus huic curiositati occurrit, dicens. Ego tibi
praedestinationem egregie manifestabo, etc. God meets with thy curiosity,
saying, I will excellently manifest to thee the mystery of my Election, but not
in that way of reason and fleshly wisdom which thou imaginest; but thus I will
do, of a God unrevealed, I will become a God revealed, and yet I will abide the
same God still, I will be incarnate, I will send my Son, who shall dye for thy
sins, and rise again, and so I will fulfill thy desire. Lo! this is my beloved
Son, hear him; behold him lying in the Manger, or in his Mothers Lap, and
hanging on the Cross; mind what he has done and said, there thou may behold
me, if thou hear and love him, then thou art predestinate to life; other
ways of reason slay thou, because God detests them. Let this be thy business to
receive the Son of God, let him be pleasing in thy heart, in his Nativity,
Miracles, and Cross, for there is the Book of Life in which men's names be
written. Thus Luther excellently on Genesis 26. To which let me add,

5. It is good for us to know the truth as it is in Jesus, and there we may
rightly discern Election and Reprobation, both in Decree and Execution, the
eternal purpose and grace given us in Christ before the agey times (...), being
now made manifest by the coming of Christ, etc, 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. and so certain
it is,

1. That God of mere favor and grace chose the seed of Abraham, of Isaac, of
Jacob, of David, even Jesus of Nazareth made of their seed according to the
flesh to be the Savior of the world, and the heir and inheritor (even in the
manhood) of all the fullness of the grace, spirit, blessing, and glory of God,
so as by him, and him only they may be communicated to others also, and in all
this to be the seed in whom all the families of the earth were to be blessed,
see Isa. 42.1. Gal. 3.16, 17. 1 Pet. 2 4.

2. With respect to Christ he chose Abraham and his seed after him, to
excellent honor and privileges above all other people, yet not all his seed,
nor any merely upon that account, but him in whom his seed even Christ should
be called, that is, Isaac, Genesis 21.12. Romans 9.7. whereas Ishmaell also was his
seed after the flesh. And of Isaac, before his two children were born, or had
done any good or evil (that his purpose of Election might stand not of works,
but of him that calls) he chose Jacob to be the progenitor of Christ, and to
have the choice knowledge of God and his Oracles deposited with him, and he
took or adopted all his children to be brought up as his houshold-servants or
children under the nurture and instruction of the same, and so to have the
pre-eminence therein, even above Esau and his posterity, whom he destinated
Nationally to be servants to them, see Genesis 25.23. Mal 1.1, 2. (which as it is
an act of less love, may be called hatred, as less love is in the Scripture so
called, Genesis 29.30, 31. Luc. 14.26. though it is not said He hated Esau, till
it is said too, and he laid waste his Mountains; not before the two children
were born, but in Malachies time, Mal. 1.2. with Romans 9.13.) yet so as the
blessing in Jacob's seed (that is, Christ) should be for all the Nations or
Families of the earth, Genesis 28.13. out of which number Esaus could not be
excluded, in submitting to and serving him; but the honor to have the blessing
to spring out of his seed, and so that salvation should be of them, and they to
be as his children or houshold-servants, a people near to him in respect of
whom others were to be as Subjects and Servants at a greater distance) this
belonged to Israel alone, Psalm. 147.19, 20. and 148.14. yet in this he bound
not his own hands, but that in case these his adopted children or household
servants rebelled against him, and would neither by mercies and lenity, nor by
his threatenings and punishments be reclaimed, he might harden and give them up,
yea, and cut them off and destroy them as any of the other Nations about them,
and call in others into their places as he pleased. Even as Solomon (suppose)
chose himsef houshold-servants who had great privileges, so as to be
pronounced happy in them, because they might stand before him and bear his
wisdom, so as his remote subjects could not (though he was good and just to
them also) yet he was at liberty for all that choice, to cast off or put to
death any of those his servants as well as others, in case they lifting up
themselves in pride should rebel against him, and might have taken out of his
remoter subjects whom he had pleased, the dispose of honors being not of any
of the servants, however forward or obedient, but of himself the Lord; though
to such as were ready to obey he would be ready to give good honors and
rewards as he saw fitting. So was the case here, as the proposals of his choice
honors by him (of whom the dispose is even him that shows mercy, and not of
any that wills or runs for them upon condition of their obedience to be
continued to them, and his threatningt of destruction otherwise, and to call in
and honor those that were not a people into their place, evince, see Exodus
19.5, 6. Deuteronomy. 7.10, 11, 12. and 8.19, 20. and 28.1, 13, 43, 44. and 32, 21.
with Romans 10.19. though yet out of love to their Fathers he engaged that he
would not utterly cast away all their seed, but reserve a remnant always, with
whom he would take pains, as it were, further, and use means still to reclaim
them to obedience, and being made obedient, receive them into favor again see
for this Jer. 30, 11. and 46.28. Zech. 13.8, 9. with Romans 11.28. and in all
this he exercised, and still exercises such power over men, as a Potter over
his clay, framing them in his providential government one to honor, and
another to dishonor, executing wrath also on one when fitted to destruction,
and showing mercy and long-suffering to another, and so having mercy on whom he
will have mercy, and hard^ning in their sins and rebellions whom he will, and
so he has had mercy now on us Gentiles, and framed us to honor, even the
honor foregiven to Israel (as to many things in it) having called us into
their place, and has showed severity to them, giving them up to hardness and
blindness, and framing them to dishonor, because of their unbelief and
stumbling at Christ, Romans 9.30, 31, 32, 33. and 11, 20. though yet he has not
so rejected them, but that the Apostle still prayed for them, and endeavored
(even for such as had stumbled) that they might be saved, Romans 10.1. and 11.14.
telling us they have not stumbled that they might fall* and that God is able to
graft them in again, ^^d will if they continue not in unbelief; nor has he so
honored us, but that if we continue not in his goodness we also shall be
broken off, Chap. 11.11, 23, 24 That Is the substance of those two too much
mistaken Chapters of Romans 9. and 11. and what I have here said of them agrees
with the other Scriptures.

3. Now in all this God still reserves the dignity of giving eternal life to
Jesus Christ only, to which he has chosen in him from before the foundations
of the world, all that are or come to be, and abide in him, through the
prevailing force of his grace with them, choosing, culling, and bringing them
out of the world into him, or daining, framing, and disposing their hearts to
eternal life, and so to believe on him for it, whither they be of the Jews or
Gentiles, the honored or dishonored vessels, 2 Timothy 2.21. as it is said, Know
ye that God has set apart for himself (that is, to be holy and blameless
before him in love, so as all the chosen into the former privileges of the
visible Church are not) the man that is Godly, Psalm. 4.3. (typified in Isaac,
Gal. 4.23, 28, 31.) Ephesians. 1.4. rejecting all that refuse and disobey Christ,
whither Jews or Gentiles, whither they be workers for life according to any law
of works, and rejoycers in their fleshly privileges, of whom Ishmael was a
type, Gal. 4.22, 23, 24, 25. or profane abusers of the goodness and grace of
God, typified in Esau, Heb. 12.16, 17. and therefore it behooves thee, and all
men, to come to Christ, and to his grace, wherein the Election is. For,

4 As salvation comes of the Jews by Gods Election, and has in it blessing for
all the families of the earth; so from that (even from Christ, who is Gods
salvation to the ends of the earth, Isa. 49 6.) none in Scripture language are
called Reprobate till through their willful resistances against the light,
truth, and grace of God extended to them through Christ, all means used toward
them becoming ineffectual, God gives them up and leaves striving with them, as
Psalm. 81.10, 11, 12, 13. Jer. 6.8, 8, 29, 30. Romans 1.21, 24, 28. 1 These. 2.10,
11, 12. for Christ that blessed seed, and Gods salvation, has dyed and therein
given himself a ransom for all, and tasted death by the grace of God for every
one, and is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15,
1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. 1 John 2.2. And God himself, who cannot lie, has sworn
as he lives that he has no pleasure (none neither secret nor revealed) in the
death of the wicked (by his still sinning,) but rather that he should turn and
live; and therefore calls such (even the worst of sinners, the simple,
scorners, fools that hate knowledge, and such as disobeying these his calls to
the end shall perish, and he will laugh at the destruction of) saying, Turn ye
at my reproofs, behold I will pour out my spirit to you, and make known my
words, Isa. 55.7. Exek. 33.11. Proc. 1.22, 23, 24, 25. Thence does Paul the
Apostle of the Gentiles tell us, that God wills that all be saved and come to
the knowledge (or acknowledgment) of the truth (which in a measure therefore at
all times he was making known to and in the heathens, so as they of them also
that rebelled were without excuse, Romans 1.18, 19, 20, 21. with 2.22; 14, 15) he
being one God both of Jews and Gentiles, and having constituted one Mediator of
God and Men (indefinitely) the man Jesus Christ, even him who has given
himself a ransom for all, a testimony in due (or in their proper) seasons
(whence those frequent calls of all Nations and all the earth to make a joyful
noise to God, serve him with gladness, enter his Courts with thank fullness, as
in Psalm. 66.1 and 98 4. and 100. and 117) and Peter the Apostle of the
Circumcision tells us the same, that God is not willing that any perish, but
that all should come to repentance, and therefore is patient toward us, and
his long-suffering is to be accounted salvation, as be says Paul also writes
(as indeed he does in Romans 2.4, 5.) in whose writings he says are some things
hard to be understood which they that are unlearned and unstable (namely in the
mystery of Christ) wrest to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3 9, 15, 16. now what
might those things more likely be, then those in which he seems to the
unskillful to say that God would have some to perish, and that his
long-suffering is out of a purpose to destroy them? which thou that pleadest
so, as before is said, and such as thou art evidently wrest by your inferences
to your destruction? Better it is to believe the plain sayings of those holy
men, which they have delivered as the sum of the doctrine committed to them to
be declared by them in all the world (as the Apostle Paul expressly says of
those passages above recited in 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. that they are the testimony
whereunto he was ordained an Herald or Preacher, and an Apostle, a Teacher of
the Gentiles (not in equivocation and deceit, for verily God sent not his
servants into the world to deceive men with lies, but in faith and verity, ver.
7) judging those understandings of, or inferences and doctrines from any other
sayings of Scripture about abstruser things, that clash with those plain
sayings to be mistakes, than to lean to such understandings or inferences
against them. Mind also what our Savior replied to one that asked him, if
there were but few that should be saved, and obey his counsel thereupon,
bidding him to strive to enter the strait gate before it was shut, as the next
verse implies, Luc. 13.24, 25. He taught him not to believe according to thy
reasonings that either he must be pulled in, strive he never so much against
it, or else there was no admittance for him, but all his strivings to enter
would be lost labor to him Our Savior calls all the ends of the earth to look
up to him, and be saved, he being a just God, and a Savior that has not said
to the house of Israel (and by consequence to no body else) that they should
seek his face in vain; but he speaks in righteousness, and declares right
things, Isa. 45.19, 21, 22. whosoever comes to him, he says, he will in no
wise cast them out, he coming down from heaven to do his Fathers will, and that
is, that every one that sees or beholds) the Son, and believes in him should
have everlasting life, Joh. 6.37, 38, 40. Ask therefore, and thou shall
receive; seek, and thou shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to thee, for
(he says not some only that are elected to it, but) every one that asks,
receives; and he that seeks, finds; and and to him that knocks, it shall be
opened, Mat 7.7, 8. cease thy reasonings then, and instead thereof; Incline
thine ear, and come unto Christ; hear, and thy soul shall live, Isa. 55.2, 3.
Assure thy self God is no respecter of persons, if thou hearing consent and
obey, thou shall eat the good things of the promised inheritance; but if thou
persist in thy disobedience thou shall be destroyed, for the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it, Isa. 1.19, 20. and let this suffice to those thy reasonings.
But,

2. If thou add and say, some that believe the Doctrine I herein preach, take
liberty therefrom to sin, and may as well as from the other principles; for if
Christ dyed for all, then must all be eternally saved, and having liberty to
turn to Christ, when they will, given them through Christ, they may be bold to
sin still, till they please to turn. I say briefly,

1. That men may, and will take liberty too often to sin, where none is given
them, many do abuse Gods goodness and truth to their own destruction, and yet
his truth and goodness are blameless therein, for its usually by believing some
lie which they add to his truth, and for which he will reprove them, Prove.
30.6. and so thou here addest falsehoods to his truth. For,

2. Neither do the Scriptures nor I, nor any that hold closely to them teach
thee, that all that Christ dyed for, must and shall therefore be saved
eternally; but on the contrary they say, that some deny the Lord that bought
them (as thou do while thou deniest to believe in, and live to him) and bring
upon themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2.1. and that those that Christ dyed
for may stumble and turn from him, and in so doing may be destroyed and perish,
Romans 14.15. 1 Cor. 8.11. and upon that account they warn believers to take heed
of offending their weak brethren. Christ having dyed for all that they that
live might live to him, will therefore adjudge to a terrible destruction, such
as refuse to live to him, choosing to live to themselves and to their sins, 2
Cor. 5.10, 11, 14, 15.

3. Nor do they assert that any man that refuses to turn at Christ's calls at
the present, have liberty given them by him to turn when they will: every
obstinate holding fast of sin, and refusing to turn when he gives liberty in
his calls by his grace (without which, and further than that effects it, none
have any liberty at all to any thing that is spiritually good) forfeits the
liberty given, and God may (should he be severe to take the forfeiture as
sometimes he does) upon that account withdraw it, and swear in his wrath, that
men not entering his rest, when by his grace they might, they shall not enter it
afterward if they would, Number. 14.22, 23, 40, 41, 42. and that making excuses
when he calls them, and they might come, they shall not afterward taste of his
Supper to which he called them, Luc. 14.18, 19, 24. Every act of willful
sinning hardens the heart and grieves Gods spirit, and provokes him to depart,
and cease striving with, or drawing a man, and if God cease drawing no man can
come to Christ without his drawing. Therefore take heed of provoking him
thereto by such thy murmurings, Joh. 6.43, 44. Yet a little while the light is
with thee, walk while thou have the light least darkness come upon thee, and
then thou walk thou know not whither, Joh. 12.35. no man has power over the
spirit, either his own to live as long as he list, or Gods that it shall work
with him as long as he please, close with him therefore while its yet a day of
salvation, Eccles. 8.8. 2 Cor. 6.1, 2.

One thing more I have to warn thee of, and I shall conclude, namely, that thou
abuse not any passage in this following Treatise about Gods goodness to great
sinners, or sudden receiving or comforting any such upon their repentance;
either to encourage thee to sin, or to harbor unsoundness in thy repentings.
Its only they that truly and unfeignedly repent that find God so gracious,
which as he has not promised to any man presuming to sin, so they that are
unsound therein, neither sooner nor latter find acceptance. The Prodigal in the
Parable did not only see, and say it was good for him to arise, and go to his
Father, or better than to lie there and ^^pine and perish, and yet lie there
still; nor did he only rise up and step (...) step or two, and turn back again,
for so his Father had never espied him, so as to run, and meet, and embrace
him: but he resolved, and arose, and went; purposed it seriously, and performed
it really; and then he presently found hearty welcome, go thou and do likewise.
Its not bare convincements, faint wishes, good desires, or half repentances,
but in the minding Gods grace, a serious and thorough arising up from sin, and
returning to God in Christ that finds acceptance.

The occasion of my penning this discourse was mainly what befell a woman in
our Town of Lin, who sinning against much light and grace from God, was by his
just and severe judgment left so to sin, and her sin so brought to light, as
brought her to a shameful death; who, though God would not spare her from such
a death here, to warn others not to sin, yet seemed to have found such mercy
with God, as gave her much comfort at her end. I thought to have inserted the
Relation of her, but forbear at present, least I should occasion too much
sorrow to, if not anger also in her relations. Perhaps, I may publish something
hereafter, if I judge it convenient, in the inte^ peruse and make good use of
what I have here done, and God give his blessing with it. To whom committing
thee, and it, and my self, and begging thy prayers for me, if thou have any
acquaintance with him. I rest,

Thine in what I am able for thy helpfulness, Jo. Horn.
Lin, May 16. 1668.
A Gracious REPROOF TO PHARASAICAL SAINTS, Murmuring at God's Mercies TO
PENITENT SINNERS.
Luke 15.31, 32. But he said unto him, Son thou art ever with me, and all that
I have is thine. It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad. For this
thy Brother was dead, and is a live again; was lost, and is found.


CHAP. I. The Preface paraphrasing the Parables of the lost Sheep, and lost
Groat, with the occasion of them.
IT is a hard thing for men to know or think themselves righteous, yea, though
but comparatively better than some of their Neighbors, and not be proud of it;
and when men are proud of themselves, they are very prone to disdain others,
whom they think not so good as themselves. Yea, and when they see God, or his
Servants, preferring such upon any account, or in any way of testimony thereof
before; nay, if but equalizing them with themselves, they are apt to envy and
fret against those persons therefore: yea, and to fault such Servants of God
that so do, and sometimes to contend against God himself. For such is the
nature of Pride, that it lifts up it self above all, and apts to be angry at,
and offended with, what or whosoever opposes it. All which observations we may
make from, and find verified in the Pharisees; who thinking themselves (though
falsely) righteous, disdained at sinners, and murmured at Christ (himself the
prime servant of God, yea, God himself) because of his gentleness and goodness
toward sinners. So when Matthew, otherwise called Levi, a Publican, being
himself converted, made a feast for Christ and his Disciples, and invited many
Publicans and sinners to come and eat with him: Christ not refusing their
company thereat, but laying hold of that occasion, to become their good
Physician, for curing those spiritual diseases, which threatened their
destruction, the Pharasees were offended at him, Mat. 9.10, 11. Mar. 2.14.15,
16. Luke 5.27, 28, 29, 30. And so was Simon the Pharasee, because he suffered a
sinful woman to come so near him, as to wash, and wipe, and kiss his feet, as
he sat at Dinner with him, Luke 7.37, 38, 39. And the like temper we find to
have been in them here, in what is said of them in the two first verses of this
Luke 15. for after Christ had informed his Disciples of what they must look to
part with and forgo, that will be indeed his Disciples, and how dangerous it is
for those that have begun to follow him, and therein to partake of his virtues,
to prove Apostates and Backsliders, Chap. 14, 25, 34. yet it follows ver. 1. of
this Chapter. Then resorted to him all the Publicans and Sinners to hear him.
As if notwithstanding all he had told them (as that they who will be his
Disciples must, in a sense, hate their dearest relations and enjoyments, yea
their very lives, forsaking all for his sake, if he call them to it; and that
such as forsake him after they have partook of any thing of his virtues are as
salt that has lost its favor, good for nothing, the vilest of men.) Yet then,
for all this, ver. 2. All the Publicans and Sinners drew nigh to hear him, and
the Pharisees and Scribes murmured, saying, This man receives sinners, and
eats with them. By sinners meaning such as were notoriously such, such, as if
called Brethren, as making profession of religion with us, we may not afterward
eat with, 1 Cor. 5.11. till they repent them. It seems with such Christ eat,
being not professedly his Disciples as yet; and while they were such sinners;
and therein testified more civility, or familiarity toward them, then the
Pharisees in their stricter way of Religion could well like of: and therefore
they murmured against him. But he for vindicating his own charitable demeanor
toward those Sinners, spoke a Parable to them; yea, three Parables, which take
up all the rest of the Chapter. The first is, of a man having an hundred Sheep,
and losing one of them; which the more effectually to silence their murmuring,
he would have any one of them to make it his own case, ver. 3.4, 5, 6. And he
spoke unto them this Parable, saying, What man of you having an hundred sheep,
if he lose one of them, does not leave the ninty, and nine in the Wilderness,
and go after that which is lost, until he finds it; and when he has found it
he lays it upon his shoulders, rejoicing: and when he is come home, he calls
together his friends, and neighbors, sayings, Rejoice with me, for I have
found my Sheep that was lost. His defense is very just and pregnant, for what is
a Sheep to a Soul? yea, what is one Sheep of an hundred to many sinful men and
women, perhaps almost an hundred for one? and if they could not content
themselves with their ninety and nine Sheep safe, when but one was missing, but
that leaving the ninety and nine in the Wilderness where they also might meet
with danger, they would undertake the care and labor of seeking one filly
Sheep, and seek while they find it, and not be weary with seeking it: yea, and
would bear the burden of its weight in bringing it home when found, that they
so might bring it the safelier home, and would make such mirth with cost for it
when its brought home, as to invite their Friends and Neighbors to make merry
with them for it: What reason had they to be angry at his Charity to the
precious Souls of a multitude, every one of which is of a greater value then
all their flock of Sheep, an hundred times multiplied? when as also his
fetching them up exposes not others to any hazard of their being wronged or
lost in the interim, whatever pains, labor, or cost it might put upon him to
seek them up, or what ever burden to sustain and bring them home, when found
by him? when as too, though they were causlesly offended, yet those who were
far their betters, and before them in hatred of sin, and love of holiness, were
highly pleased. For applying the Parable, he adds, Verse 7. I say unto you,
that even so there will be joy in heaven over one Sinner that repents, more
then over ninety and nine just persons who need no repentance. Not that heaven
is not glad for just persons keeping their way, and not offending, so as to
lose themselves; but as their Charity in a sort leads them to be sorry for the
evil and danger a sinner brings himself into: so answerable to that sorrow for
that, is their joy the greater when that danger is over, and the object of
their Charity has escaped or recovered it: Even as a loving Father, or
indulgent Mother having many Children, is more exercised for one of them wen
sick, and in danger to dye, or to be lost: and answerably is more glad when
that danger is escaped then for all the rest about whom they were not so
exercised. And if there be such joy in heaven for one sinner that repents,
sure then it is a good work to seek and endeavor their repentance. And what is
it leads any here on earth then to hinder, yea, or grudge at any good endeavor
to that purpose; or the cheerful entertainment of such in their converting into
fellowship with them? it cannot be their holiness, or hatred of sin; for that
is found more abundantly in heaven then in any here: therefore it must be their
Ignorance, Pride, or Uncharitableness, etc.

2. The second Parable is of a Woman having ten pieces of Silver, and losing
one, ver. 8. Or what Woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one of
them, lights not a candle, and sweeps the house, and seeks diligently till
she finds it: ver. 9. And finding it, she calls together her friends and
neighbors, saying, Rejoice with me, for I have found the piece, that I had
lost. But why does our Savior bring this similitude or parable from the custom
of their women? I suppose his opposers, and such as murmured at his gracious
carriage toward sinners were of both Sexes: for so we find the Apostles
afterward met with opposers, and persecutors from amongst both upon the like
account. In Acts 13.50. we find that when the Apostles, Paul and Barnabas had
preached to the Gentiles the Grace of God (and the Gentiles were as loathsome
to the Jews as the Publicans and Harlots to the Pharisees) The Jews stirred up
devout and honorable women (or as Dr. Hammond reads it, worshipping women of
good quality) and the chief men of the City, and raised persecution against
them, and expelled them out of their Coasts. Devout or worshipping women, such
as were zealous of the Law, and of the Traditions of the Elders, and old
Customs of their Forefathers: These seeing Paul and Barnabas like Mechanics
(laboring often with their own hands) and not of their licensed Preachers,
Rabbis, and Doctors, and preaching Doctrine also differing from what such
taught, and derogating from their Jewish Superstitions and Customs, and
extending the mercy of God to the Gentiles, they were easily stirred up in the
first place, and likely were Instruments of stirring up the chief men of the
City to raise persecution against them. Women are usually full of affection,
and passion, and if acted, and ordered by Principles of Truth, and by right
Judgment, are very useful helpers forward of Christ's Cause, and Doctrine: As we
read of diverse that were helpers with the Apostles; but if biased by corrupt
Judgment and Affection, if superstitiously and ignorantly zealous, they are as
fit as any to raise up mischief. And its likely our Lord had some murmurings at
him from that Sex also; and therefore in this Parable he meets with them,
appealing to them, that if they or any of them having but ten Groats, or pieces
of Silver (in the Greek, Dram, or a Dram, after one account in value Attick.
about 7d. ob. after Aegurean. 1s. ob.
another about a shilling, or something better, in our Coin) lose one of them,
whether they (if they be good Housewifes especially, and mindeful of worldly
livelihood) would not light a Candle and sweep the House, and look into every
corner of it diligently, to find it again, not contenting themselves that they
have nine of those pieces still beside in their purse, not giving over seeking
it while they have hope to find it; and if they find it, though it should be
in the sink, or in the dirt, they will scarce cry faugh, it stinks, and throw
it quite away, but rather wiping, or washing it clean, put it again in their
purse; and calling their Friends and Neighbors about them, wish them to be glad
with them, for they have found what was lost. And yet they would not have our
Lord and his Servants value a soul so much as they do a six pence or a
shilling; so as to use all means (as by bringing the light of the word, and
thereby discovering and removing their evil doings) to seek it up and save it,
and cheer and comfort it, or rejoice over it when found, and recovered. Oh what
pitteous Creatures are we, both men and women, that value such small things
better then the souls of sinners! And sure if a woman would do thus for a
sixpence, what would she not do for sixpound, or any greater sum? And is not
a poor sinful soul (much more many) far more to be prized? surely yes, and had
they wisdom to their affection, they would do so too, for their Superiors and
betters do so: Our Savior adding, Verse 10. So, I say unto you, there is joy
in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that repents.

3. The third and last parable is this, of a part whereof I have chosen to
treat, Verse 11. A certain man had two sons. Men will not willingly lose one
sheep of an hundred if they can by seeking for it find it, nor a woman one
piece of Silver out of ten. What would any man or woman (for the Greek word
(...) here, is of both Genders, or Sexes, and extends to either man or woman,
though carried on after in the Masculine, with reference to, and for the fitter
resemblance of God) but what I say would any man or woman do think you, if
having but two Sons they should lose one of them? would they not more
industriously seek him, and finding him again, would they not be much more glad
for him, though they have another beside, then for a Sheep; and, then a woman,
though never so great a Housewife for a six pence? Such the scope of this third
Parable, in which our Lord shows his and his Fathers fatherly affection to
mankind as made by him and as his Offspring (as the Poet says) descended of
him; and much more to such as are his by Adoption and special grace of
Regeneration, by and through Jesus Christ, The fruit of the travel of his Soul,
and the issue of his Word and Spirit vouchsafed to, and working in and upon
them. And so he says (and I shall a little paraphrase on it.)

CHAP. II. The Parable of the Prodigal Paraphrased to the Text.
A Certain man had two Sons, that's but a few, the smallest number that can be;
but by how much the fewer, the loather would the Father be to lose one of them.
Ver. 2. And the younger of them said to his Father, give me the portion of
Goods that falls to me; showing that the beginning of man's departure from
God, is his not liking to live upon God and Christ by Faith in him, but
desiring to have his portion in himself, in his own hand, dispose, and keeping,
that he might be a Lord in himself ( Jer. 2.31.) and live apart from God in his
own sufficiency of Wisdom, Power, Understanding, etc. And he divided unto them
his living; signifying the readiness of God to distribute to men his gifts and
benefits, as pleases him. Verse 13. And not many days after the younger Son
gathered all together (either as arrogating to himself what he had received of
God, or taking a view of, and contemplating his riches received from God, so as
to estimate himself accordingly (the Spring of Spiritual pride) and subjecting
them to his own will) And he took his journey into a far Country (went away
and departed in heart and life from his dependence on, and obedience to the
Lord, and from close cleaving to him for counsel, protection, direction, and
blessing) and he there (in the world or state of Apostasy from God) wasted
(spent or scattered) his substance (whatever substantial gift or grace he had
received of God) with riotous living, living carelessly, and spending Gods Gifts
on his own lusts and pleasures. Verse 14. And when he had spent all (as a man
may soon spend and lose all in being departed from God, who should and would
continually supply him in depending on him, and being guided by him) there
arose (or was) a mighty famine in that Land, a great want and spiritual
emptiness to the soul from the world, in that its departed and separated state
from God; there being nothing in the Idols to which the soul is gone out, but
emptiness and misery.) And he began to be in want (to be sensible of the loss
of satisfaction he was wont to receive from God, and had in his gifts; and of
the emptiness of his soul in their absence or loss. Verse 15. And he went (yet
further from God instead of repenting and turning back to him) and (fastened)
joined himself to a Citizen of that Country. (Such the folly of the heart of
man departed from God, that under the sense of its loss and want it rather goes
further from him, and lays about more earnestly for, and sticks more closely
to some creature comfort, Idol, yea, or to the Devil and his counsel, thinking
to find help there, then looks back to God. So long as it can hope to find
help or life out of him any where else, it comes not to him.) And he sent him
into the fields to feed swine. (Such is the base drudgery work of sin and the
Devil, that he employes the soul in; an employment far below a Princes Son: and
yet so foolish be the disobedient departed sons of God, that they rather submit
to any base servile drudgery, where they hope to find, though never so poor a
subsistence, rather then repent and go back to God. See this in other phrases,
Isa. 30.1, 2, 15, 16. Hosea 5.13, 14. Jeremiah 2.13. and many other places.
Verse 16. And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks the Swine did
eat of, but no man gave unto him. Such the baseness of the revolted lost Soul,
that it could be content to subsist or find its life and pleasure in the
vilest things rather then to return to God, and to the things above, that he
has prepared in Christ for us. Such the emptiness and vileness of all worldly
enjoyments, that they be fitly resembled to husks, Swines meat, rather then
Man's: And such the merciful providence of God toward his strayed children, as
oft-times not to suffer them to find satisfaction or supplies from any thing
they sinfully seek it in; for this was the way to cure him, as mad men, and men
distracted sometimes are by being kept fasting, and hunger bit. And such was he
now as follows, when its said, Verse 17. And when he came to himself, [Men are
drunk with Satan's delusions, sins deceits, or the worlds lushious fullness,
while they can find therein what to feed themselves on, or are made men, while
without sense of their sin and misery, and without mindefulness of God: But God
often by afflictions and crosses recalls them, and brings them again to their
Senses, to see what they have done, and whitherto they be brought, and what
course they should now take; as its added.] He said, How many hired Servants of
my Fathers have bread enough, and to spare, and I perish with hunger? The
beginning of Conversion is when the Sinner is made sensible of his misery, and
sees and beholds also Gods goodness and sufficiency to relieve and help him;
remembers whence he is fallen, and what relation God stands in toward him in
his Son: there is the beginning of his quickening and reviving again. God is
good to hired Servants; those that walk in his ways, and do his work only with
eye to themselves and their own advantages thereby, and have not been begotten
to him through the immortal seed of the word, the grace in his Son discovered
to, and received by them. But how much more to such as being begotten to him by
his love, do in love to him depend on, and serve him. Thence he resolves, Verse
19. I will arise. [Sin overthrows the sinner, and makes him by grovelling and
groaning under its burden and pressure when discerned: but grace perceived and
called to remembrance, quickens, and gives motion, strength, and resolution to
arise from the practice of it and from pining away in the sense of it] and I
will go to my Father [Go no more after Idols, Hosea 14.8. that afford no
comfort or profit, but to him whose love at first begat hope, as well as at
first his hands did make me] And I will say to him, Father I have sinned
against heaven, and before thee. [A resolution to confess his sins against God
and man, against Christ the heavenly one, against the Holy Spirit that is from
Heaven, and against the Word that is from Heaven too, and against the Angels in
Heaven, whose Service and Ministry is abused in our sin.] And before thee, that
is, in the sight of, and so against God himself in all this, and in all other
his mercies abused: All which confession springs from hope in God, whence he
challenges him for his Father, though offended by him; but yet adds, as
humbling himself before him, and submitting himself to him and his Dispose.
Verse 19. I am no more worthy to be called thy Son; [as if he should say,
though I am by Creation, and by thy former gracious Call, Adoption, and
Regeneration, thy Son; yet I have forfeited that relation, as to thy owning me
so any longer, and giving me the title and privileges of a Son, I have so
defaced thy Image, and likeness in me by my sin, and so disobliged thee by my
disobedience] Make me as one of thy hired Servants. [Give me but a room in thy
house, and let me have but their portion, who serving thee for themselves only,
and thy reward are under thy maintenance and protection; a speech in which he
judges himself, and submits himself to any mean condition: So his Father would
but take him into his house again, though to be under the servitude of the Law,
rather then to be left still to be a drudge to Sin and Satan. Thus Sinners come
home by weeping cross, forfeiting their privileges, honor, favor, and
dignities, by their transgressions: but all this while here is only repentance
resolved on, the practice of it must follow the resolution: And so it was.
Verse 20. And he arose and came to his Father; there is the practice of
repentance: the arising from sin, and from the discouragements under the
consideration of sin, to return and come by Faith, Hope, and the desire of
heart to God to seek after him, and submit to him, as he discovers himself to
us in and by Christ. And now see the mercy of God to penitent Sinners painted
out in the compassions of a tender hearted Father to his Prodigal, but
repenting and returning Son; for it follows, But when he was yet a great way
off, his Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck, and
kissed him. Oh how quick sighted is Love and Charity of what is good, fatherly
love, to a returning lost Child; the love of God to truly penitent Sinners?
While the Sinner is yet short in his Repentance, and a great way off from
coming up to God in conformity to what his word requires; yet he being really
in the way thereto, seriously desirous of, and endeavoring after it. God sees,
he takes notice, pittieth his misery, and is ready to encourage and animate him
in his Repentance. The Son goes toward his Father, as being between hope and
fear of acceptance with him; but the Father runs toward his Son, as it were to
hasten his endeavors, or prevent them with encouragement to more assured
confidence of welcome therein: yea, and before the Son can fall at his Fathers
feet with tears of Repentance, the Father falls on his neck, and kisses him
with kisses of his welcome; the kisses of his mouth, the sweet encouragements
of his Word and Spirit, which hinder not, but quicken the Sons repentant
Confession, and humbling of himself to him. Verse 21. And the Son said to him,
Father [now he may call him so with more boldness, as having found beforehand
such renewed testimonies of his former kindeness and tender mercies] I have
sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son. [The sense of Gods love and mercy quickens confession of sin, and
self-abasement in the sight of our vileness, Ezekiel. 16.60, 61, Nothing humbles
and melts so much as Gods love, preventing and following us, being
notwithstanding our unworthiness, streamed forth to us, and perceived by us:
But before the Son can say as he pre-resolved, Make me as one of thy hired
Servants, his Father prevents him as follows. Verse 22. But (notwithstanding
the Son had so sinned, and judged himself unworthy to be any more called his
Son) the Father (forgiving all past, and glad of his lost Sons return) said
unto his Servants, Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring
on his hand, and shoes on his feet.) [He finds his Son in a poor tattered
case, in a ragged condition, clothed with vile Apparel, or in a manner wholly
naked, like a Swineheard, far unlike what became his Son; so sin makes us: and
he dislikes it, and pitties it. And now the Servants must apply themselves too
to recruit and comfort him: and such the gladness of a loving Father to have
his lost Son again; that forgetting all his offenses, and not so much as once
upbraiding him, instead of shutting his doors against him, or calling for Rods
and Staves to beat and correct him, he calls for the best Robe, with Ring and
Shoes to adorn him; which the Servants must apply to him, and put upon him
too, as thinking nothing too good for him to be afforded him. He will have him
clad, and waited on as his Son again, to signify, as what sin continued in,
deprives us of, so also how acceptable it is to God, that his Servants, and
Gospel Ministers make it their business to encourage, comfort, and restore
penitent Sinners: Yea, he adds further, Verse 23. And bring hither the fatted
calf, and kill it, and let us eat and be merry. The poor sinning Child was
hungry as well as ragged, ready to Famish; and his Father knows his needs, and
will supply them with what may best show his love and gladness for his return.
When he was keeping Swine, Bread and Cheese would have been welcome, might he
have had them; yea, now being returned, he would have been glad and accepted
it, might he have had ordinary fare, and Servants entertainment: in his hunger
he mentioned only bread enough in his Fathers house; but that suffices not his
Fathers love to him, to testify how gladly he receives him: no, if there be
one Robe better then another, he shall have it to clad him; and if one dish
better then another, he shall have it to feed him, the fatted Calf. The
Righteousness of Christ is the penitent Sinners clothing, and garment the
Father gives him. The Virtues of Christ and his Spirit incircle his Works, as a
Ring his Finger. The preparations of the Gospel of Peace shod his Feet, and the
choicest demonstrations of Love and Grace showed forth and exhibited in Christ
Crucified, and the precious promises therethrough made, and by his blood
ratified are his feeding and nourishment. And now behold at this feast of fat
things, God, and his Angels, and Servants will rejoice with the restored
convert, who shall sit down and feast, and rejoice with them in Christ Jesus.
Yea, God himself by his Spirit calls upon both his restored Son, and his
ministering Setvants to rejoice together, saying, Let us eat and be merry. And
why? not because the sinner has so greatly sinned, but because he who by his
sin was so near destruction, is by grace reduced and brought back to salvation:
for so it follows, Ver. 24. For this my Son was dead, and is alive again; was
lost, and is found: and they began to be merry. Oh the wonderful grace and love
of a merciful Father. Here are now no bad terms given; it is not this Rogue, or
Vagabond, this Adulterer, or Murderer; but this my son was dead, and is alive;
was lost, and is found. And they began to be merry, for they had Music and
Dancing, says the next verse; not such as he used to have in his riotous
living, that is sit for Rogues, and Whores, Bawds, and Ruffians; but such as
may become the Palaces of Religious Princes, or the Saints of Heaven; such as
David's, when he danced before the Ark, and as the Virgins and women of Israel
used; and sometimes the Holy men upon occasions of rejoicing, and thanksgiving
to God. But the Devil will mar this music, and disturb this mirth if he can:
and to this purpose, though he could not prevail with the elder Son to leave
his Father, and turn Prodigal too, but he was hitherto dutiful and obedient,
yet he will now infuse a bad and envious thought into him against his Brother,
and put him into a froward and pettish humor against his Father, and the
Servants, and all that forward, the such entertainment giving to one so far
unlike him in his former demeanor: For so it follows, Verse 25. Now his elder
son was in the field. (Not with his Father in the house, but it may be wandering
in his mind, or his own wisdom, or perhaps about his Fathers business, and
looking after his affairs in the services of his Law) and as he came and drew
near to the house (to take notice how things were in Gods Church) He heard
Music and Dancing; he perceived some more than usual mirth and rejoicing, and
(wondering at it) Verse 26. He called one of the Servants, and asked what these
things meant. Verse 27. And he (the Servant) said unto him, Thy brother is come
(thinking, that whom their Lord owned for his Son, the Servants might well call
his Brother) And thy Father has killed the fatted Calf (has made a costly
Feast) because he has received him safe and sound. A fair answer, and well
given. Thy Father has killed the fatted Calf; as knowing his authority should
be great with him: and the very saying it was his Fathers act should satisfy
and content him. Whereas if they had done it, and made merry of their own heads
without him, they might worthily have been charged with rashness by him. But
yet here is not only the Fathers authority alleged to satisfy him, but the
ground and reason too upon which the Father did it, Viz. Because he has
received thy Brother safe and sound. That love to his Brother, as well as duty
to his Father might work upon him. Verse 28. But he was angry and would not go
in. Was discontented at his Fathers kindeness, and love to his Brother, and
would not join with him, his Brother, and Servants, in their merry meeting, and
rejoicing: and in this our Lord brings up this parable to the occasion of it,
to show the evil unreasonableness of the Pharisees murmuring, and taking
offense at Christ for his receiving Publicans and Sinners, to hear him, and
eating with them; that it was but like the folly, pride, and frowardness of
such an Elder Son that should be angry at such a Father, and his Servants, for
making merry for, and giving good entertainment to a prodigal repentant Son:
But yet to instruct us in Gods lenity and goodness to all his Children, even
his pettish Sons too: He adds, Therefore came his Father out and entreated
him. A perfect pattern of a loving Father, and a right Emblem of God our
heavenly Father; who, when by his authority, he might check and reprove the
forwardness of a peevish Son, and command his coming in, waves the exercise of
his authority, and gives way to his bowelly affection to steer, and lead him;
and therefore he goes out and entreats him. It had been the Sons part to judge
his Father wiser then himself, and to have acquiesced in his wisdom and
authority; and hearing that the mirth was by his order, and at his appointment,
to have complied with him: But where the Son fails of his duty, the Father
exercises the more love; and laying aside his authority, seeks to gain him to a
better Decorum, by his greater condescension and goodness toward him. And well
may the Servants entreat froward Children, and not be froward and fretful
against them, when their Lord sets them such a pattern. But see how tenacious
the passionate creature is of his peevishness; instead of the Sons being
ashamed that his Father that might command him in, should abase himself so as
to come out to him, and entreat him; as if he had shifted place and relation
with his Father, very sturdily and proudly replies upon him. And Verse 29. He
(whose mouth should have been stopped by the very authority and presence of his
Father, much more by his entreating him, expostulates the matter with him, and)
answering, said to his Father, Lo these many years have I served thee, neither
at any time have I transgressed thy commandment, and yet thou never gave me a
Kid, that I might make merry with my friends. Here is a very undutiful
demeanor, an unchildlike answer; no sign of any reverence, neither Sir, nor
Father to usher in his saying, but only a charge of unlovingness toward him;
as if; according to the old complaint of froward people, he had served God, his
Father, for naught; and there was no profit in so doing: He draws up an account
of his many years Service, his great dutifulness, and obedience, forgetting,
and quite blotting out of his mind, all the great engagements that were upon
him toward his Father, which might challenge more from him then he did or could
have done; and he lays a charge against him of neglect, or sparingness toward
him: He had never given him a Kid (a lesser matter then the fatted Calf) to
make merry with his friends. Here we meet with a proof of the position we began
with, that, as men are apt to mind and keep strict account of their own
righteousness, and services, so its hard for them that do so, not to be proud;
and from that principle wrangle with God, if he in all things please them not,
in their humors, and act not to their minds: and indeed to under-estimate
Gods mercy and goodness as much as they overvalue their own righteousness: for
so did this elder son, in this froward fit, being ready to shift places with
his Brother: and because he is received in, will keep himself out, and stand
against his Fathers entreaties, to justify himself in his so doing; for it was
his Brothers reception that was the great thing stirred him, as the next words
manifest, viz. Ver. 30. But as soon as this thy Son was come, which has
devoured thy living with Harlots, thou have killed for him the fatted Calf.
Every word has weight in it, and bespeaks him passionately froward. But (in a
clean contrary carriage toward him to what thou have had to me) as soon
(without staying to see him sufficiently humbled and penitent; as if his Father
was too hasty so to receive and respect him, and as implying it had been meeter
however to have frowned a while, yea, some long while, upon him, and made him
lie and bewail himself (at least for sometime) first at his threshold, before
he had received him, and welcomed him; but as soon) as this thy Son (this, by
way of disdain, and thy Son, not my Brother, as if he scorned to own such a one
as he for his Relation, much less his Brother; but thy Son, as if he had had a
mind to disown himself a Son, or him his Father, because he so, and so
suddenly owned him; and as if he only was made a Son by his Father, because he
so welcomed him: As soon as this thy Son was come, before any longer probation
or trial was made of the reallity of his repentance, though he is he that has
devoured thy living with Harlots. See how he as much debases and aggravates his
brothers Sin, as before he had amplified his own service and righteousness; as
if there was a direct Diametrical opposition between his own obedience: and
this follows lewdness. He has devoured thy living, as if he had ravenously
consumed all, and left his Father nothing to live on; when as it was but only
that portion of it that fell to his lot or division: But envy and frowardness
is passionately Rhetorical to aggravate what offends, with the largest note
upon every circumstance, transports beyond all bounds of soberness, and leads
to represent every thing in the worst colors: and therefore he also adds that
he had devoured his Fathers living with Harlots. Though that is beyond the first
relation of his evil courses, and more its likely then he had any positive
evidence for, but what his passion suggested. His Father mentioned none of
those things to him for gladness of his return, but blots them all out with an
act of oblivion. Ah, but the froward Brother will rip them all up, and not
suffer his Father, if it may be in his power, so to forget them; that if
possible he may move him to undo his acts of Grace again, and seeing the error
of his love, expel him his house, and make him once more seek his fortune; and
no doubt but the Pharisaical wisdom of the offended Son, would readily suggest,
that it was a far evener and more just carriage toward him, for his Father to
have shut his doors upon him, then so soon to have received him; yea, and
because he had voluntarily and of his own vain head run from his Father, and
despised him, his House, his Brother, and whatever else was therein; he should
now against his will have been made to keep from them, and go get his living
with those riotous companions he had preferred before them, and in those places
that he had haunted rather then his Fathers Habitation; or at least to have
made him bite by it a little after his return, and put him into the worst
apparel, and fed him with the worst fare, and not the best his house afforded:
So much wiser are we apt to be in our pride of our selves, and uncharitableness
to our sinning Brethren, more then the most Holy, and only wise God, who as he
is perfect in Judgment, so he has more love and charity toward them; for this
seems an intolerable respect to so vile a varlet (one whom others of his
temper would be ready to call an whoremasterly Villain) to make for him such
dainty provision, as is implied when he adds, Thou have killed for him the
fatted Calf: Had it been killed for himself before, he would have thought it
enough to let him taste of it; worser fare he thought might have been too good
for him; but to kill any thing for such a lewd fellow, that mattered not to
kill his Father, by spending his substance, to his grief; yea, to kill the
fatted Calf, the most reserved dainty that his Father had, when as he never at
any time gave him a Kid: Oh, how could he look upon such a partiality without
indignation? and yet as intimately taxing his Father with such rashness, as to
act all things without good advisement, or fore-consideration, or with such
blindeness, through his too partial affection toward his disobedient Son, that
he could see nothing either of his deserts from him on the one hand, or of his
ungracious Sons demerits on the other, or of his own too much indulgence to sin
(as if he hated it more, and were better then his Father) her prefixes an Ecce
before all this heavy charge, thus drawn out in length. Lo, these many years I
serve thee, neither at any time transgressed I thy Commandment, and yet thou
never gave me a Kid to make merry with my Friends; but as soon as this thy on
was come who has devoured (or swallowed up) thy living (and there is an
emphasis in that word devoured; as if he greedily, like a glutton, or drunkard,
without any regard of thee, or what should become of thee, or thy glory, has
eaten, or swallowed up all thy living, and that) with Harlots; yet, thou have
killed for him the fatted Calf. Oh how blind is Love and Charity? how quick
sighted, how Eagle eyed jealousy and passion? how eloquently can anger argue?
here is nothing omitted that may exaggerate the Fathers oversight in his
indulgent carriage toward his returned Son; as if his Father, like some old
blind man had seen nothing, but he sees all both for himself, and against his
Brother: and as if his Father had been as injurious to him, as fondly indulgent
to his Brother, if his stomach could bear it so to repute and call him; but he
will make his Father see how unequally he carried himself between them: he
therefore sets before him the years, yea, the many years service he had
performed to him, whereas so many years his other Son was run from him, and had
left him to look after his concernments himself for all him; yea, and the
exactness of his obedience to him in all that time, never at any time
transgressing his Commandment; whereas his brother on the contrary not only had
not obeyed him, but also greedily with Harlots consumed his living: and yet see
how unequal the Father between them, he in all those years never gave him a
Kid, which was far less then the fatted Calf, though to eat in an honest way,
and to make merry, not with Whores and Drabs, but with his friends; who, he
being so dutiful a Son, could be no such lewd Varlots, but persons of good
fashion, and honest reputation; whereas on the other side his love was such to
his other Son, that notwithstanding all his badness, and disobediences, and
mis-spendings of his substance, he could no sooner see him coming toward him,
but he runs to meet him, and quicken him in his pace; and instead of chiding
him, pitties, and kisses him, and kills the fatted Calf too, so soon as he gets
him home to feast him. And had not this elder Son great reason (...) his
Father, and refuse to join (...) with him, and his other Son and Servants in
such a merry frollick, so inconsiderately made, as he has represented it to
him? have we not many that are ready to be of his mind? what, when they have
said their Prayers a thousand times over, been good Churchmen, honest livers,
sober persons, no Thieves, Drunkards, Whoremongers, Harlots, or wicked livers,
but have as they think, served God justly, accordingly to the laudible customs
of the Church, and perhaps also in private Prayers and Devotions, hearing
Sermons, praying in their Families, fasting as often, and making as many and as
long Prayers as the Pharisees, strict and zealous in their conversations,
abstaining from all gross and known sins; yet they could never be assured of
Gods owning them, nor meet with such ravishments of heart, as to cause them to
rejoice much in God, and to be willing to dye and depart this life: and lo,
here or there a great Sinner a Whore, a Thief, a Murderer, a wanton Person,
being convicted of their Sins, and confessing their faults, and crying to God
for his Mercy, listening to, and embracing his Gospel so inwardly filled with,
and outwardly testifying their sense of Gods love, and exceeding comfort and
consolation therein, that they can glory in God, as forgiving them their Sins,
have hope in their Death, and talk of their assurance of Gods favor, as if
they had been all their lives Saints: must not these either be deluded persons,
or what what shall we say or think of God, but as those in Ezekiel. 18.25. That
his ways are unequal? or, as in Mal. 2.17. That every one that is evil is good
in the sight of the Lord, or else where is the God of judgment, or judgment
of God? where the equity of his doings and proceedings with men. But thou art
holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel, and wilt be justified in
thy sayings, and overcome when thou art judged Psalm. 22.3. and 51.4. stay then
and let us see what the Father has to say to his offended and discontented
Son, before we justify his plea, and pronounce on his side: and that is held
forth in the words that I have chosen herein to treat on, as follows.

CHAP. III. The Text Pharaphrased.
Verse 31.32. And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I
have is thine: It was meet that we should make merry and be glad, for this thy
Brother was dead, and is alive again, was lost and is found.

IT is a true saying of Solomon, He that is first in his own cause seems
just, but his neighbor comes and searches him out, Prove. 18.17. For here we
have an answer confutes all the Son has said in his passion, and clearly
evinces the equity of the Fathers carriage between them, and of his thus
entertaining his Son in his return. And first, here we may admire the Fathers
meekness and gentleness toward a froward passionate Son, in that he gives him
no bad nor angry language. He says not, thou proud and insolent fellow, that
offerest to make thy self wiser then thy Father, and liftest up thy self above
him, to call him him to an account, and draw a charge against him for his
actings, as if thou were wiser, and of more authority then he; whereas its thy
part and place to submit thy self to him, and give him honor in judging him
wise, and righteous in his doings. No such angry speech proceeds from him, but
only he gently calls him Son, and gives him a fair answer to his charge, and an
account of his doings, showing the great condescension and goodness of God to
his pettish people in their spiritual Distempers. He sees his Son was in a
passion, and he would not take the course further to heat and inflame him, but
seeks to calm him; like a loving Father, who seeing his Childs Body
overheated, and in danger to fall into a Feavour, endeavors some ways its
prevention: being wiser then his Son, he sets not himself to answer him
according to his childish folly, but exercises love with judgment and
discretion toward him: and though his Son in his anger would neither vouchsafe
to call him Father, nor his Brother, Brother; yet he in whom fury is not, but
Love, Meekness, and Charity, will not therefore disown or provoke him, but
pacify and rectify him; and therefore calls him Son. Oh the graciousness of
God, as a loving Father to froward and male contented Children, especially
while he sees their frowardness proceeds from ignorance, weakness, or the
strength of temptation: a pattern worthy imitation. Be we followers of of God
as dear children, and walk we in love as Christ has loved us, etc. Shall we
weak, purblinde, and sinful men, be froward with, and harsh to our froward
brethren, when through temptation and weakness, envyings, swellings and
discontents befall them, when as our great God and Father is so graciously
tender, mild, and gentle to such, yea, to our selves, when so distempered and
discomposed toward him.

But see again how blind passion is, though it seems to see very much, yea,
and to see more then others that have not their hearts thereby heated and
quickened to make diligent observation of things before them: It is indeed
quick-sighted of what makes for its nourishment and strengthening in its cause:
but while it looks upon all such things as it were through Multiplying and
Magnifying Glasses, and sees them more and greater then they be, and so
represents them, it is so filled with the sight of them, that it over-looks and
sees not other things before it, that judgment, charity, and right reason
takes notice of, and the sight whereof reduces the other things seen to their
due scantling and proportion. For the calm judgment and charity of the wise and
patient Father (the representative of the most wise and merciful God) sees and
observes here what the Son over-lookt, and what might stop the mouth of his
most clamorous passion. He was Eagle-eyed to see, yea, more than was to be seen
of his own service and obedience (which yet in this his passion he showed but
little of) but see not, or tookno notice of his better condition, and greater
obligements through his Fathers love and freeness toward him; which therefore
the loving, meek, and wise Father for curing of his distemper, minds him of
saying, Son thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine (and what is a
Kid or a fatted Calf to an Inheritance) that in his distemper was forgotten by
him.

Peevish frowardness, and passionate envious distempers are no good guides or
counselors for us to listen to, or to be led by in our judgments or goings;
they see where they should be blind, and are blind where they should see: It
is not for us to take notice of our services and obedience, but God who is the
wiser and best estimator of them, and will not undervalue or underweigh them
one grain, nor come short in the least reward of any thing truly acceptable in
them, but is ready to reward them like a bounteous King, so as to show his
riches of liberality far above any inward excellency they have in them. It is
for us, and more behooful and profitable, to mind and take notice of his love
and goodness to us, to quicken us up to, and in our duties and obedience, and
to preserve us from proud and haughty miscarriages, and froward repinings and
murmurings at his dealings with us or others. The minding Gods goodness to us
will beget and nourish love and obedience in us to him, and then we shall not
need to mind how dutiful and obedient we are to him, but rather shall see
cause to confess our selves in all we do, unprofitable servants to him, that
have done nothing but what his goodness already extended, challenges, and makes
due from us; and so that we cannot challenge any thing of due debt or merit
further from him: yet he will also, such his goodness, mind to reward us with
rewards undeserved by us, and exceeding glorious. But as this proud and froward
distemper made him overlook the goodness of his condition with his Father and
his obligations to him; so it blinded him also from seeing what was meet to be
done for, and toward his returned Brother, and the equitableness of his Fathers
carriage toward him; which therefore his Father to cure him and argue him by
reason and judgment out of his distemper, minds him of also. It was meet that
we should make merry and be glad. That by his fatherly authority and wisdom he
lays down as a certain truth to be received and believed by his Son, as an
Oracle, proceeding from his more perfect understanding, and unerring wisdom,
teaching his Son, who in duty ought to hear his Fathers Instruction about what
was meet, and not to take upon him to correct his Father, and be an instructor
and teacher to him. The over-eying, and over-weaning of our graces, services,
doings, duties, etc. are very apt to, yea, very certainly and necessarily do
puff us up with spiritual pride, and that lifts us out of our places and makes
us ready to disanul Gods Judgment, and condemn the Almighty to justify our
selves, and make our selves righteous. As God says of Job sinning in that way
of sin through that root of spiritual pride, Job 40.8. and instead of learning
of God and Christ, to lift up our selves against them, quarrel with them, and
set our selves to inform and teach them; doing as St. Peter d^ who after he had
heard, Thou art (...) and I will give to thee the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, by and by lifted up himself, as high as the Pope would be upon that
Scripture lifted up by men, to after and correct his Masters sayings and
doings, going therein before him, and not coming after him him as Disciples and
learners use to do to their Masters: Mat. 16.18, 19, 22, 23. yea, taking him
aside and rebuking and advising him as if his Keys of the Kingdom gave him
authority over him, and his Doctrine too, as the Pope practices upon that
pretense with Christ and his Institutions, thereby proving himself to be, and
to deserve the name of a Satan, as Christ gave to St. Peter, upon that account:
and we may very safely, by the by, observe this truth, that while the Pope or
any else, under pretense of having the Keys of the Kingdom given them, do take
upon them to alter and correct Christ's sayings or doings, his Ordinances and
Institutions (as they do in the order and manner of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper amongst other things, coming in with their non abstante, though Christ
ordered thus, yet that notwithstanding we order it otherwise, though Christ
ordered, and the Apostles practiced the receipt of the Supper in both kinds,
yet we for all that, order it to be received in one kind only, though God has
forbidden the worship of Images, and Christ came not to dissolve his Fathers
Laws, yet we command them to be made and worshipped, etc. While I say the Pope
and his Councils or any else do thus) they are so far from being the Rock,
Foundation, or the Head of the Church, that they are Satan's, enemies, and
adversaries to Christ and his Church, and so plainly Antichrists. Yet this the
pride of gifts, places, offices, and services puffs up men too usually to. But
the Father would have his froward Son here reduced into better order, and as
Christ said to Peter, come behind him, and hear, and learn of him, not argue
against him, and rebuke him; as here he did, opposing his Fathers practice and
order of making merry for his lost Son found again. It was meet that we should
make merry and be glad. Prepare a feast for mirth, and make mirth outwardly at
it, and be glad too inwardly, and in heart.

But he does not only instruct him, and teach him, or by his Fatherly wisdom
and authority dictate so much to him; but also demonstrates the truth of his
doctrine by solid and sound reason, that he might as well inform his judgment,
and make him see the truth of his saying with his own eyes or understanding, as
it were, as well as assure him of it upon his own authority, and the authority
of his saying, which ought for it self to be received, because he is the Lord,
though he gave us no other account of it: and indeed this is one great
difference between the Law and the Gospel. The Law delivers precepts from God
barely upon the account of his authority, Thou shall do, or not do thus, for I
am the Lord: But the Gospel insinuates things to us, and persuades us to them
by reason as laying down the grounds and reasons why, that we might offer to
God, A reasonable service, Romans 12.1. whence also as Christ is called ((...))
by a name signifying not only word, but reason, John 1, 1. So they that believe
not the Gospel, are called ((...)) Absurd or unreasonable men, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
and so I say here, the better to convince him, that he does not impose upon him
merely by his fatherly authority (though that might have been sufficient to
have silenced him) he also condescends to show (as all the way of the Gospel is
a way of condescension) that there is reason and equity in what he says, and
that he might see and be silenced, and brought to submission, he adds, For
this thy Brother was dead, and is alive again, was lost, and is found. Passion
had blinded his reason, and extinguished his affection to his poor Brother, so
as he took no notice of any relation between them; and pride so transported
him, that he even scorned to see or own his relation. This thy Son says he to
his Father, as if he could be his Fathers Son, and yet not his Brother; or as
if a brotherly relation was nothing to challenge and excite compassion, love,
and affection to him. Oh forsooth, he was so holy, just, and righteous (above
his Father it seems) that he disdained to own him for, or call him his Brother,
though his Father had owned and called him Son: as if he would have intimately
said, What should I own such a vagabondly Rogue, or riotous Rascal, or
Whoremasterly Spend-thrift as this for my Brother? As some such riotous livers
amongst us in their own eyes would be ready to say of such, though they have
confessed their sins, and been afflicted for them. Should I believe that God
will give pardon, and peace, and assurance so easily to such miscreants? But
the calm unpassioned, and loving Father calls him to a calm remembrance, that
for all that, whatever he had been, or done, he is yet thy Brother. Has not
one God made us? yea, and of one mold, and of the same blood, whether Jews, or
Gentiles, bond or free, zealous or profane? yea, did not one Christ dye for
us? and being called and brought to him, to believe in him, and submit to his
grace; are we not all in him that do so, justified, and made righteous, and the
children of God by the faith of Jesus? whose blood washes away both the greater
sins of the prodigal Spend-thrifts, and the lesser murmurings and spiritual
distempers of the self-over-weaning Saint, or more righteous liver. The same
good Creditor forgave Simons fifty pence, and the sinful woman's five hundred,
Luke 7.41, 42. and had it not been that he had forgiven both, both might have
gone to, and lien in the prison, neither having to satisfy what was owing:
Nay, a Debtor that owes ten thousand Talents, humbling himself to his Creditor,
and craving forgiveness, and being forgiven, may walk abroad boldly, and look
upon his Creditors face securely, and confidently, when he that owes but fifty
pence, taking his Brother that owes him less, by the throat, and being
uncharitable to him, and being not pardoned or forgiven his less debt by the
Creditor, may not dare to walk abroad, or show his head for fear of an arrest,
or be in so good a condition as the far greater Debtor that has received a
discharge for what was owing. This thy Brother, (This was a particle of
contempt in the So^ toward his Brother, when he said, This thy Son. But a
particle of Commiseration and moving to compassion in the Father, when he
says, This thy Brother, as if he would say, can thou behold him, and see him
here present, even this thy Brother so marvellously preserved and recovered,
and not commiserate him, nor rejoice for him? Can thou so far lay aside all
natural affection, and banish all remorse or joy from thine heart concerning
him? This thy Brother was dead, was lost; as if he would have said, Thy evil
eye is upon thy brothers doings, but my good and merciful eye is upon his
sufferings: thou take notice in thy pride, envy, and passion of what he
acted, and how he has lived and aggravatest that to the height, he ran away,
spent, yea, devoured my living, and that with Harlots, was a Rogue, a
Whoremaster, or the like; but my fatherly heart bleeds to think what a case he
was in, what miseries he met with, what sorrows he sustained in his absence;
went not my heart after him where he went? and did not mine eyes behold him
under the fig tree? when he began to want, and joined himself as a Servant, or
an Apprentice to a Citizen of a strange Country,; he that was free born being
brought into bondage, and he that might have lived as well as thou being
reduced to beggary. I think upon his servile state, and what drudgery work he
has been put to, while thou have lived like a Prince, or Gentleman, and see
not poverty or want. I think on his base employment, his hungry belly, his
ragged and naked back, his pining griefs, and pinching sorrows, even unto
frenzy; distracting him so grievously, that he knew not what he did, nor
whether he went: my tender bowels roll within me to think of these his sad
sufferings; yea, and then was he most dead, when he least see his danger, and
maddest when he was the merriest. He has eaten the fruit of his own ways, and
been filled with his own inventions. Thou have lived pleasurably to him, and
know not what were the sad effects of his sinnings; had thou, thou would
have had more pity on him, and compassion toward him. He is my Son, but he
was dead; thy Brother, and he was dead: so great his sufferings, sorrows, and
miseries, as bereft him of all life and senses; he was lost, no where to be
found in House, or Fields, till his own miseries that he pulled upon himself
fell so hard upon him, as to make him remember himself, and return to me. I and
thou might call him, but he was out of the hearing of our voice. My servants
might call and seek him, but he was gone and not to be heard of. Thou lost
nothing by serving me, but he lost all he had, yea, himself was lost by
deserting me, and going from me: did thou lose but a Sheep or Kid, thou
would resent it, and be troubled for it; yea, thou take it to heart that I
have killed the fatted Calf; and was one such creature more to thee then thine
own Brother that was dead, and lost? Oh the mercies of God above our mercies to
one another! we see and note this and that evil such a one has done, but God
knows the dangers they were in, the sorrows of their hearts, their secret sighs
and groans, the throbs and sobs that they have met with, as the fruits of their
sins, when Gods Spirit has been removed and withdrawn, or driven from them by
their iniquities and rebellions against him; the bangs of Conscience, and
bleedings of heart, the fears, the despairs, the inward horrors, and outward
feelings of correction sometimes upon them, in losses, poverty, or the like;
the spiritual death and lostness of their souls from the feeling of Gods
presence, and the comforts thereof, or any aptness or desire to any spiritual
action, and so the danger of being lost for ever. These God has his eye upon
that we see not usually, nor are apt to think on; no, no, we would have them
yet kept from God, and his Comforts, and Consolations, and are ready to say,
let them bite by it yet, let them roll themselves in ashes, feel the
displeasure of God and men against them without pity or comfort intermixed; at
least for some long, long time, till they have made amends for their wicked
doings, and testified so much sorrow and amendment as may give us satisfaction.
We would not deal so with our Sheep; if they through their wandering fall into a
Ditch, and be almost drowned, we would not let them lie there because they
sillily fell in, nor when they are pulled out, thrust them in again, or put
them into the pin-fold; much less with our Children, if they, though contrary
to our counsels will straggle and play about till they fall into a Ditch, or
Pit, or Oyl-Fat, and be therein drowned, we will not let them lie because they
fell in of their own wantonness and carelessness; or having pulled them out, if
they revive, turn them out of doors, and starve them, but tender them, get them
to warm Bed, and give them cordials and comfortable things that we judge
needful to restore their strength again; and should we not do so to our poor
Brethren after they have been tossed and turmoiled, shipwrack't, and dead, and
lost, and are revived again?

This thy Brother was dead, and is alive again, was lost and is sound. The same
consideration that led him to receive him and make the feast for his
entertainment (verse 23, 24. For this my son was dead and is alive again, was
lost, and is found.) He proposes to his Son to quiet him, and to induce him to
be content to join with them. This thy Brother was dead, and is alive again,
was lost and is found. Had he been still dead and lost, no ground for rejoicing
or merriment, but for mourning. We have no cause of rejoicing, but only and
altogether for mourning and lamenting for sinners, those that err and live
evilly, so long as they go on in such their ways, and are held fast in the
snares and cords of their errors and iniquities; but when they are recovered
out of them, and returned back to God, then we may rejoice for them, and be
glad, because of Gods goodness therein toward them; and especially when we may
perceive God also to forgive and comfort them, and to fill them with his
consolations. Such was the case of this repenting and recovered Prodigal. He
was dead (even he that was my Son, and thy Brother, as if he had said) but he
is alive again. He is returned to God, and God and his quickening Spirit are
returned to him again; and he is endued with the principles of life and grace
again; He is begot and brought to hope in, love, and cleave to God, who was
hopeless, helpless, and quite gone from God; and he who was lost whose presence
we had not with us, and who walked not in our family and ways, is reduced, is
found again. It is meet therefore now that we be merry and glad.

Obj. Ah, but perhaps the return of this Son may entrench upon the happiness
and riches of the other, he must have another portion, and that will diminish
the Portion of the elder Brother?

Answ. No, the Father has secured him against that too, when he said, All that
I have is thine, not only has been, but is still, though he take part with
thee its thine nevertheless still, and enough to maintain both him and thee;
there is nothing required or desired but that he live, and take part with thee,
of what is mine and thine, and enough for both of you, and all my Family: his
well and comfortable living shall be no impairing of, or impeachment to thy
felicity. God is a Sun and Fountain; he so imparts himself and his Grace and
Blessing to one, that he has thereby never the less for any others: he is not
emptied by the multitude of those that receive of his fullness. As the
Philosophers say of the soul, Tota in t^to, and tota in qualibet part.
that it is all in the whole body and all in every part of it, and no other
part has the less of it by any part having it all, even so is it of a
certainty with God, he is wholly the portion of the abiding and standing
Saints, and so he is too for those that having fallen, are raised up again. Nor
has any the less by every, or any ones having all: so that no cause for any to
envy at another happiness, or murmur, or repine at Gods freeness to any other;
seeing their having never so much leaves never the less in him for them also.

And thus I have gone over this Parable, briefly by way of Paraphrase,
especially these last verses. Now let us further consider what we may observe
from them.

CHAP. IV. An enquiry into the meaning of the two Sons.
BUT first it will be needful for us that we may the better understand and
profit by what is set before us herein, to enquire who are meant by these two
Sons (chiefly the elder) to whom these two Verses address their contents.

1. May we take them for Men and Angels, Angels the Elder, and Men the younger
Son; indeed both are called, and may be understood to be in the Scriptures
meant by those titles, the Sons of God. Some understand, Job 1.6. and 2.1, to
speak of Angels, when its said, The Sons of God presented themselves before
God, and Satan came amongst them: It may be so, and it may be otherwise taken.
Many of the Ancients thought the Sons of God, said in Genesis 6.2. to Have gone in
to the daughters of men, to have been Angels: and so they might be if we by
Angels understand such as they of the seven Churches, Rev. 2. and 3. but surely
that in Job 38.7. that all the Sons of God shouted for joy when He laid the
foundations of the earth, seems necessarily to be understood of them: And for
men its said, Adam was the Son of God, as we may construe, Luke 3.38. And the
Angels were made before men, and some of them fell before men too; but of the
fallen Angels nothing here can be understood. Those that stand indeed serve
God, and keep his Commandments, being ready to do his will, hearkening to the
voice of his words, Psalm. 103.19. And man went astray from God like a poor
lost. Sheep, and was recovered again in and by Christ, who was slain for him,
and is become, and is proposed of God to be man's food: yet I cannot understand
those good Angels to be here meant by the elder Son, because I no where find
they are, or ever were, angry at the goodness of God to man in seeking his
recovery, or entertaining him being recovered, with joy and mirth. No, they are
more wise, intelligent, and loving Spirits, and fuller of Charity to us then to
be offended at Gods goodness toward us: they desirously pry, or peep into the
mystery and efficacy of the Gospel, (...), desire with longing to peep down
into it, 1 Pet. 1.12. and here, verse 10. it is said, that there is joy in the
presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that repents, Beza
which some render apud Angelos, with the Angels: they may rather therefore be
included among the household Servants that attend the Sons.

2. We may apply it to the Jews and Gentiles; The Jews as the elder, the
Gentiles as the younger Brother? they both were made of one blood indeed, Acts
17.26. and so are brethren, as one God made them, Mal. 2.10. and though we read
of the Gentiles before any mention of the Jews, Genesis 10.5. yet the Jews being
first called to, and endued (even in and from their forefathers) with the
knowledge of God and his Mysteries after such a distinction of of two peoples
found in the world; and God calling them his first born ( Israel is my
firstborn, Exodus 4.21, 22.) they may be understood by the eldest Son to whom
also God gave himself, and with himself all things, to be their Inheritance;
and they were comparatively to the Gentiles keepers of the Law: and we find
that many of them did over-wean their services to God according to the Law, and
were often ready to expostulate with God like the eldest Son here upon that
account, that they fasted, and he regarded it not, sought him, but he took no
notice of them, that they served him in vain, and walked mournfully before the
Lord of Hosts, and kept his ordinance; yet he loved and esteemed them not. Isa.
58.2, 3. Mal. 1.2. and 3.13, 14, 15. they took also great offense, and stumbled
at the Gentiles Conversion and reception into the Church of God by the Ministry
of the Apostles, and upon that account partly stand out still: Whence its said,
They are enemies to the Gospel for the Gentiles sake, Romans 11.28. all this may
be said for this interpretation, and may render it probable that there was some
eye upon them in this parable: But yet seeing there was no color for their
saying, that they had served God many years, and never at any time transgressed
against his Commandments, and that he never gave them a Kid, etc, it being
manifest that they were very rebellious against him, as to the body of them,
and often transgressed by Idolatry and otherwise, and were many of them as
profane and bad as the Gentiles; and Christ was Crucified for that Nation,
though not for that Nation only, John 11.51, 52. yea, the feast of fat things
first made for, and tendered to them, they the first bidden and invited Guests:
yea, and they first rejected that Feast before the Gentiles were preached to,
and invited in; and their first standing out was not upon that account; nay
rather, because they first stood out the Gospel was sent to the Gentiles.
Whence its said, That the fall of them was the riches of the world, and that
through their fall, salvation is come to the Gentiles, and the casting them
away is the reconciling of the world, Romans 11.11, 13, 15. All which sayings
imply that they first stumbled at Christ, and the preaching of Christ before
the Gentiles were called in. As to that purpose also those passages in Mat.
22.7, 8, 9. Luke 14.20, 21. Acts 13.46, 47, 48. and 28, 27, 28. speak;
therefore it does not so properly seem, and so fully to agree to them generally
considered, though in some sense as stumbling at the call of the Gentiles also,
and being offended at the Gospel preaching to them it may be applied to them.

3. Or may we apply it to the Pharisees and Publicans? indeed that it took its
rise and occasion of being propounded from, because the Pharisees who thought
themselves righteous and in a sense were so comparatively to the Publicans
(that is in respect of their observing and strictly cleaving to the Laws of
Moses, and abstaining from all grosser sins that were notorious, and taken
notice of by men as such) were offended at Christ for his Grace to the
Publicans and Harlots, who were evidently breakers of Gods Laws, and walked
contrary thereto, and all of them were of that people that had the adoption,
and the name of Gods Sons upon them; so as the Gentiles in distinction from the
Jews had not, and the Publicans and Harlots entered into the Kingdom of God
before them, as our Savior says, Mat. 21, 32. and they and the Pharisees are
represented by our Savior in ver. 38. by two Sons of one man: but then the
Pharisees there are compared to the elder Son that said to his Father, that he
would go into his Vineyard and went not, whereas the other said the contrary,
yet repented and went; they repenting at the preaching of John, and betaking
themselves also to Christ, as the Pharisees did not, Luke 7.29, 30. I think
though it may be applied to them, and our Savior speaks it to them, and in
their hearing, for their Instruction, yet there can hardly be a full
accommodation of that in ver. 31. to them, that they were Gods Sons, and were
ever with him, and all he had were theirs. Christ (at least afterward) used to
speak at a rougher rate to them, yea, and John the Baptist before calling them
Serpents, a Generation of Vipers, Hypocrites, yea, Children of Hell, and the
Devil: But there might be difference of them; some that were not such opposers
of Christ and his Doctrine; such as Nicodemus that came to him by night, and
Simon, whose debts he seems to imply were forgiven him, though not so great and
many as the woman's that he called and looked upon as a sinner, an infamous
woman, and inwardly murmured at Christ's graciousness toward, Luke 7.36, 37,
42, 43, etc. Others were proud, scornful opposers, and persecutors of Christ
and his truth, trusting in themselves that they were righteous, and in the
right way, and condemning him of error and deceit; and those he calls Serpents,
and generation of Vipers, Children of Hell, and of the Devil: and if we so look
upon it, and apply it to the first sort of them (of which also Paul confesses
himself to be one, even after he was a Christian and an Apostle. I am a
Pharisee, the Son of a Pharisee, Acts 23.6, that word signifying but one
separated to the study and observation of the Law of God, the strictest Sect of
Religion amongst the Jews; much what like what used to be called amongst us,
Puritans, and now Presbyterians, etc. some of whom doubtless may be, and were
honest and good Christians) then it will agree to another sense, that I am most
satisfied in, and think to be the rightest and fullest, viz.

4. By the two Sons I understand two kinds of people both begotten to, and
born of God, adopted by him for his Children, through Jesus Christ, either as
implicitly held forth, as before his coming, or explicitly as since; one of
these compared to the younger Son are they that after some time taking, and
attributing the Gifts and Graces of God to themselves, and considering and
growing full in themselves through them, depart from God, and run into
bypath, and sinful courses, tending to the destruction of their souls,
wasting and consuming Gods gift, and talents upon their own and other men's
lusts. The other sort compared to the elder Son, such as after grace received,
and their call and birth as it were into, or in Gods house, abide therein, and
cleave to God, and his word, and the commands and councels thereof walking
justly and holily with God in the main, and not departing from him, as open
sinners do; for unto such it may be said, as is here said by the Father more
fully and proproperly. Son thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine,
as David says of such, Blessed are the undefiled in the way that walk in the
Law of the Lord. Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and seek him with
the whole heart; they also do no iniquity that walk in thy ways, Psalm. 119.1,
2, 3. Men that are truly righteous and accepted of God, and turn not aside to
crooked paths as others do.

Only here it might be questioned, whether such persons may be guilty of such
pride and frowardness as is here set forth in the elder Son and his carriage;
such disdain at erring and repenting Sinners, such quarrelling at God and his
dealings. And it seems to me they may, and sometimes have been found, and yet
are guilty of such like distempers through their over-weaning their own
righteousness, and walkings, and dislike, as they apprehend of others
wickedness. Yea, we have diverse instances of such like frowardness befalling
and exerting it self in such more close-walking Believers and righteous persons
upon diverse accounts: as to say.

1. Sometimes because they see and perceive, and with a carnal eye (which yet
may be in true and right Disciples; else Christ would not have said to such, If
thy right eye offend thee pluck it out and cast it from thee) do behold and
look upon the outward prosperity, riches, honors, and welfare of loose ungodly
persons that are and continue to be so; and on the other hand reflect upon
their own sufferings and troubles: Thus we find that good man Asaph confessing
to us that such a view of things had like to have turned him aside, and made
him slip: yea, it brought him to such a pass as that he was actually envious at
the foolish when he saw the prosperity of the wicked, and came to this
conclusion, Verily in vain have I cleansed my heart, and washed my hands in
innocence, for all the day long have I been plagued and chastned every morning,
Psalm. 73.13, 14. Whence also so frequent warnings and councels given to such by
the Holy Ghost, Not to envy sinners, nor fret themselves because of such as
prosper in wickedness, and that bring evil devices to pass; as is to be seen in
Psalm. 37. Prove. 3.29, 31. and 23.17, 18. and 24.1.19, 20. and the same carnal
eye that leads to envy and be discontented at God for the outward prosperity of
the openly wicked, may lead them to stumble and be displeased at God for giving
such upon their repentance more gracious testimonies of his love, and ravishing
satisfactions and assurance of Salvation then they have proved or felt in their
more sober and zealous walking.

2. Sometimes because God does heavily try and exercise them with inward and
outward troubles and afflictions; therefore over-weaning their own integrity,
righteousness, and good doings, they are ready to expostulate with God, and
condemn and fault him as much as this elder Brother his righteous Father: and
this was Jobs case, and weakness: sure it is that he was no Pharisee (as that
word is used to signify a seemingly righteous man only, and a real Hypocrite)
for he has testimony from God that he was a perfect man, and upright above any
in the Land, one fearing God, and eschewing evil; and he could in truth (and
did) say a great deal of his uprightness and integrity, his holy, blameless,
and good demeanor, in chap. 29. and 31. more then any man scarce can say I
believe, and so much as put to silence the jealous and false surmises, and
groundless charges of his deceitful friends that would have fastened upon him
the blame of hypocrisy and wickedness; and yet he over-valuing his
righteousness, and looking, and standing too much upon it, fell into this
distemper, to murmur against, and fault the Almighty, condemning him, and
disannulling his judgment, that he might be righteous: as this froward Son
did, faulting God, in vindication of his own integrity; as if God punished him
without cause, and did more to him then he could answer; and if a perfect
upright man through temptation may fall into such a proud and froward distemper
in one case, it may be possible also in another.

3. But we have instances too of righteous and good men, charging God
foolishly, and murmuring against men for his and their respect to penitent
sinners, and for his equalizing or seeming to prefer them in his kindness, who
were below them in their works of righteousness, and over estimated goodness: A
threefold instance at the least we have of this.

1. The believing Jews when they heard that Peter had gone in to Cornelius
(Acts 11.1.) and eaten and drunk with them that were professed Gentiles, that
is, uncircumcised persons, murmured at him for it, and took him to task, till
by repeating the whole matter, with its grounds and reasons to them, he gave
them satisfaction; and then they indeed acquiesced, and glorified God for
giving unto them also repentance unto life; but before they contended with, and
accused him, and that is all that we find this Son did to his Father; and as
they, after St. Peter had opened the matter to them acquiesced, so might this
Son after this defense made by his Father; for-we find no reply thereto made
by him, nor further mention of him, as we do of the zealous Jews afterward that
were Christians, Acts 21.^0.

2. The laborers first hired into the Vineyard, Matthew. 20.1, 11. when they
came to receive their pay, because they that were hired at the eleventh hour of
the day, receiving their pay first, received as much as they, who had been
hired early in the morning, murmured against the Master of the house, as if he
had done them wrong, in making them who had labored but a little while equal
in their pay with them who had born the burden and heat of the day, saying,
These have wrought but one hour, and thou have made them equal with us ver. 12.
and yet these appear to have been righteous persons; for in his answer he
excepts not against their saying, they had born the burden and heat of the
day, as accusing them of falsehood in their plea, and as if they had been
unrighteous loyterers, and not laborers, and they were rewarded for their work
according to agreement, and promise, and had the same reward as those last that
seemed to be more favored: Their exception against him was not that they had
less then he had promised them, or then they had been content at first to
labor all the day for, but only that he made the last that had wrought so
little a time equal with them, to whom therefore all his answer is, Friend I do
thee no wrong, did thou not agree with me for a penny? is it not lawful for me
to do what I will with mine own? is thine eye evil because mine is good? take
that thine is, and go thy way, I will give to this last as unto thee, ver. 13,
14, 15. Indeed this is not altogether the same case: but if righteous
rewardable persons (such as the Apostles, for so the occasion of the parable
which was St. Peter's taking notice of what they had done, for Christ seems to
carry it) may in consideration of their labors, and Gods bounty to others that
have labored less, fall into such distempers for his goodness to them, because
equalized with them in the reward; may it not be easier in case God seems to
them to prefer such before them therein, or rather such as have done him great
disservice upon their acknowledging only, and repenting of their sin? as it
happened to St. Paul.

3. The Prophet Jonah undoubtedly was a good and gracious man, being a Prophet
of the Lord, and a Type of Christ, and yet he fell into a peevish distemper,
like to this of this elder Son, because God had not more respect to him, and
his honor, and credit, as a Prophet (as he thought its likely it would tend to
his disparagement) then to repenting Nineveh which was threatened by him before
their repentance to be destroyed after forty days time. The repenting
Ninivites were like this repenting Prodigal, They believed Gods threatening, and
repented, and put away their evil works; and God also repented of the evil
which he had threatened to bring upon them, and destroyed them not. And as the
Fathers entertainment of his Son displeased the elder Brother here: so did Gods
mercy and indulgence to Nineveh displease Jonah there: for it is said, The
thing displeased Jonah exceedingly (as if it had been some great evil that had
befallen him) and he was angry with him, and he prayed unto the Lord and said,
Jonah 4. I pray thee, O Lord, was not this the saying that I said while I was
yet in mine own Land; therefore fled I before unto Tarshish? for I knew that
thou art gracious, and merciful, long-suffering, and of great kindeness, and
repentest thee of the evil: and now, O Lord, take I beseech thee my life from
me, for it is better for me to die then to live. What a peevish froward temper
was this good man in, that could have been content to have died for grief that
Nineveh was spared? whence the Lord said to him, Do thou well to be angry?
and showed him his folly, in that, when Jonah went out of the City, and sat
and abode on the Eastside of it, and had made a Booth, and sat under it till
he might see what would become of the City; and God had prepared a Gourd, which
grew up above Jonah, and was a shade to him, defending him from the heat of the
Sun, so that he was exceeding glad of it: He also prepared a worm, that on the
morrow smote the Gourd that it withered; and in the morning he prepared an
East-winde that was drying, and the Sun beat upon Jonah's head, so as he
fainted, so as he then desired to dye rather then to live: whereupon the Lord
said to him, Do thou well to be angry for the Gourd, and he in his great
frowardness replied, I do well to be angry to the death, justifying himself in
his frowardness as this Elder Son did; as if God had done him a double injury,
one, in being so merciful to that cruel, bloody, heathenish City, and another
in being so harsh to him, as to take away the comfort and shelter of the Gourd
from him, thereby exposing him to so much trouble; much what as this Elder Son
quarrelled with his Father for his supposed straitness to him, and for his
goodness to his Brother, till God answered him there as the Father did his Son
here, to allay his heat and passion, saying, Thou have pity on that Gourd that
thou never labouredst for, neither did thou make it to grow, but it sprung up
in a night, and perished in a night, and should not I have mercy on Nineveh, a
great City, in which are more then six score thousand persons which know not
their right hand from their left, besides much Cattle? Showing (as our Lord in
these Parables) how apt men are to be pitiful toward, and tender over
trifles, and yet they are ready to take it ill, that God so tenders, and shows
his compassion to the immortal souls of his choice creatures.

Indeed there was a difference between Jonah and this Elder Son, if we take for
true his passionate proclaiming his own dutifulness and obedience. Jonah could
not say as he, that he never at any time transgressed any of Gods Commandments;
for he had but a little bebefore gone quite contrary to his Commandment,
flying to Tarshish, when God sent him at the first to preach to Nineveh, for
which God made him smart, by causing him to be cast into the Sea, where he had
perished had he not upon his repentance and crying to God found wondrous mercy
from him, in prepaparing a Whale, and causing it after three days and three
nights to vomit him out upon the shore, safe and sound. But this was such a
circumstance as renders the case far more for our advantage; for one would have
thought that such a notable transgression deserving such, and a greater
punishment, and putting him upon such a need of crying for mercy himself, and
such a signal unparalled mercy obtained of God, should have made him more to
compassionate others that sinned, and more well-pleased, that they should in
their repentance obtain mercy too. Experiences of miseries use to make men more
compassionate to others, and mercies showed to our selves should make us more
desirous of mercy to others, whom like or worse miseries have either layen
upon, or are at present impending over: but it was otherwise with Jonah, he
that had needed and cried for, and obtained mercy for himself but a little
before, without which he had been no more heard of, even he hardens his heart
against such as needed like mercy now, and could be angry unto death, that God
should take such care to call them to repentance, and upon their repenting
spare them. Now if truly righteous persons after great lapses themselves, and
mercies received, may murmur at Gods mercies to others, because they obtain
mercy upon repentance, who had before deserved to have been destroyed: how much
more may it befall such persons, having in their apprehensions never so
offended, or been in such a plunge, but always in a posture of duty and
obedience, being puffed up thereby to fall into passions and offenses, to see
gross sinners upon an appearingly slighty repentance, received to such favors
as they have never had experience of the like?

These things seem to render valid the interpretation of the words that I have
given; besides the words themselves answered here by the Father to his froward
Son; Son thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine, which agree unto
none so properly as unto truly righteous, and obedient Children. And the words
so looked upon, though they do not suit just with the generality of the Jews or
Pharisees, who were Hypocrites, nor may be so construed as to render them truly
righteous; yet by an argument from the greater to the less, do more strongly
reprove them after this sort. If persons truly righteous, and in the main
dutiful and obedient, have no cause to murmur at Gods great mercies toward
grievous sinners, if upon their repentance they be not only pardoned, but also
meet with such joys and expressions of gladness in God and his Servants, as
themselves never had proof and experience of; much less have formal Professors,
carnal Christians, or Hypocrites, that have nothing but a form of Worship, and
an appearance of Godliness and Devotion, and that mixed too, with great
blindeness, opposition to Christ, his ways and truth, and with many other
great latent evils (and some open enough too sometimes) much less I say have
such cause to murmur at Gods mercies to penitent sinners, and think themselves
slighted in that their formal, outside, and Pharisaical Professions are less
regarded: forasmuch as their formal Devotion and Religion is far short of the
grosser Sinners hearty repentance and turning unto God. Such sinners might say
to them, as the Thief upon the Cross to his fellow that mocked at Christ,
Fear thou not God, seeing thou art in the same condemnaton, in as bad a
condition by thy resting in an ignorant, formal, outside profession, without
inward life and power, and therein indulging thy self in some seemingly less,
but as well forbidden corruptions (such as their swearing by the Temple, and by
the Altar, and thinking themselves guiltless therein, when God had forbidden to
swear, save by his Name, and by his Name too, customarily, rashly, or falsely;
somewhat like men's swearing by their Faith and Troth, or by the Mass, or by the
Name of God customarily, and such other Oaths in which they hold themselves
innocent, Mat 23.16, 17, 18, 19) Yea and adding to thy other sins that that
makes thee equal with the chief sinners, viz. opposition to Gods Ways, Truths
and people, even to the Name of his only Son, called upon by them (as Paul
tells us when he had reckoned up many great sinners, as ungodly, unholy,
profane, murderers of Fathers, murderers of Mothers, Whoremongers, defilers
of themselves with mankind, Man-stealers, etc. for whom he says Christ Jesus
came into the world to save them; yet speaking of himself that had been of the
straitest Sect of Religion among the Jews, and abhorred and hated those grosser
ways of ungodliness; yet because he had in his ignorant zeal for God and his
Church, and the Traditions of the Elders, blasphemed Christ, and his Truth, and
People, and been a persecutor of, and injurious to them: he styles himself
therefore the chief of sinners, (as if a greater sinner then those Thieves,
Whoremongers, and Murderers before spoken of by him) thou I say art in as bad
a condition as I poor prodigal was in before I repented, and how much worse
then now I am, in having repented; such as are so far guilty themselves (as the
Pharisees more generally had a spice of that persecuting spirit against Christ
and his Doctrine) have I say no cause to murmur against Gods goodness to
repentant sinners, but had need rather to repent them with them that they might
obtain like mercy also: as our Savior implies that the Publicans and Harlots
repentance, and being thereupon admitted into Gods Kingdom, and so into a state
of righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost (Romans 14.17.) should have
moved the Pharisees to repentance with them of their formal and pharisaical
righteousness, and other sinful evils found with them. To that purpose is what
is written in Matthew. 21.31, 32. Verily I say unto you, that the Publicans and
Harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you (before you Pharisees, formal
Professors, superstitiously righteous) for John came unto you in the way of
righteousness, and ye believed him not; but the Publicans and the Harlots
believed him: and ye when ye had seen it, repented not that ye might believe. I
do not say then that all that murmur at Gods goodness to repenting Sinners, are
really righteous, and the Sons of God. No, the generality of the Scribes and
Pharisees were not so, nor were the false Teachers and the Preachers up of
Circumcision in the Primitive Churches such, who were greatly offended at the
Gentiles finding such mercy as to be received in, in their uncircumcision in
the flesh, into the number of Gods Saints, and holy ones. The Apostle gives
them other Characters, when he says, Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers,
beware of the concision, Phil. 3.2. and says of such, That their end was
destruction, ver. 19. and that they were false Apostles, deceitful workers,
messengers, and Ministers of Satan, and the like, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. But I
say such as cleave to God their Father, and depart not from him in faith or
life, that are ever with him, and have interest in all he has, these are truly
righteous persons through Christ in the main, though they also may possibly be
sometimes leavened with the leaven of the Pharisees, their corrupt principles
or ways, if they take not heed thereof, as is employed, Matthew. 16.6. they may
have froward, sullen, peevish, and envious fits befall them: yea, and besides,
our Savior for better winning in the Pharisees, and taking off their
prejudices, might (and I think did sometime) speak to them upon supposal of
their being (what they judged themselves to be) truly righteous: as in Matthew.
9.13. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

CHAP. V. A threefold state of men considered in the Text, The first, The
state of righteous Walkers, in three Branches; the first Branch opened and
applied.
THE words then being thus explicated and cleared, as to the two Sons therein
mentioned, let us go forward; and I observe in them a threefold state or way of
men here spoken to, which I shall desire a little briefly to consider as God
shall assist therein.

1. The good state of truly righteous and obedient persons walking in the fear
and obedience of the Lord; and that is set forth in the first Branch of the
reply of the Father to his elder Son, ver. 31. Son thou art ever with me, and
all that I have is thine.

2. The sad and deplorable state of persons departing and wandering from God in
the ways of sin, and that is impliedly contained in the latter expressions of
the latter part of his reply, viz. in these words, Thy Brother was dead, was
lost,

3. The comfortable estate of such wanderers returned to God by repentance, and
that is signified in the whole latter part of the said reply, verse 32. It was
meet that we should make merry, and be glad, for this thy Brother was dead, and
is alive again, he was lost and is found. Of these in order.

The first state.

And first for the good estate of the obeyers and walkers with God, it is
signified in a threefold expression, viz.

1. In the compellation, Son. They are the Sons of God.

2. In the first Branch of the assertion to him, Thou art ever with me. They
are ever with God. And

3. In the latter Branch of it, and all that I have is thine. They have
interest in all that is Gods. A happy portion, and such, as one would think, if
minded, might content any one, and preserve them from envying at either the
portion of the world, or the portion of, or Gods dealing with, any of their
Brethren. View we it in each of these Branches in order.

1 Branch.

First, They that abide with God, and depart not from him, but walk righteously
before him, they are the Sons of God.

1. Men might be called the Sons of God by virtue of their Creation, in which
they received their being of, and from God, much more then a child his being
from his Parents; and so (as we noted before) its said, The Son of Adam, which
was the Son of God, Luke 3.38. and by the Poet recited and approved by the
Apostle Paul, Acts 17.28, 29. For we are also his offspring: from which the
Apostle infers, forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to
think that the Godhead is like to Gold, etc. For indeed God made man in his
own Image and Likeness, and therefore also man resembling God in some respects,
as the Son the Father, might therefrom be called and accounted his Son. But
that image and likeness (especially as to any holiness, purity, innocence,
right knowledge, yea, or any right of dominion over the creatures, liberty of
will, or the like) was wholly lost in our departing from him, and sinning
against him, we being there-through filled with the poison of sin, the spawn
and likeness of the Devil, the old Serpent, and inslaved by, and to him,
children of wrath, and heirs of destruction, though the relation of creatures
abode still, yet the likeness of children was wholly lost, But,

2. God so loved the world, that he sent his only begotten Son thereinto to be
the Savior of the world, and to that purpose made him of a woman, and under
the Law, that he might bear our sins in his own body on the Tree, and by giving
himself a ransom and sacrifice to Justice for all men, as the Lamb of God,
take away the sin of the world, by bearing and satisfying for it in himself,
and destroying by his death, him that had the power over death, even the Devil
and his works ( Heb. 2.14. 1 John 3.8.) might free us, or buy us from under his
acquired jurisdiction and tyranny over us, and from the wrath and destruction
due to us, into his own Dispose, Lordship, and Jurisdiction, to be ruled over,
and disposed of by him, John ^.16, 17. 1 John 4.14. Gal. 4.4, 5. 1 Pet. 2.24. 1 Timothy 2.6. John 1.29. Romans 14.9. For to this end he both died, rose, and
revived, that he might be Lord of both quick and dead. Now in this that he
became man, he took the manhood into unity of person with himself, so as in
him Man is become the Son of God, the only begotten Son of God, even the man
Christ Jesus, as he was also mightily declared to be by the Spirit of Holiness
in the Resurrection of the dead, as it is said, Thou art my Son, this day have
I begotten thee, Romans 1.3, 4. Acts 13.33. and in that he in that nature has
suffered for us (the just for the unjust) and is become the propitiation for
our sins, even for the sins of the whole world, and has received into himself
the immeasurable fullness of the Holy Spirit (so as he may communicate to us
thereof, and Baptize us therewith) he has opened a way for us lost men to
recover our nighness and likeness to God again, that we receiving remission of
sins through his Blood, might be also adopted, and taken into the account of
his Sons, being begotten by him, through the revelation of his Son to us, and
of the grace in and by him, to believe on his Son, and approach to, hope in,
and worship him in and by his Son. Yea, and

3. Because that manhood which he purposed to cloth his Son with, that body
he prepared for him, he chose and took it of the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob; therefore to their seed also he of his Grace and Favor gave the
adoption of Sons, as it is said of the Jews, They are Israelites, to whom
pertains the adoption, the glory, etc. Romans 9.4. when he is speaking of
Israel after the flesh, and such as for whom he could have wished himself
accursed, and had great heaviness, and continual sorrow in his heart, through
the consideration of that state of unbelief they then lay in: wherefore also of
Israel it is said, Israel is my Son, my firstborn; and I say unto thee, let my
Son, my firstborn go, Exodus 4.22. His Son, both because Christ his Son (in
respect of the flesh he was to take) was in them, or some of them, and in
respect of the knowledge of Christ they, the rest also, were called to; or also
the Covenant (the substance of which was Christ; as it is said, I have given
him for a Covenant of the people, Isa. 42.6. and 49.6 and 55.3. I will make an
everlasting Covenant with you, the sure mercies of David Which the Apostle
interprets to be Christ risen again, Acts. 13.34) into which after a sort they
were initiated and grafted by Circumcision a seal of the righteousness of the
faith that Abraham had; being yet uncircumcised, as the Apostle says, Romans
4.11. even the righteousness by the faith of Christ, through whom, and with
respect to whom they were taken into Gods house, and accounted, and called his
Sons, and Children, yea, and there abiding in subjection to his instructions
they continued so; but many of them not understanding and walking in the Faith
of Abraham, of the righteousness whereof Circumcision was the Seal, but resting
short, or wandering out of it, yea, and opposing of it, they became so far from
being the Sons of God, that they were by our Savior, and John the Baptist, (
John 8.44.) rightly styled, Serpents, a generation of Vipers, yea, the seed or
children of the Devil, Mat. 3.8. and 23.33.

4. Yea, whereas God gave to that people, a holy and righteous Law, to convince
them of sin, and show them their need of Christ, and the forgiveness of their
sins through him, and to signify and shadow him out with the grace in and by
him, that as by a Schoolmaster they might be directed to him to seek him and
righteousness, and life in him: Whence it is said, Moses wrote of him, and the
Law witnessed to the righteousness of God, that is, by the faith of him, Gal.
3.23, 24, 25. John 5.46. Romans 3.21. Many of them not understanding the Law, nor
seeing to the end thereof ( which was Christ for righteousness to every one
that believes, Romans 10.4. being blinded by their unbelief, and listening to
Satan, and closing their eyes and stopping their ears against Gods Doctrine,
(who so speaks of Christ in all his teachings, that whosoever hears and learns
of him, comes to him, John 6.45.) rested only in the Type, Shadow, and work of
the Law, seeking righteousness as it were thereby, and not coming to Christ for
life nor submitting to him as the righteousness of God, but stumbling at him (
John 5.40. Romans 10.3.) yet these not seeing their sinfulness, and the curse
they were under by the Law in all their works, but conceiting themselves alive
in the observations of it, took themselves to be the Children of God, and are
called in a sense as the Children of God: either they or the Judaizing
Christians (which I think the likelier) being compared to one of the Sons of
Abraham, who bare a kind of Type or representation of God in his two sons. But
these indeed are servants or such sons as Ishmael (the Law gendring to bondage)
and so bondmen, and not such Sons as are ever with God, as a Son with his
Father, but were to be cast out, and are cast out with their Mother that bare
them from inheriting with those that are indeed his Sons, as Isaac was; and of
this stamp too, are they that being ignorant and neglective of the Grace of God
in Christ do live upon their duties and observances of outward ordinances under
the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.13, 14, 15. and 4.4. Matthew. 13.15. Romans 9.30, 31, 32. and
10.3. John 8.41. Gal. 4.22, 30. Luke 18.9, 11. and such Sons the Pharisees
might be. But,

5. They, and they only, that being Baptized into Christ, or initiated into him
do put on Christ, or being called of God to him, do receive him, own,
entertain, and believe in him; do by virtue of him, and in union with him,
become the Sons of God (in the choice sense of of it) and attain that dignity
and privilege so to be made and called, being in the gracious call of God to
him overcoming them to receive and believe in him, born also of God, begotten
of that immortal seed of his word, that lives and abides for ever; and in
believing on Christ receive (by and through him) the spirit of Sonship, even
the Spirit of the Son, framing them to a child-like love to, and confidence in
God, as their Father, and infusing into them his Divine Nature; and so renewing
them in (or in them) the Image of Christ Jesus his only begotten Son, and
making them like to him by degrees, Who is the firstborn amongst many brethren,
Romans 8.29. And now sure they that being thus made Sons of God do also follow
after, and are led by, and so retain the Spirit of the Son, are and must needs
be the Sons of God, as it is said, To them that received Christ, to them he
gave this privilege to become the Sons of God, even to those that believe in
his name, who are born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God, John 1.12, 13. and Ye are all the Sons of God by faith
in Jesus Christ, Gal. 4.26. and If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that
every one that does righteousness (namely in believing on him, and so being led
by his Spirit) is born of him. Behold what manner of love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God, 1 John 2.29. and
3.1. and So many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God,
Romans 4.14, 15. being thereby led into, and kept in union with, and dependence
on the Son of God, and made like to him in conformity, in righteousness,
holiness, etc. And indeed men being made the Sons of God by this divine
regeneration into, and in the Son of God and brought to God, what can unson
them again, if they abide and tarry with God, not departing from him? God who
at so dear a rate, and in so great love has made them his Sons, will not out
of mutability of mind, unson them again. No, his gifts and calling are without
repenting of them, Romans 11.29. Sins and failings they may have, froward
passions, and peevish distempers as other (men's) Sons and Children have and may
have; and therefore as in their infancy and minority under the Law, they were
under Tutors and Governors, to nurture and order them till the time appointed
of the Father, Gal. 4.1, 2, 3. So also still they may need to feel the rod of
their Father, (though no longer under the tutorage of Moses Law as formerly) as
it is said, Whom the Lord loves he chastneth and scourges every Son whom he
receives, Heb. 12.6. and such will be their state while here, till they come
to perfect age, To the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, till
they see him as he is; for then they shall be completely like him, and have
nothing more of ignorance, error, frowardness, or disobedience in them, Ephesians.
4.14. 1 John 3.1, 2. but those frailties and failings, peevishnesses, and
passions, do not unson them, unless they wholly turn them out from Christ the
Son, in whom they have their Sonship, and are Sons. Indeed if any depart from
him, so as to be abolished from him, then they fall from that Grace and Favor
in which the Believer and abider stands even from the Grace of Sonship. Christ
shall profit them nothing, Gal. 5.2, 3. or as the Parable has it, become Sons
dead and lost, that are as if they were not, and without a reviving perish from
Gods presence; and if they may be called Sons, as Abraham calls the rich man in
Hell his Son, they can have but only the title and the quondam relation; the
nighness and privileges of Sons with their Father, and in his house they can
never obtain, when the gulf is fixed upon them for ever and ever; as the Parable
has it in Luke 16.25, 26. But the walkers with God, the continuers in his
Faith, Fear, and Service, must needs be his Sons, inasmuch as they abide in
Christ his Son. Such the first Branch of this hapy state, they are Sons of God.

Use. 1.

And is this nothing, or is it but a small matter to be a Son of God? is it not
a very spring, in and through Christ, of infinite and unspeakable hope and
consolation? a Son of God, who is great in power, rich in glory, in mercy, in
wisdom, in love and goodness, able to do all things, good to all, and his
tender mercies, over all his works, bountiful to Servants that are but
hirelings, and serve him only for their own interests and rewards, and may not
abide in the house for ever, being not made Sons. How many hired Servants
(says the Prodigal) are in my Fathers house, that have bread enough and to
spare, Luke 15.17. Yea good to his enemies, loving them, and doing good to all;
making his Sun to shine, and rain to fall on the good, and on the bad, the
unthankful and evil, giving whole Lordships, yea, and Kingdoms of this world in
his great bounty to them also, that regard him not b^t hate him; careful of the
very inferior creatures, feeding the Ravens, caring for the Fowls of Heaven,
even the little Sparrows, five of which are sold for two farthings, and not one
of them is forgot before him. Yea, he gives food to all flesh, for his mercy
endures for ever. If David counted it so great an honor and privilege to be
Son in Law to Saul, an earthly and mortal King, whose breath was in his
nostrils, and his power of narrow compass in comparison of Gods (as well as his
goodness) Oh what may not a soul promise it self of felicity and happiness in
being the Son, the adopted and genuine Son of a King so great, so full, so
good, so free, so liberal to, and careful of all, even of the worst men and
creatures, as God is? what cannot, what will not such a Father do for his
Children? especially such Children too, as obey and abide with him? Yea, what
may they not upon that consideration encourage themselves to look for, and
expect from him, having also such an elder Brother with him as is infinitely
perfect and dear to him to plead for them, and take away the defects and
sailings of their obedience toward him? shall he be good to strangers, provide
for inferior creatures, give large crumbs and offals to dogs, and birds, and
beasts; and will he not give what is convenient to his children? surely yes:
Shall he give good things to his enemies, and neglect his children? surely no.
Surely he has far better things for them, then for any others not so near to
him, nor in such relation with him. It is our Saviors argument, Consider the
fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into
barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Mark the Emphasis. Your Father,
and therefore loves you: Your heavenly Father, who in that he is heavenly, is
above all, and has all power, and all creatures subject to him; and in that he
is heavenly, is holy and pure from earthly affections, as covetousness and
other passions, which our earthly Fathers are bemudded with. He is your Father,
your heavenly Father; yet he feeds them that are of no compare with him to you,
and to whom he owns no such relation: shall he feed them and neglect you? what
earthly Father will do so, to feed his chickens, and forget or famish his
children? much less can or will your heavenly Father, Matthew. 6.26. and the like
in Matthew. 10.29. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing, and not one of them
shall ^all to the ground without your Father: as ^f he would say, does he that
is so* early related, and dearly affected to you, who styles himself your
Father, and owns you as his Children, take such care of so inconsiderable a
creature as a sparrow, two whereof are sold for a farthing, and who are so
infinitely below him, that he styles not himself in such a relation to them;
and can he neglect you who are his Children, whom he has so valued as to give
a price greater then heaven and earth, even his own Son for you? Fear ye not
therefore, ye are of more value (namely with him) then many sparrows. This then
is a relation estating in such a condition as affords exceeding ground of
highest confidence, and greatest expectation in and through Christ (in whom he
makes and takes us for his Children) of greatest advantages, and fullest
happiness, and in the mean while of all that he that is so great and good can
do for us, and sees good and meet to be done. Behold then what manner of love
the Father has bestowed upon us (who are in Christ Jesus) that we should be
called the Sons of God. Surely its well worthy of our beholding, for there is
in it to be seen height and strength of love and affection, and matter of
mavelous consolation: and in beholding this we may

2. Behold also how infinitely we are engaged to God, and to our Lord Jesus
Christ to love and live to them, to honor and glorify them; for what love was
that, that led the Father to give his only begotten Son to be the Son of Man,
and thereby exposed to all the miseries of man, yea, all that man by his sin
had deserved as its just reward to be sustained and born by him, that he might
open the way from destruction, to such an high privilege as Sonship to God by
him, and make him the root of it for and to us, through what he has done to
him in the body he prepared and gave him? could it be less then infinite love
in him that moved him to design such exaltation of so base and vile creatures
as we, by the so great abasement of one so high and glorious as he? and oh what
love was that in Christ Jesus, what grace, what pity, what mercy and kindeness
not to shrink back from the state of service to make us sons; yea from the
state of sin and death, For he that knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him, and died for all, that through
him we might attain such dignity and glory as cannot be valued by us? how
should it engage our hearts and affections to him, and make us ready with all
diligence to obey and live to him, that to such, and so glorious an end died
for us, and rose again? For he was made under the Law for such as were under
the Law (as in a sense all were, Romans 3.19.) that we being redeemed from the
Law, might receive the adoption of Sons, Gal. 4.4, 5.

2. Herein also we may see and be instructed into the way whereby sinners may
be made the Sons of God, even they that are not so, but are the children of
wrath: For as Christ has by his sufferings opened and made the way for it, so
he thereby as raised from the dead, and taken up to glory in the nature of man,
and owned as the Son of God, and glorified, is become the root of Sonship unto
us, as is said; and therefore the way for us to be made the Sons of God, is to
receive and close with him the Son of God: as God is commending him and setting
him forth to us by his Word and Spirit, so to be diligent to hear and learn of
him, that being therein drawn, we may come to, and believe on him, who cannot
of our selves come to him, nor have any way to be the Sons of God in truth, but
in and by him received and believed on, as the Apostle James also instructs us;
when having said, Of his own good will begot he us by the word of truth, that
we might be a kind of first fruits of his creatures to him, James 1.18, 19.
Then he adds, Let every one be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to
wrath; namely, that so he also may be begotten of him to like privileges. In
Gods drawing us then with the cords of love, and bands of a man, take heed of
breaking his bands, and casting his cords from us; of closing the eye, and
stopping the ear, and hardening the heart, lest we should see with the eye, and
hear with the ear, and be converted, and Christ should heal us, and advance us
to so high favor and dignity, and so we deprive our selves thereof: but hear
we his voice while its called to day, and yield we to his drawings of us, to
believe in him; obey we and follow we after the Holy Spirit, sent forth in his
Name, with his Word, and Doctrine to us, to convince us of sin, and glorify
him to us, that in obeying his voice, we may be led to him, and knowing his
name through his light and teaching, we may by his renewing, quickening virtue
be framed and strengthened to believe in him, John 6 45. and so being born of
Water, and of the Spirit, may be made the Sons of God in him, Phil. 9.10. John
3.3.

3. Yea, what ground of content with our conditions may we here see, being
brought into Christ, and made thee Sons of God by faith in him? what cause or
ground is there for such to envy or murmur at others for being high born, rich,
honorable, or mighty in this world? what is all the dignity and happiness of
the greatest Princes Children, or of the wealthiest and most potent Monarchs,
in comparison of the happiness of those that have God for their Father, and can
truly say they are born of him? How poor and sorry shadows are all titles,
excellencies, and enjoyments to what this dignity admits to, and to the
substance that is therein? should a Princes Son envy another, because he is Son
to the Mayor of some decayed Corporation? or because he wears a few glittering
brazen Buttons, or silken Ribbands, when he happily has none such, but has
that that is ten thousand times more precious on him? Nay not only no ground to
envy sinners, but none to envy any other Sons of God, or any of our Brethren;
for what have they right to, but we have also the same, having one Father, and
one infinite Inheritance in and with him, all in common; though we have not the
same stature, the same employments, the same garb, yet we have the same rich,
powerful, and loving Father, that is an impartial lover of his Children, and
designs to make them all his children in sharing his Inheritance amongst them,
or rather making each of them heirs of the whole ground here is of love rightly
considered, but of envy and fretting for the Fathers now smiling upon one
rather then upon another, none.

4. Yea, what folly and madness must they needs be guilty of, that having in
and through Christ way made, and advantage afforded for attaining this dignity,
either take up so much content in being the children of some mortal rich or
great ones, or in having such earthy estates, pleasures, or fading enjoyments;
or else are so taken up with care to get, and keep some earthy worldly things
that will not either satisfy or save them, that they utterly neglect and
trample under feet like Swine, or very luke-warmly and coldly seek after, and
so miss for want of more hearty seeking, such a pearl of so infinite value as
this is? as if there were more in being the Sons or Daughters of Gentlemen,
Knights, or Princes, or more in a few perishing riches, deceitful pleasures, or
empty titles, or honors, then in being the Sons of the highest, and having his
favor and affection placed for ever on us? Sure this is great folly and
madness, and yet through the deceits of Sin and Satan it is most common.

5. And how might it provoke such as are the Sons of God to cleave to, and
tarry at home, as it were with him; and to that purpose to beware of
accompanying themselves with the world, or being unequally yoaked, and bound up
with them, lest they draw them into disobedience and rebellion, and so to
deprive themselves of the love and friendship of so high a Father, and provoke
his anger and displeasure against them, but rather take the Apostles counsel
and keep to it, to Come out from amongst the world, and be separate to God in
Christ, and not touch the unclean things, the unclean principles or practices
of the world, that so God may receive them, more and more, as his, and be their
Father, and they may be to him as Sons and Daughters: Yea, as obedient children
not to fashion themselves to the lusts of their former ignorance, but as he
that has called us is holy to be holy in all manner of conversation, 2 Corinthians. 6.14, 17, 18. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16, 17.

6. And it may provoke them to behave themselves as the Sons of God, and so,

1. To be followers of God as dear children, imitating him in love, mercy, and
goodness, as Ephesians. 4.32 and 5.1.

2. Seeking to honor God as their Father, in word and conversation, Malachy
1.6.

3. And to that end, to live cheerfully in God, not giving way to, or sinking
under cares and fears, etc. Phil. 4, 4, 5, 6. 1 Pet. 5.7. Luke 12.32.

4. Loving their Brethren as Sons of God also with them, Ephesians. 5.1, 2.

5. Putting on, and wearing such apparel as becomes such high born persons,
Putting on as the elect of God, holy, and beloved, bowels of mercy, meekness,
humbleness of mind, etc. Col. 3.9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

6. Living above the world, and the things of it, yea, contemning such worldly
lusts, and delights, as far below them, 1 Pet. 2 11. Tit. 2.11, 12. And great
is the advantage of being obedient children to God, and not running from him,
but living as his children with him, as follows.

CHAP. VI. The second Branch opened and applied.
THOU art ever with me. They that are obedient to God and Christ, and depart
not away through pride and folly from him, have the advantage of being ever
with him: For God does not (as other Fathers sometimes do) send away his
Children to live from him; they that forsake not him shall not be forsaken or
thrust away by him. They that come unto Christ, and so unto God in Christ, he
will in no wise cast them away, or lose them, John 6.33. and 18.9. Other
Fathers that have diverse Children must send some of them away, because they
either want love for them all, or if not, yet have not always room for them
all in their Houses and Farms, or the like; but its not so with God, he has
room enough in his heart for them all, and room, and bread, and provision
enough in his house for them all too, and for more then all. The same love that
led him to beget them through the painful sufferings of his Son, and the
troublesome travels of his Soul, and by the powerful influences of his Spirit,
leads him also to keep and look to them.

And thus they are in and by virtue of Christ, who is their Head, and in whom
they are as Branches in the Stock or Root, John 15.4. as members in the Head,
or in union with it by Faith and Spirit, being in Christ they are in him ever
with God; for he is ever with him in his presence, in his bosom, at his right
hand, in his power and authority, ruling and ordering all things, for, and
over, and about them; and as the great High Priest making intercession for them.

We were with God, even all men in our first Parents in the Garden of Eden,
enjoying intercourse with him, till we in them offended, and sinned, and then
he justly cast us out thence as unclean and nasty creatures, and banished us
from his presence, setting a Cherubim, with a flaming Sword in his hand to keep
us thence: yet not content to leave us so, in his pity and mercy he devised a
way, a new and living way, by which he might without violation to his truth and
justice (which stood against us as in our selves become sinners) admit us again
into his presence, and have intercourse with us. To that purpose he sent his
Son into the world for us, and he became as a banished person from his presence
for a time, crying out as forsaken of his Father; that so taking away the
sentence of banishment by satisfying the demands of Law and Justice in his own
body for all men (as fallen in Adam, and therefore expelled from him) he might
become himself the way of access (the fiery flaming Sword in the hand of the
Cherubim that was every way wielded against us, being removed by his being made
under, and bearing the sentence of the fiery Law for us) and by him now we may
return to God again. He has suffered for us, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. To which purpose being raised again, and
become the mediator of God and us, he calls us by him to himself; and though we
are so unclean in our selves, that he can admit us to no immediate fellowship
with himself, yet in and by him, Who is the way, the truth, the life, the new
and living way, that makes alive and clean, righteous and holy, all that enter
into, and walk in him, and so come unto God by him (he being made to us of God,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Holiness, and Redemption) there he can speak to, and
commune with us, from off that mercy-seat, and admit us to behold him, present
our selves to and before him, and have most intimate and entire fellowship with
him, and no way, or where else. By him, as the door and gate of life opened for
all (though strait to the flesh, because of its crossness to its corrupt
wisdom, will, and affections, and because of the many reproaches, persecutions,
and afflictions attending it, so as few find and enter it) he invites all to
return to God again, Commanding all men by the Gospel every where to repent,
Acts 17.30: and sending forth his Spirit with his calls, in which he stretches
forth his hand and power, that thereby men might be inlivened, quickened, and
strengthened to approach to God by him. And through him by that one Spirit, all,
whether Jews or Gentiles that listen to, and close with him, have access, and
come to the Father, so as they are no longer strangers, or forreignors, but
fellow Citizens, with the Saints, and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2.17, 18,
19. Prove. 1.23, 24, 32. and so being made the Sons of God in Christ, are also
ever with him.

1. With him, on his side to take part with him, as in that sense Hezekiah
says, 2 Chronicles. 32.7, 8. There be more with us then there are with him, with us
is the Lord our God. And our Savior says, He that is not against me is with
me, and He that is not against us is with us; but that is not so properly the
sense here. As,

2. With him, nigh to him, A people near unto the Lord, Psalm. 148. ult. made
nigh by the blood of Jesus, shed for, and sprinkled on them, Ephesians. 2.13. so nigh
that he is within their call: when they cry and call to him he hears them. The
Lord is nigh to all that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth, he
will fulfill the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their cry, and
he will save them, Psalm. 145.18, 19. within his view and favorable sight. The
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears open to their cries,
Psalm. 34.14. within his favorable reach or touch; so that he can as he
pleases, and does as need is, uphold them when they are like to fall, and gives
them with the right hand of his righteousness, what he pleases: so nigh him as
they may also hear his voice, see his face, behold his fair beauty, take hold
of his arm, or his strength, hold them by him, and lean upon him, Psalm. 94.17,
18, 19. and 34.24. and 63.8. 2 Chronicles. 13.18. and 16.8. Isa. 27.4.

3. With him, in fellowship with him, 1 John 2.3. Our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, and if we walk in the light, as he is in
the light, then have we fellowship one with another, verse 7. that is God with
us, to take part with us in our sorrows, sufferings, services, etc. In all
their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them,
in his love and in his pity he redeemed them, he bare them, and carried them
all the days of old, Isa. 63.9. and we with God to take part with him in his
grace, strength, fullness, taking hold of his strength, Isa. 27.4. and Being
filled with his fullness. Ephesians. 3.19. yea, they dwell together in one house,
Christ Jesus, in whom all the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, and in
whom whosoever believes, and in exercise of faith eats or feeds upon him dwells
also, Col. 2.9. John 6.56. eating, and drinking, and feasting together; for
Christ is the bread of God, the meat or sacrifice offered to God, and accepted
of him, with and through the virtues of whose sacrifice and sufferings, he is
cheared and strengthened to forgive sins, to give grace and blessing, and to
work all his works in and for us; as he also is the Vine, whose juice chears
the heart of God, as poured out in drink offerings to him, and the heart of man
as believed in by us; for God also sets him forth for us to feed upon, His
flesh as meat indeed, and his blood as drink indeed for us; John 6.33.55.
Judges 9.13. even as of old God had communion with his people in their
Sacrifices, taking part by the Altar and Priests for himself, and giving part
to the Sacrificers; so both God and his people feed together in Christ Jesus:
Yea God (the Father here) would have had his elder Son have come in and eat
with him, and his other Son and Servants of the feast prepared, the fatted
Calf; only the elder Sons own frowardness kept him out: and so he is in bed
with his children too, sometimes, as it is parabolically expressed, Luke 11.7.
while and they spiritually rest, and repose together in Christ: Such in a sort
their fellowship with him, that obey and walk with him.

3. With him, so as in a sense in him. The Church of the Thessalonians, that is
in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. and 2 Thessalonians.
1.1. and we are in him that is true, 1 John 5.20. in him, because in Christ as
to their hopes, heart, love, faith, life. Our life is hid with Christ in God,
Col. 3.3. in him, in his eye or view, For the eye of the Lord is over the
righteous, and they are ever in his sight, walking with, and before him, as
Noah, Enoch, Abraham, Genesis 17.1. They being his spiritual House and Temple in
Christ, what was said by him of his Temple typically, is true spiritually, and
more really as to them, Mine eyes and my heart, says God, shall be there
perpetually, 2 Chronicles. 7.16. 1 Pet. 3.1. in his hand, power, and dispose, to
order, hold, or uphold them, yea, to lead, guide, or carry them in his love,
All his Saints are in thine hand, Deuteronomy. 33.3. Psalm. 139.9 in his mind and
remembrance, The Lord thinks upon me, says Psalm. 40.10 he forgets not the
cry of the humble, Psalm. 9 12, yea, to that purpose they are engraven as on the
palms of his hand, so as they are ever before him in all his works, Isa. 49.15.
and set as a signet upon his arm; yea, they are in his heart, his love, and
choicest affection, as a seal upon his heart, Cant. 8.6. his heart is ever upon
them. The Lord loves the righteous, Psalm. 146.8. His countenance does behold
the just, his heart and eye is upon them for good, because of Christ the well
beloved of his soul; as found in him, He loves them with the love wherewith he
loves him, even with a love of delight and pleasure taking, John 17.23, 26.
with 16.28. Psalm. 32.18. and 147.11. and 149.4.

4. With him they are as children with a loving, kind, and careful Father, who
has all power and sufficiency to help and succor them; and therefore thence
great advantages accrue to them, because being with him, he is also with and
for them: as is said, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you while ye are with
him, on his side, and in his presence, keeping at home with him; and this is
through Christ, who is Immanuel, God with us. God and man in one person, and
the Mediator and band of union between God and man, through him the Lord is
with, that is, both on their side, and present with them, by his power, favor,
and grace for their helpfulness, whence they have cause of greatest security in
him, greatest quietness and confidence; as appears from that song of the Virgin
Souls, Psalm. 46. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge;
as the burden of the Song: and that was the spring of their rejoicing,
gladness, and fear-exceeding-confidence, expressed by them, verse 2, 3, 4.
Therefore will we not fear, though the earth be moved, and though the mountains
be cast into the depths of the Sea, etc. For from hence they may be sure of.

1. His defense. He being infinite both in power, goodness, and faithfulness;
and being immutable and eternal in what he is: and he having said and promised
that he will take the care of, and defend them that are with and obey him: For
on all the glory shall be a defense, Isa. 4.5. The Lord God is a Sun, and a
Shield, and he will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold
from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. Thence let all that trust in thee
rejoice. for thou will defend them; with favor will thou compass them, as with
a shield, Psalm. 5.11, 12. And thence that glorying, The Lord is our defense,
the holy one of Israel is our King, Psalm. 89.18. and who can harm them that are
with God, as their Father, and have him with, and nigh to them to defend them,
as in 1 Pet. 3.13. yea, they have his defense both.

1. By his Word and his Spirit therein, yea, his only Son, pleading for, and
justifying them. He is near that justifies me, who will contend with me; let
us stand together, Isa. 50.7, 8. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect (those that are in Christ Jesus, walking not after the Flesh, but after
the Spirit; to whom there is no condemnation from God) It is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea, rather is
risen again, etc. Romans 8.1, 33, 34.

2. By his truth and faithfulness, love and favor, covering them over as wings
and feathers, as an Hen her Chickens: I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge,
my fortress, my God in whom I will trust, says Psalm. 91.2. as one resolving to
dwell in Gods secret place, his Christ, his Covenant; and then says his Holy
Spirit to such, He that so does, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty;
and surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the Fowler, and from the
noisome Pestilence: He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings
shall thou trust: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler, ver. 1, 3, 4, 5,
and With favor will he compass them as with a shield, Psalm. 5.12.

3. By his right hand, which does valiantly, and brings great things to pass,
by that he saves them that trust in him, Psalm. 17.7. even by his glorious
power and providence graciously exercised over them, for and about them, and
holding them from falling; and all these together in one, in Christ Jesus our
Lord, Ephesians. 1 19, 20.

2. His counsel, they may certainly expect that also; for he is nigh to them,
to teach and instruct them in the way wherein they should go, and being their
Father, will not withhold it from them, they asking it of him, and waiting upon
him for it: as it is said, Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and that as a
consequent of Gods being with him, and he with him; for so it is said, Psalm.
73.22, 23. Nevertheless I am continually with thee; thou hold me by my right
hand. Thou shall (or wilt) guide me by thy counsel, etc. So also in Psalm.
25.12. Who is the man that fears the Lord? him shall he teach the way that he
shall choose: and again, I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way that
thou shall go, I will guide thee with my eye, etc. Psalm. 32.8. and again, In
all thy ways acknowledge the Lord, and he shall direct thy paths, Prove. 3.6.
and this also is an exceeding benefit and advantage, we being childish,
foolish, and apt to mistake in our ways, designs, and undertakings; and of our
selves to choose what would hurt us.

3. His help and assistance in all services and difficulties, Let your
conversation be without covetousness, for he has said, I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee: so that we may boldly say (infers the Apostle from thence)
the Lord is my helper, etc. Heb. 13.5, 6. A mighty powerful helper, being God
Almighty, and of his help his obedient Children may be secure, through Jesus
Christ, covering the imperfections of their obedience, and pleading for them,
for help for them, because he is their loving merciful Father: and he helps,

1. By his Word and Spirit, therein encouraging them to, and in their services,
and sufferings, to do and bear what he calls, and leads them to, and that is a
good help in any work or combat to have a loving Father, and one of authority
and power, standing by us, and heartning of us as it were, countenancing us by
his presence, and speaking comfortably to us: and so does God to his obedient
Children, as we find him to Israel, Deuteronomy. 31.3, 4, 6. The Lord will go over
before thee, and destroy these Nations from before thee. Be strong, and of a
good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them; for the Lord thy God he it is
that does go with thee, he will not leave thee nor forsake thee. So also to
Joshuah he himself says the like, Josh. 1.6.7. Be strong, and of a good
courage, for unto this people shall thou divide the land for an inheritance,
etc. Have not I commanded thee. Be strong, and of a good courage; be not
afraid, neither be thou dismayed, for the Lord thy God is with thee, whither
soever thou go, ver. 9. And we may see the like to Gideon, in Judge. 6.14.16.
and to Jeremy, Jer. 1.7, 8. and to Ezekiel, chap. 2.6, 7. and 3.8, 9. and in a
word to all that wait on, and hope in him, as Psalm. 27.14. Wait on the Lord, be
of good courage, and he will strengthen thine heart; wait I say on the Lord,
and Psalm. 31.24. Wait on the Lord, and he shall strengthen your hearts all ye
that hope in the Lord: so also in Isa. 41.10, 14. Fear not, for I am with thee;
be not dismayed for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help
thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness: fear not
thou worm Jacob. Yea, he will have his Servants also to encourage them, as in
Isa. ^5.4. Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, etc. and so he
comforts them in their griefs, John 14.16 17.

2. By his Word and Spirit, putting in strength into them both for doing and
suffering his will and pleasure, as Psalm. 138.3. In the day that I cried thou
answeredst me, and strengthnedst me with strength in my soul. So God dealt with
Daniel, chap. 10.18, 19. One like the appearance of the Son of man (Christ)
touched him and strengthened him, and said, O man greatly beloved (or man of
desires) fear not, peace be to thee, be strong, yea, be strong; and when he had
spoken unto me (says Daniel) I was strengthened, and said, Let my Lord speak,
for thou have strengthened me: and so the Apostle Paul says, I can do all
things, through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4.13.

3. By his hand and power, the force of his Grace and Spirit, or also the
operations of his providence working with them, and doing their work for them,
and therein helping them, both

1. In carrying on their work and business, as 1 Cor. 15.10. I labored more
abundantly then they all, yet not I but the grace of God, that was with me: and
so he answered Paul in his temptations, and under the feelings of the
buffetings of the messenger of Satan, desiring to be freed of them, My grace is
sufficient for thee, for my strength is made manifest in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9.
His right hand also and glorious power fought for Israel, against their
enemies, brought them in, and planted them in the land of promise, For they got
not the Land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save
them, but Gods right hand and his arm, etc. Psalm. 44.3. Acts 23.11, 12, 16, 17,
18, 19, etc. and he helped Paul not only by encouraging him, and strengthening
his soul, but also in ordering by his providence, that his Sisters Son should
hear of, and discover the plot of those that conspired against him, and moved
the chief Captains heart to secure him from them.

2. In keeping off, and obstructing what might obstruct their work, or oppress
or overwhelm them in their suffering: as in the now mentioned instance is also
to be seen; and so also it is said, The wicked watches and seeks to slay
him, but the Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is
judged, Psalm. 37.32, 33. and, Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, and
the remainder thereof thou will restrain. He will cut off the spirit (or anger)
of Princes, he is terrible to the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 76.10, 12. So he
suffered no man to harm the Patriarchs, he rebuked Kings for their sakes, dried
up the Sea, and cut off the waters of Jordan before his people, and many the
like.

4. His care and providence, for the Children lay not up for the Fathers, but
the Fathers for their Children: and he being both a great and good Father, and
they being with him, on his side, and at home with him, he will take care of
them, as a Father of his obedient Children: Whence it is said, Let your
moderation be known to all men, the Lord is at hand: In nothing be careful, but
in all things, make known your requests to him by prayers and supplications,
with thanksgivings, and the peace of God that passes all understanding shall
guard your hearts through Christ Jesus, Phil. 4.6, 7. And again, cast thy
burden upon the Lord, he will sustain thee. Psalm. 55.22. And Cast all your
care on the Lord, for he cares for you, 1 Pet. 5.7. And the Lord is my
shepherd, I shall want nothing; he makes me lie down in green pastures, and
leads me by the still waters, etc. Psalm. 23.1, 2. Yea, He is a sun, and shield,
and will give grace and glory, and withholds no good thing from them that are
upright with him.

5. His infinite sweetness, satisfactions, joy, and pleasures; for in his
presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand pleasures for evermore:
therefore it is also said, O how excellent is thy loving kindeness, O Lord,
therefore the sons of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings, they
shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall
make them drink of the rivers of thy pleasures, for with thee is the fountain
of life, Psalm. 16.11. and 36.8, 9. See also, Psalm. 65.4, 5. though the dimness
of our sight, and the vail that is over our eyes, hinders our full sight and
knowledge of him, and so deprives us while here, of that fullness of
satisfaction that is in him.

Object. But some may say, Oh, but we see Gods people fall into troubles and
wants oftentimes; what meant Asaph else to complain that he was plagued all the
day long, and chastned every morning; and yet he was one that cleansed his
heart, and washed his hands in innocence: as Psalm. 73.13, 14. tells us. And did
not Lazarus beg at the rich man's door, though afterward carried into Abraham's
bosom, Luke 16. and are they not often poor in this world, that are rich in
faith? James 2.5.

Answ. True, but yet in all this God defends and helps them, and they want no
good thing, nor sustain any evil, that walk uprightly with him: for as,

1. Oftentimes his children that sustain such things bring it upon them by
departing from him, running themselves into mischief, and misery, as the
prodigal, and then they may fault themselves; and the case is not the same we
speak of. So,

2. When such things befall upright and obedient ones, it is but for trial of
them, their faith, patience, submission, love, and other virtues; and for the
exercise of them, that they might be entire and want nothing, James 1.2, 3, 4.
1 Pet. 1.6, 7, 8. and then in these things also they prove and try the
faithfulness of God, and find him nigh to them, to defend, counsel, encourage,
help; supply, and satisfy them with himself. Yea,

3. These are of those things that he sees good, and not hurtful for them; and
therefore also in love and faithfulness to them, orders to befall them, as means
of brighting, purifying, and profiting them many ways, as Psalm. 119.74, 75.
Prove. 3.11, 12. Heb. 12.6.7. As it is said, By this shall the iniquity of Jacob
be purged; and this is all the fruit to take away their sin. Isa. 27.8, 9. And
the Apostle says in these chastisements* He does all things for our profit,
that we might be made partakers of his holiness, Hebrews 12.10. So that as
washing is sometimes needful for the best Linnens, and the Plough and Harrow
for the best Earth, and the fining Pot for the best Silver, and the Furnace for
the choice Gold, and the Flail and Fan for the best Corn, and the Rod for the
best Children; so are these trials for Gods best Children here: yea, the Lord
himself in whom was no sin, went not unto his Glory, but through sufferings; in
which he never fails his obedient ones, nor suffers them to miscarry.

Object. 2. But do not such holy ones also sometimes complain that God is far
from them, though they walk with him, as Psalm. 10.1. and 22.12.

Answ. Even from such he may seem to their senses to be far off sometimes, when
as yet in truth he is nigh to them; as when Christ complained that he was
forsaken of his Father, yet even then he upheld him. Compare Psalm. 22.1. with
Isa. 42.1. As sometimes the indulgent Mother, to try the Childs behavior; and
how it will look for, and prize her presence, will hide her self behind the
Wall, or Curtain; and while the Child calls, and cries, and seeks her, and yet
neither can see nor hear her, he concludes she is gone away, and is at a great
distance; when yet all the time perhaps she is both within the sight, and
hearing, and reach of her Child; and though she try it, will suffer it to take
no harm: even so God is a God that sometimes hides himself, and yet even then
is the God of Israel and his Savior nigh at hand to all that call upon him,
that call upon him in truth, and in his due time discovers his nighness also,
Isa. 45.15, 17. Psalm. 34.17.18. and 145.18, 19.

Use. 1.

This truth thus cleared, then represents it an excellent thing to be a dutiful
and obedient child of God, and not depart from, or rebel against him; seeing
all that are dutiful are so with him, nigh to him, have fellowship with him,
are in him even in his arms and bosom, in his choice love and affections; and
he nigh to them in all they stand in need of, and call upon him for, to
protect, counsel, encourage, help, care for, and satisfy them, who can express
how rich a vein this is of strong comfort and consolation, if minded by them,
and they judge not after sense and flesh, but faith and spirit therein? Oh what
a ground of peace, security, and tranquillity of spirit is this where enjoyed
and minded; how indeed may they worthily let their moderation in their desires,
cares, fears, griefs, appear to all men, seeing they have God so nigh them? and
how well may they be without carefulness, and be filled with peace and
confidence, being with such a Father, and ever too with him? Phil. 4.5, 6, 7.
What cause have they of discontent or frowardness, and fretting at the worlds
portion, that are strangers from God, and in their fullness, otherwise have not
him with them, nor are they with him, but against, and far from him. Alas,
their portion is sad, For all they that be far from him shall perish, and he
will destroy all that go a whoring from him, Psalm. 73.27. either in mercy as to
their peace, comforts, designs, delights here, that they might not rest content
in them, but seek him and his name, that they might have him for their portion
to delight in; or else if that will not do it, but they yet persist in their
whoredoms from him, destroy them in fury, in and with their sins for ever: and
then as the Psalmist notes, how sad is their portion, They are set in slippery
places, and God casts them them down from all their riches, pomp, dignity into
destruction: and then how are they brought into desolation, as in a moment:
they are utterly consumed with terrors; but great peace have they that love
Gods law, and nothing shall offend them: minding the happiness of their
condition they need envy none, no nor any of their brethren, because of any
parts, or gifts, or places, in which they may have more then they; for they
have their Father always nigh them, and their nighness to him is always for
good, for the chiefest good to them, through Jesus Christ, whose blood
cleanses them from all sin. Indeed there is not a just man upon earth that
does good and sins not. The best have their passions and their affections
apt to be disordered; their mixtures, their mistakes, their failings; so that
should God enter into judgment with them, they could not stand before him,
their being nigh or with him, would be as the nighness of straw to a consuming
fire: but therefore God has interposed his blessed Son in his blessed Body,
and the virtues of his perfect obedience and righteousness between him and
them: and his blood always cleansing their spots (...) off, preserves them,
that they enjoy fellowship with him, and may (as the Children of Israel, Exodus
24, 10, 11.) See the God of Israel, behold his glory with open face, as in a
glass, though it he in their sight as devouring fire in the top of the Mount,
ver. 17. Yet they may eat and drink in his presence, and he not lay his hand
upon any of those noble, free, and ingenuous children in the least to harm
them, but only as he did upon Moses while he passed by him, Exodus 33.21, 22,
23. To cover and hide them from any harm that might be sustained from him.

Use 2.

And seeing this is so excellent a concondition how should it press,

1. All to seek the Lord, and not to rest in any enjoyments of the world, nor
in any gifts or seize from the Lord without, and apart from the Lord
himself; but seek that they may be born to him of the knowledge of him in Jesus
Christ, and be brought back in their spirit to him, and be with him, and not
love to live far from him in a poor, worldly, sensual, perishing condition: but
alas, none understand, nor will believe the graciousness of the Lord, and the
goodness of being with him, of dwelling in his House and Courts, in the
knowledge and faith of his Son, and in unity with those that fear him: but
generally through the lies and deceits of Sin and Satan, harbor strange,
uncouth, and hard thoughts of him, as if he was such a devouring fire, and so
barren of any comfort, content, or satisfactions; because not allowing, but
reproving those dirty pleasures of this world and sin, that they desire not the
knowledge of him, nor care how little they come near him, or he to them: so
strangely are men's fancies, minds, and hearts possessed of evil prejudices
against him, and thoughts of him, as if he and his company, presence, and
ways, were the worst in the world, no delight, no goodness in them, because
too holy and strict (we think) for us sinful men: So that while men are seeking
after worldly good things, riches, honors, friends, pleasures, any thing, they
neglect God as the only evil thing, Job 35.9, 10. Say not, where is God our
maker that gave us songs in the night. Yea, while they cry out of oppressions
and injuries, they will every one seek the rulers face, and run hither and
thither, any whither for shelter, but to God, or Christ they will not come; for
there is none that understands; and that is the reason that as follows, there
is none seeks after God, Romans 3.12. Men carry toward him and his presence,
as the Jews did toward Christ, who was God manifested in the flesh, They see
no form nor beauty, wherefore they should desire him, Isa. 53.2. Therefore they
thrust him as a poor despicable infant, into the stable, afforded him no room
in the Inn: nay, because they suspected He would lay claim to their Power,
Kingdom, and enjoyments, and deprive them of the pleasures, honors, and
sweetnesses of them, they sought betimes to kill him; and as he grew up, and
was made more manifest amongst them, the more they hated him, and the worse
they used him, thrust him out of their Synagogues; all to reviled and asperst
him, hated and rejected him as the worst of enemies to them, and desired not to
come to him to have life by him; they would rather perish then have it there:
even so do men do to God, and the knowledge and Spirit of him; they take no
pleasure therein, but hate and thrust it from them, as most destructive to
their welfare and happiness: as if the knowing and serving him, and being
always as before him in his fear and presence, could not consist with rest,
peace, mirth, gladness, pleasure, and satisfaction, but would rob us of them
all. Oh filthy creature man, that drinks in iniquity like water: like some
foolish naughty Child that loves to rake in the dunghils, and wallow with dogs
in the dust, and with swine in the mire; and so loves them, as that because the
being with his Father in the house, though in his best dining rooms, would draw
him off from those dirty sports and enjoyments, therefore hates to come home,
or abide in the house with him; nay, kicks, and flings, and cries, and
scratches, and bites, and fights with any body that would pull him out of a
mudge pit which would soon choke him, to bring him to be in the house with his
Father that loves him, and would give him of the best Wine and sweetest Cates
in his house: Such the carriage of the world toward Christ and God. But as the
Disciples of Christ being taught of God, came to him, and converst with him,
Saw his glory as the glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace
and truth, and counted all things loss and dung for him, and the excellency of
the knowledge of him, and would rather part with all things then with him, they
found such preciousness in him: even so they that know God in and through him,
and are acquainted in their hearts and spirits with him, they find him in a
measure, the immeasurable fountain of light and delight, and sweetest content
and satisfaction. A fountain of living waters, in comparison of whom all other
enjoyments are but muddy pits, and broken Cisterns: and they call to all. Oh
taste and see that the Lord is gracious, blessed is the man that trusts in
him, He that has an ear let him listen to this call.

2. All that do believe in Christ, and do follow after righteousness, and seek
or know the Lord, to abide with him, and not run from him, to follow after any
other sight, object, or allurement, that sin or Satan may make use of to allure
them from him, seeing its so blessed a thing to be with him. Oh love the Lord,
all ye his Saints, for he preserves the faithful, and plentifully rewards the
proud doer. Even rewards them with anger, the bitter fruits of their folly, who
proudly slight or depart from him, or hate and persecute him, and them that
love and cleave to him. Blessed are they that dwell in his house, and enjoy
nighness to him, and are with him, for they are, and will be still continually
praising him, and blessed are they that mind the way thereto, for they shall
go from strength to strength, till every of them appear before God in Sion. O
how beautiful and amiable his Tabernacles. What sight of his fair beauty is to
be seen therein? what sweetness to be tasted? what safety and peace to be
enjoyed? Sure its better to be One day in the courts of the Lord, then a
thousand days elsewhere. Even in fellowship and communion with the Lord under
the shinings, and in the light of his countenance, For the Lord God is a sun
and a shield. But oh then, who would run from him but one day to want the
beauty and pleasures, safety and satisfactions of his presence, and nighness
with him? who then would venture from him weeks and months to trade in sin and
defilement? nay, nor for an hour, seeing He that wandereth from (him, and so
from) his place is like a bird that wandreth from her nest. He knows not what
may befall before he returns again, whether he may not be choked with some
bait, entangled in some net, shot with some bullet, so as never to return,
Prove. 27.9. Good therefore to draw nigh to God, and to cleave to him with
purpose and resolution of heart, never to go from him, no not for a moment, so
as to leave or sin against him.

We might distinguish between the being ever with God now, and the being ever
with him hereafter; though both are the portion of his obedient children. Men
may be ever, that is, perpetually with him, now as a Son that serves his
Father, and dwells with him, who is said to be ever with him, because always
retaining to his house, as his abiding resident place, though not always in
the house (as the Son was not now, but without in the Fields, in the
employments and services of his Father abroad, or taking therein his
recreation) and so not always beholding his face, seeing his presence, and
conversing actually with him. But the being with him hereafter shall be such a
being with him, as never to be looking off him, or out of the view of his
glorious presence, and that with eyes more unvailed, and apprehensive then now
we can have while in earthy tabernacles. But I shall pass it, (the reader may
see the difference in 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 12.) and so I come to the last clause,
in which the graciousness of the Lord to his obeying children, and the
happiness of their obedience and abiding with him is expressed, viz.

CHAP. VII. The third Branch opened and applied.
AND all that I have is thine. Oh wonderful word! Oh free hearted bountiful
Father! who can comprehend this expression? all that I have is thine? if we
consider whose saying it is, and to whom, we may admire it; but we cannot
fathom it? Its the saying of a rich Father to a dutiful son, but at present
discontented and undutiful. That the Father was rich, the Robes in his
Wardrobe, and the furniture he afforded his returning Prodigal, and the feast
he made for him with a fatted Calf, imply, a Lord he was at least, and all that
he had was a great deal. He had, no question, Towns, and Cities, Castles, and
Palaces, Farms, and Fields, Manors, and Mansions, stately Buildings, and
costly Furnitures, Silver and Gold, Corn and Cattle, great Wealth and
Substance, though the Elder Son in his froward fit, says, his other Son had
devoured his living, it was but peevishly spoken. He had livelihood enough yet
left for them, and never the less for what he had spent him: and yet behold how
he loves his Son, and with what argument (able one would think to have
prevented his frowardness, or upon mention of it, to buy him out of it, but
that sin is unreasonably sinful) he persuades him, All that I have is thine.
What Is one fatted Calf (and that not fatted for him, but only killed for him,
it seems it was fatted before) to all the Estate, a vast Inheritance? I am sure
he whom it represents here is no mean person; for the Father here, as we have
noted, signifies God: And who can comprehend his riches, and yet, says he to
his abiding Son, All that I have is thine. All that God has, who can express
it? God has himself, he perfectly enjoyes himself, and in himself has
infinite Wisdom, infinite Power, infinite Holiness, infinite Truth, infinite
Glory, infinite fullness and satisfaction. He has Christ his only begotten Son
One with him, and in him is infinite Worth and Preciousness, infinite Power,
Wisdom, Fullness, Goodness, etc. An infinitely precious Sacrifice, and oblation
which prevails with God, to whatever it turns it self, and able to prevail with
men that receive it, and understand the worth and preciousness of it: He has
him with him, and in him, his King, his Priest, his Prophet, his Holy One, etc.
And he has an infinitely Wise, Holy, Powerful, Eternal, Gracious Spirit; an
innumerable company of Blessed Angels, as ministering Spirits, to attend upon
him, and obey his commands. Yea, the whole world, and all the creatures in it,
both in Heaven and Earth are his: yea, Hell and the Devils are his also; his
Prison for Offenders, and Executioners of his Vengeance: the Heaven and all its
Hosts, the Earth and all its Fullness, the Sea and all that passes through the
Waves of it. Who can reckon up, and much less value his immeasurable riches?
yet, All that I have is thine, all theirs, that being begotten of him, obey and
serve him; and this proposed to a froward Son to allay and take away his
envious passion: And this Son a man, not an Angel, not the only begotten Son,
but poor earthy man, whose original is dust, and who after a little while shall
return to dust again. Well may we cry out with David in admiration hereof, Lord
what is man that thou take knowledge of him, and the Son of man that thou
make account of him? man is like to vanity, his days are like a shadow. It
can proceed from no intrinsic goodness of his, nor desert by him, but from an
infinite inexpressible love in God toward him. And David spoke that there upon
a like consideration with this; for he had said before, Blessed be the Lord my
strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my fingers to fight; my goodness
and my fortress, my high tower, and my deliverer, my shield, and he in whom I
trust, who subdueth my people under me. God was all this to him, and did all
this for him, that made him so cry out, Lord what is man? Psalm. 144.1, 2, 3, 4.

Man has nothing of his own, no not so much as his naked being of himself, For
he has made us, and not we our selves (or his we are) we are the people of his
pasture ^ and the sheep of his hands. When he came first into the world by Gods
creating him he came naked into it, and had nothing that by any right and title
as from himself he could call his. But such Gods bounty that he had prepared a
stately and well furnished world for him before he made him, and when he had
made him, gave it all to him, that he subordinately to his word, should be the
Lord thereof, and have rule and dominion over all therein: yea, and endowed him
with rich and precious indowments of his soul: for he instampt his image upon
him, and so by his favor and goodness he was a rich creature, and in honor
with him.

But man being in honor did not consider, so as to resist the temptation of
the wicked one, but being drawn by him into rebellion against his Maker,
because he forbad him the tasting of one Tree planted in the pleasurable
Garden, into which he put him, he forfeited all that God bestowed upon him;
yea, both mental and bodily endowments of excellency; nay, his very life and
being, and all the whole Creation given him, and deserved to have been thrust
back into his own nothing again; or rather with the Serpent into Hell and
destruction far worse then nothing. Poor man!

But oh the riches of the mercy of the Lord that was not well pleased to see
his creature, man, so poor, but devised a way how to set him up and enrich him
again, and to that purpose sent forth his rich Son, the Lord in heaven, the
maker and heir of all things, and by making him one with the nature of man,
made him in the poverty of man, that by laying down his infinite riches for man
as a price of his redemption; yea, his rich and precious life, as man, he might
redeem man, and enrich him again, and so it is said, Ye know the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ (one with his Father, complying with and yielding to him in
that design) that he being rich, became poor for your sakes, that ye through
his poverty might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8 9. But how,

1. He that made himself, or became poor in man, made man, even the manhood in
himself, the man Christ Jesus, infinitely rich in God, by so great a price as
so impoverished him, having satisfied Justice, fulfilled Truth, paid the Debt
of Man, overcame and got the better of what impoverished him; having wrought
himself out of it as it were, and being raised again he was taken up to the
Throne of God, and accounted of God his Father, as he is also judged to be by
Men and Angels, worthy to receive and be filled with the unsearchable riches of
God: So in Rev. 5.11, 12. The Angels about the Throne with the Beasts and
Elders, pronounce, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and
riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing: Yea, God
and all his fullness is given wholly to him, All the fullness of the Godhead
dwells bodily in him. The Father is in him, and he in the Father, his God, his
Father, the Spirit is upon him, his Spirit, the Spirit of Christ, The Angels of
God minister to him, and attend upon him, his Angels, and the Angels of his
might, Heaven is his Throne, yea, the heaven and heaven of heavens is the
Lords, and the earth is his too, and all the fullness thereof, the world, and
all that dwell therein, yea, all power in heaven and upon the earth is given to
him, Mat. 28.19. The Father has loved the Son, and given him all things, John
3.35. So that here we may say in the first place now. Lord what is man that
thou take knowledge of him, and the Son of man that thou make such account
of him: and so the Apostle applies it, Heb. 2.6, 7, 8. And so here in the first
place, as in the root and foundation, all that God has is man's, and man is
ever with him, the Son of God.

2. Through him God makes known himself to other men, for he is the light of
the world, the true light, enlightening every one coming thereinto: and as God
has done all that he has done to him, in abasing and glorifying him for man's
sake, and ovt of love and pity to man, and desire of his good (Oh the riches
of his love and mercy to fallen man! God so loved the world that he gave his
only begotten Son, and herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved
us, and sent his only begotten Son to be the propitiation for our sins, John
3.16. 1 John 4.10.) So he has in him thus enriched and glorified (having by
his death and sufferings ransomed man from death and destruction into his
dispose) wonderfully provided for man, even prepared all this infinite fullness
in his Son as God-man; as an infinite treasury for the enriching of man, for
the Grace, the remission of Sins, the redemption from Thrall, the fullness of
Spirit, and all spiritual blessings in him, and possession given him, it is for
us men, and for our Salvation and enriching, but so to be enjoyed as only in
and with him, to whom therefore God calls and draws men (both by the riches of
his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, leading men to repentance,
Romans 2.4 5. and by the unsearchable riches of Christ, as preached in the Gospel
to men) inviting and alluring them to him that they might be saved by him, and
enriched with him, Ephesians. 3.8. with Romans 1 16. 1 Cor. 1.23. 2 Cor. 8, 9. and
they that hereby are begotten to receive him, and knowing his name, trust in
him, as they in and through him receive the privilege of Sons; so being made
in him, the sons of God, they also by virtue of him, and in him become the
heirs of God (both as their Father, and as their Inheritance) joint heirs with
Christ, says, Romans 8.16, 17. for as the Father has loved the Son, so he again
loves his Disciples that believe in and follow him, and makes and owns them as
his Friends and Brethren. And as God gave him all things that were and are his,
so he again gives all his things (and they are all things) to his brethren. All
things are yours, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. and so the beggars are lifted out of the
dust again, and the needy from the dunghill, and set upon the throne with
Princes, not the Princes of this world, who perish, but which is far more
excellent with the Princes of his people, whose Kingdom shall endure for ever,
James 2.5 Psalm. 113.7, 8. praised be the Lord; though oftentimes they be in
appearance as Princes disguised in Beggars habit and state as having nothing,
and yet possessing all things, 2. Cor. 6.10. going on foot while servants (even
to Sin and Satan) ride on horseback, Eccles. 10.7. This indeed is a mystery
that the world sees not, because they have not faith, and therefore not
understanding of it they slight it; but the holy Spirit of Truth asserts it,
All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or world, or life, or
death, or things present, or things to come: all are yours. But how theirs?

1. Not as to actual possession, fruition, and enjoyment of all in their own
persons and comprehensions; for the Kingdom is not yet received by them, only
prepared for, and promised to them that love him: but in that respect He that
overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God and he shall be my
Son, says Revel. 21.6, 7. See 1 Corinthians 2.9.

But 2. In Christ their Head they possess all things. He possesses all things
for them, and they in him, as they are his, and he Gods, In him we are
complete, Col. 2.9, 10. And,

3. In and through Christ in our persons, in title, and interest, by promise,
as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob did the Land of Canaan, while yet they had it not
in possession; for Israel did not take away wrongfully the Land of Canaan from
the Inhabitants, they claimed but their own by the gift of him who is the Lord
of all the earth, and had sworn to give it them: and so the Fathers that are
said to dye in faith, not having received the promises, Heb. 11.13. are yet
said to have received them, Heb. 6.14. that is as to promise or covenant, and
the title that gave them thereto. Thence too the believers are said to be heirs
according to promise, Gal. 3.29.

4. In hope and expectation, that being justified by faith, ye might be made
heirs according to the hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie has
promised before the world began, Tit. 3.7. and 1.2.

5. In usefulness and benefit; all things working together for good to them
that love him, that are the called of God, according to purpose, Romans 8.28. And
so they that overcome and keep Christ's words, and keep with God, are heirs of
all things. All that I have is thine. Let us take a brief view or survey of
their riches.

1. God is theirs, and all that he is; not that he can be comprehended of and
by them, seeing he comprehends them, and all things, and is himself
incomprehensible but by himself; but he is their God, their Father, their
Portion, and Inheritance, as to be worshipped and acknowledged by them; so to
enrich, save, and satisfy them. The portion of Jacob is not like unto them, he
is the former of all things, the Lord of Hosts is his name, Jer. 10.16. and the
Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him, Lam. 3.24. I
go to my God, and your God, my Father, and your Father, says Christ, John
20.17. an infinite portion; for in having him we have infinite Wisdom to order
and dispose of all things for us, and our benefit, and of us also for our own
greatest happiness; and to advise, counsel, and direct us in all our
difficulties; infinite power to effect and bring about what in the counsel of
his will or wisdom, he sees good to be effected, and to prevent and hinder,
remove or destroy what he sees destructive to us; infinite strength to bear up
all things for us, and us in all cases, and to strengthen us in all services,
and sufferings; infinite duration to continue and lengthen out our happiness
for ever, that we may never be deprived of it, but enjoy it to eternity;
infinite goodness to lead him to exercise all his other attributes for our
infinite and everlasting advantage, infinite truth and holiness to perform all
his words and promises to us, etc. and all this for us in and through Christ
Jesus.

2. Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.23. and he is theirs, and all his infinite
fullness, I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine, says the Spouse, Cant.
2.18. and 6.3. He that has the Son has life, and he that abides in the
Doctrine of Christ (that is, that continues in the belief and obedience of it)
He has both the Father and the Son, 1 John 5.11.2. 2 John 9. and its in having
Christ that any man has God, his God and portion, and has all his fullness for
him; for he that transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ has
not God, and its in him he has all things, who has and abides in him, even
unsearchable riches, in him infinite wisdom to order and manage all things with
God for us, and from God to, over and about us, and to direct and guide us in
all conditions, In him righteousness, infinite and everlasting, for presenting
us just and acceptable in the sight of God, and in him all the promises of God
are, yea and Amen, affirmed and confirmed, true and certain, 2 Cor. 1.19, 20.
Isa. 45.23, 24. In him holiness infinitely for us, and therein dedication to
God, and renewing into his image and likeness; grace to make us holy and renew
us, and so to make us also Gods Inheritance, his chosen generation, Royal
Priesthood, Holy Nation, peculiar people. In him Redemption even forgiveness of
sins through or in his blood, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. even infinite plenteousness
of Redemption for redeeming us from all iniquities, Psalm. 130.7, 8. and so from
all troubles, miseries, bondages, death, the fruits of sin lying upon us, Psalm.
25.22. Yea even from bodily death and Grave, yea, from hell and destruction,
Romans 8.23. Hosea 13.14. John 11.25, 26. in him sonship, heir-ship, title to
the Inheritance, John 1.12. Gal. 3.26, 27. Yea in a word, This is the record
God has given of his Son, that God has given us eternal life, and this life
is in his Son; he that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son,
has not life, 1 John 5.11, 12.

3. God has an infinitely Holy Spirit which he has put upon Christ to bring
forth Judgment to the Gentiles, and this he also gives in and through Christ
to them that obey him, Acts 5.32. to help their infirmities, teach and lead
them into the knowledge of Christ, glorifying him to them, and so into all
truth, to bring his words to remembrance, justify them in their Consciences,
sanctify and wash them in the Blood and Name of Jesus; comfort them in their
exercises, tribulations, and temptations, be a Spirit of Holiness to and in
them, leading them in the way of, and framing and quickening them to holiness,
teaching them to pray, and groan after God, and his Grace, and Mercy in Christ
for their helpfulness. In a word, to inhabit and dwell in them, through the
Word, or Faith of Christ, and be in them as a spring of living Waters,
springing up unto everlasting life, and gifting them for usefulness to others,
and so to be as rivers of living waters flowing out of their bellies, or inward
man, to seal them up also to the day of redemption, and be to them the
anointing and furnisher for Gods Service, the earnest of, conductor to, and
raiser up of their dead bodies, to the enjoyment of the Inheritance, Romans
8.14.26, 27. John 16.14, 15. and 14.16, 17, 26. 1 Cor. 6.11. Isa. 11.2. Gal.
5.16. Psalm. 143.10. and 119.37. and 51.10, 11. Zech. 12.10. Ephesians. 2.22. and
5.18, 19. with Col. 3.16. 1 Cor. 12.7. John 4.14. and 7.37, 38, 39. 2 Cor.
1.21, 22. Ephesians. 1 14. and 4.30.

4. God has an innumerable company of Angels to minister to him, Dan. 7.10,
11. and these are in and with Christ the Believers and Obeyers of him, Pitching
their tents about those that fear him, to deliver and save them, Psalm. 34.7.
Bearing them up in their hands, and keeping them in all their ways, Psalm.
91.11, 12. Sent forth to minister to the heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.14.
In^i^^^ing the Throne of God, the Camp, or Congregation of the Saints, as
attendants about them, Rev. 5.11. and 7.11. bearing the souls of the just when
taken hence, into rest and peace, as in Luke 16.22, etc.

5. God has many servants on the earth furnished with spiritual gifts for
profiting the body of Christ, as Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and
Teachers: these are all theirs that obey and abide with him, Let no man glory
in man, for all things are yours, whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas; not you
theirs, but they yours, 1 Cor. 3.21. Son of man, says God to Ezekiel (as both
the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin read it) I have given thee to the house of Israel
for a watchman, etc. not them to thee, to use as thou please, and to exercise
Lordship over them, but thee to them, Ezekiel. 3.17. and and so the Apostle, We
preach not our selves, but Jesus Christ the Lord, and our selves your servants
for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4.5. and he ascended up on high, and gave gifts to men,
and he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, etc. for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body Christ, etc.
Ephesians. 4.8.11, 12.

6. God has the world as his, the frame and fabric of it, and the Government
orders, dignities, and fullness of it. This is theirs also, All things are
yours, the world, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. The heavens and heavenly influences and
Inhabitants, He rides on the heavens for Isreal's help, Deuteronomy. 33.26, 27. their
motions and influences, the light, warmth, and influences of the Sun, Moon, and
other Stars, the Clouds and their shadow from the Heat, the Rain, etc. and
whatever passes through the air, animate or inanimate, as also the Air it
self, they are all for the benefit of Gods obedient Children, amongst (and with
more special eye to them then to) other men, for their nourishment,
maintenance, refreshing, chearing, and sometimes for the exercise of their
faith, patience, the Spirit of Prayer, etc. Psalm. 74.12, 16, 17. and 89.12, 13,
14, 15. Deuteronomy. 33.27, 28. Judges 5.20. Josh. 10.11, 14. Zech. 19.1, 2. the earth
and its fullness, the Sea, and all therein, affords them supplies, and God out
of them and by them, Gives meat to them that fear him, and will ever be
mindeful of his Covenant, Psalm. 111.4, 5. besides the manifold occasions that
they afford them to admire and bless the Lord, as manifestations of his Glory,
Power, Wisdom, Providence, Mercy, Justice, Truth, etc. in his providential
ordering of them and their several Hosts, Psalm. 19.1, 2, 6. and 65.6, 7, 8. and
104. and 148. and manifold lessons and instructions that they teach and suggest
occasionally to us, Job 5.8, 9, and 12.7, 8. Matthew. 6.26, 27, 29, 30. Prove.
6.7, 8. and 30.24, 25, etc. And then the orders of the world, the Magistrates,
Kings, and Governors, and Authorities, etc. They are the Ministers of God
(says the Apostle) to thee for good, not for mischief and harm, Romans 13.3, 4.
if thou do well, to protect thee, that thou may live a peaceable and
quiet life in godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. and if they do otherwise; yet
its for good to thee to exercise thy faith and patience, and quicken thee up to
more mindefulness of the way to the heavenly inheritance, and make thee cry
more earnestly, Arise O God, judge thou the earth, for thou shall inherit all
Nations, Rev. 13.5, 6.10. Psalm. 82.8. and whether they preserve thee from being
broken, or scower, and make thee look brighter, thou have no damage but
benefit by them; and so for all other things of the world, Believers are the
seed of Abraham, and heirs, and blessed with him, and he was heir of the world,
Romans 4.13.

7. Life is Gods, to give and dispose of; this is the Believers too; he is an
heir of life, and of the grace of life, 1 Pet. 3 8. Spiritual life is his to
enjoy and serve God and Christ in and with, yea, and eternal life is his
inheritance: nay, but this life is his too, and not he its, as a servant to
this life, but it is a servant to him, to afford him time and opportunity to do
his Fathers work in, that he may receive the fuller reward, and to give him
leisure to renew the spiritual things that by any means decay in him, that he
may come to his Grave as a shock of Corn fully ripe, Job 5.26. Psalm. 39.13.
Psalm. 6.4, 5. and 30 9. and 115.17, 18. Isa. 38.19. John ^.4. Eccles. 9.10. and
12.1.

8. Yea, Death is Gods too, in his hand to dispose, and its his Saints too, not
they its, not its Vassals and Captives, but its theirs, and for their good,
sometimes to cut off and destroy their enemies that molest them, 1 Samuel 26.10.
Isa. 51.7.8, 15. Sometimes to take themselves from evil men, and things, and
give them rest and peace from their troubles, Isa. 57.1.2. Rev. 14.13. and the
more to exercise their faith in God for the performance of his promises, when
they see death seems to cut them off, and put them out of all possibility of
attainment, Ezekiel. 37.11, 12. John 11.25, 16, 40. Rev. 13.9, 10. and to give
them more experience of Gods power and glory in the Resurrection, Ezekiel. 37.11,
13. John 11.4, 40.

9. Things present are theirs: Whatever God does and orders now in this present
world or time, his mercies theirs to encourage them to hope in him, his
judgments theirs to make them fear and stand in awe of him, prosperity theirs
to give them advantage to serve God with more cheerfulness; and adversity
theirs to exercise their faith and patience, and give them the more experience
of Gods care of, and faithfulness to them, and the sufficiency of his Grace for
them: yea, the very falls of others are theirs to awaken and admonish them to
more watchfulness over themselves and others, and to exercise charity in
pitying them, and seeking their recovery. Yea all his ways are mercy and
truth to them that love God and keep his testimonies, Psalm. 25.10.

10. Things to come (as they are Gods in his hand to produce and distribute
according to his pleasure, so) they are theirs, in and through Christ for their
good, both as now proposed in the word of God, the everlasting rewards of
righteousness, to allure, encourage, and confirm them in the ways of the Lord
to seek and press after him, and keep his ways in the love and obedience of
him, Heb. 10.35, 36, 37, and 12.1, 2, 3. and the unspeakable terrors of the
Lord and destruction of the wicked to stir them up to more watchfulness, and
care, lest they should sin against him, and depart from him; they are but as
armor of righteousness on the right hand, and on the left, 2 Cor. 6.7. and 5.1,
10, 11. and the revelations and accomplishments of them in the time to come.
The joy, glory, and happiness to come is theirs, to reward and satisfy them,
the woe and vengeance and everlasting fire is theirs (not they its) to avenge
them of their enemies, the Devil and his instruments, and all the evils that
here did molest them, and to give them infinitely more occasion and provocation
for ever to admire his mercy toward them, and bless him, Psalm. 145.20, 21.
Luke 12.32. Mat. 25.35, 36, 41, 46. Isa. 66.2^, ^4.

A mavelous, full, and glorious portion, and such as passes understanding;
only there is this difference between the believers enjoyment of it now and
hereafter: now they have the title to it, and the encouragement of the faith
and hope of it, and so much of it as they need, and God sees good for them. But
hereafter they shall have all that shall be then to be had in the most full,
absolute, and glorious sight and fruition of it.

Use 1.

And the consideration of this with all before may serve,

1. To move such to contentation with their condition; for what can they want
who have such a portion as God, and all that are his to satisfy and save them,
The just shall live by faith; and this is a truth to faith, not to sense; and
in living by faith may abundantly, and will administer content in every
condition, and Godliness with contentment is great gain. The Lord is my
shepherd, says David, and thence infers I shall not want: yea, thence he had
abundant experience of Gods provision for him, and supplies of him, and
faithfulness to him in all cases, and therefore concludes, Surely mercy and
goodness shall follow me all the days of my life, Psalm. 23.1, 6. as thence
also, or from the like consideration of Gods goodness, and the blessedness of
all that trust in him, he exhorts and incourages others, Fear ye the Lord ye
holy ones, for there is no want to them that fear him; the Lions shall lack,
and be bit with hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall want no good thing.
Psalm. 34.8, 9, 10. Its true, the dispose of all is in the Fathers hand; but he
being wise, and loving, gracious, and full of compassion, and abundant in
goodness and truth, cannot, nor will suffer his children at home with him to
want any thing that may be good for them. And its but a childish humor (from
which its good that we be weaned) to pet, and cry, and be froward for that that
is not good, but hurtful for us, having all things that are our Fathers, and he
being free to afford out of it all good for us, Be careful in nothing, be
peevish and discontent in nothing, be not covetous of more then we have, or of
more then he thinks meet to give us into our possession and fruition, but be we
content with what we have, for he has said, I will never leave thee, no I will
never forsake thee: so that we may boldly say, the Lord is our helper, we will
not fear what man can, shall do unto us, Heb. 13.5, 6. Minding what we have in
Christ, and what ground of confidence that God will give us all things with
Christ, because he has not spared Christ, but delivered him up for us all: let
us through him be content with what he gives us, either of outward supplies,
for this life, or of spiritual gifts, discoveries, experiences, comforts, or
the like, waiting upon him, to give us especially spiritual blessings, and
taking what he gives without envying at others, or murmuring at him for what he
gives them: But,

2. Oh the evil nature of envy, frowardness, pride, and discontent; though a
man has all things in Christ, and God is faithful to give us all things with
him, as he sees we need, and is good for us; and though he gives abundantly
like a Father to us, yet the froward soul finds no good, Prove. 17.20.
Frowardness and discontent eats out the good of what we have, and deprives us
of the comfort of it, rendering it as nothing to us, and hinders us of what we
might further have, as being freely exposed to us; as may be seen in Haman
partly, and in this elder Son. Haman though he had Honor, and Riches, and
Wife, and Children, the Favor of the King, and as he thought, of the Queen
too, yet the only want of a bow, or prostration from Mordecai, a slight from
him, marrs all the mirth from all other things, What Is all this to me (says
he, when he had been telling his Wife and Friends of all his glory and
happiness, and enumerating all its several particulars) so long as I see
Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings gate? such a viper is envy and discontent
to eat out the bowels of them that breed and nourish it: And what less or
better here was the case of this Elder Son, this righteous person, leavened
with the Pharisees leaven; though all his Father had was his, yet all that
contents not, because his Father had killed for his Brother the fatted Calf,
and therein testified his love to him, and joy for him; as if all was lost that
fell besides himself. But what, was he like to lose his share in any thing,
because of because of his Brothers having part therein? surely no. The fatted
Calf was not taken from him by being killed for his Brothers welcome; there was
meat enough in it for him and his Brother too, yea, for the Father, and Sons,
and Servants, and all to feast on: and if that could have been too little, yet
the Son needed not fear want, the Father has enough beside to maintain and
satisfy him: nor was his love the less to him, by being testified thus to his
Brother. The same feast, though made by occasion of his Brother, and for his
entertainment, is free for him also; and his Father had entreated him to come
in and take part of it: there was neither want in his Fathers love, nor in the
sufficiency of the cheer to have made him as merry as his Brother, and the rest
that were making merry within. It was only his own pettish humor and
discontent causelessly at his Fathers dealing, that was the let that he was not
as merry and as well refreshed as any of them: his Father would have had him
come in and welcome, and to be sure his Brother would have been glad to have
seen ^ much love and freeness in him toward him, and all the servants would
have liked to have had his company with them; and as for the fatted Calf it was
an everlasting dish that would have given him with all the rest full
satisfaction: it was spiritual and living meat, like to, or better then that
the Jews call living water, that is Spring Water, that while its drawn out or
received in its streams, is not lessened by men's taking of it, but runs still
perpetually, and increases in its running, and meets the person that likes to
use it, and offers it self of its own accord unto him. Such is living bread and
meat, like the meat in the miracle, the loaves and fishes that multiplied in
the eating of them, increased in the dishes, and upon the trenchers (if they
had any) and in their hands and mouths as they eat it; and could they have
needed to have eaten of it till this day, might have grown upon them yet: such
this fatted Calf in the spirit and mystery of it, unless we take it for some
particular visit, refreshing and chearing of the repentant sinners heart, like
to a Posset or a Caudle made by a tender Mother for her almost drowned Child,
when being pulled out of the Pit, and brought home, she puts it to bed: and
should the other Children that kept themselves in the house, and safe from the
pit, murmur at such a thing as that, when they may at all times sit at meat
with their Father, and eat of his meat, yea, and if they please, take part of
that Posset too made for that escaped Child? take it in either sense the
murmuring was unreasonable, as the acts of envy and discontent all be. It was a
good saying of an ancient Doctor, Toll invidiam and quod meum est tuum est:
and si ego tollo invidiam quod tuum est meum est. Take away envy and
frowardness, and what is mine is thine too; and if I put away envy from me, that
that is thine is mine with thee. This is (on the contrary to envy) the
excellency of Divine Love and Grace, it makes all common that may be so
lawfully, or with expediency: and as God gives us an interest in all that he
has, leads us to say to our brethren too, all that we have is yours for your
usefulness: as the Saints in the Primitive Church, that said nothing that they
had was their own; they were so free to communicate^ it to all others also. Had
this Brother said to his younger Brother, as the Father to him, welcome home
Brother, let us live lovingly together; and as my Father gives me interest in,
and the use of all he has, so I freely give thee leave to take part with me in
all I have with him, and by his gift: It had been an entertainment of him
worthy such a condition of a Son of such a Father; and that that may be
proposable to us for imitation.

3. This also shows the goodness of living at home with God, or walking with
him dutifully in his ways, seeing he that is so infinitely full, is so
infinitely free too to them that love him, and keep his Commandments: not only
a Sun and a Shield, but also gives grace and glory, and withholds no good thing
from them that walk uprightly with him: therefore, O Lord God of Hosts, blessed
is the man that trusts in thee, and so abides in thy courts always, Psalm.
84, 10, 11, 12. Whither can we go from God to better our selves, as Peter said,
Whither shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life, John 6.68. All is
ours if we be with and keep to God; and we cannot have more then all by going
from God, or sinning against God: Nay, that is the way to go from all, for all
is in and with God, and without him nothing but sin, emptiness, vanity, and
vexation of spirit.

4. Therefore also it may provoke us not to leave him, but to keep close to
him, as David, or Asaph says, Ps. 73.28. It is good for me to draw nigh to,
(or as the vulgar reads it to hold me fast by) God: seeing then we have all;
whether would this Elder Son go, or what would he do, that he will not come to
his Fathers house, and so to his Father, Brother, and the rest therein? what,
will he exclude himself from his Fathers house, and so deprive himself of all?
and because his Father receives him in, will he that is so angry at his
Brothers naughtiness, out of anger throw himself into his Brothers condition?
and divest himself of all, because his Brother is admitted to a share with him?
surely he took the course thereto by so doing: or would he turn his Father and
Brother out of doors, or at least his Brother, to make room for himself, as if
the house was too little to hold them both? and a Kings Estate too little to
maintain them both? sure its better to submit to God, and to resist the Devil,
from whom proceeds such a temptation, and by living at home to keep possession
of all, rather then by standing out, or departing to divest our selves of all:
But if we would keep at home with God, we must take these helps and directions
against discontent.

1. Mind the goodness of God to us in Christ, rather then our goodness, or
good doings for or toward him; that was slipped out of this Sons eye, when he
stands thus at a distance, and comes not in: the minding his Fathers goodness
would have given him such satisfaction, as to have contented him in all his
service with his Fathers dealings with him, and made him thought himself happy
that he might so live with, and serve him still. The application of the
medicine informs us of the disease; the Fathers minding him, what he afforded
him, and what privileges he enjoyed with him, shows us that the Son had forgot
them when he fell into this froward discontented passion.

2. Consider the abundant fullness in God, the abundant sufficiency in him,
together with his freeness to satisfy and content us and all others. There is
room enough (says Abraham to Lot) in the land for us both, therefore let us
not fall out between our selves, being brethren, Genesis 13.8, 9. Had this Brother
minded how large his Fathers house was, and how large his estate, and how free
he to communicate it, it might have kept him from this murmuring.

3. Be not hasty in our spirits, but wait for Gods counsels, inquire at his
mouth, and be swift to hear what he has to say to us, and slow to speak, slow
to wrath, James 1.19. This Son was too hasty, he should first have heard what
his Father could say for his doings, before he had given way to his anger.

4. When the right eye offends pluck it out, and cast it from thee; and so,
when the right hand and foot offends cut them off and cast them from us. Cast
away the weight that presses down, and the sin that easily besets, Keeping our
eye single to what is set before us in the testimony of God. It was this
Brothers looking with an evil eye at his Fathers kindeness to his Brother, made
him sullen; and the minding what his hand and foot had done for his Father, how
he had wrought and walked for him, that puffed him up with pride, and caused him
to think his Brother got too much love that had done worse and less then he:
Good and needful it is to cast away such considerations as draw to discontent,
and with draw us from him. As it was also the Prodigals eying an excellency in
his conceit, in having a portion in his own hands, and a sufficiency in himself
to manage it distinct and apart from his Father that led him into that
separation, and withdrawing from his Father, which brought upon him all this
misery that befell him: which now after so large a view taken of the elder
Brothers state, comes in the next place as the second Branch of this Text to be
considered by us, viz.

CHAP. VIII. The second state of wanderers from God, in two Branches, opened
and applied.
THE misery of departing and wandering from God, employed in these words, This
thy Brother was dead, was lost; a twofold metaphorical expression to represent
it by. Let us briefly, and but briefly consider them.

Branch 1.

Was dead. A sinner by leaving God, and running after sin and Satan, brings
death upon himself, becomes as a dead man: So Solomon tells us too, Prove.
21.16. He that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall abide in the
congregation of the dead: For as the Apostle says also to the Believers, Romans
8.13. If ye walk after the flesh ye shall dye, and it must needs be so: for,

1. With God is the fountain of life, Psalm. 36.9. In his favor is li^e* Psalm
30.5. and his eternal Word, or Son, is that eternal life, that was with the
Father in the beginning, in whom was life; and that was manifested in these
last days more fully to us, 1 John 1.2. with John 1 4. The Spirit of God is
life, and the spirit of life, Rom 8.2.10. by whom God through Christ breaths in
life; and so this God, this one Father, Son, and Spirit, having life in
himself, gives life also to others as he pleases, and has given to all life,
and breath, and all things: and so in the beginning when he made man, made him
of the dust of the earth, and breathed in him the breath of life, and man
became a living soul, Genesis 2.7 both as his body and person was made alive in
the world, endued with breath, sense, motion, and understanding; and also as
his soul or inward man being upright, and having its dependence on God (being
in subjection to his Word and Spirit, in his image and likeness, and so in his
favor while upright) he was owned of him, and in union with him, and had peace
and joy and spiritual life in himself, as so deriving it from him; but in
departing from him his word, and command (which is life, and tends to life
also) is death; and man so doing he dyed. Spiritually. First, as to the loss of
the favor of God, in which was his life, and of his subjection to God, and
fellowship with his Word and Spirit, the fountain and conveyor of life; and he
fell under his displeasure in and from which is death, even the death of the
spirit of man; inasmuch as the favor and fellowship of God, his Word, and
Spirit, being withdrawn, his life was withdrawn with them, and inasmuch as it
lay open to his anger to inflict misery upon it: and so the inward state of the
soul and spirit, became unquiet, dead, without sense of the life of God (the
favor, spirit, and operations of his grace in it) and was filled with fear,
shame, guilt, as the effects of the life withdrawn, and misery deserved and
exposed to: and then, bodily death as to its principles entered, and so the
sentence for dying at Gods pleasure bodily and for ever (had not mercy looked
upon man, and prevented) followed also, Genesis 2.17. and 3.18, 19, Romans 5.12.18.

2. But God rich in mercy looking back upon his prodigal Son, man, here,
devised his recovery, and to that end sent his Son or Word, that eternal life
that was with him, and made him flesh, and in that flesh mortal and under the
sentence of death that was upon man; and accordingly delivered him up to death
for our Sins, who, by his death destroyed him that had the power of death, that
is the Devil, and swallowed up death from off the nature of man, as it is in
him, and filled it with immortallity and eternal life: so as he having dyed,
dies no more; death has no more dominion over him, but the fullness of the
Godhead dwells in him bodily; and all the fullness of his favor, grace, and
blessing in which is life, yea, and the Spirit of Life is in and upon him: so
as he also in dying, and by his death (inasmuch as it was sustained by him for
us, even for all men) has obtained a release of all men from under that first
Death and Judgment in which all universally and alike were condemned to dye
(as it did and must have stood upon us without his interposing) and has the
ordering of Death, and Grave, and Hell in his hand; and dispose with power and
authority to bring us thereout, and enliven and quicken soul and body, yea, and
invest them with immortality and eternal life, as pleases him, he being in
himself and for mankind the resurrection and the life, the deliverer and the
raiser, and the only ground or foundation, cause and effector of the
Resurrection in others, either as to soul or body, and the life quickening them,
and in which they being quickened, live, John 11.25. Yea in him is, and God has
given to us (even to the same us whom he commands to believe, which is all men,
or men indefinitely) eternal life, so as that in partaking of him we partake of
the Resurrection, and are raised up in and by him in our spirits, and partake
of life, spiritual life; and so, whosoever believes in him, though dead in
himself, is enlivened by him, and shall live, and being made alive in believing
and going on yet to believe, shall not dye, shall not lose this life that he
has in and by him, for ever, but is always in the raised state as to his
state spiritually, and shall be so at the last day bodily too; and so always
in the favor of God, in which is life, in a justified state from sin and
wrath, curse and death, and in a state of acceptance with God, and heir-ship
to the life promised further of God in and by him, and has his interest in,
and fellowship with God the fountain of life, and the Spirit of God, and its
influences, who is the Spirit of life, and gives and upholds life, as it is
said, He that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not
life; and so as all mankind are in a released state from the destructiveness
of the first death as in, and of it self, and in a possibility of life, because
in the hand of Christ, where is life, even spiritual and eternal life, yea,
both for soul and body, as in a root and fountain for them, and communicable to
them: so all such of men, as in hearing and receiving the Word and Doctrine of
Christ (which is called the word of life, and life, Acts 5.20. John 6.63. Prove.
4.13. because Christ objectively is in it, as the matter of it set forth in and
by it, and his Spirit, which is life, and the Spirit of Life accompanies it,
and breaths in it) are therein by the Spirit quickened and raised to spiritual
life, endued with spiritual sense, and perception of spiritual things, and so
of God and Christ, and to spiritual breath, and desires after them, and motion
toward them, and in them, and so spiritual understanding, peace, joy,
satisfaction, according to the measure of Christ partook of by them; but yet so
as the room enlightened by the Sun retains its light by admitting that light
from without into it: so as if that be withdrawn and shut out the light within
is gone, or as the branch lives in the stock and root; so as if it be separated
therefrom, it dies and withers: so is it here. The soul in thinking to live on
it self, or what it has in it self; yea, what life it has received in it self
from Christ, and so withdrawing from Christ, and from his Word and Spirit,
loses its life, and dies, as it lets slip, departs from, and rejects Christ, or
the Knowledge, Faith, and Spirit of God and Christ; so it departs from, and
lets slip its life. Whence that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47. Set your hearts to
all the words that I testify amongst you this day; for it is not a vain thing
for you (or an empty word for you) for its thy life, and in this word (as the
Hebrew words are, (...)) you shall prolong your days: and so, Prove. 4.13. Lay
fast hold of instruction, let her not go, keep her for she is thy life; and
ver. 23. Keep thy heart above all keeping, or with all diligence, for out of it
are the issues of life: and the Apostle John, 2 John 9. tells us that, He that
transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ has not God: that is
(as by the opposition in the next branch of the verse appears) the Father and
the Son, and so by consequent the Spirit of both, they are strangers from the
life of God, and so without God and Christ in the world, Ephesians. 4.18. and 2.12.
and so they are dead.

1. Spiritually, as being deprived of spiritual life, and destitute of it,
being in departing from the Word of God, and obedience of the Spirit of Christ
therein.

1. Gone from Christ and his Spirit, and the Spirit of Christ departed and gone
from them, as to any enlivening or living efficacies in them, as a principle of
spiritual life in them; though in this there may be as a gradual departing from
the word of God, and from God and Christ, and the Spirit therein: so a gradual
withdrawing and dying of the spiritual life in them, as it is in the natural
life, when a man forsakes his meat, that should preserve life in him: yea, and
then,

2. There is a spending, consuming, or dying of the spiritual gifts or
efficacies of the Spirit of Life formerly infused and found in them; though
there may be for a time somewhat of these abiding, as it is in a branch, that
though the life of it be gone, yet something of the sap and greenness, the
effects of that life, abide for a time, and go away by degrees, John 15.5, 6.
and as the heat in a dead body, after the life and soul is gone, yet something
of the heat and warmth often abide that was the effect of the soul and life
while there, but that is decreasing too, and goes away at last; and this may be
signified in the Parable by the Prodigals spending his portion or substance in
riotous living: it was not all gone so soon as gone from his Father, but it
soon after went away, and was spent; though yet the rational sense as a man, a
natural man may abide, and so he began to be in want* he was sensible there was
not that of gifts, parts, and graces, fore-received from the Spirit of God as
used to be; but that there was a loss of those things, and so of his comfort
and hope springing from them, they were gone: but then,

3. There is a senselessness of spiritual and divine things properly such, and
of his state in that respect, no sight and view of the Glory of God that is in
the face of Jesus, nor of his excellencies and preciousness, the Virtues of his
Blood and Sacrifice, no hearing of his Calls, Counsels, Instructions, no
spiritual hearing of his Voice, when wholly gone from God and Christ: he is
deaf to all these things, nor knows, nor regards the meaning of them; no taste
and relish of the Grace and Favor of God, to and in his Spirit; no sense and
feeling of the joys of Gods Salvation, and the workings and breathings of his
Grace in him, Prove. 23.35. nor of his judgments upon him, no savor or taste
of his graciousness, nor smell of his ointments: could he but find gifts or
parts, or some such things, or have but the love, respect, or favor of such as
admired him before, its all he desires, is sensible of the want of, or troubled
about.

4. There is no breath, no spirit in any of his profession, if the carcass of
that remain; an outward form of godliness, there may be, and of religious acts,
but no breath in them; no divine force, power, or virtue from Christ, as the
body without the spirit is dead, so faith without the works of it or that works
nothing in the soul, or upon others) is dead, James 2.26. Nor is there any
inward spiritual breathing after God, or toward him; as is seen in the
Parable: where when the Prodigal began to be in want, he has no sense or
remembrance of his Father, or Fathers house, nor desire after it: but all
spiritual things being gone; he goes further from his Father, and joins up
himself to a Citizen of that Country, puts himself servant, or an Apprentice
to his lust, or to Satan, wholly to be given up, and be at the beck thereof,
and to seek satisfaction in and from it, as the Apostle says, His servants ye
are to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto
righteousness, Romans 6.16. and so he only savors the things of the flesh now,
and desires the husks that the Swine feed on, which this Citizen set him to
keep, even such things as brutish men delight and rejoice in, and have their
comforts from: Nor,

5. Is there any motion Godward in him, no creeping, stirring, much less going
toward him in his heart or spirit; but as a Swine-heard, a moving only as a
rational or brutish man, after the Swine and their husks; after and with evil,
sensual, and wicked persons: but as no thought or desire after, so no seeking
to go to his Father till he came to himself from out of that spiritual swoon or
death, as we often find the Scripture tells us the way of sinners is that
being gone from God, when they fall into misery or want, yet they return not to
God that smites them, nor seek healing and help in Christ, but run after dead
works, or empty lying vanities, asking counsel, but not of God, and covering
with a cover, but not of his spirit, that they may add sin to sin, Isa. 30.1,
2, 15. When God calls to return to him, they have no breath, desire, sense of,
motion after the things in him, But we will ride upon horses, say they, and
flee upon the swift: and as in Hos. 5.13. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and
Judah his wound; then went Ephraim down to Assyria, and sends to King Jareb,
etc. No motion toward God, but from him: and therein.

6. As from a dead body there issues forth filth and stinch, blood, and matter
sometimes that is loathsome and abominable, and makes it unfit to be amongst
the living: so is it with dead souls, devoid of the life of God, as Psalm. 14.1,
2, 3. The fool (or fallen man, fallen from God and Christ) says in his heart,
there is no God (there is his voidness of spiritual, life, sense, or motion, or
faith toward him; as also in that, Romans 3.^2. There is none that
understands, none that seeks after God; but then beside it follows) Corrupt
are they, and have done abominable works; there is none that does good, no not
one: they are all become filthy (or as in the Margin, stinking) loathsome. And
as in Romans 3.13. Their threat is an open Sepulcher, nothing breaths out thence
but putrefaction, and filth, and stench; things abom^nable to God, and
unacceptable to God and good men. When the Doctrine of God, and the Spirit of
God and Christ are gone once, and the savor of his Grace lost, though there
may be yet too a form of Prayers, Fasting, and outward formalities and
observances; yet then they are all dead works, Heb. 9.14. as a menstruous
cloth, a filthy thing, The sacrifices of the wicked are an abomination to the
Lord, Prove. 15.8. and 21.27. Isa. 1.11, 13, 14. and unpleasing to men, unsavory
to those that are spiritually men endued with sense, reason, and understanding:
nay often gross profaneness and debauchery issues from them.

7. And then as dead bodies they are separated from the living; from the living
God, and his living Household and Family. God cannot endure to look toward them
with any delight or likement of them, or have them in his sight or presence:
they are condemned of him, loathed and detested, as to their dead estate by
him, cut off from him, and and his justifying, and approving Grace, and then
objects of his anger or displeasure, as any evil or vain Spirit may bring them
before him, or make them come as dead carcasses possessed with evil spirits
into his sight.

2. And so (if they be not through some miraculous mercy revived) they be dead
as to body; not only in that they must as all others come to a natural death in
the appointed time, but often are also exposed to, in danger of, and sometimes
taken away by judicial deaths, as either in some judgment or testimony of
wrath from God, as Pharaoh, when drowned in the Red Sea, Saul conquered by the
Philistines, and slaying himself, and many of the Rebellious Israelites
destroyed in the Wilderness; or else as sometimes by some judicial deaths from
men, as Zedekiah and Ahab whom the King of Babylon, roasted in the fire, Jer.
29.22. The two Malefactors that were put to death with Christ; God sometimes
permitting, and in anger against his people for their voluntary goings from
him, giving them up so far to their own hearts lusts, (as Psalm. 81.11, 12.) as
to suffer them to fall into notorious sins, such as bring not only shame, but
exemplary punishments by death also; or however (persisting) they dye in their
sins as to their bodies also; yea, and if by these things mercy be not
extended, so as to turn them to God, and pull them out of spiritual death,
there follows at length,

3. Eternal death of body and soul wholly cast out and separated from God, and
from his presence into everlasting misery and torments, both in souls and
bodies for ever, in which is both a perfect loss and deprival of all good
things both bodily and spiritual; and also a perfect and eternal subjection to
all misery and mischief, pain, sorrow, and unspeakable torment upon soul and
body for ever: a sad and doleful portion of the workers of iniquity, and of
those that having been quickened up to a spiritual life let it slip again, and
depart from it by going away from the Doctrine of Christ, and so from Christ
and the Holy Spirit, and so finally persist; but this last was through mercy
here prevented. This is one expression of the sad estate of the sad estate of
such persons. The wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. The other is,

Branch 2.

He was lost. The word, say some Critics here translated, Lost, is at the best
of a harsh signification, (...), at the best to dye, yea, to dye by some
miserable way to perish; as in this parable, I perish with hunger, ver. 17. and
so the expression of coming to himself implies that he was extinct for a time,
fainted and dyed away through hunger; but that the mercy of God revived him, he
had quite perished, which is worse then simply dead perished, as we properly say
of those that dye of hunger and cold, and are lost for want of help, or looking
to; he being gone away from them that used to look to him: or with reference to
the other Parables where (whatever the Critics say) the same word is used of
the sheep and groat, lost, ^o as not forthcom^ng, or found; and so being a
loose Son, he was not only a loser, but quite lost himself too: Such the fruit
of men's sinning and wandering from God. Let us view it in some particulars.

1. He was a loser, though that is not all,, he lost his Father, and his Fathers
house, his portion, and patrimony, his enjoyments he was wont to have, and his
brother yet had; all that entertainment, food, raiment, harbor, shelter,
lodging, attendance, respect, and honor, which he had in his Fathers house
formerly; these and all things of that nature were wholly lost and gone from
him, and from his enjoyment and interest: and is this nothing for sinners to
lose? both livelihood and life, yea such a livelihood, and such a life as God
in Christ is, and gives: such safety, satisfaction, content, rest, and
refreshing, hope and rejoicing, as his Word, and Spirit, and Christ in and by
both, and God in and by all, give to the abiding soul, to lose a most sweet,
secure, satisfying, and abiding livelihood and life, it cannot be expressed: to
lose a Kingdom with all its contents.

But 2. He was lost himself, he was gone quite out of all these things, and out
of the way to them again, as a sheep lost out of its pastures. He was not to be
found either in his Fathers house, or Fields, under none of his promises, under
no engagement of his shelter, or protection, in no way of his, or of his
servants and peoples walkings. He was gone (and so are sinners) out of all Gods
paths, and so from all Gods promises of protection, mercy, or blessing, and so
lay open to any danger that might befall him, only mere undeserved, yea,
uningaged mercy in God and Christ prevented his being actually torn in pieces,
and devoured for ever: but as he was sound in none of Gods paths, so he had no
engagement from God, that he could challenge to keep him from destruction, even
from dropping into Hell, and everlasting damnation. The servants of God might
seek for him in the house of God amongst his Saints, and Holy Ones, but not
find him, they might seek him in any of the ways of the righteous, and not
find him; nay, nor God, nor his abiding Brethren could find him there, though
they never so diligently seek for him.

3. He was lost: no endeavor or dispensation of God met with him for a time to
work upon his heart and conscience, and so in that sense to find him out. He
was dead, and deaf to all means used for a great while (these many years, says
the elder Son) toward him; neither those gifts and enjoyments which he had
received from his Father, and which were riotously misspent by him, found him
so as to work upon his heart, and make him remember his Father from whom he had
them. Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked; thou art waxed fat, thou art grown thick,
then he forsook God, etc. Of the Rock that begot thee, thou art unmindeful, and
have forgotten God that formed thee, Deuteronomy. 32.15, 18. And she remembered not
that I gave her her Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and multiplied her Silver and
Gold, which she prepared for Baal, says God to back-slidden Israel, Hos. 2.8.
Nor did the Famine brought upon the Land, and the emptiness proved in all
enjoyments, and the defect of them, the want he was reduced to, (the pains and
afflictions he met with) work upon him to remember his Father; but he thinks of
other ways to get a livelihood, rather then of returning to him again. This
people returns not to him him that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord
of Hosts, Isa. 9.13. And God did this, and that evil to Israel, yet they
returned not to him, says, Amos 4.6; 7, 8. they have stricken me, but I was
not sick, they have beaten me, but I felt it not, says the besotted Sinner,
Prove. 23.^5.

4. He was lost, so as he knew not which way to get back again; nay, he had not
a thought to return, he wandered after satisfaction indeed, but knew not the
way to it, nor could attain it; but was like those in Psalm. 107.4, 5. That
wandered in the Wilderness, and found no way, hungry and thirsty their souls
fainted in them, they had not a City of habitation. Such his estate till mercy
saved him.

5. He was lost, he was miserably perished, through many foul sins, and filthy
transgressions, and lewd courses, and by many sad convincements, convictions,
checks, and bangs of conscience, and as it were Devils and evil Spirits,
renting and tearing out his bowels, wringing him with inward pains, and sense
of hellish miseries, perplexities, fears, horrors, despairs, quite brought down
as it were into the pit of destruction. Manifold sorrows (or great plagues, as
the vulgar reads it) shall be to the wicked, Psalm. 32.11. Yea, they shall
multiply sorrows to themselves that hasten from God after another: their drink
offerings of blood will not Christ offer, nor take up their names into his
lips. Will not mediate nor intercede for any acceptance of any of their
services in which thus bent they seek deliverance from their horrors, and
terrible perplexities, no not any of the works of righteousness of their own,
with which perhaps they would establish their hearts before God, they being but
as things thrown to Dogs, ((...)) or Swine, as these husks in the spirits
account, Phil. 3.8, 9. Oh the misery of departing from God, All they that
forsake thee shall perish, Psalm. 73.27. and thou destroyest all them that go a
whoring from thee.

7. He was lost, perished without God, without hope in God and Christ, had no
hope to uphold him, nothing of his former gifts, part, portion, would now
relieve him, it was all spent and gone; he had consumed that with riotous
living, and nothing this Citizen, to whom he had bound or joined himself,
affords him, could give him any comfort; but despair and destruction seize upon
him, and swallowed him up, as it were: so that he might say, as in Ezekiel. 37.11,
As for us, our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts. Or as those, Lam.
4.17. As for us, our eyes as yet failed for our vain help, etc or as David, The
sorrows of death compassed me about, the pangs of hell caught hold upon me, I
found woe and sorrow, Psalm. 116.3, 4.

7. He might be (and sinners often are) lost and perished as to this life, by
falling into some notorious evils, fall under the law, or into some loathsome
and foul disease, bringing him into death here, in a perishing way for this
world, and all the mercy he might have had and enjoyed therein, had he kept
Gods ways, and not departed from them; for so sometimes the word perishing or
lost is meant of perishing or being lost men here, cast and condemned at law,
sentenced to dye; or utterly cut off from the land of the living and this is
the way sometimes between the Bridge and the Water to find mercy. So the
Disciples cried out to Christ, Matthew. 8.25. Master save us, we perish, that is,
we are lost as to our lives here.

8. And unless he had perished thus (perhaps) he had perished worse, even
eternally from the presence of God, and from the glory of his power, so as to
be lost and perished for ever, with the Devil and damned spirits in unutterable,
unbearable, endless, remediless, miseries and destruction: for sinners turned
aside from God are in the way to this, and this unless mercy prevent will be
their issue, Such is the portion of all that forget God, and the Hypocrites
hope shall perish. See Heb. 2.3. and 10.29, 30, etc.

Use.

And is not this a sad portion? and who would turn from such a portion as the
former to such a portion as this latter? who but mad men would run from God to
the Devil? from all to nothing, or from all that is good to nothing but what is
unspeakably bad and sad, from Heaven and Happiness, to Hell and Destruction?
what is there in the pleasure of sin, or in the profit of it that can
countervail either the pleasure or Profit of the former portion lost, or the
pain and misery of this portion incurred? Oh what is an inch of pleasure to an
immeasurable pain! a minute of sweetness to an endless bitterness: yea, if it
were but a months, or years; but how much more to many years gall and wormwood?
a superficial appearance of delight to a real deep heart-sinking torment and
distress? how vain is the pretense of sin, that we shall step but a little
aside, and it will let us return again? where as when it has once got us out
of the way it leads us into a Wilderness^ where we lose our selves, and can
find no way out? how desperate a thing is it to believe the deceits of sin, or
of a deceitful heart, then which there is nothing so deceitful or more
desperately wicked in the world? It will bid us put but a little from the
shore, and when it has got us off, makes us launch out into the deep: It
carries the heart as with a storm into the Ocean, whence it returns not again
but by the belly of Hell, like Jonas, if ever it return: how many sinners
flatter themselves in their own eyes, till they fall into the deep sleeps of
sin, and awake not out of them but in death, either temporal or eternal? O what
Wine, or Woman, what sport or Pastime, what Honor or Advancement, nay, what
Crown or Kingdom is that that can be worthy of the loss of so great a happiness
as is that of the obedient Children in Christ, or of the incurring of such a
portion as endless; yea, or but as the danger of endless destruction. What
folly and madness is it to exchange an infinite Birthright for a mess of
Pottage? and beside that loss, to incur the punishment of a perpetual dungeon,
with all the exquisitest torments can can be thought on?

Use 2.

Therefore also it speaks admonition to us all to take heed of departing from
the Lord: yea, it is to all a warning to take heed and stand in awe, and not to
sin, though more especially to such as have tasted the graciousness of the
Lord, and been in any measure brought to him not to revolt and depart from him
again. All that are far from God shall perish, and needs they must, because
they are far from him that is the fountain of all good, life, and safety; but
God destroys all them that go a whoring from him, Psalm. 73.27. They shall not
only perish as out of necessity, as being without that that should keep them
alive, but God himself also will set himself against them to heap upon them
what makes for their destruction. I will heap mischiefs upon them, I will spend
mine arrows upon them, says he, Deuteronomy. 32.23. Oh therefore take we heed of an
evil heart of unbelief of departing from the living God: for not only there is
nothing like him, we can go after from him (if we turn aside from him, we must
needs go after vain things, and things that cannot profit, because they are
vain 1 Samuel 12.21.) but also if any man draw back, Gods Soul shall have no
pleasure in him; which is but a figurative expression of more meant then said:
as namely, that he will withdraw from him and be angry with him. It is good
for us to hold us fast by God; and that we may do so its good and needful.

1. To take diligent heed to his word and testimony, minding, meditating, and
yielding up our selves to the obedience of the truth and grace discovered
therein; and the wholesome counsels and commands therein, and therefrom given:
for by what means shall a young man cleanse his way, but by taking heed
thereto, according to Gods word: and what way is there to be kept from sinning
against, or departing from God like the hiding his word in our hearts, as David
says he did, Psalm. 119.9, 11. Blessed is the man that makes the word of the
Lord his delight, and therein meditates day and night; for he shall be like a
tree planted by the rivers side: not to be blown away with any wind of
Doctrine, or temptation, as the chafe in the floor, as ungodly men, Psalm. 1.3,
4. We Ought therefore to give earnest heed to the things which have been spoken
to us in the Gospel, lest at any time we let them slip. Keep wisdom and her
instructions, and she and they will keep us, Hebrews 2.1. Prove. 4.6.

2. To walk in company with, and in the love of our brethren, those that are
wise, for that is the way to be wise, Prove. 13.20. Two are better than one, in
many respects either to hold one the other up from falling, or help one the
other up when fallen, Eccles 4.9 10. And a threefold cord is not easily
broken. There Is warmth in such fellowship, Did not our hearts burn within us
while walking together, Christ joyn^d himself and communed with us, Luke 24.^2.
There God commands the blessing and life for evermore, where brethren dwell
together in unity, Psalm. 133. So we may exhort one another to love and good
works; yea, daily while its called to day, to the preventing our hearts, being
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.12, 13. and 10.24.

3. To watch and pray that we enter not into temptation. Watching and taking
heed to the word of God, and in the light thereof against Satan; and what would
draw us from God, and praying and crying mightily to God for our selves and one
another; that he would show us his way, lead us in his path, and guide us, and
uphold us, that we fall not; yea, to hold us up in our goings, that we may be
safe, as knowing that we need his guidance and support at all times, and that
of our selves we are good for nothing, Matthew. 26.41. Psalm. 25.4, 5. and 27.13,
14. and 119.116, 117.

4. To beware of all such things as might undo us, and withdraw us from God,
as to say as of all sin in general, so particularly.

1. Of sinful porings upon our own weaknesses, unworthiness, inabilities to do
or suffer, with a neglect of the Grace given us in Jesus Christ for our
helpfulness every way. Take heed of an evil heart of unbelief, but casting away
the weights that press us down, and the sin that easily besets us, let us run
with patience the race set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and
finisher of the faith, Heb. 3, 12. and 12.1.12.

2. Of knowing our selves in any of our receipts, gifts, seize, and so of
being puffed up with pride, to be high minded, and to think to live of our
selves, and not upon and by the Faith of Jesus Christ, Pride goes before
destruction, and a haughty mind before a fall, Prove. 16.17, 18. Be not high
minded, but fear, Romans 11.20, 21. The desire of a portion in himself, and his
conceit of living upon that portion received was the fall of the Prodigal that
brought this death and loss upon him, Luke 15.11, 12.

3. Of false Prophets who would draw us from Christ into our selves, or after
the world and flesh, from walking in the narrow way of truth, to wander in the
broad way of sin and error, Matthew. 7.13, 15. Cease to hear the instruction
that causes to err from the words of knowledge, and go from the presence of a
foolish man, when thou perceivest not in him the lip of knowledge, Prove. 14.7.
and ^9.27.

4. Of the inticements of sinners, and of worldly carnal persons; and to that
purpose of haunting, walking, or being yoaked up with them; for they will prove
snares to our souls, and draw us away from God by their conversations, Psalm.
1.1. Prove. 1.10, 11. and 9.6, 7. and 13.20. and 22.24. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17.

5. Of slothfulness in the way of God, for that will cast into a deep sleep,
and lead to weariness and fainting, Prove. 19.15. Be not slothful, but follow
their steps, who through faith and patience have inherited the promises, Heb.
6.12.

6. Of giving way to our affections and passions, Be sober, be vigilant, for
our adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour, etc. 1 Pet. 5.8. Mortify we our Members that are upon the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, evil concupiscence, inordinate affections, and
covetousness, which is Idolatry: put off also these things, anger, wrath,
malice, blasphemy, lying, etc. Col. 3.5, 8. I might add more, as not to dally
with temptations, nor conceal, but disclose them seasonably to some faithful
friends, etc. But I forbear; in reading, and minding the Scriptures, and
calling upon God, we may get such understanding, as to discern and hate every
false way, Psalm. 119.104.

Use 3.

Think upon our ways, and bring them to the light of Gods truth, and where we
find we have gone awry, Turn we our feet to Gods testimonies, searching and
trying our ways, and turning to the Lord, Psalm. 119.59, Lam. 3.40. Yea, where
we have turned out from God, make haste to return and keep his Commandments
again. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts,
and turn to the Lord, for he is gracious, and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon, Isa. 55.7. not continuing in sin, to back-slide to a
perpetual backsliding, refusing to return, and holding fast deceit, till there
be no remedy but destruction, not despairing of finding mercy and forgiveness
with him upon returning to him; for with him there is mercy, and with him
plenteousness of redemption, in seeking to him that wounds for sin he will heal
us; yea, he will revive and quicken us, and the third day we shall live in his
sight, Hos. 6.1. but that leads us to, and springs from the third Branch, viz.

CHAP. IX. The third state of Penitent Sinners, in two Branches of it opened.
THE joyful and good estate of sinners that return to God after they have
wandered from him, and that is signified in these expressions, It was meet that
we should make merry and be glad, for this thy Brother was dead, and is alive
again, was lost, but is found; in which are three expressions considerable, as
implying the goodness and joyfulness of such a state, viz.

1. In that it is said, He is alive again. 2. In that its said, He is found, 3.
In that its said, It was meet that we should make merry and be glad.
Branch 1.

First, The converted, repenting, and returned sinner is alive again, he is
come to himself again, ver. 17. How comes that about?

1. Not from himself, he had no power while alive to keep himself of, and by
himself, being withdrawn from his Father, from dying, None can keep alive his
own Soul, Psalm. 22.29* How much less when dead can any quicken himself again?
But,

2. It was from and by the good Shepherd seeking him and restoring his soul,
Psalm. 23.3. Though sinners by departing from Christ in his Word and Spirit, and
so from God lose their life and dye: Yet Christ from whom they depart loses not
the life that is in him for them; in him, yet is life as the root of mankind,
or for mankind to be enlivened by, or as the fountain and spring of life: and
though the branch be dead, yet this root can infuse life to it again; and
though the pipe being cut be dry, yet the Fountain being a living Fountain can
fetch in the pipe again, and infuse living waters again into it. Christ lives,
though the sinner dye, and while he is not as a tree twice dead, plucked up by
the roots and withered; yea, as a branch cut off from the stock, withered,
gathered, and cast into the fire and burnt: such is the nature and excellency
of this stock above all other stocks, and of this root above all other roots,
that it can gather it into unity with himself again, and infuse new life into
it. God is able to ingraft the cut off Branches in again, Romans 11.23. Yea, some
compared to trees twice dead, may be pulled out of the fire, Jude 12,23. with
Zech. 3.2. That is while a man is not wholly given up of God, and rejected;
while the day of Grace is not wholly past and expired Christ has life in
himself for men, and so as he can extend it to men to quicken them again, and
bring them back to himself, and to the life in him; for the Spirit is still
upon him, and is the Spirit of Life, and the word is still in his mouth, a
living word; and he can yet call to the dead, and make them hear, and hearing
to live, John 5.25. Adam when he was fallen, and we in him, he could not
recover us again, for he was but a living soul at first, and being dead, our
root in him was dead, and so we also irrecoverably lost and gone in him: But
this second Adam is not so, he being dead for us, raised himself again, and he
lives yet, and has the power or keys of Hell and Death, and can therefore
revive us, though dead: therefore writing to the Angel of the Church of Sardis,
of whom he says, That he had a name to live, but yet was dead, he says, Thus
says he that has the seven Spirits, and the seven Stars. Having the seven
Spirits of God, though he that he speaks to be dead, yet his speaking to him
can put life into him, and therefore he rationally enough bids him be watchful,
and strengthen the thing that be ready to dye, and remember how thou have heard
and received and hold fast etc Rev. 3.1, 2, 3. If he say Lazarus come forth,
though he was dead he lives, because he is the Resurrection and the life, and
his giving forth this life by his Spirit in his word again, brings in the
nature and operations of life into the dead sinner, though as rubbing and
chafing men in a swoon, often helps to revive them: so here we may conceive
Gods ordering the Prodigal to be so pinched with poverty might conduce to the
receiving him. See the like intimated, Hos. 5.15. with 6.1. but in the life
infused was,

1. An inward spiritual sense, mind, and remembrance of things that in the
state of death were forgotten, and not thought of or apprehended as we find
this dead Prodigal reviving calls to remembrance what he thought not on before,
at least with any livingness; as that he had a Father, and a Fathers House, in
which were many hired Servants, and bread enough for them all, and to spare,
and that he perished there for hunger. Now he is awakened both to a sense of his
state, and to an understanding, where he may find relief; or rather this was
as Aqua vitae infused into him.

2. An inward desire and breathing after that relief and help that he is made
apprehensive of, and whereof he had had before the taste and experiment; for
that is employed in his resolving to go to his Father for it, that he desired and
breath^d after it. So the sinner brought into mind and remembrance of God and
his goodness in Christ, in his reviving again has effected in him a desire to
find that goodness again, which he had proved before, and that he has again
heard of, and remembers. And this is a gasping for life and breath again upon
the Aqua vitae, or Water of Life infused.

3. An inward hope that he may be made partaker thereof again in giving
diligence to return to God in Christ for it, and to seek it in him, and in his
favor and love toward him; and indeed therein life is more completely entered,
or breath recovered; and the soul more properly lives in the receiving this
hope, and having it begotten in the heart, and though it be but of a
possibility, and some likelihood of being made a partaker of satisfaction again
in God and Christ. Whence proceeds and springs as a further action of life.

4. An inward purpose and resolution of quitting his present posture, in which
this thought of God and his goodness coming upon it, found it. This state of
sinning, keeping Swine, maintaining and nourishing brutish lusts, affections,
and appetites; in the objects whereof the Soul and spirit finds no
satisfaction, together with a purpose to rise up from under those discouraging
complaints and despairs, under which it before lay pining, and to betake it
self by faith and repentance unto God its Father, from whom and whose house it
had departed, and to confess its sin, and vileness, and submit it self to his
disposing. I said I will confess my sin, Psalm. 32.4, 5. I will arise and go to
my Father, and I will say to my Father, Father I have sinned against heaven,
and before thee, and am not worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy
hired Servants, This like the moving and stretching himself when a person is
come to himself, and revives.

5. A putting that resolution into practice, strengthening those things that
they might not dye again, by still remembering his Father, and still retaining
in mind, the fullness of his Fathers house, and his great goodness to all
therein, of whatsoever condition; and so he rose up both from his sinful way,
practice, state, and condition, and from his pining away in himself, and in the
poring upon his own want, and wretchedness, and betook himself toward his
Father by faith and repentance; like the revived man's turning himself that he
may get up.

6. Being thus made alive by the Grace of God understood and yielded to as
common, in its gracious workings in the soul, as infusing principles of life,
while he is yet but begun to act and exercise that life, in putting sin
resolutions into performances, his Father sees him, and pitties him, and runs,
meets, embraces, and kisses him: that is, while the soul is thus turning to
God, and going back toward him in the exercise of faith and repentance, though
but in their beginnings. God in the greatness of his compassion and goodness
closes with it, returns to it, accepts it, incourages and helps it, and speaks
comfortably to it, kisses it with the kisses of his mouth, and therein further
puts life and strength into it, making it more to hope for his pardon and mercy
toward it: And this is like the giving the hand to a reviving man, endeavoring
to turn himself, and to arise, to help him up therein, and then,

7. He more confidently (though yet humbly and penitently) confesses his sins
and wretchedness to his Father, and humbles himself to him, and so exercises
repentance in these acts of it. Father I have sinned against heaven and before
thee, and am not worthy to be called thy Son; wherein he is like to Daniel on
his knees and hands, or as one that begins to speak.

8. And then he receives a full and free pardon of all his former sins and
offenses, and is made alive with the life of justification employed in his
calling for, and putting upon him the best robe, even the righteousness of his
Son, which he will have his Servants and Ministers also to declare to him, or
put upon him, being in his Fathers gracious acceptance, embracing and kissing
him, as it were inwardly, and in the Court of Heaven forgiven before: and now
he is indeed alive from the dead, and as a man upon his legs again, while he is
not only inwardly quickened, but also outwardly by his Fathers sentence
proclaimed as an acquit and justified person, whom he will not call to an
account for his former mispending his living, nor execute judgment upon him to
death, according to the law in that behalf provided against rebellious and
stubborn Children that are gluttonous and drunkards, Deuteronomy. 21.20. but being a
new man is owned in Christ, in whom he presents him to himself just and
righteous, and now he has received him safe and sound, ver. 27.

9. And so is further acknowledged as his loving Son, while the ring is put
upon his finger for ornament, or espousing the soul to himself again in
righteousness and faithfulness, and his feet shod to prepare him to walk up and
down as his Son before him; and herein he is fully restored to his former state
of favor with his Father, and Fathers House, and to his pristine Dignity. And
in these things.

Branch 2.

He is found. The repenting converted sinner that returns to God is found
again: found, passively; not that he found himself, or recovered himself, but
the good Shepherd that came to seek and save that that was lost. Finds him,
and he is found when he comes back again. Though the ways by which that good
Shepherd seeking, finds, may be different; and here seems to be employed to be,

1. By neglecting him as to appearance, or suffering him to wander after his
own hearts lust, till he be quite lost and perishing, Till he eat the fruit of
his own way, and be filled with his own inventions, till he fall down hungry
and thirsty, and his soul faints in him, Psalm, 107.4, 5. as is said in Hos.
5.15. I will go and return to my place (as it were leaving them, and letting
them take their own course, till misery and affliction come upon them) till
they acknowledge their offenses, for (then) in their affliction they will seek
me early. To further which also God

2. In the mean while by a secret ordering Providence suffers not the sinner to
find the life of his own hands, or not to continue so to do, but to be reduced
to more misery and want daily, and to be crossed in, and disappointed of his
expectations in all his ways, which is that he says in Hos. 2.6. That he
would hedge up the sinners way with thorns, and make a wall that she shall not
find her paths, and she shall follow after her lovers, but shall not overtake
them, and shall seek them, but shall not find them; then shall (or will) she
say I will go and return to my first Husband, etc. Just as this Prodigal
meeting with a Famine in one place, and pined with hunger, none giving him
husks in the other place was that way found, or brought to himself to say, How
many servants in my Fathers house have bread enough, etc. And I will arise and
go to my Father, etc. And the way in which God usually does this, is expressed in
the same place of Hosea, namely by taking away his gifts, (or, which is the
same, suffering them to be spent till they come to nothing) and then
discovering her lewdness in the sight of her lovers, and pressing her so with
his judgments that none deliver her out of his hand (as the Prodigal was made
so poor and vile that no man regarded him to give him husks with the Swine) and
so destroying all her former gifts and rewards from her lovers, take away all
her mirth, and all that might support her, etc.

3. By presenting and bringing to the sinners mind in this sad lost condition,
himself in his goodness and grace in Christ, drawing the soul out from its
holes and caves, its fields, and brutish swinish company into the wilderness,
a solitary, mournful, repenting state; and there he is said properly to find
her, as it is said, Hos. 13.5. I did know thee in the wilderness, in the land
of great drought, which is in Deuteronomy. 32.10. He found him in a desert, forsaken
land, in the waste howling Wilderness, etc. And in Jer. 2.24. The wild Ass in
the wilderness that snuffs up the wind at her pleasure, and none can turn her
away in her occasion, with whom all that seek her will not weary themselves any
longer; yet in her month (says he) they shall find her: that is, in the time
of trouble, when her pains come upon her, and God is brought to her mind, then
she will say, Arise and save us, as ver. 27. And indeed when this is hearty and
earnest, as here, then he may be said to be found, and in the next step to it,
for he is properly found.

4. In Gods seeing or taking notice of him, in his thinking on, and returning
to him; for that is it in which a thing is properly found, when that that could
not be espied or seen any where before falls suddenly into the sight, and is
seen and discerned. Now his eye is more properly set upon the creature when he
minds, regards, and notes it, so as to observe it by way of gracious respect
to it: as in Isa. 57.18. I have seen his ways, and I will heal him: and so he
is said to hear them then too, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. I have surely heard Ephraim
bemoaning himself, thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a Bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke; turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the
Lord my God: Surely after I was returned, I repented, etc. Then God sees and
hears the sinner when he begins to bemoan himself, and repent, and look toward
God, and then, Is Ephraim my dear Son? is he a pleasant child; for since I
spoke against him, I earnestly remember him still; therefore my bowels are
troubled for him: I will sure have mercy upon him says the Lord. And then a
repenting sinner being thus found is and may be said to be a person found.

1. In the way to God, thinking of him in Christ, desiring after him, hoping
that he may find help and mercy with him, resolving to return to him, and
putting such resolutions of repentance into practice, humbling himself in the
belief of his goodness, and hope of mercy, as is seen: And herein.

2. In the eye, respect and gracious observance of the Lord, having respect to
him: as Isa. 66.2. To that man will I look that is poor, and trembles at my
word. He respects the lowly, but the prond he knows afar off, Psalm. 138.6.
such as think they can live without him.

3. In the heart or compassions of the Lord, there he is found. He saw him and
had compassion upon him, to pity his misery, hear his bemoanings: help his
infirmities. I will sure have mercy upon him, as before, in Jer. 31.20.

4. In the arms of the Lord, who meets him speedily, falls upon his neck, and
kisses or embraces him. Now he is found indeed when he has him in his arms, in
the enclosures of his grace, gracious power, and protection, and promises.

5. In his dear Son. In whom he saw and thought upon his Fathers goodness, and
through whom he received life and motion toward him, resolutions, and actual
performances of faith and repentance toward him, and came to him, but now is
instated into him, and declaredly accepted in him the beloved, Made in Christ
Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.30. Ephesians. 1.6. found in him, Phil. 3.8, 9. and then he is more
fully and formally found when in and through him accepted: So was Cornelius
before an actual, positive, and explicit knowledge of him, and enwrapping him
about as it were with an explicit discovery of him, and giving in the
justification, forgiveness of sins, life, and peace in him as explicitly
believed on by him, his prayers, and tears, were accepted before through him,
and upon his account; but then he was more properly found in him, when he was
so invested with the knowledge of him and righteousness in and by him, in the
actual receipt of remission of sins, and the Holy Ghost in his Name believed on;
and so the Prodigal here in the best robe put upon him: and then,

6. In his Fathers house, received in by his Father, set amongst his Children;
and having there liberty and room again to go in and out amongst them: Now he
is found indeed of God, and his people too. And thus a repenting returned
sinner, of a lost, perished man, is found again, yea, found now safe, because in
his Fathers love, acceptance, approbation in Christ, and in his Fathers house
and tuition, and sound; because now healed of all hurts before-got, by his
Fathers compassion and goodness extended to him. Whereupon follows.

CHAP. X. The third Branch opened, and the whole applied.
THAT his condition now is such, as its meet to be rejoiced for and in. It was
meet that we should make merry and be glad, for this thy Brother was dead, and
is alive again; was lost, and is found. To be rejoiced for, by making merry
each other as it were, and by being glad in inward heart, and outward
demonstration, in entertaining him with a Feast, and with Music, the voice of
Thanksgiving and Melody; and with Dancing, Exulting, leaping, or orderly moving
our selves in showing our gladness, and setting forth the Praises of God: Yea,
this is a thing meet to be joyed in, and for.

1. By God his Father himself, for so he puts in himself here, not only its
meet that thou should make merry, but we, I and thou too. A wise Son makes a
glad Father, Prove. 10.1. My son be wise, and make my heart glad that I may
answer him that reproacheth me, Prove. 27.11. Though this Son had done foolishly
in departing and running away from his Father, and when he began to be an
hungry, in joining himself to a Citizen of that Country? yet he did wisely,
when coming to himself he repented and returned; and the Father here rejoices,
and has wherewith to answer his other Son reproaching him: So also in Prove.
23.15, 16. My Son, if thy heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even mine:
yea, my reins shall rejoice when thy lips speak right things. Its meet a Father
be glad of his Sons welfare.

2. By his Brother or Brethren, it is meet we should make merry and be glad;
not only I, but thou also with me, for should not brethren love one another,
and be glad they may enjoy one another company in health and safety? and
therefore be glad when any of them escapes any danger, and the more, the
greater the danger was that is escaped? and then.

3. By the Servants also that attend on them. There is joy in the presence of
the Angels of God over one sinner that repents, ver. 10. and I have no
greater joy (says one of Gods Servants in the Gospel) then to hear or see that
my Children walk in the truth; yea, and to repent and turn from swervings too:
so the Apostle Paul, the Servant of Christ. Now I rejoice, says he, not that
ye were made sorry, but that ye were made sorry to repentance, 2 Cor. 7.9.

4. But most of all by the sinner himself, made alive again, and found of his
Father, and in his Fathers house amongst his Brethren, whether in the lower
rooms while here, or in the upper chambers, as the Thief, (or Malefactor) that
day he dyed, was in Paradise. O give thanks to the Lord, for he is good, for
his mercy endures for ever. Let the redeemed of the Lord say so whom he has
redeemed from the hand of the enemy, etc. Psalm. 107.1, 2.

Quest. But why is it meet to make merry and be glad for such a one, upon such
an occasion? surely there is great and good reason for it:

Answ. 1. Because of the goodness of the condition it self in which a repentant
sinner is found, or brought into. Good things are matters of joy when had and
enjoyed; here is nothing but good in this state, good it is in it self, and good
to all others; therefore worthy joy, and mirth, and gladness.

1. Good in it self: for,

1. It is a state of life, and life is good in it self, and therefore matter of
promise, which it would not be if not good: for we do not use to promise what
we judge bad: and if God judged life bad, or it were so in it self, God would
not promise it. He is just, he shall surely live, Ezekiel. 18.9. Its matter of
prayer, Oh that Ishmael might live before thee, Genesis 17.18. Let Reuben live,
and not dye, Deuteronomy. 33.6. And its matter of praises, Psalm. 1^9.175 Let my soul
live, and it shall praise thee, and let thy judgments help me. Yea, its a
matter of Christ's purchase that he came into the world to procure and give;
yea, the principal matter, I am come that they might have life, and that they
might have it more abundantly, John 10, 10. and therefore surely life is good,
a great good: Yea, skin for skin (said the adversary) and all that a man has
will he give for his life: It Is usually so, but especially spiritual life, the
life of the soul in Christ, and so in the favor of God is good. The life which
is in the path of righteousness, wherein is no death, Prove. 12.28. And this is
the state the sinner is taken into upon repentance, and coming back to God in
Christ, as in Ezekiel. 18.17. If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he
has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that that is lawful and right,
he shall surely live he shall not dye: and ver. 22. He shall live. So in Chap.
33.11. Turn and live. Being brought back to God in and by Christ (the only way
by which any can come, or be brought to God, John 14.6.7.) he lives in and by
Christ, who is the Resurrection and the life, so as that whoever believes in
him, whatever he be, or has been, though never so dead, yet he shall live, and
living and believing in him, he shall live for ever, John 11.25, 26. And so its
said here, He is alive again.

Object. Oh! but the repenting Malefactor upon the Cross dyed for all his
repentance.

Answ. As to his body he did, and all must; and that as so inflicted on him was
the fruit of his sin, not of his return: yea, as to its sentence a means of his
return from his sin; but that which was the fruit of his repentance, was, that
he lived to God. Being judged according to (...) in the flesh, but living
according to God in the Spirit, 1 Pet. 4.6. and so his soul lived and went that
day to Paradise, and lived for ever. His death as it was the fruit of his
sinning was matter of sadness; but as it was a means to his repentance, so it
was to be joyed in; but much more the life of his soul, and eternal life
(promised to, and to be enjoyed by both soul and body, in the Resurrection) the
fruits or consequents of repentance are matters of unspeakable joy and
gladness: if a Child fall into the fire, will not the mother rejoice to see
him snatched out of it, and live safely, and in health again, though with
causing the scorched skin to peel off? surely yes.

2. It is a state of being found, a found state, a state wherein a sinner is
not lost from God, and his goodness to his Brethren and fellow Servants, but is
found in and with them, known, owned, and approved with God, and with men and
Angels of one mind ^ God, and so is with them, under the gracious approving
knowledge of God, and under his gracious care, counsel, defense, etc. and in
unity with all that are well and happy, found in a large and spacious house in
and under the enjoyment of, or title to large Provisions, richest Furniture,
sweetest Relations and Friends, abiding and eternal safety, and satisfactions.
Come to Mount Sion, the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to be
of them; as Ephesians. 2.19, 20. and to an innumerable company of Angels, to have
fellowship with them, and protection by them, to the General Assembly, and
Church of the firstborn, whose names are written in heaven, as owned of God,
and enrolled as heirs of heaven, and its infinite glory and happiness, to be
with, and of them, to the spirits of just men made perfect, to be their
brethren followers of their faith, and to be in the hope of, and to have the
title and way to their enjoyments, and to God the judge of all, to protect,
bless, reward, and satisfy them, And to Jesus the mediator of the New
Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then the
blood of Abel, to be prepared for, kept, and brought to the enjoyment of the
Glory of God by him, and in the virtues of that his precious blood. Yea, coming
to Christ the living stone they are made living stones too, and are built up a
spiritual house, and an holy Priesthood, etc. A chosen generation, a royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation, and a peculiar people to show forth the praises of
God, who has called them out of darkness into his mavelous light, Heb.
12.23, 24. 1 Pet. 2.5, 9. Can there be a better state and condition? in a word,
its the same condition that the person is in, that keeps to God, and never
departs from him; a state of Sonship to God, of being ever with God, and
having interest in, and benefit by all that is his: for as Blessed is the man
that is undefiled in the way, and walks in the Law of the Lord: so also,
Blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered,
Psalm. 119.1. and 32.1, 2. Blessed is he to whom the Lord will not impute sin,
etc. Both of them are in a blessed state; and what can be better then blessed?
wherein is a removing of all evil, and an estating in all that is good, either
as to the way to it, or end attained. Such is this condition. Good in it self,
and then its

2. Its good to others also: as

1. To God, in such a sense as any thing besides himself can be good to him,
not as if it added to him, who is infinitely perfect in himself, and not to be
added to by any thing, but good to him as its pleasing to him, as a
satisfaction to his love, an attainment of his desired end in all his goodness
expressed and testified toward the sinner, at least so far as he has
attained. He would have all men saved, he has no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but rather that he turn and live. He has pleasure then that a wicked
man turn and live, Ezekiel 33.11: 1 Timothy 2.4. That Is good then to God that is
pleasing, or a pleasure and delight to him. That that he is glorified in and
by, even his mercy and truth in Christ are herein glorified, Psalm. 1 ^5. 1.
Such a person will praise him. The living, the living, they shall celebrate or
show forth thy praises, Psalm. 115.17, 18. Isa. 38.19. Yea, and others will
glorify God in and for such a person as they did in Saint Paul, Gal. 2.23. and
his house and kingdom is hereby increased, and the Kings honor is in the
multitude of his Subjects, Prove. 14.28.

2. To Christ also upon all the same accounts. Its matter of joy to him when
what he labors for, and in, succeeds. That his Plantation thrives, and that
any tree of his setting revives, and prospers, John 15.12.

3. To the Holy Spirit; for as God is love, and Christ the Son of the Father in
love and truth: so the Spirit is the Spirit of Love, and its a rejoicing to
love, when it has what it may love, and when what it loves succeeds, and is
well: as he is grieved and vexed in his peoples ill-doing and rebelling: so he
is delighted in their well-doing and repenting, Isa. 63.10, 11. Ephesians. 4.30.

4. To the holy Angels, who loving men and their good, desire it, and in such
persons have their desire answered, and the number of their blessed company in
a sort increased, Luke 15.10. Heb. 12.23.

5. To their Brerhren, whose number is added to, or preserved from being in
such diminished, and whose spiritual desires, breathings, prayers, and
endeavors are herein answered; and they may have benefit by them in mutual
fellowship with them if here surviving: or if not yet edification however in
the beholding or here-say of the Virtues of Christ, and his Sacrifice, and the
power of the Grace of God appearing in them in their dying.

6. Yea, to all other men its good, either as making them fit to pity, pray
for, and seek the good of them, and be useful to them, or as, affording
inducement to them, to repent also and seek God, and hope in him; and it cannot
but be

7. Good to a man's self such, and so happy a condition as in which is the
confluence of all good to a man.

Now that that is good, and so good, surely it is meet that all that are good,
and love what is good, or may have good by it should rejoice, and be glad for
it. And so God makes this mirth here, and a feast hereat for all that can and
will be glad of it; and we should make merry by exhorting and exciting all to
gladness by all means we can upon such occasions.

2. It is meet we should make merry and be glad on such an occasion, because of
the relation the sinner stood and stands in to us, to God and his people
especially. This thy Brother, and ver. 24. This my Son. Love will lead us to be
glad for strangers or enemies if they come to good, to what is truly good, to
what is spiritually and eternally good: but how much more for a man's own near
relation. The Lord rejoices in his works, the works of his hands, as being all,
as his works good, and holy, and just; but how much more in man his choice
work, for whose sake he made, and to whose good he ordered all the rest! made
in his own likeness and image, and so his Son: but yet how much more for and in
those that were and are again Sons in his Son, in his only begotten and beloved
Son^: Those whom he begot with such desire and love as through the gift of his
Son, and his Son bare and brought forth with the travail of his soul poured out
to Death, and brought to be his Sons by the Word thereof, and by his Spirit
breathing therein; and whom he nourisht up with the flesh and blood of his Son,
and virtues thereof? Should not the Father rejoice and make merry to see his
Son, and so dear a Son in a good condition? And should not Brethren make merry
and be glad at the preferment, good, or recovery of their Brethren! Would it
not be unnatural for Brethren, not to rejoice in love for one another when they
do well, very well, and one as well as another, and all well! Shall the Angels,
not so related to us Men, be glad of our good; and shall not we Men for one
another, and especially for such as have been our whole Brethren, and so are!
Yea, and should not all the Servants be glad of the happiness of their Masters
Sons, with whom they enjoy their happiness and livelihood and about whom, and
whose good, the Master appoints them their choice employment! It was meet we
should make merry and be glad, for it is my Son and thy Brother; what though he
has been a bad husband? he is not so now: What though a spend thrift, an evil
liver? then indeed we had cause of sadness; but now he that was so is
reclaimed, and he is still my Son, thy Brother: That a Second.

3. It is meet, etc. Because of the sad estate he has been in, and from which
he is raised again, and brought to this condition. He was a Son, a Brother of
whom there was great fears, and for whom we had great grief and exercise; he
has been long away and far from us, there was little hope that we should ever
see him again; he has been in great poverty, necessity, and straits; he has
been pinched with hunger, dried up with thirst, naked and destitute of clothing
and harbor, ready to famish and perish with want; and this in a strange
Country, where all were set to ruin him, none to help him: Its a thousand to
one but he had perished and been lost for ever, and yet from this strange and
sad case he is at length returned safe again, and should we not make merry for
the good of such a relation, that has been in such perils of death and
drowning, or of perishing by the most cruel and lingering death, that of Famine.
It Is true, he is not come into a better condition in it self than those that
abide and walk with God, but he is come to it out of a worse than ever they
were in; and therefore has reason hereafter to be more wary to keep home, and
may walk more thankfully and dutifully, because under the sense and mindfulness
of the greater mercy to him. And as we had more abundant cause of grief and
fear for him, so we have now answerably more abundant cause to make merry, and
be glad for him, as we are most glad of the safety of ours, after the greatest
danger of utter loosing them: That Is a Third.

4. It was meet that we should make merry, etc. If we consider whence this has
happened to him that he is come safe home again. It Is the Lords own work, and a
work of more abundant grace, mavelous and miraculous power and mercy to
convert a sinner, after he has been with God and departs from him again. And
as God rejoices in his works generally, Psalm. 104.31. so especially in those
that are works of his mercy, because mercy pleases and delights him, Mich.
7.18. and yet more in those in which his mercy is most glorified by him. And
surely, as all the works of God are wonderful and glorious, and its meet we
should have pleasure in them, so especially those in which he is most brightly
discovered, and his glory (that is all matter of gladness) is most of all
displayed. And such is his mercy in converting and calling back from death, and
giving pardon and life to a rebellious offender; and therefore it is meet, that
all flesh should bless his holy name in this and such works as these
especially, and that all his people who have thereby more abundant occasion of
beholding and cause of admiring his goodness, and whose hearts may thence
receive most encouragement to obey and serve him, have cause to rejoice in him,
and in his doings herein. It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad.

5. It was meet in respect of its tendency and fruit, which is the glorifying
of God, and drawing in other sinners to repentance, that they also may be
saved; the most acceptable thing to God, 1 Timothy 2.3. David being pardoned for
and healed of his great sins of Adultery and Murder, delivered from
blood-guiltiness, Would teach trangressors the way, so as sinners should be
converted to him, his tongue should sing aloud of (and greatly commend) Gods
righteousness, though he could thenceforth less speak of his own: His lips
being again opened should show forth Gods praises, Psalm. 51.13, 14, 15. As the
turning away of good men from God by sin does mightily dishonor God, and
stumble and hurt others; so the returning of backsliders to God, tends much to
the glorifying him, and doing good to others, by their examples before them,
and confessions, and praises of God to them; strengthening those that are in
God's way, and recalling others that stray from it, yea, and encouraging them
to Repentance: That Is a fifth Reason.

Use.

And this consideration also in its several Branches may be of diverse
usefulness to us: as,

1. It magnifies and tends to provoke us to magnify the greatness of the grace
and mercy of God to Mankind, that has prepared, and made a way in, and by his
Son Jesus Christ* that rebellious sinners and back-sliders from him, might be
brought back again to him, and be received of him. There is with the Lord
plenteousness of redemption; so as he can, and will redeem Israel from all his
iniquities. He can forgive and revive such as none else can, or will. Such as
being put away for Whoredom, have joined themselves to others that might not
be received again by the Law, yet he can receive and forgive such; and declares
himself ready to it also, through Jesus Christ, Jer. 3.1, 2.8.12, 13. All
things that could not be atoned, or from which men might not be justified by
the Law of Moses, all that believe in Jesus Christ are justified from by him,
Act. 13.38, 39. And he can call, and revive, and quicken the most dead souls
through* the seven Spirits of God that are in him, Revel. 3.1. And so it leads
us,

2. To magnify, and commend the exceeding preciousness of the blood of Christ,
and the fountain opened therein, For the house of David, and inhabitants of
Jerusalem, to wash in, for sin, and for uncleanness, Zech. 13.1. The house of
David we know was guilty of blood, and the City Jerusalem a bloody, idolatrous
City, compared to a woman to be judged for breaking Wedlock, and for shedding
Innocent Blood, Adultery, and Murder, Ezekiel. 16.38. and yet this fountain in
Christ's most precious blood will extend to, and is virtuous for the washing
them. God hates the bloody and deceitful man. David was guilty of both, and yet
in the multitude of God's mercies he durst go into God's house, and appear
before him, Psalm. 5.6, 7. And praying to God to wash him from those sins,
says, That if he would purge him with Isop, and wash him, he should be whiter
than the snow, Psalm. 51.7, 8. And the like is promised upon their repentance to
the Princes and People of Jerusalem and Judah, though compared to the Princes
of Sodom and people of Gomorrah for badness, Isa. 1.10, 16, 17. Such is the
virtue of the blood of Christ, that in coming to it, and bathing in it, in
turning to God, and believing in his Son, it can make a City that is an harlot,
and full of murders white as wool or snow, ver. 21. He can wash away the filth
of the daughters of Sion, and purge the blood of Jerusalem in the midst
thereof, by the spirit of judgment, and the spirit of burning, Isa. 4.4.
judging them and helping them to judge themselves, and burning up what is
reproved by him. Oh! how precious is Christ then, and how much to be prized by
us? who when the richest man in the world, though the greatest King or
Potentate, cannot give a price to God sufficient for one man's soul to ransom
it, though guilty of the least sins, yet he was judged of God (whose judgment
is according to truth) a sufficient ransom for all men, 1 Timothy 2.6. And there
is virtue enough in his blood to obtain sparing for the greatest sinners, and
mercy to be extended to convert, and grace to pardon them being converted to
him. Being made a Prince and a Savior to give repentance to Israel, (a people
guilty of greatest sins against the greatest mercies) and forgiveness of sins,
Act. 5.3^: Oh! let us magnify and run into this fountain, to which also God in
his mercy by Christ calls the greatest sinners.

3. It leads to hope in God for backsliding and sinful brethren (and much more
for them that never so tasted God's goodness, and sinned against such tastes)
and in that hope to seek and endeavor their conversion; and upon repentance to
receive them as God for the sake of Christ received and receives us, Romans
15.6, 7. not to cast off the care of them, and say with Cain, Am I my Brother's
keeper, or up-seeker? But rather as the Apostle says, With meekness to instruct
those that oppose themselves, if peradventure God may give them repentance to
the acknowledgment of the truth. And that they may recover themselves out of
the snares of the Devil, who are taken captives by him at his will, 2 Timothy
2.25, 26. Yet herein praying for and asking discretion; some rebuking sharply,
and wi^h some dealing gently, as Jude says ver 22, 23. Of some have compassion
making a difference, and others saving with fear (or terror) pulling them out
of the fire, hating even the garment spotted by the flesh. As some the Apostles
gave up to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved
in the day of the Lord Jesus.

4. It may provoke such as have sinned, and done shamefully, and wickedly, even
after grace received, as Peter and David did; not to despare, but to look back
back again to God, and hope in his mercy, and wait for it in his ways through
Jesus Christ. Confessing and forsaking their sins that they may find mercy,
Prove. 28.13. For God has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather
that he turn and live. And therefore let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and turn to the Lord for he is gracious, and to
our God for he will abundantly pardon, Ezekiel. 33.11. Isa. 55.7. However, much or
great evil, or sin men have done, its not the way to be helped to despair of
help, or to seek for it elsewhere, then in turning to God. by Jesus Christ; for
whithersoever else a man turn, he goes after vain things, and things that
cannot profit, but in God and Christ as is said, there is mercy and help. Let
Israel therefore (though great sinners against greatest mercies) hope in the
Lord, for with him there is mercy, and with him is plenteousness of redemption,
Psalm. 1^0.6, 7. 1 Samuel 12, 19, 20. but delay not to turn to him, least he cut
us off in his wrath. To day if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts,
least ye be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Delays in this case are
dangerous, for what is our life! and in whose hands, but his that is offended by
us?

5. Yet let none presume upon this therefore, To sin that grace may abound; for
though grace is more abundantly declared in saving and pardoning great sinners;
yet they that therefore do evil that good may come thereof, if God leave them
to sink and perish in their sinful presumption, their damnation is just, Romans
3.8. because there is forgiveness with God, so as in his hands to dispense or
withhold it, therefore he is to be feared and not presumptiously sinned
against, Psalm. 130.4. In this respect of calling back and showing mercy to such
offenders: He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens. The Surgeons greatest skill is showed, in healing the most
shattered bones or most desperate wounds. Yet, who but a madman would
therefore to prove his skill go break his bones in pieces, or run upon sword
points on purpose, when as if he be healed he will be but in the same sound
state happily as before, and might have been without these pains and smarts
they will put him to. Yea, and he runs a desperate hazard of being never
healed, it depending merely upon the Chirurgeon's good pleasure.

6. If it be meet for us to rejoice and make merry for the restoring of
sinners, and God also call upon us thereto: then also,

1. It faults those that neither endeavor it when they be fallen, nor are glad
for it when restored, but rather murmur at it, and are offended like the
Pharasees here in this Chapter, were either for seeking such that they might be
restored, or receiving them when restored, so far are they from rejoicing at
it. If thou thy self that do so have an interest in Christ, why should
thou be offended at thy brothers restoration and reception, and not rather
desire it, yea, endeavor and rejoice in it; there is never the less room for
thee in God's house, nor never the less cheer for thee for the multitude of
them that dwell and feed therein. Here the more the merrier, and never a whit
the lesser cheer: for as we have showed the bread of Christ's giving is living,
growing, and enduring bread; that is no more consumed by being eaten and fed on
and digested, then the Sun is (perhaps far less) by being daily looked upon, or
the light of it walked in: And if God please to show mercy to any great
sinners, why should thou snuff at it, and envy it; Is thine eye evil,
because Gods is good? Ought thou not rather to rejoice to see a soul saved
from destruction, and that God is so gracious to us, who are all of us sinful
enough to deserve a thousand destructions at his hands, than to be offended at
it? Is it a light matter for a soul to go to hell? what pleasure is that for
thee, or what profit in it? surely they are more cruel than Tigers and the most
savage beasts, that would wish their worst enemies, or the worst of sinners
such a mischief, and not rather desire and endeavor to prevent it, and rejoice
to see any good ground to think that God has prevented it upon any; and yet
how often is it found, that not only profane and wicked men take delight in
making others sin, and then make a sport and jest of it, being savage Heathens
under the denomination of Christians: But even believers in Christ, and seekers
of him, are too careless of their brethrens souls, while they matter not if for
their meat, or drink, or some foolish custom, or will, or pleasure their
brother, for whom Christ dyed do perish, 1 Cor. 8.11. Romans 14.25. How far is
any unlike therein to Christ! who thought it not too much to lay down his
precious life to save us, and we will scarce lay down a toy or trifle, our will
or pleasure, a fashion or fancy to save our brethren, and bring them from
misery to endless happiness? but it is meet when God reclaims by any means, or
shows mercy to any sinners, especially to Prodigals and notorious offenders;
yea, though he give them some more signal testimony of his favor to them upon
their returning, then he has perhaps to our selves at any time (which was the
thing stomacked in the Parable) to make merry and be glad for it; and if so,
then

2. Let us be exhorted to such a demeanor and carriage in such cases. God is
sometimes affording such instances of his great mercy and goodness, that we
might take notice of him, and give him the glory of it, and set forth his
praises. He sometimes suffers such as profess his truth, and have some right
understanding also of it, and affection to it to fall into temptations, and
thereby into great sins and sufferings, and yet shows his mercy on them to
their salvation, by bringing them into sufferings for their sins he sometimes
awakens them (as the Prodigal here) so effectually to repentance, that they
remember, and turn to him, and find mercy with him; though indeed there be too
few such penitents to be found, more there are that imitate this Prodigal in
wandering from God, and spending his gifts, and their receipts in riotous courses
and sinful conversations, then imitate him in converting and returning unto God
again; which is a matter worthy lamentation, and surely the severity of God may
be seen in part therein that he gives up so many that wander from him to their
hardness, and impenitency so as to persist to Death and perish therein. Though
God also has a good and gracious end therein to others, for therein he is
admonishing us to beware of presumption and presumptuous sinning; that seeing
he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, in giving them repentance in
such cases, and whom he will he hardens for their presumptions, we may stand in
awe, and take heed of abusing his goodness to any in such a way, as to say, Let
us do evil that good may come thereof, sin that grace may more abound. God has
given repentance to some that have fallen fowly, and showed them mercy in
receiving them again, therefore I will be hold also to give way to my
corruptions, and take the pleasures of sin for a while, I hope God will be
merciful also to me and recover, and receive me again, and I shall not perish
therein. Surely the seeing many so turn away, as not to return, but back slide
by a perpetual backsliding, holding fast deceit and refusing to return, as Jer.
8.45. might keep us from adventuring on so desperate a resolution. Thus the
Apostle teaches us to improve a like consideration in Romans 11.22, 23. Be not
high minded, but fear, for if God spared not the natural Branches, (that were
hardened, blinded, and broken off for their unbelief, ve. 7.20.) take heed least
he also spare not thee. Behold then the goodness and the severity of God on
them that fell severity, but on thee goodness, if thou continue in his
goodness; otherwise thou also shall be broken off. See the like use also made
of the like severity toward the Fathers that finned in the wilderness, and
perished there through God's displeasure, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2.10.11. they were our
admonitions to provoke such as think they stand to take heed least they fall;
not presuming that, though they throw themselves voluntarily into sin, yet they
shall rise, or be raised up again, because they are God's people, and he has
loved, and loves them, and being once loved they must needs be always loved (as
some misread and abuse that saying in Joh. 13.1. contrary to Isa. 63, 9, 10,
11. Hos. 9.15.) and so that however they fin they cannot perish. A perilous
temptation, that has caused many to stumble^^ and fall to their destruction.
Surely our Lord Jesus, who was the Son of God in the most proper sense, and the
most sure of his love and favor, even in the manhood; yet would not listen to
such a voice of the Tempter, to cast himself from the pinnacle of the Temple,
presuming it was impossible for him to be hurt, because the promises belonged
to him, of which this was one, that God would give his Angels charge over him
to bear him up in their hands, that he should not at any time dash his foot
against a stone. But knowing that God's promises are annexed to his ways, and
that his keeping them was it that should be attended with his being kept in
them, he repelled the temptation with having diligent respect to God's
Commandment bidding man, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, Mat. 6 6, 7.
in which he has set us a good example that we might follow his steps, and sure
he is a presumptuous fool that durst venture to go where his Leader, being
wiser, and stronger than he would not venture before him.

But yet when the goodness of God is so exercised and put forth in his mercy to
any as to give repentance, and restore them again from their falls and bruises
(as God is able to graffe in again what is broken off, and raise up what is
fallen, even of those that are distinguished from, and opposed to the Election
that has obtained, Romans 11.7, 14, 23.) let us be glad and rejoice therein,
both for their good in charity to them, and that God is affording such a motive
and encouragement to others that have sinned and are bruised thereby, and lie
pining away in their sins to rise again in repenting. In such cases its meet
that we should make merry, and be glad as is here said, and not with the
Pharasees or Pharasaical Saints, murmur at God's mercy and goodness toward
them; whither it be that he give them repentance, and restore them to us here
to ^ive with us, and testify their repentance by a better and more heavenly
conversation afterward, as David, Peter, Manasses, Mary Magdalene, and others
did: or that he awaken them to repentance by bringing upon them some signal
shame and punishment to death, as befell the Malefactor upon the Cross
crucified with Christ: And as God is sometime pleased to show his goodness to
others brought to like shame and death, for the like, or as bad, or worse
offenses.

I know some foolish or Pharasaical ones are apt to strange at God's dealings
sometimes in such cases; as if God could not be so gracious to such offenders,
as if it stood not with his holiness, and especially if they be soon comforted,
and pretend to great peace and joy in their death having done and committed
some heinous offenses; as Adultery, Murder, Felony, etc. They are apt to
suspect they are but deluded persons, and Satan that enticed and deceived them
to commit such sins, has again deceived them to make them think God is
merciful to them, and forgives and accepts them. To whom I would say, It Is
possible for Satan to delude souls after that manner, as to make them presume
of mercy without serious and hearty repentance of their sins, as Agag, who
said, Surely the bitterness of Death was past with him, when he was g^^ing to
his execution, 1 Samuel 15.32. and I wish many do not so delude themselves: I am
afraid it is so. But yet it is not good to either abridge the mercies of God
toward, nor the merits of Christ for the souls of greatest sinners, so as to
despair that such may be converted heartily, and received again certainly, and
sometimes suddenly, or to judge their repentance and consolations when there
is no manifest appearing ground for so doing; much less when there are
appearing evidences of the contrary.

That God may both convert and forgive upon conversion greatest offenders many
things may evince, as the Parable also implies: as,

1. It is but suitable to God's oath, who has sworn that he has no pleasure
in the death of the wicked, but rather that he turn and live, Ezekiel. 33 11. as
we noted before, and to his calling the worst of sinners, the simple scorners
and fools that hate knowledge, Prove. 1.22, 23. And those that are compared to
the Princes of Sodom and the people of Gomorrha, Isa. 1.10, 15, 16. etc.
promsing forgiveness to such upon their repentance; yea, and back sliders that
have come toward him, and gone back again, promising to heal their back
slidings, Jer. 3.12, 14, 22. Hos. 14.4.

2. It is suitable to the end of Christ's coming, who came into the world to
save sinners, even chief of sinners, even such as are Murderers of Fathers,
Murderers of Mothers, Menkillers, Whoremongers, Defilers of themselves with
Mankind, Man stealers, Liars, Perjured persons; yea, and those that by the
Apostle are counted nothing inferior to, but rather greater than these, zealous
Pharasees, that set up their own righteousness against God's in Christ, and out
of false zeal persecute Christ in his truth and members, for upon that account
he afterward, after mention of such notorious offenders, styles himself the
chief of sinners, though a Pharasee and one of the strictest sect for Religion
among the Jews, and far from those gross fleshly abominations, 1 Timothy 1.9, 10,
13, 14 15, 16. indeed nothing but the blood of Christ, and the grace of God in
him will make such sinners or any sinners else to be Saints, or cleanse them
from their fins, that will as appears in 1 Cor. 6 9, 10, 11. where such horrid
offenders that had been such are said to be washed, to be justified, to be
sanctified (which what is it but to be made Saints) in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the spirit of God, no sorrows, tears, or humiliations of ours can
do it without purging with hysop (Psalm. 51.7.) that is, with the blood and by
the spirit of Christ, and that will.

3. Otherwise we must exclude from heaven those that the Scripture enrols among
the Saints, if we think God cannot convert and forgive great sinners, or never
does. What was David but a great sinner, being guilty of acting adultery and
murder, and yet I hope he was a Saint. Indeed he found many ready to say of
him, there was no help for him in God, when God began to call him to account
for his sin, as appears Psalm. 3.1, 2. the title whereof is a Psalm of David
when he fled from Absolon his Son, but yet he found it otherwise, so as to
rejoice and glory in God, verse. 3. Thou art my shield, my glory, and the lifter
up of my head. Though Absolon's rising up against him was a punishment for his
sin, and a remembrance of it, yet God was so therein with him having repented
(to show the reality of his repentance, and truth of God's acceptance of him)
that he was helped to carry that punishment of his sin with much magnanimity.
God lifted up his head when many thought (as some Pharasaical Saints are apt
yet to think of great sinners, especially if brought to shameful sufferings for
their sins, as he then was) surely he must be lamentably distressed and
dejected in his spirit, and hang down his head. He lay him down and slept in
the midst of his troubles, for God sustained him; and he would not be afraid of
ten thousand of people that had set themselves against him round about, ver.
5.6. See what a saintlike spirit (yea, even under their sufferings for their
sins) God sometimes endues great sinners with upon their repentance, and surely
we may not say they were deluded, and therefore neither may we conclude that
others are so, if having been great and notorious offenders they upon turning
to God find him comforting them, yea, and filling them with expressions of
confidence of his favor toward them, and of their salvation. For indeed,

4. Christ therefore suffered like a sinner and malefactor, that sinners (yea
such sinners as deserve and have shame and punishment here, even the Cross or
Gallows for their just reward) might through him be called and brought to
repentance, and dye like Saints, and be Saints in their dying, that is, have
hope and joy in him, and in his salvation; and this was evidenced in the
Cross, and at the death of Christ. For Christ himself, though the Son of God,
and the most just person that ever was in the world, yet he dyed like a Sinner,
Malefactor, Thief, or Murderer, not only in that he suffered such a death as
such offenders used to be put to by men (the death of the Cross) but also in
his dying, as to the manner of it, in respect of grief, sorrow, agonies, that
did accompany it (yet not without evidences of his righteousness and hope in
God his Father.) For did not he sweat through the violence of his agonies, as
it were great drops of blood trickling down to the ground? And did he not cry
out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me! As bearing upon himself the
punishment of such capital offenses, though upon our account, not his own; that
such as are guilty of such offenses, and deserve such sorrows, agonies, and
rejections of God, might through him have hope and comfort in God in their
dyings, though of violent deaths by legal punishments, as was seen in the
Malefactor that suffering with him dyed like a Saint. We find no such matter
testified of him, no agonies nor exclamations as his sins deserved; but on the
contrary, rebuking his fellow sufferer for his reproaching Christ,
acknowledging the justness of their sufferings, and our Saviors innocence; and
praying Christ to remember him when he came into his kingdom, he heard this
comfortable word (which doubtless strengthened his confidence, and gave him
full assurance of his salvation.) Verily I say unto thee, this day shall thou
be with me in Paradise. Surely this was written for an encouragement, even for
such offenders also to hope in God by Jesus Christ, and betake themselves to
him for mercy, in an humble acknowledgement of their offenses, and of his power
to forgive and help them; which that they also may obtain of him, (even to the
giving them large confidence in him, and full assurance of their salvation.)
Christ's graciousness to him doubtless does testify, that none may say, what
should such heinous sinners dye like Saints? though yet in one sense such dye
not as Saints; while they glory not in, nor justify the cause of their death;
(as those that dye for Christ and righteousness sake may and often do) but in
that regard take shame to themselves, and acknowledge the righteousness of the
shame and punishment ordered to them, as deserved by them, and submit
themselves thereto. And surely it would be too great an injury to the grace of
God, and to his love to mankind, and to their welfare: and too great a
derogation to the virtues of the precious blood and sacrifice of the Lord
Jesus, to imagine that such mercy may not be showed to them, that are so great
sinners, both as to make them, in their receipt of it, hearty in their
repentance, and cheerful in their spirits under their sufferings, in the hope
of God's salvation.

Object. Ah! but the suddenness of the conversion, and speediness of the
consolations, and the coming so easily by them, without more drooping and
humiliation makes some question. They expect such great sinners should long lie
under dejection and sadness, before they get a good word from God; and if not
so, they are apt to conclude them under a delusion, or but hypocrites in their
profession of joy and consolation.

Answ. Truly, I would not be misunderstood to speak in behalf of any that are
not truly penitent and turned in to Christ, or that are daubed with untempered
mortar, and slightly healed. Yet this is evident, that sometimes the grace of
God makes quicker work in men's conversion, and he more speedily comforts them
thereupon, than the wisdom of the flesh or of man judges fitting, as by this
Parable appears, as also by the carriage of the Pharasees toward Christ, often
censuring him for his receiving sinners while it appears they were not
satisfied of their conversion. I conceive, had they been first made Pharasees,
they would not then have been offended and judged them sinners still. The woman
that at Simon's house stood behind Christ, and washed his feet with her tears,
etc. had not satisfied the Pharasee that she was a convert, for then would he
not have had indignation thereat, nor said in his heart, If this man were a
Prophet, he would have known who and what manner of woman this is that touches
him, for she is a sinner, Luc. 7.39. Surely Christ knew her better then he did,
and knew her to be a real convert, though it seems she had not so publicly
bewailed her self, and bewailed her sin, as to satisfy the Pharasee that she
had left it. And what appears to have been the sorrow and humiliation of the
Malectour? we find nothing said thereof, and yet evident tokens appear of his
real conversion, and he had speedy absolution: For,

1. He rebuked his fellow for his carriage toward Christ, as if he had been
turned a sudden Preacher of repentance to him, Fear thou not God seeing we
are in the same condemnation.

2. He confessed his sins, and justified the righteousness of his death,
submitting himself upon that account to bear it patiently. And we indeed
justly, for we receive the due reward of our deeds.

3. He confessed Christ, and justified him in his sufferings, and that when the
whole multitude, the Princes, Priests, and zealous Pharasees, and learned
Rabbis, the chief builders did most of all reject him, despise, and deride
him. And when he was in his deepest sufferings. But this man has done nothing
amiss.

4. He in this lowest case of Christ, when his own Disciples durst not own him,
owns and professes his faith in him, that he was Lord and King; and that he
should have the kingdom, and so that God would glorify him through and after
those his sufferings, saying, Lord remember me when thou come into thy
kingdom. And

5. In that faith he calls upon him as upon the Savior of the world, or of
sinners, saying, Lord remember me, etc. as intimately professing his faith,
that he could forgive, and save, and bless him.

We find no great lamentation for his sin, nor dejection under the sense of
it, but yet a better confession of faith we scarce find from any of the
Apostles, who were now shrunk from him. Yea, Peter that thought to have stood
it out, denied him. See here how suddenly and silently the grace of God may
work a notable alteration as to conversion, and then see the speediness of
Christ in forgiving and comforting. He lets him not hang long drooping to his
death upon the Cross, but presently tells him, This day shall thou be with me
in Paradise. And was it not so with David, he said he would confess his sin,
and God forgave the punishment of it. He said but, I have sinned, and Nathan
replies, the Lord also has taken away thy sin, thou shall not dye, Psalm. 32.5.
2 Samuel 12.13. So Peter had but begun to speak to the Gentiles, and presently
the Holy Ghost fell on them, and they spoke with tongues, without any long
humbling them first for the sins of their Gentilism, or bringing them into the
profession of Judaism by circumcision, as it seems the Disciples of the Jews
had some thought he should have done, by their quarrelling with Peter for his
eating with and receiving them, Acts 11. Yea, and Peter himself says, what was
I that I could withstand God! as if there might be some such leaven in him also
as to have kept them longer out from comfort, and made them more humbled first
before he would have received them had they been at his disposing. Truly, I
suspect its our hypocrisies, or want of thoroughness in coming off from our
idols, our sticking long in the place of the breaking forth of children, that
increases and lengthens our throws and sorrows. Hos. 13.13. As while David kept
close his sin his bones waxed old, and he roared out with daily disquiets,
Psalm. 32.1, 2. the heart that comes off soon and roundly from its sin is sooner
comforted. So the compassionte Father here, so soon as he sees his Sons
resolution, and finds him upon his way to him; yea, While he was yet a great
way off presently runs to meet him, and falls upon his neck and kisses him. Oh
hasty Father, and too passionately fond, thinks his Pharasaical Son to show so
much love before no more humbling. He was not yet fallen on his knees scarce,
and behold his Father falls upon his neck. He had not yet confessed his sins,
only says he would, and the Father prevents him with his compassion, and before
he could utter all he had to say, calls for the fatted calf, and the best robe
to feed and cloth him, and therefore he hears of it afterward, As soon as this
thy Son was come, that has devoured all thy substance with harlots, thou have
killed for him the fatted calf. And so how apt are we to say, Oh! they must be
soundly humbled before we may show them any hopes of mercy toward them; and
yet indeed its hope of mercy here that humbled him, yea, the best and sweetest
humbling is after the receipt of mercy. Then Mary loved much, and wept much when
much was forgiven, Luc. 7.47. and so in Ezeck. 16.60, 61, 62, 63. when God
remembers his Covenant with adulterous and idolatrous Jerusalem, and makes an
everlasting Covenant with them, then she shall remember her ways and be
ashamed, etc. yet if God speedily comfort men we are ready to say, it was some
delusion, they were not humbled enough.

But what is that that men call humbled enough? I fear as some are not humbled
and ashamed for their sins, so some may mistake and idolize it. If by being
humbled enough they mean, so as to give satisfaction for their sins, or make an
amends for them, that is an enough that none can attain to, and therefore Christ
humbled himself to death, the death of the Cross for us, Philip. 2.7. and was
not he humbled enough for us think we? it is upon the account of his
humiliation, and not of ours, that God receives satisfaction, and forgives us,
None can be sufficiently humbled for the least abuse of any mercy to deserve
the forgiveness of it thereupon, but in Christ: God is the best estimator of
our being humbled, so as to be fitted to receive what Christ's humiliation and
sufferings for us have purchased; and he seems to men sometimes to accept of a
small measure or time of humbling, as the instances before recited make
manifest. And if God speak peace to any upon short and slight humbling to
appearance (yea, or when he sees us go on frowardly, turning aside in the way
of our (...), if he see our way and heal us, and create the fruits of his lips
peace to us, as Isa. 57.17, 18, 19. seems to import) who or what are we, that
we should limit or fault the Holy One! When God comforts any, how can they be
dejected! would we have them play the hypocrites to humor us, counterfeit
terror and dejection when God speaks peace to them? surely no.

Again, we vain creatures are apt to judge of men's being humbled by the
outside, the sad countenance, plenty of tears, sorrowful tones, wringing of
hands etc. but God sees the heart. And God that knows the heart bare them
witness (says Peter) speaking of the Gentiles, so suddenly in their
uncircumcision received in by him. And indeed we may find the Scriptures
mention persons as well humbled, and so as God counts them meet to be
comforted: When,

1. They having sinned do (or are willing to) ingenuously confess, and not
hide, cloak, extenuate, or plead for their sin and filthiness, and turn from
them. So in Prove. 28.13. He that bideth his sins shall not prosper, but he that
confesses and forsakes them finds mercy. And in 1 John 1.9 If we confess our
sins God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness Though this confession, as to particulars, is not needful
to be made public to all men, but to God. I said I would confess my sins to
the Lord, and thou forgavest me, Psalm. 32.5. and in some cases to some faithful
men, Jam. 5.16. that are concerned, and the heart made free to.

2. When they see themselves so vile, and their sins so heinous, that they
cannot take comfort in any of their confessions, weepings, humiliations,
fastings, but go out of all to the grace of our Lord Jesus, and his precious
blood, Psalm. 51.1, 2.7.16, 17. And indeed they are proud persons that have
their hope in other things, as their weepings, humiliations, etc. for they
think so well of themselves as to conceive some excellency in such their acts,
that they may do something in their worthiness with God, to procure his
acceptance of them, It Is a greater act of humility or humiliation, to see such
emptiness or nothingness in them all, as to disown any resting in them, or
comfort from them, but only to hope in the mercy of God, and the precious blood
of the Lord Jesus Christ: And,

3. In case God lead them out to sorrows and griefs, bring shame and sufferings
upon them, to be willing to yield our selves to God. To be afflicted and mourn
and weep, Jam. 4.9. Accept the punishment of ones iniquity, and bear the
indignation of the Lord till his wrath be past, as having sinned against him,
Mic. 7.8, 9. This God himself makes the character of an humble heart in his
sight, when in the view of him the uncircumcised heart is humbled, and they
accept of the punishment of their iniquity, confessing that they have walked
contrary to God, and he has walked contrary to them, Lev. 26.40, 41, 42. and
that was the great act of Christ's humbling himself for us, that he accepted
the punishment of our iniquity, and yielded up himself to bear it quietly, not
repining or grudging thereat. And here also in this Parable the Prodigals
humiliation appears in this chiefly; that rising and coming to his Father he
confesses his sin, submits himself to bear the shame of having his Father or
Servants see his poor estate, and to be in any place how mean soever that his
Father would put him in, though of an hired servant, so he might but be
received. And surely, when we find any that have been great sinners turned in
from their evil ways, confessing their sin and vileness, and submitting to the
grace of Christ to seek their absolution, rest and righteousness there,
submitting themselves to walk in his ways, and bear his chastisements; and if
in so doing (yea though there be some imperfections in their so doings) they
meet with refreshings and rejoycings in God and Christ, and in the riches of
his grace, we may rejoice in their behalf, as here the family are called upon
by the Father, Let us make merry and be glad. Though others that are profane
scoffers may take occasion from such falls and miscarriages of professors of
the truth to jear and blaspheme, (for which and for whom we have cause in such
cases to be sad and grieved) and others take occasion thereby to abuse God's
goodness and mercy to such to harden themselves in sin: (for whom we may be
sorry also, warning all to take heed of so doing) yet in regard of God's
goodness in general to repentant sinners, and in particular to this or that to
whom he gives repentance, and restores and comforts; we may make merry and be
glad. Especially seeing our heavenly and gracious God and Father calls upon us
so to do, joining in himself with us, saying, Let us eat and be merry: We may
by good authority do so; yea, it is unmannerlinesse, and peevish frowardness,
like this elder Brothers in this Parable, to be fullen and sad, when God says,
Let us eat and be merry, and its meet we should make merry and be glad. Shall
not the Children and Servants be merry and cheerful to see their Father merry
and cheerful, and in such a rejoicing temper? Surely its meet then we should
make merry and be glad. Again,

CHAP. XII. The third state, and the Text further improved in some further
usefulness.
3. IT may teach us, that God is a good God, not a Spirit of sadness, or that
delights in our melancholy dumpish tempers; but is a cheerful, though a most
holy Spirit. One of the fruits of the Spirit is joy, but sadness is not
reckoned amongst them. Not but that the Spirit of God leads men to be sad
sometimes, or rather through sadness to gladness, as of old his people
through a wilderness to the land of promise, and in most cases sorrow is better
than laughter, than a vain foolish worldly frothy laughter, or affliction than
prosperity for us, because by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made
better. Yet sadness and sorrow are occasioned by and spring from another cause,
viz. sin, and its fruits: were it not for them in our selves or others, the
Spirit of God would scarce ever lead us to be sad. His ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all his paths are peace, Prove. 3.17. He is a cheerful
spirit, and leads to cheerfulness, and loves not sullen sour frames and
dispositions. Yet we poor foolish creatures (as I prove sometimes my self) are
apt to be either carnally, lightly, wantonly and vainly merry, or else on the
other extreme, to espouse to our selves a sad, glumpish spirit, a melancholy,
rugged, harsh disposition, or Pharasaical face. For they put on sour sad
countenances, as too many yet do as a piece of religion, Mat. 6.16. as if God
delighted in such Cynick or Stoic frames, formal bodily humilities, a whining
voice, a head hanging down like a bul-rush, and such like self-tormenting
carriages. No, no, God is a cheerful Spirit, as having infinite joy and delight
in himself, and in his Son, and in his works and doings, and He and his Spirit
call for, and lead to cheerfulness in his service. Whence he says, Make a
joyful (not a doleful, sad, lamentable) noise to the Lord all ye lands, serve
the Lord with gladness (he says not with sadness) and come before his presence
with a song. Not with a complaint, as thinking hardly of him, or being afraid
of his harshnesse and aptness to be displeased with us, Psalm. 100.1.2. He
loves not to have his Altar covered with tears, he accepts not such offerings
at our hands, except in case of sorrowing after God, and for our sins, Mal.
2.13. He loves a cheerful server of him, as well as a cheerful giver, 2 Cor
9.7. In his presence is fullness of joy and pleasures at his right hand for
evermore. And they are to reward his followers and worshippers, Psalm. 16.11.
Thence those many exhortations to the righteous his worshippers to rejoice.
Finally, my Brethren, rejoice in the Lord, Philip. 3.1. and rejoice in the Lord
evermore, and again, I say, rejoice, Phil. 4 4. and in 1 These. 5.16. Rejoice
evermore. See also Psalm. 32.11. and 33.1. as checking that aptness to be sad
that is in his worshippers, and signifying that it displeases him; and well it
may, for its dishonorable to him, occasioning people to be offended at his
service and ways, as affording nothing but sadness and melancholy to them
that walk therein. And as signifying the great goodness of God, and the good
and abundant cause that God's people have of rejoicing in him. For as he is the
only good God, and infinitely better than any other god, or object of trust and
worship; so there is infinitely more cause of gladness in and from him, than
any where else. Nor have any people such cause of rejoicing, and confidence,
and boldness, as those that are God's, and belong to him; considering what
they have in and with him, and what a portion and happiness he is to them. All
other things are muddy cisterns, in point of causing or affording joy and
cheerfulness. He is the free, and full, and perpetually running fountain of
joy, delight, and consolation. He gives everlasting consolation, and good hope
through grace, 2 These. 2.16. We have not found God then, so as to know him
indeed, till we meet with and have in him, yea, under and notwithstanding all
occasions of heaviness that befall us, joy unspeakable and full of glorying, 1
Pet 1.6, 7, 8. None may rejoice so as the righteous, they that are in Christ
Jesus, and walk with him, such may boldly say, The Lord is our helper. Come
what will come, We will not fear what can man do unto us? Oh! seek we him, and
the knowledge of him, till we find it so as to have rejoicing evermore in him.
Though we may have manifold occasions of sadness both from within us and from
without us, yet we have cause, being in him and walking with him, of a
perpetual and evermore rejoicing. Away, away then with all hypocritical
Pharasaical thoughts, to please God in our demure looks, and sour
countenances, as if therein stood our being humble before him, and let us take
the advice and counsel of our Lord and Father, and accept his exhortation. Let
us eat and be merry. Make merry, and be glad.

Quest. But what must we do to make merry and be glad?

Answ. Alas! what can we do to make merry and be glad? it must all come from
God as the ground and Author of it. He must go before, and its our parts to
comply with him and follow after him. If he frown upon us we have no cause to
make merry, but to mourn before him till he call us to mirth, and further then
he calls us to mirth and to make merry, we shall do well to be sober and attend
to him. But when he calls us to joy and gladness, as here, and to make merry,
we may in the supplies of his grace do something; as to say, we may, and let us,

1. Hearken to the voice of God and his servants calling us thereto, and
opening the cause thereof, and the grounds for it to us. Such as be his mercy
toward sinners, and to us and our Brethren in what he has done for, and to
both us and them. As the Servants say here to the elder Son, inquiring the
cause of their mirth. Thy Brother is come, and thy Father has killed the
fatted Calfe. And the Father here: It was meet we should make merry and be
glad, for this thy Brother was dead, and is alive again; was lost, and is
found. And indeed upon these two grounds especially is the cause of mirth and
joy; Gods goodness, and our Brethrens welfare and happiness, as also our own
through the same goodness. His goodness is declared in the feast made for us,
and in our own and others liberty to it, or enjoyments of it. And indeed the
ground and cause of mirth, as that which is the spring of our happiness and
our Bretherns too, is the feast that is made for us by him, and his love to us
therein: A feast is made for ^laughter, and wine makes merry, Eccles. 10.19.
That we may laugh and be merry then in the Lord, let us I say, first hear him
calling us to it, and expounding it to us, and presenting occasions of mirth to
our view. So the Samaritans hearing and closing with the Gospel had great joy
in their city, Act. 8.8.

2. At our Fathers call go into the house to him, and be there with him, and
with our Brethren. Let us not here be Schismatics, and make rents from our
Brethren that believe in, confess, and rejoice in God's love and grace to us
in Christ, and walk therein. Take heed of what may separate and divide us from
them. For Schism is a work of the flesh, and leads to destruction, Gal. 5.20.
There is a feast made for all, and all are called to come in and eat of it; The
simple also, and they that have no understanding, Prove. 9.1, 2, 3, 4.5. Yea,
the poor, maimed, halt, lame, and blind, Luc. 14.13, 21. The Publicans and
Sinners are received here in their coming to Christ the house wherein it is,
and to his people with whom he is one, and who are his holy house also: As it
is said, Whose house we are if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing
of the hope firm unto the end, Heb. 3.6. with Luc. 15.1, 2. Pray, let us not be
so busy as those in that Parable Mat. 22.5. about our farms, merchandises, or
pleasures, much less be so wicked and rude, as they that took the servants
that called them in, and despitefully entreated, and slew them for their labor
therein. Nor so taken up as in the Parable, Luc. 14.18. about our Oxen, Farms,
and Wives, as to think thereby to excuse our selves from coming in to this
feast. No, nor so superciliously proud with this Pharasaical elder Brother in
his froward distemper, to think the grace of God is too free, and too freely
exposed and proposed to sinners, and they too easily admitted into Christ's and
his peoples fellowship, and so into God's house, and to feast therein. As if it
were only fit for us, and such holy creatures as we conceit our selves to be,
that are so regulated, and have lived so obediently: as if we feared the
lamenesse, blindness, maimednesse, that is, the imperfections, ignorances, and
defects of the other guests and in-goers would infect us; or their looser
demeanours formerly, their riotous livings and being publicans and sinners,
would too much disgrace us if we should go and fit in God's house with them
such vise wretches. This was the fault of this elder Son here; he was a
Schismatic as he was in this temper, he would rent from his Fathers house.
Why, I pray you? oh my Brother (nay, I will not own him for a Brother) that
spend-thrift, that has devoured his living with harlots is entertained there,
and he is too bad for me to join with. Thrust him out, and I will come in
galdly. Let me, and such as I am have the calf to our selves, and we shall need
but little entreating. He is offended at his Brothers badnesse, though not at
present continued in. He has repented it and has left it. Indeed it is
employed that there is no ground of joying in or for sinners else, nor are any
faulty for refusing to join with them, if they have not testified repentance.
But the Servants have testified of him. Thy Father has received him safe and
sound. Now yet to hang back is too incredulously done. Yea, though the Father
himself also entreat him to come in, he still objects his badnesse, till he
hear it from his Father himself. He was dead, but is alive again; he was lost,
but is found, that is, he is a real convert. This is too much unbelief, not to
believe the Servants, testimony, unless we have assurance from God of our
Brethrens conversion. This, stand by thy self, come not near me, for I am
holier than thou, is it that oftentimes makes men Schismatics from God's
house, Saints and Servants, but these are so far from pleasing God better than
others, that he says of them, These are a smoke in my nostrils, a fire that
consumes all the day long, Isa. 65.5. Away then with these hangings back, and
refusals of Christ, and the feast in him, or taking offense at the freeness of
God's grace to sinners, or at our Brethren, for being or having been worse than
our selves, as we proudly think. If we will indeed make merry and be glad,
better go in and fit down, though there should be one unworthy one there, that
has not on the Wedding Garment. He only, not we, for that shall be rejected,
Mat. 22.12.

3. Going into the house of God (that is, joining up our selves to Christ and
his people, that is, all them that call upon him in sincerity, however they may
have in some things done worsethan we, or differ from us) sitdown to meat there
and eat, and drink at this feast. But here we must take heed that we take on
with us the Wedding Garment (for this is a Wedding feast too) which is prepared
also by the feast-maker for us as well as the feast, that is, that in our
coming into the Church of Christ to join with Christ, and his people or
worshippers, we put the Lord Jesus Christ, so as to come only upon the account
of him, and the grace of God in him* not presuming upon our own worthiness to
approach his table, or lay claim to his provision, though also putting on his
virtues in our believing in and on him. Putting off the deeds of darkness, put
on the armor of light, not walking in surfettings and drunkenness,
chamberings and wantonness, strife and envyings; but put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, making no provision for the flesh to fulfill it in the lusts thereof,
Romans 13.12, 13, 14. that is, put on as the Elect of God in receiving the grace
of God, as those that are holy and beloved the virtues of Christ, Bowels of
mercy, meekness, kindness, humbleness of mind, etc. Coll. 3.13. Otherwise if
we take up only the form of godliness, and deny the power; the profession, and
deny subjection to Christ and his Spirit, we shall be cast out again into outer
darkness, Mat. 22.13, but so coming and being entered, Let us eat and be merry.
Unless we eat our meat, and drink our drink, that our heavenly Father has
provided for us, we shall never be merry. Fasting and mirth are not meet
concomitants, but feasting and mirth. Our Father has killed for us the fatted
calf; indeed he bid his Servants do it, and so they do in a sort, in their
ministerial holding forth Christ crucified for us. Yea, all are his servants,
they that crucified Christ did but therein what his hand and counsel had
determined to be done, Act. 4.28. But the Son puts it upon the Father, Thou
have killed for him the fatted calf. God has prepared him for us, delivered
him up for our sins, and raised him again for our justification. Sets him forth
in the Gospel as a sacrifice offered up for our sins, and gives him to us as
the bread of life to eye and believe in, exercise faith in, and so feed upon
him. We are not put upon it, or called upon in this feast to bring any dish
with us, but only to eat what he has prepared and made ready for us. It will
make our Father's heart glad to see us accept his love, and eat heartily of his
meat, and eat together like brethren lovingly. He will not think his fatted
calf ill bestowed on us, if we will but eat heartily on it. Yea, therein he
has delighted, its meat and drink to him his Sons obedience and
righteousness, and in and through him, its as meat and drink to him to see us
eat heartily on him too. Do not look upon our meat only (though its good to
look on it too; for its so lovely, and altogether pleasing to an enlightened
eye, that it will allure us to eat) but also eat of it, feed on it, put it in
our mouths, let it go down into our bellies or hearts. Cause our bellies to
eat, and fill our bowels with it, Ezekiel. 3.3. If thou confess with thy mouth
Jesus the Lord, and in thine heart believe that God has raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved. Romans 10.10. But what have we no drink to our meat?
yes, yes, I warrant you, our Father keeps a good bountiful house, he has a cup
of good wine for us, spiced wine, the most choice wine, the blood of the grape,
and yet its but the fatted calf still; For his flesh is meat indeed, his being
incarnate and made flesh for us, his being delivered up to death for our
ransom and redemption. He, as therein the way for us to God, the mediator of
God and us, the receptacle for us and convayer of the grace and blessing of God
to us: This is our meat, and its meat indeed. And his blood is drink indeed,
his abasement and sufferings as obtaining for us and confirming to us the New
Testament, and its precious promises which are all in him (by virtue of this
his most precious blood obtaining for us the continual pardon of our sins) yea,
and Amen. Affirmed and confirmed, or ratified for and to us. This, this, and
the love herein testified is drink indeed, Joh. 6.55. His love is better than
wine, will cause the lips of those that are asleep to speak, Cant. 2.2. and
7.9. come then, let us eat together of this meat, this is better than to feed
on the flesh of our own arms, Isa. 9.20. That Is pitiful stuff; that is, what
we can do and gather up to and for our selves by our own strength, our
fastings, prayers, whinings, pinings, works of righteousness of our own
doings, our humblings and self abasements, as reflected on by us. The flesh and
blood of this fatted calf is ten thousand times better; it will make us strong
to labor and work what is good, and make us thankful to him that gives it to
us, and to acknowledge our selves infinitely unworthy such a dish to have been
prepared for us; but these things are the fruits and effects of it fed on, not
the meat we are to eat, much less what is but the issue of our own power and
strength. Come then Brethren, let us sit at it here, and eat and drink heartily
if we will be merry and glad, and make our Father merry and glad, and our
Brethren merry and glad. Let Us eat, and drink, and be merry here. This will
never make us Epicures, nor drunkards, nor riotous eaters of flesh. Here is no
excess in this feast, eat and drink of it what we can. Eat we that that is
good, and let our souls delight themselves in fatness. Hereto we are invited
and called upon, Isa. 55.2, 3. And here call we upon one another too, as our
Lord does upon us all. Eat, oh friends, yea, drink, yea drink abundantly of my
love (as some translate that) Cant. 5.1. Our Father will never chide us or tax
us for it, as gluttonous eaters of flesh or drunkards. I say, for eating our
fills here, nor shall we need to spare this fatted calf is a living dish, that
will grow upon us in the eating it; the more we eat the more we may eat, and
the more we eat of it the more welcome. And the wine here will do like the oil
in the miracle, increase as we empty it, or drink of it. Here Is a Princely
feast, no law to limit us how much to eat or drink. Oh! that all the Epicures,
drunkards and gluttons in the world would lay aside their epicurism, in which
they spend and wast God's creatures, and break his laws, and bring upon
themselves misery and destruction, and turn gluttons and drunkards here if they
can. Yea, here its lawful and a privilege to be drunken, for so some read that
in Cant. 5.1. Drink, and be ye drunken, oh! my beloved, or with my love. And to
be sure if Christ make men drunk, he will never fault them for it; if men drink
here till they loose their own understanding, reason, senses, it will never
harm them; for they loose them not for the worse, as in bodily and sinful
drunkenness, to be made like beasts; but for the better, to be made like
Angels, or conformable to Christ. To be drunk into his Spirit, his will, mind,
judgment, and to be carried above not beneath our selves. Here we may call for
cups and flagons too, Stay me with flagons, Cant. 2.5. be not drunk with wine
then, wherein is excess, but be filled with the spirit of love, and of Christ,
there is no excess in that, Ephesians. 5.18, 19. This wine will exhilarate or cheer
us, while it assures us of God's love in Christ, and ascertains us of the
enjoyment of his promises, yea, and convays them to us. This wine will indeed
make glad our hearts. Let Us eat, drink and be merry then here (not for tomorrow
we shall dye, but) and we shall never dye. We shall never drink our selves dead
here, as the drunkards of this world do, but we shall drink our selves alive,
we shall drink death away, and drink our selves into eternal life. For whosoever
eats my flesh, says our Lord, and drinks my blood has eternal life, Joh,
6.56. And this will beget mirth, and as it begets mirth, let us make it or be
given up to it: For it makes us

4. Sing. Let us sing the songs of Sion, not of fools, that know not of this
feast: but of those that are instructed into Christ by his Spirit, a new song
even praises to the Lord, Psalm. 40.2, 3. Lauding, and magnifying, and blessing
the Lord; yea, and blessing, and commending the Lamb we eat of, or this fatted
calf, and the cup we drink, for its a cup of blessing, such as it both yields
blessing to us, and is to be blessed and magnified by us, 1 Cor. 10.16. Take a
Psalm then, Psalm. 81.2. But how shall we come by it? why, drink but off our
cups of the wine forementioned, and we shall have Psalms spring up in us, as
the spirit thereof also has composed some by his servants the Prophets for us,
and take we of them. Be we filled with the Spirit (in eating this meat and
drinking, this drink forespoke of the love of God in Christ) speaking to our
selves (as implying that then we shall speak, for it will make the lips of them
that are asleep to speak, as was noted before in Cant. 7.9. but not as
drunkards often do in a sinful way, but) Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs, singing and making melody in our hearts to the Lord, that is, to the
praising, commending, and glorifying him, Ephesians, 5.18.19. Col. 3.16. Yea, and
to help that

5. Bring hither the Timbrel, and the pleasant Harp, and the Psaltery, Psalm.
81.2. We have music at this feast too to help our mirth, so we read ver. 25.
When the elder Son came out of the field, and drew nigh to the house, he heard
music. Here was music it seems then, God allows his children music to their
meat. So in Rev. 14.2. I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps,
and they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and all meat, and songs,
and music of our Fathers providing. He gives us songs in the night too, Job
36.10. and he gives gifts to men, the instruments of music; we are bid only to
bring them hither, bring them all to provoke this spiritual joy and mirth to be
expressed at this feast; use all our gifts to further God's praise, and the joy
of one another in the Lord. Music was used to stir them up, and help them in
their songs, to sing the more tunably and merrily, as there were in the
sanctuary, The singers going before, and the players on instruments following
after, in the midst the Virgins or Damsels playing on Timbrels, Psalm. 68.26,
Such a one was the Prophet Ezekiel, As one that could play well upon an
instrument, and had a pleasant voice, Ezekiel. 33.32. or rather like the lovely
song of such a one, of the good musician Christ himself, the Master of the
music; he that excels in skill, and tunes all the instruments and plays upon
them with his hand, or breaths in them; whose ears and hearts being bored are
made as wind instruments to receive his divine breath and inspirations; and to
whom (namely Christ) all the Psalms and Songs of Sion are dedicated. Such
musicians and instruments of music also subordinately too are Gospel-Preachers
skillful in the praises of the Lord, and to direct others in their
acknowledgments and confessions of him, Blowing up the Trumpets, as in the new
Moon, and playing upon the Tabret, the merry harp, and Lute. To whose music
diligently attending, our hearts will be composed for the accesses and
impressions of the holy Spirit upon us (as the Prophet Elishas in 2 King.
3.15.) and we shall be framed both to sing, and as pleasant instruments to make
melody to the Lord. Primely the Prophets and Apostles, and those that are
endewed with, and exercise their heavenly and spiritual gifts, as helpers of
our joy, 2 Cor. 1.24. To their found, to their joyful found attending: Sing we
merrily to God our strength, and make a cheerful noise to the God of Jacob, as
the Vulgar reads it, Psalm. 81.1, 2. with 89.15. And to make our mirth complete.

6. Dance. That was here too, ver. 25. Music and dancing. A regular motion of
the body is dancing (but here of the heart, as in Psalm. 28.7. The Lord is my
strength, and my shield, my heart has trusted in him, and I was helped,
therefore my heart danceth, (...)(so some render the Hebrew) and with my song
will I praise him) according to the modulations of the music (the heavenly
music made by the musician, and musicians and in struments before mentioned to
the glory of God) not such as tends to beget unclean lusts, as in bodily
dancing of men and women promiscuously together is often found, but to the
provoking to heavenly, divine, and spiritual love to Christ, and of one
another, and of Christ again to them all, in which if they be moved to a
spiritual conjunction in the bed of divine love, as a chaste Virgin all of them
to Christ; yea, and if also they give and receive the immortal seed of the Word
of God betwixt themselves promiscuously either men with men, or any man with
any women or men (though indeed there are neither male nor female in Christ
Jesus, but all are one) there is herein no turpitude or uncleanness, nor will
Christ ever reckon them therefore Adulterers or Harlots, but his chaste Spouse
all of them; and own all the spiritual fruit or children so begot and born as
his and holy to him, nor shall they ever be endited by him, or by any law of
his, or agreeing with his, or be brought to suffer death for it upon the
gallows; as for bodily and fleshly uncleanness they justly may. But Enjoying
love in this Bridegrooms arms,
They shall be above all the fleshes charms.


And all this mirth and spiritual jollity, singing, dancing, proceeds from the
spirit of this heavenly meat they feed on; about which therefore they may play,
and sing, and dance. For though it was idolatry, and heavily punished of God,
when Israel made a Golden Calf and danced about it; and so it is yet to make a
calf of men's own earrings, jewels, or any gifts, parts, or works of
righteousness, and sacrifice to, and worship it: Eating and drinking, and
rising up to play. Yet it is no idolatry or sin at all to worship this fatted
calf, (so understood and interpreted for Christ) sacrificing sacrifices and
songs of praise to it, eating and drinking of it, and rising up to play, and
dance about it, for this is none of our making. This is God's image in which he
will be worshipped of us, and which he will allow us to worship, sing to, and
rejoice in, as one with himself. And indeed the God that gives us this mirth,
and makes us able to play, and sing, and dance: For its he that confirms and
strengthens our feeble knees, that were ready to knock together, and puts
strength into our ancle bones by his Name, as he did to the lame man's, that lay
at the Beautiful Gate of the Temple, Act. 3.7, 8, making him to leap up, and
stand, and walk; and to enter the Temple leaping, and walking, and praising
God. So does his heavenly Name, in which is this spiritual food, this flesh and
wine proposed, strengthen us to dance. Leaping over the Mountains,
Skipping over the Hills;
Capring to those Fountains,
Whence this liquor Drills.
Mounting up to Heaven,
And to Earth descending;
To show unto Men
Where it is safe depending.


For this cheer lifts up the heart above all fears, droopings, and
discouragements, and above all towering objects of enticing vanities and
allurements, to take a view and converse with heaven; and then lets down again
to men to show forth the virtues and praises of Lord to them; and guides in all
to regular and heavenly ordered motions, according to the instructions of the
grace and operations of the Spirit of God and Christ. No such dancing, no such
mirth as this, which God allows his children, in which they may spend their
days, and in a moment go up to heaven; contrary to that of the wicked and their
children, Job. 21.11, 12, 13. With this were the Epicures and Pleasure-mongers
of this world acquainted, they would leave their drinking and drabbing their
dandling and dancing to come to this feast; and would they come indeed hither,
this loving Lord, and glorious feast-maker would intertain them as he did this
Prodigal. Yea, and persuades the Pharasaical to agree with them therein,
letting go their own righteousness (which is spiritual whoredom to adore,
however much they make of it, and in the view of it look a squint at publicans
and harlots received in) while they stumble at the grace of God to sinners, and
keep out from this fatted calf, they do but make golden calves of their own to
delight in, worship, and dance about, and commit adultery, spiritual adultery
(as bad in the sight of God as bodily adultery) with. Though they think it
their righteousness, its but stolen waters, bread eaten in secret, because
they think the table of the Lord contemptible, and his meat polluted by being
exposed to, and partook of by such unholy ones in their apprehension. But, I
say, God would persuade them relinquishing those their stolen waters, and
secret breads, to come and join with their penitent Prodigal Brethren in this
feast of love, where they might eat, and drink, and sing, and play, and dance,
till they take a frisk at God's calling them out of the flesh into the heavens,
where they might everlastingly live and love in the bosom of their Father, and
embraces of the Lamb and sing Hallelujahs for ever and ever. It is meet that we
(thus) make merry, and be glad, for thy, thy Brother was dead, but is alive
again, was lost, but is found,

Blessed be God.
CHAP. XIII. The Conclusion in some Poems.
Psalm. 23.
THe Lord's my Shephead, I shall not want
In pastures green he feeds me.
And there to lie down does me grant,
And by still waters leads me.
My fainting Soul he does restore,
And guides me in right ways
For his own names sake. I therefore
To him sing laud and praise.
And though with death, and grim despair
I grapple I Will not care:
For thou art with me, thy Scepter
And staff my comforts are.
Thou do support me by thy power,
Thy strength is all my stay;
And by the same what would devour
Thou drivest far away.
In midst of my disdainful foes
My table thou do spread
My cup of comfort overflows
Thy balm anoints my head.
Thy mercy and goodness always
Shall compass me about,
And in thine house I Will ever stay,
And never more go out.
Amen.
Finis.
1. Spring up, O well, to it we will sing
The praises of the Lord.
Let each musician strike his string,
And all herein accord.
2. Oh Lord how wondrous is thy love!
What one is like to thee.
It does exceed, and goes above
All things that we can see.
3. The heaven above, the earth beneath,
And all that is therein
Do show it: yea, it shines through death
And gloryeth over sin.
4 What is it thou have done or said
Ere since the world began.
Yea, or before the world was made,
Wherein thou eyd'st not man!
5. Did thou not all things for him make,
And all things to him give?
Thou shew'dst the course that he should take,
That he might ever live.
6. Nay when he heedless of the love
Against thee did rebel;
Thy only goodness did thee move,
To care he might do well.
7. When he forlorn, and all undone,
Helpless and hopeless was,
Thou then sent'st forth thine only Son,
Thy will to bring to pass.
8. Which was, this wretched Man to raise,
Through his own Death and Blood;
Unto a state more worthy praise,
Then that where first he stood.
9, Him thou declar'st, and to him call'st
Thy very enemies:
By him thou heal'st their wounds and falls,
And Fools thou make wise.
10. They that obeying to him come,
To them thou do impart
Thy self, and all things; so great room
Have they within thine heart.
11. They that refuse, or from him stray,
Thou do not presently
In wrath destroy, or cast away;
Being loath that they should die.
12. Thou usest means them to reclaim
By sweets, and sowers, as thou
Who all things know, do see their frame,
And what may make them bow.
13. When vilest Sinners worthiest
Of Wrath, to thee return;
Thou intertain'st them with the best;
Thou glad'st them when they mourn.
14. Thou such a Feast for such have made,
As shows thy love most dear
To Mankind: Oh it cannot be said
How virtuous is its cheer!
15. A fatted Calf thou have prepared,
More than the world to thee;
Which to Men worthless of regard,
Thou giv'st their Meat to be.
16. This fatted Calf help us to praise,
So long as we remain.
When we are down it does us raise,
And make us strong again.
17. His Flesh as meat the Soul does feed,
His Blood Man's Heart does cheer:
He Is such a Robe as Sinners need;
None like it can we wear.
18 With Songs and Music here our hearts
Rejoice may: and nothing
Of worth there is, but this imparts
Us unto bliss to bring.
19. Dear Lord, clear up our eyes that we
More clearly may discern.
The virtues in this Food that be,
And cause us them to learn.
20. Come all ye Sinners far and near,
Let go what does you kill;
Come hither. Taste this dainty cheer,
And eat thereof your fill.
21. Here you may eat, and drink, and sport,
And heavenly pleasures get;
Riches, and honors, and comforts,
Whereof none may you let.
22 Here Is that will satisfy your hearts,
When all things else prove vain:
Here Is that will cure your wounds and smarts
And make you whole again.
23. Come murmuring Momus too, whose eye
Does grudge to see our Cheer:
Let go, disdain, Pride and Envy;
Here Is room too for thee here.
24. Think not thy self too good for those
That intertain'd here be:
For that thy proud thought will thee loose,
If not let go by thee.
25. There Is no true goodness but what springs
From hence. What this does give
Is food and physic, this all brings,
That tends to make us live.
26. Yea, if from what in thee is wrought
By feeding on this meat
Thou feed'st on, sleighting this, to naught
Thoult come, and thy self cheat.
27. Who keep to this, by this are kept
To everlasting joy:
Who stray from this away are swept:
Evil will them destroy.
28. Here is the Spring whence all good flows,
Washing all ill away.
Here is the Light which all things shows,
And makes perpetual Day.
29. This House of Mirth where this feast is,
Is only that exceeds
The House of Mourning, for in this
There Is to supply all needs.
30. This is God's house. Let Us here abide,
Him hear, his Table taste:
His favor shall us safely hide,
While any heavens shall last.
Finis.
A spiritual Song.
1. WHo can sing the songs of Sion?
Who can dance the heavenly dance?
Who can Judah's valiant Lion
Worthily with songs advance?
2. They be happy souls indeed,
And may sing all cares away.
Their felicities exceed
All that we can think or say.
3. Come ye noble heaven-born spirits.
Joining hearts, and clasping arms.
Raised up in your Saviors merits
Above griefs and fears of harms;
4. Lift your feet from off the earth,
Not affecting things below:
View the place whence is your birth,
Let your lives your breedings show.
5. Take good heed to all your motions,
And let all your turnings be;
Such as with the heavenly notions
Of the joyful sound agree.
6. Toward Sion set your faces:
Jump not with the worldly wise,
With the Saints keep equal paces;
Nimbly'bove your droopings rise.
7. And to strengthen you the better
To perform the heavenly dance,
That you may break every fetter,
And your hearts to heaven advance.
8. Come and eat of the provision,
By our blessed Father made:
And therefrom by no misprision
Let your appetites be staid.
9. Come and eat the fatted Calf,
Taste and see how good the Lord is,
All the world the tenth of half
Its sweetness cannot afford us.
10. Then be gone thou fleshly pleasure,
And ye sensual delights:
Here Is the mirth exceeds all measure,
Where no after sorrow bites.
11. Eat and drink then and be merry,
Here be wholesome dainty dishes,
Better wine than Sack and Sherry,
And all the Wine-biber wishes.
12. Better cheer than Beaves and Muttons,
Partridge, Pheasant, Fallow Dear:
Come ye Drunkards, and ye Gluttons,
Eat, drink, and be merry here.
13. Yea, come Pleasure-mongers all,
Here be pleasures sweet and lasting:
To a feast I do you call,
Where be all things worth your tasting.
14. Where ye cannot be Epicures,
Though you feast it day and night:
Our Lawmakers us assures,
He will count it good and right.
15. Never such a feast as this,
Never such a merry meeting,
^re all People may have bliss,
Coming to it as is fitting.
16. Ye whom avarice makes vicious,
Here are riches worth your craying:
And ye proud men and ambitious
Buy these honors worth your having:
17. Ye who righteousness seek after,
And in works and frams would find it;
Here Is the feast prepared for laughter,
Isaac Sarah's Son; pray mind it.
18. Whom her Womb had not conceived
Till they eat the fat Calf stain.
Till the mystery be believed,
All your labor's, but in vain.
19. Come my Brethren let us be cheerful,
Though earth and hell, against us plot;
Feeding here we shall not be fearful.
They may kill yet harm us not.
20. The Virtues and Medicine
Which this fatted Calf does give;
Do afford such joys Divine,
As in Death will make us live.
21. Blessed be the God above,
Who his own Son has not spared.
Blessed that Lover, and that Love,
Which for us vile sinners cared.
22. And this food is worthy praises,
Honor, glory, thanks, and bliss,
Which from Death and hell up-raises
To such merriment as this.
FINIS.

