THE BRAZEN SERPENT: OR, GOD'S Grand Design. VIZ. CHRIST'S Exaltation for MAN'S
Salvation, in his believing on Him. OR, The Right Way to Regeneration, and
therethrough to the Heavenly and Eternal Kingdom, Discovered by the Lord Jesus
Christ Himself, for our sure Direction therein; Considered, Opened and Applied,
with a double Excursion, touching the Glory and Excellency, 1. Of the Gospel of
Christ. 2. Of Christ Himself.


By J. HORN, an Unworthy Servant of God, in the Gospel of his Son Jesus Christ,
and sometimes Minister of Lin Allhallows in Norfolk.

Isa. 52.13. Behold my Servant shall deal prudently, (or shall prosper) He
shall be exalted, extolled, and be very high. As many were astonished at thee
(his visage was so marred more than any Man, and his form more than the Sons of
Men) so shall He sprinkle many Nations; the Kings shall shut their mouths at
Him, etc.

Isa. 55.5. Nations that knew not thee shall run unto thee, because of the Lord
thy God, and for the holy one of Israel; for He has glorified thee.

Psalm. 99.10. Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his Footstool: for He is
holy.

Psalm. 21.13. Be thou exalted, O Lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing
and praise thy power.

Respiciamus and nos in faciem serpentis aenci, elevati Christi, si volumus a
pravorum Daemonum suggestionibus serpentinis liberari: respicere autem, est
fide in ipsum tendere.

Bern. de pass. Dominica. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Southwood, at the Star
near to Sergeants Inn in Chancery Lane, 1673.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Gentle Reader,
LO Here I present thee with what, as to the matter treated of, is a most
needful and excellent Subject; worthy thy most serious consideration, the Grand
Design of the God of Glory: the Devise that He in his Infinite wisdom and
goodness, devised for our recovery from sin and misery, and for reducing and
bringing us back to life and safety; the product and birth of his eternal
purposes, and most deep counsels, for our welfare and happiness. A Subject
never sufficiently looked upon, never thoroughly enough seen into, while we can
see but with mortal eyes, and imperfect understandings: the great Mystery of
Godliness. God manifested in the Flesh; justified in the Spirit; seen (yea,
very intensively pryed into, 1 Pet. 1.12) of Angels, preached to us Gentiles,
believed on in the World, received up into Glory, 1 Timothy 3.16. The great
Catholicon, the Sovereign and Universal Remedy for all our spiritual distempers
and diseases, the supply of all our wants, the support of us in all our
weaknesses, temptations, and troubles, the instructor and helper of us in, and
unto all our services, the stay of us in this life, in and under all its
various vicissitudes and changes, the joy and comfort of our hearts in Death,
the Raiser and Resurrection both of our Souls to lively hope, and comfort when
oppressed with griefs, and cast down with sadness; and also of our Bodies to
immortality and Eternal happiness, in a word the spring, original and fountain
of all our felicity, the great subject of the Doctrine, both of the holy
Prophets, and of the holy Apostles, the substance and body of all the types and
shadows in the Law of Moses; the accomplishment and fulfilling of Predictions
and Prophecies, and the ground and end of all our future hopes and
expectations. Such ( I say not is this Treatise but) the subject treated of,
and directed to herein; for, it is no other than Christ himself and Him
crucified, and through sufferings and death raised up again and glorified.
Glorified of God for thee in his own glorious actings, in and upon Him, and
glorified of God to thee by the spirit of God in his word and testimony:
glorified both ways to save and deliver thee from the stings of the old
Serpent, and to bring thee to glory. A Subject which who can sufficiently treat
of; for, who can show forth all his marvailous acts? who can set forth all his
praises? Psalm. 106.2. A Subject much too great for my imbecility and
stupidity, too deep, and high, and large, and long for my narrow head and heart
to reach its dimensions, so as to handle it, and set it forth worthily. A
Subject in my reception of it into, and conception of this Discourse about it
in my mind, and earnestness of my heart to draw it out, and incorporate it in
this body, and give it these lines and lineaments, so pleasing to me (or
perhaps rather my exercise therein) that it drew me on with so eager an
intention, and rapid a motion, as endangered my miscarrying of it, before its
perfection; for, I received in my self, in a manner, the sentence of Death
before I had finished it, till God renewing my strength beyond my expectation
and confidence, it attained to this Period. God therein both showing me my
weakness (and perhaps also chastening my unworthiness and unmeetness for such
an undertaking, and my darkning wisdom so much by words without knowledge, and
so slenderly and slovenly handling so excellent a subject, both therein, and
since in its sticking so long, and coming out at length with so many Errata's
in its impression) and yet also showing his great power and goodness in what I
received of him for my reviving. I confess I had some eye in it, upon a good
and gracious Woman, who had met with some exercise in the death of her only
Son, and intended she should have had one of the first rights of it, as for
comforting her also, I put in some expressions, respecting that her trial, in
some part of its application; but the Lord pleased to put an end to her days
also, before it could arrive at her, and be perused by her. He designing to
comfort and satisfy her spirit, I trust with another, and far perfecter sight
of the glory of this blessed Son of man, here treated of, then this so weak a
discourse could have given her of him. I trust its conception was not
altogether without the Holy Ghost, though as it was imbodyed in, and by me, I
cannot but see and acknowledge its too great likeness to me in imperfection. It
is a rule in Philosophy, that Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum
recipientis. Whatsoever is received of another, is received after the manner or
measure of the receiver. We cannot expect that a Bucket can contain the Ocean,
and the purest Wine received in a fusty Cask will somewhat taste of it. The
Eternal Word as conceived in the Virgins Womb, was made partaker of her Flesh,
and as therein brought forth by her, appeared a weak and little one; not
according to the Immensity and Infinity of the Word, but in such small and
finite dimensions, as agreed to the humane nature, and the narrowness of her
Womb, in which it was formed, and therefore He was capable of being wrapped in
swaddling cloths, and laid in a Manger, and afterward of being taken up in old
Simeon's arms, and of growing in stature, in wisdom, and in favor both with
God and man, Luc. 2.7, 28, 52. Yea, and though through the operation of the
Holy Ghost, He was conceived, and brought forth without any stain of sin in his
Flesh, yet He was born with a foreskin thereon, so as He was capable of
receiving Circumcision, as well in afterward, He passed through Baptism, and
that too, not only of Water, but also of fire or afflictions, in manifold
sorrows, sufferings, and Death, not otherwise agreeable to the Divine and
Almighty Word; which yet was so made and manifest in that Flesh, as to render
those sufferings, and that Death a full and all-sufficient Sacrifice, and
expiation for the sins of the World. Yea, that Heavenly Word, in and through
the Flesh, so spoke, and so wrought, as to procure, and to produce the good of
men; not only in the instructing and healing them, as there was need, and He
judged them meet or worthy thereof, and they worthily complied therewith: but
also so as to the Eternal salvation of all that duly entertained Him. And me
thinks there is a great analogy and resemblance between the conception and
incarnation of that blessed Word, and its manifestation in the Flesh; and the
Conception of Divine truth in the mind of man, and its manifestation in word or
writing, though there is and may be much disagreement also therein. Verily the
truth of God cannot be comprehended in its fullness, in and by the narrow,
finite mind of mortal man, (as well the truth of God, as the peace of God
doubtless passes all understanding) at least while mortal, and till (if that
may be) though a perfect union with it, it is advanced to its Divine and
Inconceiveable largeness, nor can what is there conceived, and thence emitted
or brought forth, but he bounded by the model of the mind that receives and
emits it, and partake in its expression of somewhat of its infirmities: Yea,
oft-times it receives some mixtures of Sinfulness, Ignorance and Mistakes, or
other Distempers from it, in its being conceived, worded or writ, at least such
coverings and superfluities, as render a Circumcision by the Spirit of
understanding, or an understanding Spirit; or a Baptism, or Cleansing from the
defilements mixed with it, and a Remission of the sinfulness therein at the
hands of God needful for it, in which it differs from the word Incarnate of the
Virgin; for from her he received nothing of sin, and therefore neither needed
Circumcision, nor Baptism for Remission of sins, to admit him into Covenant and
Acceptance with God: Though both Circumcision and Baptism he received, that he
might fulfill all Righteousness. But the Divine Testimony received into the
sanctified Minds, and expressed in the Preachings and Writings of the Holy Men
of God, the Apostles and Prophets bare, and bears a far fuller Analogy
thereto, then as in any other men; it contracted nothing of sinfulness or
uncleanness to it self as received and given forth by them, from their receipt
of it or giving it forth. And therefore in all the Prophecyings of other men,
though not to be despised, we are to try all things and hold fast that that is
good. To try them not by comparing them with, or bringing them to the Sayings,
Traditions, reputedly Orthodox Doctrines. Frames, Systimes, or Composure of
other men, of what ever party, no, though of the straitest Sect of Religion,
among a professed people of God; but even their Sayings, Traditions, Doctrines,
Frames, Systimes, or Composures, are all and every of them to be tried and
judged of by the words and sayings of the holy Apostles and Prophets; and
wherein soever any of theirs, or any man's Doctrine or Sayings disagree
therewith, they may, and ought to be rejected of us. But their Sayings are in
all things to be Reverenced and Received without doubt or suspicion, as the
Sayings of God (as indeed they are) though uttered and given forth by men. And
even as Christ though as Born of a Woman, and as to his Flesh partaking of man's
Infirmity, yet had in him for all that, even in that state, the Power and Force
of the Eternal Word, so as that to them that received him he give heavenly
Light, Life, Understanding, Strength and Freedom; yea, the Power and Privilege
to be the Sons of God, even to them who believed on his Name: And though his
Flesh and Body might suffer Pain, and be Abused, and Crucified, as indeed it
was: Yet his Deity, or the blessed Word was not thereby impaired, even so the
Truth of God received and conceived in a pure Mind and good Conscience (as in
the holy Apostles and Prophets, it most certainly and clearly was) and thence
brought forth to Light, by Word or Writing (with which it is Clothed, and as it
were Imbodied) though its form appearing according to the Model of the mind
that conceives it, and the Letter or Speech in which it is expressed, may seem
rude and plain (as the Apostle Paul's Speech was by some said to be contemptible
2 Cor. 10.10.) yea, and may be exposed to diverse injuries or abuses: Yet the
Divine and Heavenly truth (though in that Dress) retains its Divine Nature and
Worth. True it is that its force toward others, may by such Injuries be less
apparent, and they may therefore more slight and disregard it; as Christ also
by reason of his suffering Reproaches and Abuses, was more slighted by many:
But yet where indeed minded and Embraced, it produces singular and Divine
effects in their Hearts and Lives, by virtue of that Divine Nature and Spirit,
that is in and with it: So as to Inlighten, Instruct, Reprove, Convert,
Comfort, Cleanse, Sanctify and Save them; yea, make them the Sons of God, and
in some measure like to God, and in the end Blessed and Happy; as on the other
hand to those that Reject or Abuse it, it occasions the greater Judgment, and
heavier Condemnation; and so does Christ also to them that stumble at, and
reject Him and his Government. Wherefore the Heavenly Truth is not to be Judged
by, or Valued according to its outward Dress and Clothing, nor according to the
Man and his Meanness through whom it comes, and in and by whom it is as it were
Imbodied: But it is to be received according to its Divine Original, and to be
made much of according to its excellent Virtues and Effects; though no man's
Saying or Writing is further the Truth of God and Divine, then it is of God,
and is purely emitted from a pure Mind.

Thou must apply this Analogy fully and properly, as is said, to the Word and
Preaching of the holy Apostles and Prophets, and to other Men's, only so far as
one with and agreeable thereto; and so far thou may apply it to this
Discourse presented here to thee. Christ lifted up as the Brazen Serpent was by
Moses in the Wilderness, is of only and unspeakable Usefulness and Virtue, for
the saving the Souls of those that View and Believe on him from Sin and
Destruction: And for fitting them by Regeneration for, and Advancing them by
his Divine Power and Virtue, to life Everlasting in his heavenly Kingdom. But
this excellent matter (worthy to have been conceived in a more pure Womb or
Mind, and laid in a far better Dress then I have here wrapped it in) as conceived
and Discoursed of by me, partakes of, and evidences my great weakeness; and as
here Imprinted, the Printers and Stationers too great Carelessness or
Unfaithfulness (both which may gain it disrespect to many) and is as here
represented far short of that Excellency and Glory that Properly and Originally
is its own, and appertains to it; and may perhaps meet with course Respect,
Censurings and Sufferings, if it fall into some men's hands; especially from the
Scribes and Pharisees, men Learned and of great Zeal for Gods Ordinances and
Worship to appearance; but yet such as have their Faith and Fear toward God,
taught them by the Traditions and Traditional Glosses of some Elders of their
Party. According to which also they Teach it to others, and generally from
Proud and Malevolent persons. But yet if (the Superfluity and Fleshliness of
its Expressions in any thing, being cut off by the judicious Judgment, and
charitable candid Constructions of the understanding Reader, and it being
Animated by the holy Spirit, and his Presence and Blessing) it be duly
considered, listened to, and embraced, it will appear to have something in it
of Virtue and Divine force: So as that attending to the Truth and Spirit of it,
in singleness and simplicity of Heart, it may be useful for Instructing,
Helping and Healing thy Soul; but if Rejected or Abused, it will rise up
another day as a Witness and Judge against thee. Take heed therefore, good
Reader, to what thou Read, and take heed how thou Read, Hear and
Receivest it, not judging of its Truth and Goodness according to the weakness
in Phrase and Expression, or the too many Mis-spellings and Mis-pointings in
its Printing; but according to its agreement in Matter and Desi^u with the
Doctrine and Writings of the holy Apostles and Prophets: That so thou may not
fail of the Grace of God tendered in Christ to thee in and by it. Heartily
minding and obeying the Truth herein propounded, thou shall find (I hope)
here-with, and herethrough, Gods Blessing with thee and upon thee, praying for
which upon thee, and upon all that hear it, and to the same purpose committing
thee to God, with my self, and weak Labors and Endeavors, and desiring thy
Charitable and Candid construction and kind Acceptance thereof, and thy Prayers
for me for further Grace and Mercy, I leave thee and rest

Thy Well-wishing Friend and Servant, in and for Christ Jesus, J. Horn.
Lyn, Febr. 6. 1673.
REader, there is a Passage in page 36. wherein I say, the Apostles and
Evangelists never call Christ the Son of man, in their speaking of him, which I
should have restrained to the Writings of the Evangelists, or also to the
Epistles of the Apostles; otherwise I must desire a Grain of Allowance, because
St. Stephen (though indeed neither Evangelist nor Apostle, yet a Holy man, and
Inspired by the Holy Ghost) called him the Son of man, in Acts 7.56. when he
said, I see Heaven open, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God.
And the Apostle John imitating, or using the phrase of the Prophet Daniel,
says of him, I saw one like the Son of man, Rev. 1.13. with Dan. 7.13.

The BRAZEN SERPENT: Or, GOD'S Grand DESIGN. Which is, Christ's Exaltation for
Man's Salvation in believing on him.
John 3.14, 15. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must
the Son of Man be lifted up: that whosoever believes on him might not perish,
but have everlasting life.


CHAP. I.
Brief Observations upon Nicodemus and our Saviors Discourse with him.

OUr Lord Jesus at Jerusalem wrought many Miracles at the Feast of Passover, by
means whereof many believed on him; but he that knew what was in Man and needed
not that any should testify of Man, knowing all men, did not commit himself to
them, says the Evangelist. John 2.24, 25. But above all the rest (who are left
unnamed) the Evangelist gives us an account in this Chapter of one man, by
profession a Pharisee, the strictest sect of Religion among the Jews; by name
Nicodemus, and by place a Ruler of the Jews; and tells us what passed between
our Lord and him, as that he came to Jesus b^ night. He came to him, as b^ing
moved and drawn by the excellency of the Power of God that appeared in him, and
attested the truth and divinity of his Doctrine; and so much he also tells him
in his address to him making this Confession, Rabbi, or Master, We know that
thou art a Teacher come from God; for no man can do those Miracles which thou
do, except God be with him. And yet he came by Night; either being let by
his other business to come by Day: or rather as being not yet so strong in his
affection to him, as for his sake to be willing to undergo the reproaches and
rebukes that an open Daylight resort to him, and owning of him, might have
occasioned to him. He loved, yet it is likely to retain his honor with his
Brethren, and to avoid the speech of People about him, and yet so much he loved
him, as come to him he would, and acquaint himself with him, and therefore
chooses to come to him by Night rather then not to come at all. Nor does our
Savior upbraid him with his weakness, or brand him as guilty of Cowardliness
for so close and hidden an acknowledgment of him, but bears therewith, till
better knowledge of him, and more acquaintance with him might put more Courage
into him, as afterward we find it did; for he durst and did plead for him among
and against his Enemies. Ioh. 7.50, 51. Yea, and when he was in his lowest
abasement, Crucified, and put to death as a Malefactor, and was hanged upon the
Cross, or Tree, in a most shameful and reprochful manner, he durst and did own
him so far as to join with Joseph of Arimathea in bestowing an honorable
burying upon his then dead Body. Joh. 19.38, 39, 40. honoring him when dead,
whom all the Authority and chiefest of the Priests and Rulers had dishonourably
persecuted while alive; and ceased not until they had put him to Death: yea,
and then also reputed and blasphemously spoke off as a Deceiver; yea, he then
owned him when the rest of the Disciples, yea even the Apostles, had forsaken
and left him. Surely our Lord herein set us a good Example, verifying the
Prophecy that went before of him, viz. that he should not cry, nor lift up, nor
cause his voice to be heard in the Streets; that he should not break a bruised
Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, till he bring forth judgment into victory.
Isa. 42.2, 3. And also by showing himself meek and lowly in this case,
Condemned that Pride and rashness of Spirit, too ready to show it self in
others that are too apt to upbraid the weakness and timerousness of new
beginners. Let us learn to follow his good Example, and entertain any that come
to seek Christ with us, though they come trembling at the first, and show some
fearfulness to be known by others to do so well. Its an evidence of an hearty
love when men will venture after Christ notwithstanding they know they therein
go cross to the worlds opinion, and do that which they would turn upon them as
a reproach, though yet its a symptom of weakness to be afraid or ashamed it
should be taken notice of. Let us encourage what is good: and bear with, and
overlook the weakness cleaving to men therein; So did our Savior here, taking
occasion meekly to instruct Nicodemus into that which concerned both him and us
to know, viz. the necessity of Regeneration, without upbraiding his weakness in
the time of his coming; for Jesus answered, and said unto him, Verily, verily,
I say unto thee, Except a man be born again (or from above) he cannot see the
kingdom of God. There is an heavenly Kingdom, or Kingdom of Heaven or of God,
spoken of by the holy Prophets, chiefly by Daniel, which was believed and
looked for of the Jews, though they mistook many things about it, as to the
spiritualness of it, and the way to it. Nicodemus therefore makes no question
of that as to its being, for indeed, both the Baptist and our Savior had
preached its nighness, and thereupon exhorted the people to repentance. Mat.
3.2. and 4.17. yea, the Pharisees afterward inquired of him of the time of its
coming, as taking it for granted, that it would certainly come in its time.
Luke 17.20. And the people thought it should shortly be manifested. Luke 19.11.
And doubtless Nicodemus desired to see and enter it; and therefore our Savior
here instructed and informed him what is requisite and necessary thereto;
affirming his Doctrine with a double asseveration. Verily, verily, I say unto
thee, that except a man be born again ((...) or from above) he cannot see the
Kingdom of God. That happy state in which God more immediately ruling and
bearing sway, fills those that are subject and obedient to his Government with
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost here; and with Life and Glory
Everlasting in Soul and Body for ever hereafter is not to be seen, known, or
enjoyed, but by new Creatures; those that are born from above. This earthly and
carnal birth is so much defiled and ushers in such pollution of sin and
mortality because of sin, that we are not fit without another higher birth for
the privileges of Gods Kingdom, into which no unclean or unrighteous thing (as
we all are by nature) may find admission. In this natural birth we descend of
the first Adam as fallen from God, and begetting in his own sinful and mortal
likeness: but its necessary to our enjoyment of Gods Kingdom that we be born of
the second Adam, who begets Children in his image and likeness, holy and
heavenly ones. Birth of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, might suffice to give
admission into the outward form and court of the Church, and unto the Land of
Canaan: but to Heaven and the joys and glory thereof, nothing but a birth from
Heaven. Nicodemus stounding at this Doctrine and yet believing Christ to be a
Teacher come from God, does not reject it as false, but inquires further into
it of him who taught him it, and who he thought also was fittest to inform him
further about it; and therefore asked him, how it could be. How can a man be
born, says he, when he is old (as probably he himself was) can he enter into
his Mothers Womb the second time and be born? in which he shows the grosness of
his understanding, as not being yet acquainted with our Saviors manner of
teaching. He its likely-thought (and not amiss) that our Savior meant it of
some more unwonted thing then were the legal observations, or any thing they
could confer on men: and whether it might be some strange birth over again in
the Flesh, and perhaps in the Resurrection (according to some fancies of the
Platonists of all things after some long periods of time to be acted over again
as before) he might not know, nor could conceive how a man could be born again,
but by such a reduction to his first entrance into the world again. But its
better to show our grosness of understanding, and inquire into truths proposed
to us of those that teach us them though we speak like fools therein; then by
an over-bashfulness, or a desire to be thought wiser then we are, to conceal
our doubts; and to pretend, that we do apprehend what we are ignorant off; for
by so doing, we deprive our selves of the help and instruction, which by
propounding our doubts (however gross and ignorant our proposing of them may
make us appear) might be received; and sure, as the Apostle Thomas his
doubting, and expressing his hardness to believe occasioned a more full
demonstration of the reality and verity of Christ's Resurrection, to the great
benefit and advantage not only of himself, but also of the whole Church in the
present and following ages: So Nicodemus his proposing his doubt here, tho
therein showing the grosness of his understanding occasioned and received such
further instruction into the nature and necessity of Regeneration, as tended
not only to his, but also to our greater helpfulness and advantage. For in ver.
5.6. Jesus answered, verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of
Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. That which is
born of the Flesh is Flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. In
which our Savior shows, that his words are not to be grossly taken, as if he
spoke of a fleshly birth, from the Mothers Womb, but of a Spiritual and Divine
birth, the Principles whereof are Water and Spirit. By Water signifying, that
knowledge of God that is often in the Scriptures compared to Water. as Psalm.
1.2, 3. Ezekiel. 47.3, 4, 5, etc. Isa. 11.9. Hab. 2.14. Or the free grace and love
of God held forth, and declared in the said knowledge, word, or doctrine. The
Water in the Word (...). Ephesians. 5.26. Grace being powered into the lips of Christ.
Psalm. 45.2. Or else also, a submission to Christ in receiving him, and his
word, and ordinances, in being baptized into his name may also be implied; and
then the Spirit is that holy breath, inspiration, and working of the holy
Spirit of God, in and with the Doctrine of Christ, which is afforded in his
name; working effectually upon the heart, to the framing it unto the Faith, and
into the likeness of Christ, and so effecting therein a new man, a new mind,
judgment, heart, affection, confidence, and frame of Spirit; Created after God
in righteousness and holiness of truth (...). Could a man be born never so
often of the Flesh, he would be yet but Flesh; weak, sinful, and corrupt: and
that is indeed the reason, why its necessary that we be born again (or from
above) of Water, that may wash and cleanse away our filth; and of Spirit, that
may infuse a spiritual life, force, or power into us; namely, because, what is
born of the Flesh is Flesh: Whether we understand it of the first birth which
is of the Flesh: or of any change or alteration that we can work in and upon
our selves by any wisdom, will, or strength of the Flesh, in any observations
of outward Ordinances of the law, or much more in devised traditions, or
precepts of men; all that is so begotten and born is but Flesh; corrupt, weak,
and sinful. But, that which is born of the Spirit (the new man, the renewed
mind, judgment and heart) that is Spirit; that is clean, holy, lasting, etc.

Now, whereas Nicodemus marvailed at this, as being a Doctrine he had not been
before instructed into, our Lord therefore adds, Marvail not that I said unto
thee, ye must be born again, or from above. The wind blows where it lists
(or the Spirit breaths where he pleases) and thou hear the sound of it,
but thou know not whence it comes, nor whither it. So is every one that is
born of the Spirit. There are hidden and strange secrets in the works of God
that fall under our senses which pass our skill: how much more are there
wonderful things in the spiritual effects and products of the grace and spirit
of God, which the natural man cannot comprehend. As in Eccles. 11.5. As thou
know not the way of the Spirit, (or of the Wind) nor how the bones do grow
in the Womb of her that is with child: so thou know not the works of God who
is the maker of all things. But in this, every one that is begot, or born of
the Spirit and thereby is made spiritual, is like to the Wind; that the Natural
man may hear his speech, perceive a sound, find a force and power in his
confessing, and breathing forth the truth; but whence that virtue was received:
or whence he was born and brought to it, and whether he and it tends. What is
his Original and End, the natural man perceives not, as is said. 1 Cor. 2.14.
Nicodemus still being lost in his understanding and not able to conceive those
mysteries, marvailes at them, and replies How can these things be? or be done?
To whom our Savior answers by way of reproof to his dullness and ignorance. Art
thou a Master? (or a Teacher) of Israel and know not these things? as
signifying, that those that are teachers of others, and chiefly in, and of
Israel the Church of God, should be well taught and of good understanding in
the mysteries of God themselves, and especially, of those things that pertain
so to Gods Kingdom as to be necessary to their admission thereunto, and
enjoyment thereof, and that for such to be ignorant of and unacquainted with
such things is a matter of great shame and blame to them; and thence he takes
occasion to show the difference between such masters in Israel, and himself,
and his servants the Teachers sent of God. Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
what we know we speak, and testify what we have seen, and no man receives our
testimony. Wherein our Savior also further intimates and inculcates upon
Nicodemus the weightiness and certainty of the Doctrine he taught him about
this Regeneration, that he might not doubt of it; though generally over-looked,
and not received by men: men are apt to please themselves in other matters far
short of this, spending their time and strength in disputing, debating,
pressing and entertaining discourses about more light; and impertinent things
about the outside and form of Religion. The Tithing mint, cummin and annise;
neglecting the weighty things concerning Judgment, Faith, and the Love of God.
As our Savior elsewhere faults the Pharisees. Luke 11.42. Mat. 23.23. Busying
themselves in cutting and lopping off some superfluous branches of sin, while
they let the root, the heart-blindness, ignorance, and unbelief of God and his
Grace, and the rejections of that, alone: and so under pretenses, and forms of
religion and godliness, about which they wrangle, they let go, or deny the
Power, life, and heart of it. Paint and gild over rotten Posts, and Pictures,
and Images of Men destitute of the true Life, and Power of God in them. The
Pharisees could contest about Purifications, outward Washings, Sacrificings,
observations of Sabbaths, and other times and places of Worship, and such like
Ceremonies: and great zeal they had to bring men to be of their mind and way in
such things; pretending to, and persuading them that that way they should be
fit for Gods Kingdom. But our Savior who knew all things perfectly, is for the
bottom and groundwork of all right and acceptable Religion. He knew (and
taught, and spoke what he knew) that it was in vain to endeavor to make the
fruit good, while the Tree that should produce it abides naught and corrupt. He
bids therefore first, make the Tree good, and then the fruit good; because a
good Tree cannot bring forth bad fruit, nor a corrupt Tree good fruit. Instead
then, of doting about questions, and strifes of words, and outside Ceremonies,
and shows, or works of Righteousness of our own, after the Law, which can never
make us good, or fit us for the Kingdom of God; he would have us look to the
main: to be made new Creatures. That is, so to know and mind the grace of God
in Christ (which he after unfolds in the verses I have pitched upon, and some
that follow them) that our hearts may there-through be renewed, to love and
trust in him, and worship God, in, and by him, in Spirit and Truth: otherwise,
let their birth be what it will, their Circumcision never so exactly, according
to the Letter of the Law: their Baptisms, Washings, and Purifications, never so
many, or diligently made; their Sacrifices never so costly, their Fasts never
so frequent, their Prayers never so long, or fervent; their outward walkings
among men never so blameless and circumspect: yet, without a new Heart and
Spirit, made so by the grace of God, discerned and embraced, and his Spirit
there-through in his operations and efficacies complied with all, would avail
nothing to the enjoyment of Gods Kingdom. And this is very needful to be minded
by us, and the truth and certainty hereof inculcated, and Christ and his holy
Servants to be listened to in it, as Teachers that knew, and were certain of
what they taught: and not the blind followed, that grope at things as in the
dark; and who, while they would be teachers of the Law know not what they say,
nor whereof they affirm. Who as the Prophet Isaiah says, Lay out money for
that which is not bread, and their labor and strength for that which
satisfies not. Isa. 55.2. Doteing about questions and strifes of words, of
which come contentions and perverse disputes, to no godly edifying: Or leading
men to walk in a road of Practices, Observations, and Performances of External
duties without the Root, the great mystery of godliness, the right
understanding, perception, and receipt of the grace of God in Christ, so as to
the renewing them in the Spirit of their mind, about which, there is in many,
both Teachers and Professors of Religion, exceeding great blindness, and thence
incertainty, and confusion in their apprehensions: The labor of the foolish
wearying every one of them, because they know not the way into the City.
Eccles. 10.15. Much zeal there is, and may be about the outward form and time
of Baptism, the manner and way of Praying, receipt of the Supper, or Communion,
Hearing, Fasting, the times and places of Worship, with its Forms and
Ceremonies; yea, and about walking in diverse Religious practices, when yet
inwardly, pride and arrogance, confidence in our selves, our own frames or
works, with unbelief, and rejection of the Grace and Truth of God; Despising,
Hating, and even Persecuting men, because differing in their modes and
apprehensions: Envy, Malice, Covetousness, Fraud, and such like things, lurk
and bear sway underneath. And yet men are apt to think, all is well with them,
and encourage themselves, and one another to expect Gods Kingdom. Crying,
Peace, peace, where God speaks not peace, and healing the hurts slightly that
should be made sound; like those in Jeremiahs days, that thought their having
Gods Temple and Worship among them, should secure them from Judgment, though
their hearts were uncircumcised, and their ways and doings naught and unmended.
But its good to take heed to sound Doctrine; the wholesome words of our Lord
Jesus Christ: and of his holy ones, taught and instructed by him; for they
spoke what they knew, and testified what they see, not stearing our course by
the multitude, for so we should be rejecters of the Truth. For Christ's Doctrine
was not so crowded after, as to be heartily embraced, by the most, for then
would he not have said, We speak what we know, and testify what we have seen,
and no man receives our testimony; wherein after signification of his own, and
his holy Servants fitness for teaching others, and faithfulness in teaching, he
faults and complains of the too great want of credit to, and receipt of their
faithful teachings by the generality of men: which he yet signifies to be the
more inexcusable, because he spoke but hitherto of things Earthly or done upon
earth, and therefore thence argues, their greater unfitness, and incapacity for
Heavenly things more properly, and in a fuller sense such. If I have told you
Earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe if I tell you of
Heavenly? v. 12. As implying also, his fitness and ability, for declaring the
heavenly things (the things done or to be done in Heaven) also. Yea, and he
further signifies his only fitness and sufficiency for declaring them, in what
he adds, viz. when he says, ver. 13. And no man has ascended up into Heaven,
but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of Man who is in Heaven.
Signifying as his own descent from, and yet being in Heaven: so that none but
He, That Son of Man, is fit or able to declare the things of Heaven, because
none else came down thence furnished with the Knowledge of them.

And whereas, Nicodemus might still be more amazed at these intimations of his
coming down from Heaven, ascending up to Heaven, and being in Heaven, even
while he see and heard him on the Earth, speaking to him, he adds the words of
the Text. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the Son
of man be lifted up; that whosoever believes on him should not perish but have
eternal life. Of which he gives the reason in the next verses. For God so loved
the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him
should not perish, but have everlasting life, etc. Whence we may note by the
way, that Christ did not for Regenerating Nicodemus, Preach to him some
particular love, or special manifestation of it to him, more than to others;
but generally, love or grace, even the love of God to the World. As the Apostle
Paul also tells us, that, that which saved him, and others from their natural
and sinful state, was the appearance of the love, and pity of God to mankind.
Tit. 3.3, 4. He says not, it was some peculiar love to them, more then to
others that was made to appear, as the object upon which their eyes and hearts
were fastened; but the love of God to man more indefinitely and generally. And
therefore they are not to be heard, who, rejecting the Testimony of Gods love
and grace to mankind, and to the World, make it their first and main business
to Preach, special and particular love to some elect and chosen ones, as the
way to bring Souls in to God. Let us follow the way our Savior has walked in
before us; Preach to men Gods good will and love, as testified to all in
general in the gift of Christ, and leave it to God to bear testimony to the
word of his grace, and to work therewith; opening their understandings, and
persuading their hearts to embrace it, and evidencing and bearing witness to
them, as he who knows their hearts sees good. Act. 14.3. and 15.8.

CHAP. II.
The words of the Text considered, its parts. Four main points thence Observed.
The first point spoken to [ viz. The Type of the Brazen Serpent lifted up] in
some brief notes upon it.

LET us veiw the words themselves, which I have chosen to treat on, wherein we
have, 1. The main thing asserted. viz. That the Son of Man must be lifted up.
2. The manner of it proposed by way of similitude. As Moses lifted up the
Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up. 3. The end of
it declared. viz. That whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have
Eternal Life.


We may note from the words also, these several notes or points.

1. That Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness; that is supposed and
implied. 2. That the Son of Man must be lifted up; that is mainly asserted. 3.
That this latter must answer to the former; The lifting up the Son of Man, must
answer to the lifting up the Serpent by Moses in the Wilderness. As Moses
lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up.
4. That the end of the Son of Man's being so lifted up, is, That whosoever
believes on him should not perish, but have eternal life.
To the first Point, which is the comparison; or that by which the lifting up
of the Son of Man is illustrated and set forth, viz. Moses his lifting up the
Serpent in the Wilderness, I shall speak more briefly; the other points being
more principally intended. And in speaking thereto I note, 1. The thing set up.
A Serpent. 2. The cause or reason of its being set up. 3. The person setting it
up, Moses, and 4. The place where he set it up, in the Wilderness. As for the
manner of his lifting it up, that pertains to the Third Point, where I shall
consider it.


1. As to the thing it self. It is said to have been a Serpent; not a living
Serpent, nor the carcass of such a Creature dead, but a Serpent in figure, or
Resemblance, a Serpent of Brass, as the Scripture calls it. Number. 21.9. Moses
made a Serpent of Brass and set it up, etc. though in verse. 6. Its called a
fiery Serpent. That is, the resemblance of such a kind of Serpent as is so
called. From this, we might by the way observe, That in Gods Ordinances,
Sacraments (and sometimes otherwise, or in other cases) the Figures,
Resemblances, Memorialls, and Significations of things, are called in the
Scriptures by the names of the things resembled or remembered by them. So we
find Angels appearing like men, often called men. Judge. 13.3, 6, 8. Mat. 28.2,
5. With Mark. 16.5. Luke 24.4.23. Act. 1.10. The Altar erected as a medium of
Worshipping God, called by the name (though not transubstantiated into the
Essence) of the Lord God of Israel. Genesis 33.20. The Paschal Lamb called the
Passover, because a remembrance of Gods passing over Israel, when he destroyed
the Egyptians. And so the Bread in the Lords Supper called, the Body of Christ;
and the Cup, the New Testament in his blood, because significations, and in a
sort exhibitions of them etc. But the further use of this observation, as to
the Matter lifted up, we may by and by consider, when we have taken in the next
particular. viz.

2. The reason of its setting up; and that is two ways considerable. Viz. as
to 1. The end of its being set up, and therein the occasion thereof. 2. The
original of its being, set up for that end, or the authority by which it was
set up.


1. The end of its being set up, was in order to the healing, or preserving
from death the people of Israel, when for their murmuring against God, and
despising the Manna, or bread from Heaven, wherewith he fed them; he had sent
fiery flying Serpents among the People that bit some of them so, as that they
dyed. As is related in Number. 21.6. A simple thing to appearance, to be of use in
such a case, and yet to that use it was made and set up, with this promise
annexed, that it should come to pass, that when a Serpent bit any man whosoever
it was, he looking to that Serpent of Brass should live. ver. 8. And such were
its effects as appears ver. 9. And that because of the original of its being
made, and set up to that end, which was the Lord himself. It was by his
appointment and command. Moses though King in Jesurun, yet did not order the
people after his own will, nor appoint them Ordinances and institutions of his
own head: but depended on God for direction, and proposed to them, what he
appointed them. Note hence, that its not for men (though never so great
Magistrates, or of never so great Authority in the Church) of their own heads
to make, and erect means and ordinances of Salvation: nor significant
Sacraments in Gods Church, in the use of which, men may and are to expect
blessing: but this is Gods, and Christ's Prerogative. As men can give no
blessing with their institutions; so neither can they make Ordinances for God
to bless, or promise Gods blessing with them they make, that men in the use of
them may wait with confidence, and good ground for it, therein. Its Gods part
to appoint the mediums which we are to make use of as Sacraments, or divine
Ordinances; and promise, and give blessing in the due use of them, according to
his appointment: and in such mediums we may expect and find blessing, no matter
how unlikely, or homely be their matter. God who has the sole power of
instituting Ordinances and means of blessing, has power to give blessing,
with, or by what means he pleases. If he bid, set up a piece of Brass, and
direct a wounded Creature to behold it, and promise healing to the beholder by
it, it is enough to engage him to look to it, in such a case, and to expect
benefit by it, according to his promise. Nor shall such use of it, or
expectation of help thereby be frustrate. If he bid a Leprous man go wash in
Jordan seven times, and he shall be clean, he is to be obeyed, and healing in
that way is to be expected, nor shall it be missed: though those waters in
themselves be nothing better than others, which never so often washed in, have
no such effects. If Christ make clay with his spittle and anoint a man's eyes
with it that was born blind, and bid him go and wash in a pool of water, its
good to obey him, for he is able to give sight thereby; whereas, others using
the same, or like means, without his Authority an hundred times over may remain
still blind.

If he appoint us to be Baptized with Water into his Name for the remission of
our sins, and receipt of his holy Spirit, it is not in vain to practice it;
yea, it is a sin, and such, as in which we deprive our selves of the benefit,
if we refuse it. And if he bid us take and bless, and break, and eat a loaf,
or a piece of bread, in his Name, and in the remembrance of his love to, and
sufferings for us; and to drink a cup of Wine to the same purpose, and it shall
be to us his Body and Blood; or a Communion of them: its not good to dispute,
or despise his Ordinances, because of the meanness of their visible matter, but
obey and observe his appointments. For this we may also hence note, That the
efficacy or blessing of Gods Ordinances, depend not on the excellency, or
meanness of their outward matter. He gives forth his treasures in earthy
Vessels, and makes manifest his Power in very weakness; makes the foolishness
of the Preaching of the Cross the power and wisdom of God to Salvation to them
that believe it. Therefore its not good so say (as the Sons of Belial said of
Saul, when God having Anointed him, they despised him, and sent him no
presents, How can this man save us? so) how can this water wash away our sins?
or this bread and wine nourish our Souls, or promote our eternal Life? for as
there it was not the man that saved, but the power of God with him, that made
him an effectual mean, or instrument of conveying his Salvation as to
deliverance from their Enemies: So here its not the outward mediums of Water,
Bread, and Wine; yea, or of the words, but the power and appointment of him
that appointed them, as mediums of holding forth his grace and blessing to the
duty-waiter upon him, in them, that gives the promised efficacies and blessings
by them, or in the use of them. We may, and ought then to attend upon Gods
Ordinances whatsoever they be, and expect his presence and promised blessing,
in, and by them. But so we neither may nor can by men's devices, and human
institutions. God or Christ have not forbidden us, to set up Golden, Wooden,
Brazen, or Silver Crosses, to mind us of the Cross of Christ; or represent him
to us, by drawing curious Pictures, or making Statues for resembling him to us:
and therefore in such things, or any of no higher Original, or greater
Authority then so (as men's devised holy Bread, holy Water, Oil, Cream, Spittle,
Crossing, etc.) may we not look for, or expect his blessing, and presence with
us. Gods institution, command, and promise gives any thing, to which they are
annexed the virtue to be expected; and upon those grounds such things are to be
used according to his appointment. I say, according to his appointment;
because, when even such things are otherwise used, they may become rather hurts
than helps unto us: as we have an instance in this Brazen Serpent. God
commanded it, and Moses set it up at his commandment, to be a medium of
conveying, healing to the Israelites that were wounded; not to be worshipped or
censed, either by persons wounded or healed, but to be looked to, by the
wounded, in order to their being healed. And therefore Hezekiah did well, and
its reckoned amongst his good acts, that he pulled down this Brazen Serpent and
brake it in pieces when the people went a whoring after it, and burnt incense
to it. See 2 Kings 18.4. And surely to bow down to, and worship the mediums,
or matters of Gods Ordinances, appointed only to be mediums of our remembering,
and worshipping him, is a great abuse of them; much more, to worship such things
as have only man's authority and not Gods, in their institution and imposing, as
Crosses, Altars, Temples, etc. But as those things be hence observable: so
also, Note, That God is good, to them that wait upon and follow him, though he
sometime punish them for their neglects of him; and unbelief, and distrust in
him; unthankfulness for his benefits, or disobedience to his Commands; yet he
is both loving to, and careful of them, in their obeying and following him.
Yea, to those also, who, having moved him to anger, and to punish them for
their sins, are by his punishments awakned to Repentance, and brought to humble
themselves before him for their offenses: and that is evident here, in that,
when the people having by their murmurings against him, provoked him, and he
had punished them with fiery Serpents that bit and wounded them; yet when they
turned again and humbled themselves, and got Moses to pray for them, upon his
praying for them, God appoints them this way of preservation. He undertook to
be their Physician, as well as their feeder; to heal them, as well as to
nourish them. And yet its worthy our not^ing. That God did not grant the very
thing they desired, but what he see good to grant them, and what might be
better for them, then what they desired. The thing which they desired Moses to
Pray for was, That God would take away the Serpents: God takes not away the
Serpents, but provides a means of preservation, in case they were bitten by
them. He yet continues the chastisement, to mind them of their sin, and to
nurture them to stand in awe of him: which probably had he removed the
affliction and danger, they would soon have ceased from. And yet he takes care,
that in obeying him, and his appointment, they might in such cases of suffering
be kept from perishing thereby; and therefore appoints a means to cure and heal
them. God is gracious to hear the cries of his poor humbled, and penitent
people; though he does not always grant the very thing they desire of him. We
are apt to savor the Flesh, more then the Spirit; and the things of Man, more
then the things of God, in our afflictions and desires of help in them. But God
consults the good and profit of our Souls, more then the ease of our Bodies, in
his gracious answers to us: we are too apt to be of this peoples strain in our
desires in such cases. Lord, take away these Serpents. Or as Pharaoh, pray to
God, that these Frogs, or Locusts may depart from us; or that he will take away
this pain, sickness, or the like. Being more sensible of the trouble of Gods
Chastisements, then of the sins that occasioned them, or apt to believe the
good end of God in ordering them, and the profit to us, that he aims at in
them: or then we are desirous to be rid of the sin, and to be made pertakers of
the profit. And truly Gods dear children are too apt to be led by sense in
their desires in such cases; as we may perceive in the Apostle Paul, in what he
relates of himself, till Christ had better instructed him. When God after he
had rapt him up into the third Heavens, had ordered to him a thorn in the
Flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet him, least he should be puffed up, or be
exalted above measure, through the abundance of the Revelations given him; he
was weary of that exercise, and therefore prayed thrice to the Lord, that it
might depart from him. But after that, Christ had told him, that his grace was
sufficient for him, then he could most gladly rejoice in tribulations,
infirmities, necessities, etc. 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. Christ dealt with him there in
his desires, as God dealt with these Israelites here. He took not away the
thorn in the flesh; the grief and exercise that he complained of, as he
desired of him: but he supplied him with his grace to bear it, and receive
profit by it. Even as here he took not away the Serpents, but caused a medecin
to be prepared for them, and proposed to them, against the deadly hurt of them,
because he saw it might be more for their good and profit, to be exercised
still with them; that in such exercise, they might more prove his power, and
the sufficiency of his grace for them; learn to hope in him, stand in awe of
him, etc. And is it not so with us, as with them, when God tries us with
sickness, or pain, or bad neighbors, or unkindness in, and from Relations? Oh,
how fain would we be rid of these troubles; we are all for this, take away
these Serpents. These exercises and afflictions; but learn we here to know,
that God is good to us, and will do us good in our turning and seeking to him,
though he answer us not just to our desires. He sees afflictions and
temptations (be they what they will) may be needful and behooful to be
continued to us. 1 Pet. 1.7. They have not yet perhaps had the end, and effect
in us, and produced the good to us he sent them for. He may see, were they
removed, we would then grow neglectful or forgetful of him; or grow worldly,
carnal, careless, wanton, kick against him, etc. And therefore having given us
an Antidote against the evil and destructiveness of them, in his Son, and his
Word as setting him before us, he pleases still to continue them to us. It is
better for us in such cases, to imitate our pattern the Lord Jesus; who, when
he was to drink that bitter Cup which his Father gave him to drink, did not
pray absolutely, that he might not drink it, or that it might pass from him:
but with a thorough resignation of himself to his Fathers will, prayed; Father
if it be possible let this Cup pass from me, nevertheless, not my will, but thy
will be done.

3. But view we now, the person setting it up, and that was Moses, concerning
whom, I shall only note his obedience in doing Gods Commandment without
disputing it: He said not, how can a piece of Brass, made in the likeness of a
Fiery Serpent heal them? or would it not be better, that the people look only
to thee for their healing, then to direct their eyes to any such mediums
whereby they may be moved to ascribe their healing, or preservation, to the
medium; rather then to thy self! But laying aside all the exercise of his own
wisdom and reason, against the command and will of God, he obeys him. As our
Savior here says; and the History in Numb. 21.8, 9. shows. Moses lifted up
the Serpent. And so it may be instructive to us all (and to the greatest
Princes, or Officers in Gods Church) not to lift up our reasonings and
understandings, against the will and word of God; but ( to do all things (that
he by Jesus Christ, and in his name, by his Apostles have given us in
Commandment) Without murmuring or disputing. Phil. 2.14. As judging God wiser
then we. The only wise God; and worthy to be obeyed, however absurd his
commands may seem to our wisdom. The foolish things of God, being wiser then
the wisdom of man, and his weakness, stronger then man's strength. Obedience is
better then Sacrifice; and to hearken, is better then the fat of Rams. Or then
any, the most desirable or advantageous ways of honoring him, that our wisdom
and reason proposes to us. Saul and Jereboam by preferring their seeming and
appearing pious intentions, and carnal policies, before Gods Commandments lost
their Kingdoms. And Nadab and Abihu, by offering strange fire lost their lives;
when as others have always met with blessing in obeying him.

4. The place where Moses lifted up the Serpent to the end, and upon the
accounts aforementioned was the Wilderness. Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
Wilderness. God when he brought his people out of Egypt led them into, and
through the Wilderness: a waste and howling Wilderness, a Land of drought and
of the shadow of death; a Land where no man passes through, and where no man
dwelt. Gods way that he leads people in, and by, is not without Trials and
Temptations; and therefore we are not to judge^ we are out of Gods because, or
when, we meet with trials. Or that we are in his way, because, or when we meet
with none. The way to know our way, is to mind his Word; even his way, that
leads to his heavenly rest, and eternal Kingdom, is a way that lies out of the
road of the world, a way of exercise for faith; a way of trials and
temptations. And yet, as God in that Wilderness, showed himself alsufficient
for his people, provided for them bread, and water, clothes, and physic, or a
way to cure their wounds, and prevent their perishing: So God is alsufficient
for us too in all our trials and temptations; and has provided for us, all
grace and blessing in Christ Jesus; and will not fail to dispense it, to them
whose hearts are perfect with him. For the Lord God is a Sun and a Shield. He
will give grace and glory: and no good thing will he with hold from them that
walk uprightly. Psalm. 84.11. And therefore it is good for us to follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes; though through Floods, and Seas, and Wildernesses; though
into straights, and exercises, trials, and temptations; knowing and believing
him, to be such as he has manifested himself to be, in that Wilderness; able
and faithful to supply, and save us in all conditions: and that he has
promised to be with us, when we pass through water and fire, to preserve us
from being hurt of them. Isa. 43.2, 3. Oh Lord God of hosts, blessed is the man
that puts his trust in thee: for thou Lord have not failed them that seek
(or follow after) thee. Psalm. 84.12. and 9.10.

There is no State, or place so barren of provision or relief, wherein in
obeying, and following after Christ he cannot or will not provide and afford
such help and succor to us, as he sees fit for us; which may serve, both to
fault our unbelief, and fearfullness to betrust our selves with him, and to
follow him whithersoever he calls us: and also, to stir up, and excite our
faith, and confidence in him, and our willingness to obey, and follow him. But
I shall add no more to this first point, but come to the second which is the
main.

CHAP. III.
The second Point in part considered, who is the Son of Man? and three Reasons
propounded, why Christ is so called.

THE Second point is, That the Son of Man must be lifted up. To which Point,
the other two may also be reduced, they holding forth but the way wherein (or
manner after which) and the end, to which he is to be lifted up. In speaking to
this Second Point, we may consider, 1. Who is meant here by the Son of Man. 2.
Why he is so called. 3. What is, and what is employed, in the lifting of him up,
and in part. 4. Why he must be lifted up, and lifted up in such acts as we
shall mention; leaving the fuller consideration of it to the last Point.


1. Who is this Son of Man? or who is meant and pointed at by that phrase or
Title; and that appears every where in the wrightings of the Evangelists, to be
no other then he, who spoke; even the Lord Jesus Christ himself. And so both
other expressions of the Evangelists, and those that are about this Text do
evidence. For

First, For other expressions, we have our Savior himself, as related in
Matthew, plainly signifying it, Mat. 16.13. For, there the Evangelist tells us,
That Jesus asked his Disciples, Whom do men say, that I the Son of man am?
plainly calling himself the Son of Man As also in the same Chapter ver. 27.
Saying, The Son of Man shall come in the glory of his Father with his Angels,
and then he shall render to every one according to his Works. But he that shall
come with his Angels, and whose Father God is, and shall come to Judge the
World, and shall render to every one according to his Works, is evidently
asserted to be the Lord Jesus Christ. See for that. Romans 2.6, 16. Act. 10.42.
and 17.31. 2 These. 1.7, 8. 2 Timothy 4.1.

Secondly, For expressions about the Text. In the verse before, the Son of Man
is said to be, He that Descended and came down from Heaven, and Ascended up
into Heaven, and is in Heaven. But none has done so, and is so, but Jesus
Christ. Yea, and in the very next verse it appears, that He who is here called
the Son of Man, is there called, The only begotten Son of God. For, whereas it
is here said, That the Son of Man must be lifted up, that whosoever believes
on him might not perish, but have eternal life. It follows in the next verse,
as the reason hereof. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son; that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. Now certain it is, That God has not designed two distinct
objects of Faith; or two distinct Saviors to be believed on, and to be the
givers of Eternal life, but only one; and that is his Son our Lord Jesus
Christ, there being Salvation in no other, nor any other name given under
Heaven, whereby we must be saved. Act. 4.11, 12. They are then the same. the
Son of Man. And the only begotten Son of God. The only begotten Son of God,
therefore is the Son of Man: that's the Person here meant of, and called so.

2. But then the reason, why he is called, or rather calls himself so, is
worthy to be inquired into, and considered. For we do not find the Evangelists,
or Apostles any where so to call him, when they speak of him; but they usually
call him Jesus, or Jesus of Nazareth. Mark. 10.47. and 16.6. Luke 24.19. Act.
2.22. Or the Lord Jesus. Luke 24.3. Act. 1.21. and 4.33. Or simply the Lord.
Luke 7.31. and 11.39. Or Jesus Christ. Mat. 1.18. Mark 1.1. John. 1.17. Or
Jesus which is called the Christ. Mat. 1.16, Or Christ, the Son of the living
God. Mat. 16.16. Or The Lord Jesus Christ. Acts 15.11, 26. But he often and
usually speaking of himself, calls himself the Son of Man; as is easy to
observe, in reading the Evangelists. Now the reason of this may be manifold, as

Reason 1. That he calls himself the Son of Man, might be to show us (and set
us an example of) his Humility; and to instruct us how to withstand, and be
kept free from temptations to pride, and high-mindedness; to which, Satan is
ready to tempt us from the consideration of any privileges, or more excellent
endowments bestowed upon us. It is an evident thing, that we are very prone to
lift up our selves, in the view, or conceit of any thing, almost either inward
or outward, wherein we differ from, so as to appear better therein, then
others. If it be but a better suite of Apparel, or Hair, or Stature, or Beauty,
or Strength, or Estate, or Birth, we are apt to know our selves by them, and to
think so much the goodlier of our selves, and carry our selves above, or
loftily toward others that are, or appear inferior to us in such things; how
much more if we be more honored, or honorable, be in greater office or place
among men? have better gifts or parts? Yea, the very works of righteousness
wrought by us, or the Revelations of Mysteries, and great things to us,
reflected on by us, are apt to puff us up, as is employed, both in the pride of
the Pharisees trusting in themselves that they were righteous, and despising
others. Luke 18.9. And that admonition given to the believing Gentiles, Not to
be high-minded, but fear, When they consider Gods goodness to them, and their
better state then that of the unbelieving, and in part rejected Jews. Romans
11.21, 22. and by what the Apostle says of himself. viz. Least through the
abundance of Revelations given him, he should be exalted above measure there
was given him a thorn in the Flesh, etc. 2 Cor. 12.3. Now as God out of
faithfulness to, and care of the Prophet Ezekiel to prevent his being lifted
up, when he had seen the Visions of the glory of God, the God of Israel. Chap.
1. and 3. and 8. and. 10. etc, And the Visions of the re-edification of the
Church and Temple of God, and of the New Jerusalem; always I think in his
speaking to him, calls him Son of Man as is to be seen in Chap. 2.1, 3, 6, 8,
3, 1, 3, 4, 10, 17, 25. etc. Yea, its used in that Prophecy in Gods speaking to
that Prophet, at least ninety times; whereas, its never used to any of the
Prophets else, except once to Daniel (who also had diverse great Visions of
things to come showed to him) Dan. 8.17. Even as for the like cause or reason;
namely, to prevent his being exalted above measure, through the abundance of
the Revelations given him, he gave the Apostle Paul a thorn in the flesh, a
messenger of Satan to buffet him. 2 Cor. 12.^ 8. (That title the Son of Man
having in it a signification of an earthy and low extract, and used often by
way of abasing and diminishing persons; to whom it is applied, As Job 25.6. Man
that is a Worm, and the Son of Man that is a Worm. And in Isa. 51.12. The Son
of Man that shall be made as grass) So also, our Lord Jesus, who was in the
nature of Man: taken up into, and privileged with the highest honor and
excellency of State, that ever man was: far above all the Prophets, Priests,
and Princes of the Earth; being (as none of them were) taken into unity of
Person with the Eternal Word, and therein made the Son of God, the only
begotten Son, the chosen and appointed one of God to be the Savior of the
World; the Savior of sinners from Sin, and from the power of Death and Devil,
as none ever else was, or could be. Yea, and being endued with such power and
authority to do great Miracles and Wonders, and doing them also, such as never
any before him did: Yea, both so speaking, and speaking such things ( Joh.
7.46. and 15.22) and doing such works, and therein being of that wonderful
benefit and advantage to the World as never any beside (mighty occasions for
Satan to find matter for tempting to pride, and high-mindedness; and to carry
himself loftily above all others.) He to show his humility, and lowliness of
mind and heart in the greatness of his honor, and these manifold occasions of
temptation to high-mindedness, styles himself (as God styled that Prophet, to
keep him low and humble (as the greatness of Christ's humility was also showed
in his being so) the Son of Man. Not, that Christ had as man that corruption of
Nature in him, as Ezekiel, Daniel, and other holy men had, that he should need
to use such expressions to keep down that corruption from working in him, as
they, and we need to have it kept down and mortified. For he knew no sin though
he was made in the likeness of sinful flesh. 2 Cor. 5.21. Romans 8.3. He was the
spotless Lamb in whom there was no blemish. 1 Pet. 1.19. But he was tempted of
Satan to things sinful: as we may see in Mat. 4.6, 7, 8. Even to worship the
Devil for the enjoyment of the glory and Kingdoms of this World. And though we
find no mention of any temptations, but what was there specified after his
Baptism, and before his Preaching; yet in saying there, that the Tempter left
him for a season ((...) or till an opportunity) it is employed, that he was not
without temptations at other aftertimes, and in other particulars also. And so
having so great occasions (as before is said) for Satan to take hold of, he
might have such darts cast at him too, as motions to pride and haughtiness.
Yea, such a temptation also may I conceive be apprehended to have been
inclusively in that saying to him, If thou be the Son of God, command that
these Stones be made bread. And in, cast thy self down from the Pinnacle of the
Temple, etc. Mat. 4.56. And as in those temptations mentioned, in Mat. 4.8.
Luke 4. Our Savior did not barely by his Authority and Power rebuke Satan,
but proposed to himself, and made use of such consideration, and allegation of
the Law and Doctrine of the Lord, as was proper to resist and preserve himself
from yiedling to those temptations; and such as in such cases minded by us,
would preserve us also; such as, It is written, man lives not by bread alone,
but by every word proceeding out of the mouth of God. And it is written, Thou
shall not tempt the Lord thy God, etc. Even so he might make use of such a
consideration as this, That, He was as to the flesh a man; descended from men,
and so the Son of man, to repel and keep clear himself from temptations to
pride; that Satan upon the above mentioned accounts might tempt him to. As
also, He did and said many things, not so much for his own need, as to give us
an example, that we might follow his steps. And so he might and did instruct us
hereby, that we should avoid pride in any thing, wherein we differ from, and
excel others, and that it is a good-way for avoiding it, to consider what we are
as to our worser state, that is, as to our Natures in themselves as fallen
considered, and as we find, sinfulness in us, or have committed sins: for
though we be rich, honorable, strong, beautiful, of good wit and parts, etc.
Yet we are men, Sons of Adam, begot, and brought forth in his Image and
likeness; and so are mortal, sinful, and in our selves miserable; those things
notwithstanding. Yea, though Noble born, or descended, of Religious Parents:
though we have the Law, or Doctrine of God, and skill, and knowledge therein,
and many righteous frames and works thereby, and thereafter; yet this is Gods
gift, if there be any thing, or as to all things, really good therein; we yet
are in, and of our selves Men; mortal, sinful, unworthy creatures. Yea, though
we are called of God to Christ, and in him owned of God, and become his
Children; accepted and blessed in him; and endued with many singular gifts and
privileges: yet for all that, according to the Flesh, we are men, sons of men,
infirm, mortal, sinful; and what we are in Christ, we are it merely and freely
by grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. And we have no cause
to lift up, or boast our selves, because thereof, because we received it of
grace; only God and Christ are to be glorified therein. Yea, and by how much
the more any man is benefited, and privileged of, and by the Lord, so much is
He the more obliged for it to the Lord. Certainly, we find the holy men of God,
in their enjoyments of favor and grace, from, and with God, and honors with
him, to exercise their minds to sobriety and humillity in themselves, from the
consideration of what they were in, and of themselves; or by Nature and
Corruption before such grace or honor bestowed upon them. So we find Abraham,
when God so highly honored him, as not to hide from him, the thing he intended
toward Sodom, but to acquaint him with it, and admit him, to plead with him,
and make intercession for them; thus depressing himself, Suffer me that am but
Dust and Ashes. Genesis 18.27. And when David had been blessing the Lord, as his
strength, goodness, fortress, and for his great benefits bestowed upon him;
least he should be lifted up, or be thought to have had this favor of the Lord
bestowed upon him, for any goodness in himself; he adds, Lord, what is man that
thou regardest him, or the Son of Man, that thou make account of him? Man is
like to vanity, his days are like a shadow. Psalm. 144.3.4. And the Apostle
Paul, speaking of the grace bestowed upon him, and the favor showed him of God
and Christ, in counting him faithful, and calling him to be an Apostle; usually
takes this course (to hide Pride from himself) to confess what he had been, and
was, when Christ came upon him, to convince and convert him, and take him into
that dignity. Viz. That he was a Persecutor, and a Blasphemer, and Injurious,
not worthy to be called an Apostle, because he had Persecuted the Church of
God. Yea, therefore he styles himself the least of all Saints; yea, the chief
of Sinners. 1 Cor. 15.8, 9. Ephesians. 3.8. 1. Tim. 1.23, 14, 15. That so he might
the more magnify the grace of God and Christ; and being sensible of his own
demerit, and unworthiness in himself, be the more low and humble: the more
diligent, and obedient in service, more compassionate over others, though
sinners; yea, more ready to every good work. And so Christ here, and his
Servants ought to be imitated by us, in avoiding pride and high-mindedness, and
in exercising our selves to humility and lowliness. Learn we of Christ who was
meek and lowly, that we may find rest unto our Souls. Mat. 11.29. That Is the
first reason.

Reason 2. Secondly, he is called the Son of Man: not only of some particular
man, or of the Father of some particular branch, or family of men; as to say,
the Son of Abraham, or of Heber, or of Shem, or of David, or the like: though
it is true, he was the Son of all those persons, as to descent of his flesh.
Yea, and he is elsewhere styled the Son of Abraham; to signify, that he is,
and was that Seed promised to him; and so the person in whom the blessing for
all Nations was prepared. And the Son of David to signify, that he was, and
is, the Heir of the Kingdom that God spoke of in his Oath and Covenant to
David. Mat. 1.1. But that is not the title that he ever gives himself: but
speaking of himself, both here, and often besides, he styles himself The Son of
Man: which word man, is not appropriated and limited to any one Person, or
Family, or condition of men, but is common to all men. And may he not herein
also imply, that he came, and was born into the World, for the public,
general, and universal benefit of Mankind And that so far, as the nature of Man
extends; so far has he relation and favor; so as for the good of his
Creature, he came in, and stands to, the nature of man (and not only of this,
or that person of it) in the notion, relation and affection of a Son. And so we
may understand that saying, of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 9.6. To (or for) us a
Child is born. To (or for) us a Son is given, and the Government shall he upon
hi^ shoulder, etc. To, or for us, Men namely: not Jews only, though more
immediately, and directly, to, or for them, as of them, and first sent to them.
Romans 9.5. Act. 3.26. To be their glory as it is said, Salvation is of the Jews.
John. 4.22. And he was born to be the glory to, or of his People Israel. Luke
2.29, 30, 31, 32. And so it is said, Of them came Christ after the flesh, who
is God over all, blessed for ever. Amen. But though he was of them so ^as not
only of them, some of the Gentile stocks, as to his Mothers side were in his
Geneology also. Mat. 1.3, 5. So much less was he for Salvation to them only,
but to be also a light to lighten the Gentiles (as a Son or Child is called, a
Light or Lamp to the Parents, or Family. 1 King. 11.36. and 15, 4.) And to be
for Salvation to the ends of the Earth. Luke 2.32. Isa. 49.6. And so a Child
born To (or for) mankind, the Son of Man; as owning Man generally in a larger
sense, as his Mother; though in a choice sense, or more Spiritually, they only
are so, that hear the Word of God and do it. Luke 8.21. He is so given to man,
and owns a Relation to Man, as that he is the Savior of all men; especially,
of those that believe. 1 Timothy 4.10. And so he puts an honor and dignity upon
the Nature of Man, though in a special sense, he is the glory of his people
Israel; As before. Both as to Israel after the flesh, as after the flesh he
came of them; and also (and most especially, and chiefly) of Israel after the
Spirit; whose Savior and Portion in the most full and choice sense, he is for
ever. But I say, his being made Man, puts an honor upon the Nature of Man, and
shows him to be a lover of Man; even of that Nature, and Creature above all
others (even Angels too, whose Nature he took not. Heb. 2.16.) And that his
delight is with the Sons of Men. As is said, Prove. 8.31. For as it was a great
honor, that man was made in the Image and likeness of his Maker: So it was a
great honor, and showed yet more respect to Man, and his Nature; that God,
even the Word, which was, and is God, the Son of God, and Man's Maker ( For all
things were made by him. Joh. 1.2.) Should be made in the likeness of men, and
in the habit of a man. Phil. 2.7, 8. Though (as it is twice said, so its twice
true, with respect to either Adam) that Man being in honor and without
understanding (or not considering to walk worthy of it) becomes like (or is
compared) to the Beasts that perish. Psalm. 49.12, 20. But sure it is a great
privilege to our nature, to have such a Son begotten on, and brought forth by
it, and to it as it were. And he being also the Son of the Father in love and
Truth; full of goodness, righteousness, and charity. What may not men expect
from him, as being his Brethren (For so he is not ashamed to call us) from such
a Son, from such a Brother, who is also the Everlasting Father (and so the
wonderful one) ready to cherish and provide for us for ever? Sure he will, and
does honor both his Father and Mother; both God his Father, and the manhood,
or man as his Mother; as in doing all things to his glory and renown; so in
doing what may be for her; that is, man's honor, support and benefit. Whatever
a poor, decayed, decrepid Mother may expect from a loving Child, that is rich
and honorable, for her maintenance and support: man may expect from this Son
of Man; yea, in him the honor and dignity conferred upon the nature of Man in
the first Adam is fully, and with advantage restored. And that which was truly
affirmable of us, in that first Adam; Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful
of him, and the Son of man, that thou visitest him? for thou have made him a
little lower then the Angels, thou have, crowned him with glory and honor;
thou made him to have dominion over the works of thine hands: thou have put
all things under his feet, etc. Is now applied to man in Christ Jesus, with
advantage I say because Angels, and Authorities, and Powers are also made
subject to him. Psalm. 8.4, 5. With Heb. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 3.22. 1 Cor. 6.3.
And what ever poor and perishing Brethren may hope for, from a rich and
powerful Brother that is good and righteous, that may men expect from Christ
the Son of Man; only as in case, such a Mother, and Brethren be unruly proud,
scornful; refuse to be helped by, or receive relief from, and be beholden to
such a Son, or Brother, in such a way as is just, and honorable to Himself,
and to his Father; but will rather, rejecting his help, shirk elsewhere through
their stubborness, contempt and scorn, they may ruin themselves: so is it with
man here. But because his delight is with the Sons of men, as his Brethren; and
he loves, and honors the nature of man, as his Mother in a sort, therefore he
calls to men, and counsels them to be ruled by him, that he might, by relieving
them, make them happy. As it is said, Does not wisdom cry, and understanding
lift up her voice? As who would say, can that be denied or doubted of? surely
no, it is a matter beyond controversy. She stands upon the top of high places
(where she may with the most, and greatest audibleness, and advantage call) by
the way, in the places of the paths. She is not far from any one of us, but in
all men's ways, and walkings (though she walk not with them, nor can go in their
paths) she is by her Spirit striving in man, judging, reproving, and calling to
him. She cries at the Gates, at the entry of the City. As, and when men come
to the years of discretion, and are entering, as it were into the World, to be
conversing therewith, choosing, and refusing for themselves, at the coming in
at the doors. The entering into or upon their several conditions or states,
wherein they are seeking rest. To you o men I call; and my voice, says she, is
to the sons of men. O ye simple understand wisdom; and ye fools be the of an
understanding heart; hear, for I will speak of excellent things; and the
opening of my lips shall be right things. etc. Prove. 8.1, 2, 6. And having
said, Her delights are with the Sons of men. She adds, Now therefore ye
Children hearken unto me, blessed are they that keep my words. ver. 31, 32. Any
of man's nature, during the day of grace and patience, may in listening to, and
obeying his Councels, expect, and hope for succor and blessing from this
excellent person, he being the Son of Man indefinitely considered (yea, and
such a Son, as has also the relation of a Father, Brother, Friend to us) and
not of this, or that man only. That Is a Second Reason.

Reason 3. A Third may be this, that he styles himself, not only a Son of Man.
For so any of us may do, we being all of us Sons of Adam descended, and sprung
out of his Loins: as the holy Spirit styles us, when he says, O Sons of men,
how long will ye change my glory into shame? how long will ye love vanity, and
follow after leasings? Psa. 4.2. But the Son of Man; emphatically, and in a
choice and peculiar sense, the most excellent Son of Man; who is such a Son of
Man, as there is none other besides, like to him. The Son, the Heir of Man. He
to whom all his Inheritance falls. But what is that which man has to leave, or
bequeath to him? or that he could fall Heir to, by being his Son. Surely, man
is become so miserable poor; that he can leave him, or conveigh to him nothing
of worth; no riches, or excellency by which he might be benefited by him, as he
had from God his Father. Yet, being the Son, he is the heir of Man, as well as
of God. If Sons, then Heirs, says the Apostle. Romans 8.17. And so, as Christ is
the Son of God, he is the Heir of God; the Heir of all things. Heb. 1.2. The
inheritor of his Fathers Riches, Power, Glory, etc. And as he is the Son of
Abraham, he is Heir of his Covenant, Heir of the World. Romans 4.13. And as the
Son of David, the Heir of his Throne, and Kingdom; which therefore God will
give him. Luke 1.32. The Lord God will give him the Throne of his Father David.
So as the Son of Man generally, and indefinitely, what Inherits he, but what
Man (Adam) left as a natural Heritage, so far, as was derivable to him? That is
his great debt that he fell into, even his sin, as to the guilt of it (he being
sanctified and separated from the filth, and defilement of it in his
Conception, by the power of the holy Ghost: therefore called, That holy thing
conceived in the Virgin. Luke 1.35.) And so the Curse and punishment due to us.
This Christ was the Son and Heir of Man in. For God made him, that knew no sin
to be sin for us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor.
5.21. And he Redeemed us from the Curse of the law, being made a Curse for us.
Gal. 3.13. And therefore was made under the Law; obnoxious to all our debts,
forfeitures, and penalties, That he might redeem us from under the law: that we
by him (receiving and believing in him) might receive the Adoption of Children:
even of the Children of God; and so being Sons become Heirs of God, in, and
through him. Gal. 4.4, 5. Romans 8 17. So that this was for our great advantage:
also; he hereby becoming the Son (the most excellent redeeming, infranchising,
enriching Son) of Man, upon whom, all the hope, and help of Man lies. That Is a
Third.

CHAP. IV.
Two other reasons (and they the Principal ones) of Christ's calling himself,
the Son of Man.

Son of Man, to signify (as is employed also in the two foregoing reasons) That
he was, and is really Man: and not only Man in appearance. That he partook with
us in Flesh and Blood. Heb. 2.14. And had not only a show, and likeness of
them. He was indeed in the likeness, and but in the likeness of sinful flesh;
his Flesh having no sinfulness in it: but he had more then the likeness of
Flesh, even the stubstance, or reality of Flesh in him. We find, that in former
times, the Angels appeared in the likeness of Men (yea, Christ himself might,
and doubtless did, sometimes as to his Spiritual Being so appear also, before
he was Incarnate, and made of a Woman, as in Josh. 5.13, 14, 15.) And such
appearances are often in the Scripture, also called Men, though they were
really Angels, and Spiritual Beings, and not of the same species or kind with
us: of this we have instances; in Genesis 18.1, 2, 3, and 19.1, 2. Judge. 13.6, 8,
10. Mat. 28.2, 5. With Mark. 16.5, 6. Luke 24.4.23. Act. 1.10.11. But these
were never born of a Woman, nor reckoned their Genealogy from Men, when they so
appeared: and therefore the Title of the Son of Man, is never attributed to
Angels so appearing. That Title implying a descent from Adam, or Man, and so a
real participation of Man's Nature. Only I conceive God may also send any of the
Spirits of the deceased Prophets or holy men if he pleases, as Angels to Men,
to bring his messages to them (the name of Angel, being not a name of Nature,
but of Office; signifying a Messenger: a Title that may agree to any natural
employed, and sent of God on his messuages, as the Angels of the Seven
Churches. Rev. 1.20.) As to me seems probably, by that saying of the Angel.
Rev. 19.10. I am one of thy fellow Servants and of thy Brethren, that have the
Testimony of Jesus, etc. And more plainly, that in Rev. 22.9. I am thy fellow
Servant and of thy Brethren the Prophets, and of those that observe the words
of this Book, etc. But for those that were indeed Angels of a distinct kind of
Creature from Man; though they might appear as men, yet they were not Sons of
men, born of Women; as Christ was born of a Woman, and so the Son of Man. Now,
Christ implies, the reality of his Manhood here, to signify to us, or give us
occasion to call to mind, the greatness of his grace, and of the grace of his
Farher showed to us, in his being made, and becoming a real man, one of us:
even, One chosen out of the People. Psalm. 89.19, 20. Grace, and love worthy to
be minded, and remembered always by us, for in that, he is very Man, the Son of
Man therein is manifest.

1. Gods great love, and condescension to us, in giving us the most excellent
advantage of knowing him, and his will concerning us, in a more full,
satisfying, and familiar way, then by any other, or former dispensation, for
revealing himself to us. God in former times, by sundry ways, and in diverse
manners, spoke to the Fathers by the Prophets, to whom he made known himself,
by Dreams, Visions, Angels, and such like appearances. And especially, by a
more visible Demonstration of his presence, and audible speaking of his voice
to them, out of the midst of the Fire, when he gave the Law upon Mount Sinai
(which is said, notwithstanding to have been given by the Ministry of Angels.
Act. 7.52. Gal. 3.19.) Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 4.5.11, 12, 33. and 5.10.28. Heb. 1.1.
But as for those ways of making himself, and his will known, they were more low
and mediate, then now in his speaking to us, by his own, and only begotten Son.
Heb. 1.2, 3. Indeed, that of his giving the Law on Mount Sinai was accompanied
with most certain, and undoubted evidences, of its being the voice and
dispensation of God; such as never was vouchsafed to any people beside, or to
them, at any other time. But that was with so much terror and dreadfulness,
that the people were not able to hear, or to bear it. Yea, Moses himself, its
said, did exceedingly fear and quake. Heb. 12.18, 20, 21. And all the people,
when they heard the voice of the Words, with the sound of the Trumphet, and
terrible Thundrings, accompaning Gods so speaking to them, and saw the
Lightnings, the Fire, and the Mountain burning, or smoking, shaking, and
trembling under him, fled a far off; desiring of Moses, that they might no more
hear God speaking after that manner to them: but that he would go near to God,
and hear his Commandments, and bring it to them, and they would hear it, and
do it. Exodus 20.18, 19. Deuteronomy. 5.29, 30. Behold, say they, Our God has showed
us his Glory, and greatness; and we have heard his voice out of the midst of
the fire, we have seen to day that God speaks with man, and he does live; but
now wherefore should we die? for that great fire will consume us, if we should
go on to hear the voice of our God, we should surely dye: for is there any
flesh that has heard the voice of the living God, speaking out of the midst of
the fire, as we have done, and yet does live? Go thou near, and hear whatsoever
the Lord our God shall speak unto us, and speak thou it unto us, etc. Which
saying of the people God approved of, saying, They have well spoken all that
they have said. A Prophet will I raise up to them out of their brethren like
unto thee, and I will put my words into his mouth, and he shall speak to them
whatsoever I command him. Deuteronomy. 18.16, 17, 18. But there arose no Prophet like
to Moses in Israel. Says, Deuteronomy. 34.10. Therefore God fulfilled their desire,
and his own Promise, in his making his own Son, to be the Son of Man. The Word
by which all things were made to be made Flesh; and in speaking forth his mind
and will, yea himself to Mankind by him; for herein we have God speaking to us,
and yet a Prophet raised up for us out of Israel, by whom he speaks. Acts.
3.22. Such a Prophet of God, as is God himself. God speaking in, and by a man,
a Son of Man: yea, such a Son of man, as is still God. The same that was in the
beginning with God: yet so covered, and hid under the veil of the Flesh, or
Manhood, that his voice terifies not from hearing it. Men might draw nigh to
him, hear and speak to him, converse with him, and receive instruction from
him, and thereby be drawn to God, to love and believe on him. Surely, this is a
very great grace and favor of God a marvailous condescension of the Divine
Majesty to us, in which, also he has done for us; as Job sometimes desired of
God for himself, And as Elihu answered him, to that desire: we find, that Job
in his great Affliction and sore Temptations, had a great desire to speak to,
and argue with God; only Two things would he desire of him, by way of caution.
viz. That he would remove his hand, (his Blow, Rod, or stroke of Affliction)
from him, and that his Terror might not make him afraid. Job. 9.34, 35. and
13.20, 21, 22. And then says he, I will speak and not be afraid of him. Or as
it is, Chap. 13. Call then and I will answer thee, or I will speak, and let him
answer me. He was sensible, that his hand was too heavy for him to bear: and he
judged, that he was able by his presence to affright him, and fill him with
terrors; but might he be but freed from those Two things, the weight of his
Hand, or smart of his Rod; And the terror of his Voice, through the appearance
of his greatness and Majesty therein. Then an intercourse with him might be
very advantageous. Elihu (whose Name by Interpretation is, He is my God.)
Answers him, Cap. 33.6, 7. Behold, I am according to thy Word, instead of God.
I am also formed out of the Clay. Behold, my terror shall not make thee
afraid, neither shall my hand be heavy upon thee. This is most exactly granted
to us in Jesus Christ, in his becoming the Son of Man. A real, very Man for us.
One who was the Son of Adam, who was formed out of the Clay, and yet was
instead af God: so as that, He was, and is God. And it was the Father that
spoke in, and by him; and wrought the works that he wrought. John 14.8, 9, 16,
11. There we have God speaking and making known himself, and his mind to us;
and yet, so as he neither laid his hand upon us to make us feel the weight of
it. Nor his Rod, to beat us for our faults. But his Rod and Hand was upon him
for us, That through his stripes he might pass by us and heal us. Nor was his
appearance dreadful, but such, and with such humility, lowliness, and meekness,
as that all, or any might have access to, and intercourse with him, being found
in the likeness of Men; even of ordinary men, nothing differing in appearance
from them, except in goodness and holiness, as being without sin. Yea, not in
the likeness of great men, or of the Princes of this World; but only of mean
men, in the form of a Servant. Such as any mean and poor men, as well, and as
freely as the greater and richer, might have the boldness and liberty to
converse with him. Phil. 2.7, 8. Heb. 4.15. And so we find whole multitudes
thronging to, and about him, to hear him, and see his Miracles: not running
through fear from him, as they did at Mount Sinai; but pressing upon him to
hear, and see him. Luke 8.4. and 12.1. Matt. 13.2. Mark. 1.33. and 2.1, 2, 4.
Yea, the poor, the halt, the maimed, and the most miserable Creatures, had free
liberty and encouragement to repair to him, to hear, and see him, and be helped
by him. And by him, God conversed with Men, and gave forth a more clear
discovery, demonstration, and knowledge of himself, and of his will, and mind
concerning Men, then formerly; diverse ways, as to instance.

1. By his audible voice, doctrinally instructing men in the knowledge of God,
and of himself, the Christ; and of what God requires of men, and is behooveful
to them, in order to their welfare and Salvation. And this was one of his great
businesses in the World, to teach the People the knowledge of God, and of his
Kingdom, and of the way thereto. So we find him, Preaching, and Teaching the
Word of God in the Synagogues, and in the Temple, and in the Houses and Ships;
and wheresoever the people resorted to him; taking all occasions thereto. Mat.
4.17, 23. and 5.1, 2. and 13.1, 3, 4. Mar. 1.14, 15, 21, 38, 39. and 2.2. Mat.
26.58. Luke 21.37, 38. Joh. 18.20. And he spoke and taught them, as one having
authority: even the authority of God his Father; and not as the Scribes. Mat.
7.29. Job. 7.16, 17. Therein, both declaring to men, the love and goodness of
God to the World. Joh. 3.16, 17. And his special love and goodness to them that
believe on him. Joh. 16.27, 28. And his perfect hatred of evil. Mar. 9, 42, 43,
44, 48. And in a Word, both the name of the Father. Joh. 17.6. And his Word,
Instructions, or Commands. ver. 7.8. With Chap. 12.49, 50. And so what was, and
is his will concerning us, that we might be saved and live. Joh. 5.24. and
6.29. etc. And all things whatsoever we need to know, believe, and practice.

2. By his walking, works, and doings; exhibiting God and his Name, and nature
to the eyes of Men, as it were, as well as to their ears; for he was God
manifested in the Flesh. 1 Timothy 3.16. So as God, even the invisible God might
be seen in him, as in his proper and most perfect Image. 2 Cor. 4.4. Col. 1.15.
Thence it is said by our Savior, He that believes on me, believes not on me,
but on him that sent me; and he that sees me, sees him that sent me. Joh.
12.44.45. And when Philip said to him, Lord show us the Father, and it
suffices. Jesus reproving and instructing him, made this answer, Have thou
been so long time with me Philip, and have thou not known me? he that has seen
me, has seen the Father; and how say thou, show us the Father? Joh. 14.8, 9.
Signifying to us, that the invisible God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
was so made manifest in him, that in perceiving, and beholding his power,
wisdom, and goodness, love, holiness, meekness, patience, wrath, etc. The same
Attributes of God, might be discerned and known, and so it might in him be
seen; how able, and wise, and willing God is to help, save, and succor his
poor Creatures; to forgive their sins, to heal their diseases, to succor them
in their needs, instruct their ignorances, comfort them in their diseases. How
loving, and good he is to all, and yet, how he hates their sins and sinfulness.
And how especially, good and loving to the truly virtuous; such as are subject
to, and followers of him, etc. So that here God afforded to man a sight of
himself, and of his excellencies in the Son of Man, and in his demeanours, and
carriages, doings, and sufferings; that we might know him, love him, believe in
him, obey and follow him, and be saved by him, and satisfied in, and with him.
How great a benefit was this to the World, to have God so represented, and made
manifest to them? and especially, to such in it; as closed with, and followed
him out of their false Principles and ways, learning of, and obeying him: who
saw his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father. John 1.14. So
as it might in him be verified, what is said in Psalm. 68.25. They have seen thy
goings O God, the goings of my God, my King (That is Christ) in holiness, or in
the holy Place or Sanctuary. Again,

3. By his walking as man, toward God and Man. He has by his example, not
only showed us, what God is, and how he walks toward and among men; but also,
how men ought to walk, and please God in their demeaners of themselves toward
God and men: for, as he was man, the Son of man, walking in God, he has given
us a perfect pattern and example, of what God requires of, and likes in us men.
As it is said, He has left us an example, that we should follow his steps. 1
Pet. 2.21. And as himself said, I have given you an example (or pattern) that
as I have done to you, so ye should do. John 13.15. And so he has showed us in
himself, how we should obey the call and command of God his Father, to us. How
we should perfectly love and trust in God, and commit our selves, and our ways
to him; doing all things commanded by him, without murmuring, and without
disputing. How we should patiently and quietly submit our selves to him in all
trials, temptations and sufferings that he orders to us: perfectly casting our
selves upon him therein, and trusting to him for his support and seasonable
deliverance. And so therein he has showed us a perfect pattern of Humility and
Patience. And so for walking toward men, he has set us an example of perfect
Charity, seeking the good of all, and doing hurt to, or seeking or desiring the
harm of none: and yet how, when we seek to do them good, we should not have
fellowship with them in their sins; but in meekness reprove them, and where
need is, use sharpness therein: that is, where men are guileful and
Hypocritical, proud and conceited, and there-through set themselves against
Gods glory, and the good of others, under pretense of Religion and Piety
toward him. And such were the Scribes, Pharisees, Lawyers, and the like; so
smartly reproved by our Lord. Mat. 23. Luke 11. and 13.14, 15. So Christ also
has set forth himself as an example of subjection to the Magistrates, and of
paying wrongfully, and to our own damage, what they demand of us, rather then
give offense by contending with them, and striving against them therein. Mat.
17.24, 25, 26, 27. As also, of patient putting up, and suffering injuries from
them or others. 1 Pet. 2.21, 22, 23. And so of all Righteousness and goodness,
and of all tender care of, and love to such as are good, or desire so to be;
and to that purpose yield themselves willing and ready to learn, that they may
know, and obey the truth. John 15.9, 10. and 10.15. and 13.34. etc. And he that
says, he abides in him, ought even so to walk, as he has walked. John. 2.6.
And surely this in every branch of it was a very great grace, or gracious
condescension of God to us men, that he in the person of the Word should be
made Flesh, and therein give us an evidence of himself, his name, nature, and
will concerning us, both by his vocal Doctrine and Ministry; and by his own
demeanor and walking in the Flesh; both showing us the way of Gods walking
toward man; and the way how man ought to walk toward both God and Men. But
again,

2. In his being the Son of Man; that is, very man: he has given us the
greater ground of boldness and confidence in our dependence on him, and
approach to God by him, as the Mediator of God and Man, and the high Priest and
Apostle of our professiion, in that thereby he has both contracted an affinity
and kindred to us (as is partly said before) and has had experience of what is
in man; even of the weakness and frailty of the nature of man; and what
temptations, oppositions, and evils from Men, and Devils they are exposed to,
and meet with that walk with God, and by Word, and Conversation, witness
against the wickedness of men; and war against the lies and deceipts of
Satan. As also he has had an experimental knowledge, of the weakness of the
nature of man, to stand under, and bear the Wrath of God; the hidings of his
face from, or strokes of his hand upon him. Inasmuch as he being made man, the
Son of man, has proved the frailties of man; and as a good man, obeying his
Father, has grappled with the contradictions of sinners, and the rage and
malice of evil man, and Devils: and as bearing our sins in his own body on the
Tree, has felt in his humanity, the force and power of the Wrath of God. And
so also has had trial of poverty, reproaches, hunger, thirst, weariness, etc.
Through which, he is the meeter to be the high Priest over the house of God,
and the mediator for us. This the Apostle mentions. Heb. 2.17, 18. Wherefore it
behoved him in all things to be made like to his Brethren, that he might be a
merciful, and a faithful high Priest in things pertaining to God to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he suffered being
tempted. He is able also to succor those that are tempted. And in Heb. 4.14,
5. As the greatness of his Person in being the Son of God, and gone into the
Heavens: So also the reality of his Manhood, and therein the experience he had
of our condition, is made an encouragement to a bold and confident approach to
him, and so to God for his mercy and grace, to be extended to us for our
seasonable help: for so those words employ, wherein it is said, Let us hold
fast the profession of our Faith, for we have not an high Priest, that cannot
be touched with the feeling of our infirmities: but was in all points tempted
like to us, without sin. (And that was also for our great advantage, that he
sinned not under any temptation, for he thereby is the more pure and acceptable
to the holy and pure God, in all his actings for us with him.) Let us therefore
go boldly, etc. Were there any sort of men of any Profession or occupation,
that stood in need to Petition the King in any thing of concernment for their
welfare, or for removing any impediment thereto, redressing any grievance or
the like: of what great advantage would it be to them, to have a friend that is
set up purposely by the King, to seek their welfare; so gracious with the King,
as that there is none like him, with him: his ear, and eye, and heart and hand,
all at his dispose as it were. And this person one advanced from among the men
of that Profession and occupation; and one that himself had been sometime,
before such his advancement, tried, and exercised with the very same grievances
that they now groan under, and seek redress in! Surely, in such a case, though
they might have no encouragement to hope of success upon their own account, as
being ignorant how to draw their Petition, and how to present it in such
manner, as might be becoming the person and presence of one so Mighty; having
been also rebels against him: yet, in the confidence of their friends interest
in him, and faithfullness to them, how might they be assured of speeding, in
putting up their Petition by his hand, and as directed, formed, and tendered by
him? Such our case. Our Lord Jesus that came on purpose into the World to save
sinners, and is gone up to the Father to be our friend with him. A Prince and
Savior ever living, as the great high Priest, to make intercession for them
that come to God by him, is, one of us, as it were, a real man, and our
kinsman, and has been tried with our infirmities, temptations, and grievances,
and so knows our mold and temper, as to the weakness and frailty of it, by his
own proper experience. And how also may that give encouragement to hope for
mercy and help from him, as in mediating with God for us, so in ordering the
government of God, as the great Prince and Lord over us, so as not to lay upon
us more then we can bear; much less, more then is equal and right? He being
also such a lover of us, as is manifest in the next consideration. Namely that,

3. He therefore became the Son of Man, and so a real very man, that he might
be in a capacity to suffer, and offer for us, what was needful and behooveful
for our Redemption from sin and death; and for obtaining for us Gods favor and
blessing. It was his great business in coming into the World to save sinners.
And to that purpose, to take away sin by the sacrifice of himself. 1 John 3.5.
Heb. 9.26. Now in all Sacrifices for Sin, there was the suffering of the
Sacrifice to Death; that being given, and taken in exchange for the Sinner, who
ought to have suffered else for his own sin: and then there was the offering of
it up unto God on the Altar as a gift, as it were, to him. Now, then Christ
being come into the World to take, or purge away our sin by Sacrifice, was
first to bear our sin on himself, even the punishment of it, and so suffer for
it, as to satisfy Gods Justice, and make amends to the Law, that sin had
violated; that so God might with equity and justice, release the punishment,
and forgive the sinner; and so destroy the interest, right, and title of him
that had the power of Death, that is the Devil, to urge for, or be an arbitrary
inflicter of punishment upon us, according to his will. Christ, as in the form
of God; and as God could not suffer the weight of our sin and punishment unto
Death. Therefore it was behooveful, that he should be made in a nature capable
of suffering: And what should that be for us men, but the nature of man, even
the same that sinned? And so it is said in Heb. 2.14. Forasmuch, as the Children
were partakers of flesh and blood. He himself also took part of the same, that
by Death he might destroy him who had the power of Death, that is, the Devil.
As implying, that he could not have destroyed the Devil; that is, made null his
Power and Jurisdiction over us, but by death. Nor could he have died to that
end, if he had not been partaker of flesh, and blood with us; and therefore he
took part with us, in flesh and blood; that is, was made of a Woman and under
the Law, in the similitude of sinful flesh. The Son of Man, That he might be
capable of suffering such things as Death and Curse for us, to redeem and
deliver us from death, and curse, and from the fear of them. And to the same
purpose he speaks of his offering, in Chap. 8.3. With 10.5, 6, 10. Every high
Priest is appointed to offer gifts and sacrifices: wherefore also it was
necessary, that this man should have something to offer. And what that was, is
said. Chap. 10.5, 6, 10. Namely, the body that God prepared for him; the body
of his flesh that died. This through the eternal Spirit, being raised from the
dead, he offered up unto God for us, as an offering of a sweet smelling savor
unto him. In which God finding rest, and well-pleasedness; through him he is
gracious and propitious to us. Upon this account therefore, and upon this
mainly; it was needful, that Christ should be the Son of man, very man for us.
For as Adam was something before he was a man; namely, dust and clay, something
below the nature of man, and therefore in that form incapable of knowing, and
praising God, till being made into a man, endued with a reasonable and
understanding Soul, he was made capable: so even so Christ also was something
before he was a man, something higher and better then earthly man, even the
Lord in heaven, and therefore not capable, as being in the form of God of
dying, and so of being an offering and sacrifice for man, so as in the Nature
of man he was: and this is that, wherein the greatness of Gods grace was
testified toward us, in making his only begotten Son the propitiation or
propitiatory Sacrifice for our sins, to prepare him a body for us, and to lay
the iniquities of us all upon him therein. And this is the foundation and
bottom, as well as also the great and main matter of his declaration to us, of
what concerns us to know; and the foundation and ground of his appearing for
us, with his Father as Mediator of God and Man, and the great High Priest over
his house; and his being Man, ( the Son of Man. Verily man,) fitted him for
this, both as thereby he had what to suffer in, and what to offer: as also, I
might add, as therein he became our Brother and Kinsman, as is said before:
and so according to the Law of Moses. Levit. 25.48, 49. The The right of
redeeming us, appertained to him. For the man that has sold himself for a
servant, must be redeemed by one of kin to him, as is there said. And that he
might hint to us all this grace of God, in these forementioned branches we may
understand him, stiling himself the Son of Man. That Is the Fourth.

Reas. 5. Lastly, he styles himself the Son of Man; (or, as some read it, That
Son of Man) with reference to that Prophecy of Daniel that went before of him,
in which he was represented in such an appearance, and so declared: that he
might signify, that he is that Son of Man of whom the said Prophet wrote, and
spoke in his said Vision. And so to show himself to be what is therein
signified; which, what it was may be perceived by considering the place. It is
in Dan. 7. Where God showed to Daniel the things that were to come to pass in
the World. The Kingdoms that should be set up and take place therein. And so he
saw first four great Beasts arise up out of the Sea, which the Angel afterward
tells him should be four Kings; that is, succesion^ of Kings, or Kingdoms with
their Kings, as may appear by comparing ver. 17. With ver. 23. Now those four
Beasts, Kings, or Kingdoms, were the four Kingdoms or Empires of the Gentiles
or Heathen, that should with their Kings and Emperors have the great command
of the Earth; and they are represented like Beasts there (or as the word
properly signifies, Wild, or Savage Beasts; as the Lion, Bear, Leopard, and the
fourth, a composure of them all. Ver. 7. With Rev. 13.2.) To signify, and
imply, the Savageness, Brutishness, and unreasonableness of those Governments:
That they should rule by Might, Will, and Power, more then by (yea with a
neglect and contempt of) right, reason, and equity, as indeed they have
generally done. But then in ver. 13. There is a Vision of one said to be like
the Son of man coming in the clouds of Heaven, brought near to the ancient of
days; to whom was given dominion and glory. And a Kingdom, that all Nations,
Peoples and Languages should obey and serve him Now this is afterward
interpreted to be the Kingdom of the Saints, or of the People of the Saints of
the most high God. ver. 26, 27. In which, Christ shall be the great King and
Governor; and he therefore is principally and properly denoted by that one
like to the Son of Man, to whom was given the Dominion, Glory, and Kingdom, as
was before expressed. But by the opposition of this mention of his appearance,
to the mention of the appearance and resemblance of the other Kings and
Kingdoms is denoted doubtless: not only, that he should be a real Man, as to
the verity of his human nature, to whom the Kingdom should be given: But also,
that he should be as the Son of Man, as to his Government, and ordering of the
Kingdom, in distinction from, or opposition to those that would be, and Govern
like Savage and Ravenous Beasts. Namely, that he should Govern, and his Kingdom
be governed, or ordered, by right, reason, equity, mildness, gentleness, and
discretion, etc. Which things belong to man as made of God, and in distinction
from the Bruit and Savage Beasts. And so that He should reign in righteousness,
and his Princes (the Saints reigning with him) should decree Justice and govern
with Law and equity. Isa. 32.1, 2. Now our Savior in calling himself the, or
that Son of Man. May, (and as I apprehend did) therein imply, and signify,
that he was that person spoken of in that Vision and Prophecy; to whom the
Kingdom and Glory, and Dominion was appointed, and should be given of God. To
whom, all Peoples, Nations, and Languages owe obedience and service. And who
should and will Judge the Nations of the Earth (both as to that Judgment
exercised in his Word and Providence, and by his Spirit now: And as to his
ordering the Government of God, judging, disposing, and reigning at the last,
in his glorious Kingdom with his Saints) in equity and righteousness, according
to the rules of that reason that is sound indeed: even according to the word
and mind of God. To this purpose it is also, that our Savior said, John 5.22,
23, 26. That the Father Judges no man, but has committed all Judgment (or
Government) to the Son, that all men might honor the Son, even as they honor
the Father. He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father that sent
him. And he has given him power to execute Judgment also, because he is the
Son of man; even the or that Son of Man; who in the night Visions were seen to
be brought nigh to the ancient of days; to whom the Dominion, Glory, and
Kingdom was given. And that phrase [because he is the Son of Man] in this view
of it implies also because of his equity, reasonableness, sound judgment,
wisdom, and discretion, with freedom from all brutish ignorance, self-will,
unrighteousness, cruelty, unreasonableness, partiality, and such other passions
and dis-affections as too commonly blind other Governors, or persons that
exercise Authority.

Such may be the reasons of Christ's being styled, or stiling himself the Son of
Man. Every of them worthy to be duly considered by us, and rightly improved for
moving us to love, and thankfulness to God. High-prizings, and ready receipt of,
closing and complying with the Lord Jesus Christ, in his addresses to us; his
gracious calls to, and counsels of us: turning at his reproofs, obeying his
commands, and submitting to his rule and Government in all things. Having hope
and confidence in his graciousness, who has showed such love and respect to
us; and is so nearly related to, yea, become one with us.

But I shall pass on to the remaining particulars now, to be considered from
this Scripture in hand by us.

CHAP. V.
A twofold sense of the Phrase of lifting up; and what is employed in it in the
latter sense especially,

THE next thing then to be considered by us is, That this Son of Man, the Lord
Jesus Christ must be lifted up. Concerning which Phrase, it is to be minded,
that it signifies two ways, as used in the Scriptures.

1. To lift up. Is sometimes to take away; or so to lift up, as to take away by
lifting up from the place or station one is set in, by putting him to death:
and so the phrase of lifting up, is used in the interpretation of the Dream of
Pharoahs chief Baker. Where it is said, Genesis 40.19. Yet within three days shall
Pharaoh lift up thine head from off thee, and hang thee on a Tree. And in ver.
20. It is said of Pharaoh, That he lifted up the head of the chief Baker;
hanging the chief Baker, as Joseph had interpreted. ver. 22. And in this sense,
to lift up, is to take away, more properly by such a death, as in which the
body is lifted up from the Earth, as to be hanged on a Tree. And so its applied
also to our Savior, with respect to his death, and the manner of it: as the
Jews also understood him. John 12. For having said. And, I if I be lifted up,
will draw all men to me. It is added, this spoke he, as signifying what manner
of death he should dye. As implying, That the Phrase of lifting up, had respect
to his Death; and that the Jews understood it, of a way of dying is apparent in
the next verse, where it follows, The people answered him, we have heard out of
the Law, that Christ abides for ever: how say thou then, the Son of Man must
be lifted up! who is this Son of Man? Plainly implying, that they understood
his words (after an use of it in the Syriack Language, then frequently or
usually spoken by them) to import, a taking him away by death. And then the
Evangelist^ note^, in the verse before [ that this he spoke signifying what (or
what manner of) death he should dye] may plainly include in it, his being
hanged on a Tree (as Pharoahs chief Butler was) in a sort. And as Christ is
said to have been, in his being Crucified. Act. 5.30. The God of our Fathers
raised up Jesus whom ye slew, and hanged on a tree. And the same expression is
used by the same Apostle Peter. Act. 10.39. And by the Apostle Paul it is
employed in Acts. 13.29. in saying, They took him down from the tree. And more
plainly in Gal. 3.13. In saying, Christ has Redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, being made a curse for us. As it is written, Cursed is every one that is
hanged on a tree. Where the same way of punishing, that is called by Moses, a
hanging on the tree; is applied to Christ's being Crucified. Though yet possibly
there may be more in that expression [signifying what manner of death he should
dye] Viz. That he should dye as a Sacrifice, as a public propitiatory
Sacrifice for us, a ransom for all. 1 Timothy 2.6. And in this sense Christ was
lifted up by men; they lifted him up from the Earth, so as to take away his
life from off the Earth, or to cut him off from the Land of the living. As the
phrase is, Isa. 53 8. And so it was foresaid by our Savior, John 8.28. When
ye have lifted up the Son of Man, then shall ye know that I am he, and that I
do nothing of my self, etc. Where it is evident, that he was to be lifted up in
this sense by the Jews. For it was the Jews (The hands of wicked men that slew
him, and hanged him on the tree) that lifted him up in this sense. And in that
sense it behoved him to be lifted up even by men, that all things written of
him might be fulfilled. As it is said, When they had fulfilled all things
written of him, they took him down from the Tree. That is, When they had put
him to death, the death of the Cross, slain him, and hanged him on the tree,
with all the spite and violence against him they used in reviling him, giving
him Vinegar to drink parting his Garments, and casting lots on his Vesture,
piercing him with a Spear in his side, etc. (for all these things were
fore-prophesied of him) They took him down, etc. Implying, that their so
slaying him, and putting him to death, their hanging him on a tree, was written
of before, and therefore was to be fulfilled; for the Scripture cannot be
broken; as is said by himself, John 10.35. That is, They must be fulfilled: as
he also employed in his saying to Peter, Think thou not, that I could pray
the Father, and he would send me more then twelve Legions of Angels? But how
then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? Mat. 26.54. and
ver. 56. All this was done, that the Scriptures of the Prophets might be
fulfilled. See also, Act. 3.18. Mat. 27.35. With Psalm. 22.16. and 69.21. Zech.
12.10. With John 19.34.37. As also, he must and ought thus to have been lifted
up, that the purpose of God might be accomplished: For they did herein
whatsoever his hand and his counsel had before determined to be done. As is
said, Acts 2.23. and 4.27.28. That so we might be redeemed from the curse of
the Law by his being made a Curse for us, as is said Gal. 3.13. Now seeing he
was thus lifted up, and there was such a necessity for it too, this sense of
his being lifted up must necessarily (if not most directly) be here included.
And to the use of the word lifting up in this sense, might be referred the
lifting up of the Talent of Lead with the Epha into which it was cast
(signifying wickedness) to be removed into the Land of Shinar. Zech. 5.6, 7.
And the lifting up of the Sacrifices upon the Altar to be burnt up. But I but
mention them. But

2. To lift up signifies often, to exalt, magnify, or glorify. And to the
same phrase of lifting up the head, is used by Joseph too, in his
interpretations, in a quite contrary sense to the former. In Genesis 40.13.20, 21.
For interpreting the chief Butlers Dream, he tells him, Within three days shall
Pharaoh lift up thy head, and restore thee into thy place; and thou shall
deliver Pharoahs cup into his hand. And it came to pass (says verse. 20.) That
the third day, which was Pharaohs birth day, he lifted up the head of the chief
Butler, and he restored the chief Butler unto his chief Butlership again. And
so the lifting up the horn, was the exalting, and lifting it up on high. Psalm.
75.10. And according to the Spirit, the exalting or magnifying the Kingdom and
Power of Christ and his Saints. 1. Chron. 25.5. And in this sense also Christ
was to be lifted up; that is, exalted: and that both by God and Men, as we may
see. And in this sense, the same Greek word here rendered lifted up, is often
translated, to exalt, or to be exalted or magnified. As in Mat. 23.12. Luke
14.11. and 18.14. Act. 2.33. and 5.31. But in this sense of lifting up, there
is something employed, even that which was done, and included in the former
sense, or way of his being lifted up: Namely,

1. That he was, or is down, as it were; made low, and in a low place,
condition, or esteem. For as when the Psalmist had said by the holy Ghost, Thou
have ascended up on high. The Apostle from it inferrs, Now that he Ascended,
what is it but that be first Descended into the lower parts of the earth? Psalm.
68.18. With Ephesians. 4.8, 9. So we may say here, in that he says, The Son of Man
must be lifted up. What is it, but that the Son of man was below, or was down,
in a mean state or posture; and in a lower place then that, to which he must be
lifted up? And surely so he was; and in some sense is so yet. As to say,

1. In respect of bodily place. This Son of man was (though now he is not) here
upon the Earth, born here, and living, walking, acting, and conversing here.
Though he was the heavenly One, the Lord in Heaven; yet, he came from Heaven,
from above. As it is said, He that comes from above, or from Heaven, is above
all. John 3.32. He was above, in respect of what he was before he was manifest
to men. But he descended into the lower parts of the Earth; the lower parts of
Gods Creation, the Earth. Yea, into the lower parts, the heart of the Earth.
Ephesians 4.9. Matt. 12.40. And so it is said by him. And I when I am lifted up from
the Earth will draw all men to me. John 12.32. He was then on the Earth, and
thence to be lifted up on the Earth in respect of place. And

2 In respect of State; in respect of what God did to him; and what he
submitted and yielded up himself to: he was in a low and humble state and
appearance among men in the world; being of rich made and become poor, that we
through his poverty might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8, 9. Of one in the form of God,
not thinking it robbery to be equal with God. He was made in the form of a
Servant, and was found in the fashion and habit of a man, Phil. 2.6, 7. Being
made of a Woman, he partook with us in Flesh and Blood, and was made under the
Law, in a Bondage and Servile state. A Servant to Rulers; though he was Lord of
all, Gal. 4.4.5. Isa. 49.7. Born of a mean and poor parentage; as was evident
in the entertainment given them in the Inn when his Parents were thrust into
the Stable, and he when born was entertained there in a Manger. As also, by the
offering of his Virgin Mother, offering, according to the appointment of the
Law of Moses for poor people, whose hand or sufficiency could not reach to the
offering a Lamb. Viz. A pair of Pigeons, or two Turtle Doves. Luke 2.7, 24.
With Levit. 12, 8. As also in that his reputed Father, to whom the Virgin his
Mother was espoused, was not a person of any great port in the World, or in any
office or dignity; but a Carpenter, as he was called. Mat. 13.53. Yea, and it
appears, that he himself sometimes wrought of that Trade; being therefore
called by way of reproach the Carpenter. Mark. 6.3. And when he manifested
himself to Israel, he was not attended with any great followers: but his
Disciples were noted to be illiterate and mean men, Fishers, Tole-gatherers,
and the like. So as that the people stumbled at that matter; saying, Have any
of the Rulers or Pharisees believed on him, but this people that know not the
Law are accursed. John 7.47, 48. Yea, and he himself, when one said, he would
follow him; replied, Foxes have their holes and the Birds of the Air have their
nests; but the Son of Man has not whereon to lay his head. Luke 9.58. Yea, and
he went lower, descending into the lower parts of the Earth; into great
sorrows, and sufferings, agonies, and overwhelmings of his heart, so as to the
Death and Grave, Dying the Death of the Cross; the only accursed death. Deuteronomy.
21.22, 23. With Gal. 3.13. Being therein numbered with Transgressors: yea, and
being dead, he was taken down and laid in the Earth, in the heart of the earth,
(as we noted before) Mat. 12.40. Making his Grave with the rich, and with the
wicked in his death. Isa. 53.9. Yea, he was compassed about with the snares of
death, and the pangs of Hell caught hold upon him, so as he found we and
sorrow. Psalm. 116.2, 3. and 18.4, 5, 6. A Worm and no Man, a Man of sorrow, and
acquainted with griefs. Yea, his Soul went down into Hell, in his great
sufferings, for our sakes; as his not being left there implies. Act. 2.27.31.
So low was he brought; and this was low ind^ed, lower, not only then the
Angels, but also, as to his abasement therein, then other men: and from such a
casting down, was he to be lift up. Job. 22.29.

3 In respect of his esteem with, and among men: He was, and so is still, too
low in Men's hearts, in their thoughts, and accounts of him, and affections to
him. There he was very low in all his appearance: in his Birth when they
afforded him not room in the Inn. And in his Life, when they that were his own,
received him not, though he came to them in his Fathers name: even in the name,
power, and authority of God. John 1.11. and 5.43. Doing such things as none
else did, and speaking such things, as none else ever spoke. Yea, they not only
received him not, but also rejected, and despised him. As it was
fore-prophesied. Isa. 53.1, 2, 3. Who has believed our report? and to whom is
the arm of the Lord revealed? For he shall grow up as a tender plant before
him: as a root out of a dry ground. He has no form, nor comeliness, and when we
see him, there is no beauty, that we should desire him. He is despised and
rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief. (As an hiding of
faces from him, or from us, or) We hid as it were our faces from him; he was
despised, and we esteemed him not. Yea, he was laden with ^corns and reproaches
to the breaking of his heart. Psalm. 69.20. He was reputed, and reproached as a
Wine-^ibber, and a Glutton; because he came eating, and drink^ng. Yea, as a
friend of Publicanes and Sinners. Mat. 11. ^9. He was traduced and Blasphemed,
as if he had been ^ Samaritan and had a Devil. John 8.48. Yea, as if he ^ast
out Devils by Beel-zebub the Prince of Devils. Luke 11. 15. Nay, they called
him by the name of Beel-zebub the Prince of Devils himself; as is employed, Mat.
10.25. They traduced his Doctrine and doings; as if he was a Sabbath-breaker, a
Deceiver, a Seducer of the people, a Blasphemer, an enemy to Caesar; and
whatsoever else Satan, and their own malice could suggest. So that herein his
visage was more marred then any man's, and his form, more then the Sons of men,
Isa. 52.13, 14. But how much more did they show their low esteems of him in his
Death, when coming out against him, as against a Thief, or evil doer, with
Lanthorns and Torches, Swords, and Staves to apprehend him, they took him with
wicked hands, and leading him away bound to the Highpriests, from one to
another, from Anias to Caiaphas, they there falsely accused, and condemned him,
as guilty of Blasphemy; and then offered manifold indignities to him. They spit
in his face, buffeted him, and smote him with the palms of their hands:
taunted him, reproached him, and spoke many things blasphemously against him,
Luke 22.63, 64, 65. And in the mean while, as one of his own Disciples had
before betrayed him; and the rest left him in his troubles, and fled: So the
first, and forwardest of them, even Peter denied him. Then he was led to the
Civil Magistrate, and there falsely cried out against, as a maintainer and
keeper of Seditious Conventicles, or Meetings. For, what else ^ignifie their
sayings, that he perverted the Nation, and forbad Tribute to Caesar? And the
Magistrate, even against his own mind and conscience, was urged and persuaded
to Condemn him, and deliver him up to them to be Crucified: wherein a Murderer
was let go, and preferred before him; when also the Powers of Darkness had
their force upon him: and both Jews and Gentiles insulted over him. Herod, and
Pilate, though enemies before, were made friends about him. The rude Soldiers
offered all reproachful abuses to him: they stripped him, and put on him a purple
Robe in derision; platted a Crown of Thorns, put a Reed in his hand, bowed the
knee to him, and cried in mockage, Hail King of the Jews. Yea, and then they
spit on him, smote him on the head; and when they had done their mind to him,
led him away and Crucified him: and therein also showed their cruelty further,
in giving him Gall as it were in his meat, and Vinegar to drink, Psalm. 69.21.
Yea, the high Priests, the Scribes, Elders, and rest of the people: yea, and
very Malefactors taunted, and reviled him as he hung upon the Cross. And this
the rather, because the wrath and Curse due to us for our sins, lying heavy on
him, he was filled with sorrow and deep distress; and was as one weak in their
hands, that could not rescue himself from their abuses; and cried out, as
forsaken of God. Whence they judged him, stricken, smitten of God and
afflicted. Though indeed, He was wounded and tormented for our transgressions,
bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace fell upon him, and
through his stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.4, 5. But these things did not
appear to men, in his humilation, his judgment being taken away. And therefore
also, in, and after his Death, they deemed him a Deceiver, and took care to
shut him up fast in his Sepulcher, least his Disciples stealing him away in the
night, should cry him up, as if he was risen from the Dead: Which they also
suborned the Soldiers to report when he was risen; That so they might still
keep him from finding any credit or respect in the World: Whence also, he was
yet through the false and subtle endeavors of men, and Devils (God permitting
it, both as a just punishment upon, and means of hardening the impenitently
wicked, for their malicious wickedness: and as an occasion of the more clear
manifestation of his Divine Power and Virtue, to such as he accounted worthy
thereof) vilified and contemned in his Doctrine, and blasphemed in his Person
after his Resurrection, by all whose eyes through unbelief Satan prevailed to
blind, That the light of the glory of the Gospel of Christ, the Image of God
should not shine into them. 2 Cor 4.4. And so he stands yet in the hearts of
the Jews, the vail being hitherto over their hearts: and too much in truth, as
to the hearty esteem of him, and faith in him in, and among the Gentiles; yea,
even the professed Christians too; who too generally strip him of his own
apparel, his own appearance, as represented in the plain, faithful preaching of
the Gospel; And put on him a purple Robe, rendering him, as a Worldly Christ or
King, suitable to the Whore or false Church. Rev. 17.4. And Crown him with
Thorns, with honors as little delightful to him, or fruitful to others, as
Thorns are; And put a Reed in his hand for a Scepter, a mock Power; as if his
threatenings and punishments were not much to be dreaded: and what they
attribute to him, they turn against himself, and Sovereignty, etc. But of that
I shall not here enlarge. What is said, evidences his being low, sometimes both
in himself, and in men's esteem of him; and too low in this latter respect; too
generally yet, and that is one thing implied in this phrase, That he must be
lifted up. But yet further,

2. That he is the subject of this lifting, or to be lifted, up, as he is the
Son of Man; Not as he is the Son of God simply considered: though he be also
the Son of God. It is the same person, that is both the Son of Man, and the Son
of God, in different respects. Yea, the only begotten Son of God; yet our
Savior says not, the Son of God must be lifted up, but the Son of Man; and
good reason for it: for it was not as the Son of God, simply considered that he
was low; for therein the Nature of Man was exalted, in being made the Son of
God: and that also was one act of his exaltation, as the Son of Man or seed of
David. He, as the Son of God abiding, only, as the Son of God, without Being,
made the Son of Man, had not therein been low or abased, but had a bid in his
proper height, incapable of higher exaltation in himself: but it was the Son of
God, become the Son of Man, that was abased and low, and therefore as the Son
of Man (though also the Son of God, in that form or state) that was to be
exalted or lifted up. Which is worthy to be noted, against those who make the
humanity of Christ to be but a dispensation made use of for a time; that is,
till the Spirit was sent forth to be the Comforter: and then as Moses and his
ministration passed away to give place to Christ and his Ministration, when he
came in the flesh: So Christ his flesh, or his being in it, was to pass away
and cease. And men's minding his flesh humanity, or dispensation therein to pass
away, in the coming of the Spirit. Indeed, his appearing in the flesh, to
Minister in it, and as a man, by personal acting, preaching, and working
Miracles visibly among men was to cease, not at the coming of the Spirit, but
before it, and to make way for it, to be powered forth upon the Disciples; that
they in, and by it, might be enabled and strengthened to minister in his stead.
But his Flesh or Body, neither ceased to be in him, nor to be useful to, and
for us, and needful to be known, understood and considered by us, even after
the Spirit, was sent forth upon the Apostles; for the Spirit when he came,
witnessed of him who was in the Flesh; and confessed him (not come in the
Spirit but) come in the Flesh. Says, 1 John 4.2. And every Spirit that
confesses not Christ come in the flesh, but lays him aside in that
consideration, as no more needful to be eyed or known (and so that speaks of
him, as gone out of the flesh; except they thereby only mean, out of his frail
infirm state) is not of God: but is that Spirit of Antichrist that was to come
into the World; and now is in the World. ver. 3. It is the Son of Man, which
the Spirit cannot be said to be, that is, to be lifted up. Let that be minded
by us.

3. I might also note, that in saying the Son of Man must be lifted up, there
is implied some agent to lift him up; for where there is a subject to be
wrought upon, there is also in what is wrought upon, or about it; something
that acts, or works; as when any thing is heated, there is something heats it.
When any thing is beaten, there is something, or person beats it. So, when any
thing is exalted, or lifted up, there is some thing, or person exalts it. As
Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness: so there is some body, some
persons, or person that must lift up the Son of Man; which we shall inquire
into, and consider who, or what it is in our speaking further to the act it
self, of lifting him up. Which we come now to consider, more fully; as taken in
the second sense of that expression, as the lifting up signifies, to Exalt, or
Magnify.

CHAP. VI.
A Twofold way of Exalting the Son of Man; either by real Action upon his
person, namely: Or by demonstration of him, and his worth and excellency to
others. The former of these is here enlarged upon.

NOW Christ the Son of Man, may be capable of lifting up, or being exalted, two
ways, suitable to the twofold way of his being low: that is,

1. As to real and Personal Exaltation, by something acted upon himself. Or,

2. As to Demonstration and Manifestation of him to others, for exalting him in
their views, and esteems. Let us consider these Two ways distinctly. And so, 1.

1. As to the former; He was exalted and lifted up of God, even the Father. He
exalted, lifted up, and glorified him, as was behoveful and needful for us; in
diverse Acts. As to say,

1. In his taking the Humanity, or Seed of David, Abraham, and so of the Woman.
The Son of Man into unity of Person, with his Eternal Word, or only begotten
Son. As was hinted by the way before. And this was a great favor to, and
exaltation of that Seed. As it is said, I have laid help upon one that is
mighty. I have Exalted one chosen out of the People, Psalm. 89.19. And that holy
thing that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. Luke 1.35.
Though indeed this was rather a lifting up that Nature, then that Person.

2. In his calling him forth, to suffer for us; or rather, his accepting him,
and his sufferings for us, as a valuable price of our Redemption, a
satisfaction to his Justice, and Sacrifice, or Atonement for our sins. And so
our Savior himself may be understood to say, when speaking of the hour of his
sufferings; he says, John 12.23. The hour is come, that the Son of Man should
be glorified. And when Judas was gone out to betray him into the hands of
sinners; he said, Now is the Son of Man glorified; and God is glorified in him.
John 13.31. And with that agrees the Apostle, in Heb. 2.9. Where he says, That
Jesus was Crowned with glory and honor, for the suffering of Death: that he by
the Grace of God might cast Death for every man. Not only that he was glorified
through sufferings, but that he might taste Death. And indeed, as the other, so
this also was a great glory and honor (though a great abasement in the World,
and suffering in himself, as he was the Son of God) that the Father should
account and value him at so high and great a rate, as to judge him, this Son of
Man, of sufficient value to answer for, and expiate the sins of the World.
Whereas, all other Sacrifices (though all the Beasts of Lebanon) could not be
sufficient for a burnt sacrifice: nor all the Wood in that mighty Forest
sufficient to burn, to kindle that fire, that should consume that, that should
be pleasing to him for any man's sin, Isa. 40.16. Not thousands of Rams, nor ten
thousand rivers of Oil, no nor the fruit of the body, even the firstborn, for
the sin of the Soul. Mic. 6.7. No nor the richest, wealthiest man in the world,
how ever full of riches, or high and mighty, could by all his riches (though he
offer them all, or lay them all out in Sacrifices, to be offered up to God, for
any one man though his dearest brother) could make an expiation of his sins, so
as to give thereby a sufficient price to God for him, that he might live for
ever, and not see Corruption. So precious is the Redemption of the Soul. Psalm.
49.7, 8. Yet God has accepted the abasement, sufferings, and sacrifice of his
Son, the Son of Man; as a valuable, sufficient Ransom for all men; so as
through him to preach remission of their sins, to them, and justify all that
believe on him, upon that account, from all things, from which they could not
be justified by the Law of Moses, and all its sacrifices: yea, so as to
justify all from that first Sentence of Condemnation, so as they shall none of
them perish therein, but be all raised up again therefrom. The Free gift
herethrough abounding to all men, to the justification of life. Romans 3.22, 23,
24. and 5.18. 1 Timothy 2.6. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. This honor God put upon none else,
Man or Angel, to call them forth to that Judgment, to satifie for, and redeem
any man from death, and destruction. But he has so magnified his Son, as to
look upon him, as sufficient to be the propitiation for the sins of the whole
World. If it be a magnifying a man (as Job says) to take pains with him, in
visiting him every morning, and trying him every moment that he might purify,
and purge him from sin, and render him fit for fellowship with him, Job 7.17,
18. Surely, then it was much more a magnifying the Son of Man, and a greater
account made of him, to take him as an offering and oblation, a ransom and
expiation for the sins of the whole World; so as upon that account to uphold,
and spare the whole World, during the day of his grace and patience; and to
justify, and save for ever, all that come to God, and abide with him, in, and
through him.

3. In his raising him up from the Dead; which was an eminent Act of the
exaltation and lifting up of his Person. A lifting him up from the gates of
Death, that he might show forth his praises in the gates of the Daughters of
Sion. As is said, Psalm. 9.13. And of this raising him up from the Dead, may
that be understood prophetically that is written in Psalm. 30.1, 2. Where this
Phrase is used, of lifting up. I will extol thee O Lord, for thou have lifted
me up, and have not made my foes to rejoice over me. Comparing it with ver. 3.
Where he says, O Lord, thou have brought up my Soul from the Grave. Thou have
kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit. Or rather (as the Hebrew
Word more properly signifies, and as Symmachus reads it) thou have quickened me,
or made me alive again, from my going down into the pit. Or as some read it;
from them that go down into the pit: in which he also was mightily declared, to
be the Son of God with power, Romans 1.3, 4.

4. Most fully in his exalting him at his right hand, in his Ascension, and
taking him up into his own Glory: that is called an exalting, or lifting him up.
Act. 5.31. For it is the same Word that is here Translated, lifted up. Him has
God exalted (or lifted up) with his right hand, a Prince and Savior, to give
repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins: This was most evidently and
fully a glorifying of him, according to what himself also said, John 13.31, 32.
Now is the Son of Man glorified, and God is glorified in him. If God be
glorified in him, God shall also glorify him, in himself; and shall straight
way glorify him. Of this it is said, God raised him from the dead, and gave him
glory, that your faith and hope might be in God. 1 Pet. 1.21. A lifting him up
indeed. For herein he was lifted up.

1. As to place: both out of Grave and Hell, and also out of, and above the
Earth, into the heavenly places; as in Ephesians. 1.20, 21. He raised him from the
dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenlies, or heavenly places;
for he is not entered into the holy places, made with hands: into which the High
Priests under the Law, used once a year to enter, but into Heaven it self. Heb.
9.24. To which agrees, 1 Pet. 3.22. He is gone up into Heaven. Yea, far above
all Heavens. All these visible, and perceptible heavens, or what are known to
us. Ephesians. 4.10. Into Heaven it self, and far above all Heavens. As opposed to
the Earth, from which he Ascended and went; and where other high Priests used
to Minister. Heb. 8.4. Unto which Earth, he shall descend again from Heaven,
when he comes again to Judge the World in righteousness. Act. 1.11. 1 These.
4.15, 16. As he was not in the Grave, when he was risen: So being now in
Heaven; he is not upon the Earth, in respect of that body, and personal Being,
in which he Ascended, and went up to Heaven. He was taken up into Heaven. So as
he truly said, I am no more in the World, but I come to thee. John 17.11. And I
leave the World, and go to the Father. John 16.28. And, me ye have not always.
Namely, present with you in body; in such a manner, as he said, The poor ye
have always with you. Matt. 26.11.

2. In respect of state, He is lifted up, and exalted to dignity and honor;
into a more excellent and glorious condition, then either he himself was in
here among men: or then other, either Man, or Angel is in, A State

1. Of greater felicity then ever any other man, or Angel was, or is in; his
Body, which was here subject to many infirmities and weaknesses, in the
similitude of sinful flesh, capable of being put to pain and smart, and
sensible of troubles, and injuries; yea, actually abased, dishonored, and made
vile: is now glorified, and become glorious. A body of glory, as its called in
the Greek. Phil. 3.20. And such is its Glory, that in its appearance from
Heaven to St Paul the glory shining from it, was in brightness, far surpassing
the glory of the Sun at midday. Act. 9.3. and 22.6. and 26.13. Compared with
ver. 16. And Chap. 22.14. With 1 Cor. 9.1. and 15.8. Yea, the glory of its
shining to him, struck him blind, so as that he could not see; so as the glory
of the Sun in its greatest brightness will not (at least on such a sudden) at
any time do. Act. 22.11: And as for his person, he is so in the presence of
God, and so immediately beholds his face, and is filled with his favor and
glory, that he is in that fullness of joy that is therein, and of the pleasures
that are there for evermore. The hope and assurance of which, exceedingly
animated and encouraged him in his sufferings, and unto them; so as to endure
the Cross, and despise the Shame; as appears, comparing Heb. 12.2. With Psalm.
16.8, 9, 10, 11. Which the Apostle Peter applies to Christ, as Prophetically
foreseen and spoken of him. Act. 2.25. This excellent and most happy State was
the Son of Man to be lifted up into; and accordingly into it he is lifted up,
and exalted. Being glorified with Gods own self, with the glory he had with
him, before the World was. John 17.5. The Son of Man, or Christ in the Nature
of Man, being taken, or received up into glory. 1 Timothy 3.16. So owned of God,
as no other, either Man, or Angel. So favored, as to have it said to him, so
as to none of the Angels. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And,
Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thy foes thy footstool. Heb. 1.5.13.
Yea, All the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him, bodily. Col. 2.9.

2. A State of greater Authority, Power, and Majesty. For he is set above all
Authorities, Principalities, Powers, Thrones, Might, or Dominion: yea, and
every name that is named; not only in this World, but in that which is to come.
Ephesians. 1.21. For, He has put all things under his feet. And, Given him to be
Head over all things, to his Church. ver. 22. The Head, top, or chief of all
Principality, and Power. Col. 2.10. Not only, Lord of Lords, and King of Kings.
Gods firstborn, higher then the Kings of the Earth. As Rev. 17.14. and 19.16.
Psalm. 89.27. But he is also A great King, above all Gods. Psalm. 95.2. Angels,
and Principalities, and Powers, being made subject to him. 1 Pet. 3.22. Lord of
all. Act. 10.36. Being made (in the Nature of Man) so much better, higher, and
more glorious then the Angels, at he has by inheritance obtained a more
excellent name then they: being, not only owned of God, as his Son, begotten by
him from the dead, to all this excel^ent glory, dignity, and majesty; even to
be set at his right hand, on the Throne of Majesty in the highest. Heb. 1.3, 4,
5, 13. and 8.1. But as set on Gods own Throne. Rev. 3.21. So as it is said to
all other Potestates and Powers. Let all the Angels of God. Or (as in Psalm.
97.7.) Worship him all ye Gods. And again, to him it is said: Thy Throne O God
endures for ever. The Scepter of thy Kingdom, is a Scepter of Righteousness,
(or a right Scepter.) Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity.
Therefore God, thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows. Above all other Gods, Potentates, or Powers, among either Men or
Angels. And thou Lord (Jehovah) in the beginning have laid the foundations of
the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of thy hands; they shall perish, but
thou remainest: they shall all wax old as a Garment, as a Vesture shall thou
change them. Or fold them up. And they shall be changed, but thou endurest, and
thy years shall not fail. Heb. 1.6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Yea, the Angels are all
Ministering Spirits to him: commanded by him, and with one consent proclaim him
the excellent, and worthy one. Worthy to receive Power, and Riches, and wisdom
and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. Rev. 5.11.12. In a word, All
Authority and Power in Heaven, and over the Earth is given unto him. And, all
that the Father has is his. Even all the Authority, Power, and fullness of the
Father; and it pleases to dwell in him. Mat. 28.18. John 16.14, 15. Col. 1.19.
and 2.9. So that it may well be said, as the Prophet foresaw. That He is
exalted, extolled, and very high. Higher then Moses, then Adam, or David; as
some Jewish Critics observe from the letters of the word Translated, [very]
being made up of the initial letters of those three Names. Yea, and should they
to Adam join Abraham, too, whose name begins with the same letter, their
observation might hold true. Isa. 52.13. And herein also, he is lifted up (and
so it behoved that he should be, that he should suffer such things as he did,
and so should enter into Glory. Luke 24.26.) That he might exercise and
discharge the most glorious Offices, most useful for us, and most honorable
for himself, for, and concerning our welfare and happiness. Such as wherein he
answers, to all the most excellent and honorable things, and persons under the
Law, and among the Israel, after the flesh that was lifted up, to any
honorable and useful Office, or Service: as the Covenant of Circumcision, the
Sabbath, Sacrifices, Temple, etc. Of which, I may say more elsewhere

I shall here only mention such Offices as were estated upon, and exercised by
most honorable persons amongst them, as,

1. The Prophets were holy and honorable persons; and the office of a Prophet,
a most excellent, useful, and honorable employment; they having intercourse,
and Power with God, and receiving their message from him, for directing the
people into the knowledge of him, and of his mind and will concerning them.
Whence that of God to Abimelech, concerning Abraham. Restore the man his wife.
For he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee. Genesis 20.7. And, Do my Prophets
no harm, Psalm. ^05.15. The Son of Man was to be, and is lifted up into that
honor and office: For this is he, of whom it was said, A Prophet shall the
Lord your God raise up unto you, from among your Brethren like unto me: him
shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18.
With Act. 3.22, 23. The Great Prophet. And, The Testimony of Jesus is the
Spirit of Prophecy. Rev. 19.10. The Great Light, In his Testimony, Word, and
Doctrine; and the true Light, lightning every man coming into the World. Who
came a Light into the World, that whosoever believes on, (and follows him)
may not abide in darkness, but see the Light of Life. John 1.9. and 8.12. and
12.46. And, so I might say also of the Apostles, That they were highly
honorable, and useful as to their office; and he is the Great Apostle of our
Profession. Heb. 3.1.

2. The Priests were holy, and honorable Persons under the Law, in respect of
their Office; And the Priesthood, a most honorable and useful Office, for
making atonement, and Reconciliation for the People, by offering gifts and
Sacrifices for them, to that purpose: their lips keeping Knowledge also, and
teaching the People the Law. And Christ the Son of Man, was to be, and is
exalted to that Honor and Office to be the Priest, the great High Priest,
after the order of Melchisedech. As God did raise him up to be his Prophet and
Apostle, giving him that honor and glory, that no man in Heaven, or Earth, or
under the Earth was found worthy of, even to open the book of Gods Counsels,
and unloose the Seals of it, and unfold the Mysteries therein contained. Rev.
5.2, 3, 6. So he gave him also, the honor, and Office of the Priesthood: For,
no man takes to himself that honor (of the High Priesthood) but he that is
called of God, as Aaron was. Wherefore Christ also glorified not himself to be
made an High Priest: but he that said to him, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee. Said also to him, Thou art a Priest to me for ever, after the
Order of Melchisedec. Yea, the Lord swear and will not repent; saying, Thou art
a Priest for ever, etc. Heb. 5.3, 4, 5. etc.

3. Whereas some of the Prophets or Priests, had other additional honors
beside, merely their being Prophets, and Priests, or the like: Christ is lifted
up in this his glory, unto such honor also. As to say,

1. Whereas Moses was also a Deliverer of them, by the Power of God, out of
Egypt and its Bondage; and the Lawgiver from God, to whose Laws they were
bound in all ages to yield obedience, till the Messiah should be revealed. So
also the Son of man was appointed, and is made of God, the Redeemer, and
Deliverer of us Mankind, from the hands of our Spiritual Enemies, and from all
that hate us. Luke 1.70, 72, 73. Especially his followers and obeyers; those
that believe in him, and are made the Seed, or Israel of God, in, and by him
[He being also as Abraham and Israel was, their Father. The Everlasting Father
of this Spiritual offspring. Isa. 9.6] And he is the great Lawgiver to the
World; for whose Laws, the Isles or Gentiles are to wait; and to them to yield
obedience to the end of the World. For the Lord is our Lawgiver. Isa. 33.22.
and 42.1, 4.

2. Again, as Joshua was a Savior, and the bringer of them into the
Inheritance which God had promised to their Fathers, delivering them from the
Inhabitants of that Land, the Cananites, utterly destroying them before them,
and dividing their Land to them by Lot: So also Jesus the Son of Man was to be,
and is exalted, and lifted up of God, to be the expeller and driver out of
Satan, and his Angels, the powers of darkness out of their possession: and the
bringer in of his People, the Israel of God that follow him, into the heavenly
Country and City of God, which he has promised to the spiritual Israel, that
are subject to him: driving out all the power of Sin and Corruption from them.
Yea, and in due time, driving out all the Tyrants of the World, with their
Captains, and Ringleaders into Destruction: he shall possess his People of the
glorious Kingdom, and divide to them their several portions and rewards; in
giving the Kingdom and Dominion, and greatness of the Kingdom, to the Saints of
the most high God, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and his dominion
that, that shall have no end. Dan. 7.27.

3. As they had Judges also to be their helpers, and Saviors from their
enemies; and to judge and avenge them of them, and order their Affairs So
Christ, the Son of Man is raised up, and appointed of God to be the great
Judge, the pleader of the Causes, and avenger of Mankind, against Satan and
the Powers of Darkness. And more especially, of his Israel, the Seed, and Sons
of God; through the faith of him against all their Enemies. Yea, the great
Judge of quick and dead, who shall raise up all from their Graves, and gather
them together from all quarters of the World: determining all Cases, deciding
all controversies; and finally, disposing to every man according to his Works;
everlasting rewards, or punishments in Justice and Righteousness. And seeing
his Sentences put in execution, with great and irresistible Power and
Authority. Act. 10.42. and 17.30, 31. But perhaps we might as well have reduced
these last mentioned offices or honors unto that, that follows. Viz. That

4. Whereas they had Kings set over them to go in, and out before them, to be
their Captains and Leaders, and to appoint Officers under them, giving them
Laws and Commands, fighting their Battles and so to subdue their enemies,
protect them in peace and quietness, in the peaceable possession of their
Inheritances; and enlarge their borders. etc. And so Moses also was said to be
King in Jesurun. So Christ this Son of Man is lifted up of God to that
Authority, and Sovereign dignity, made his King, by him set upon his holy hill
of Sion. Psalm. 2.1, 2, 6, 7. And Maugre all opposition made by the Heathen, and
People; the Kings and Rulers; the Jews and Gentiles; Herod and Pontius Pilate,
and all, or any of their Successors that set themselves against him. Act. 4.26,
29. The King of Nations. Jer. 10.7. Yea, Of all the Earth. Psalm. 47.7. And the
King of Saints. Rev. 15.4, 5. A Great King above all Gods. Psalm. 95.2. The Lord
is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our Judge. The Lord is our King and he will save
us. Isa. 33.20. Yea, and further,

5. Whereas their Priests and Kings (and once we find a Prophet) was anointed
by Gods appointment, to their several offices, and so designed of God to them;
upon which also (as we sometime find) God gave his Spirit to fit them, for the
discharge of them; as thereby also they were separated from others, to attend
unto God to serve him, and his People therein, and receive his help and
supplies for the same. So also the Son of Man Christ Jesus, was to be, and is,
and was anointed of God with the holy Ghost and Power. Act. 10.38. To design,
separate, and authorize him to, and furnish him for all those Offices and
undertakings, to which God appointed, and called him. As for the discharge of
his Prophetic Office and work, it is said, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because the Lord has anointed me to Preach glad tidings to the poor, to bind
up the broken hearted, etc. Isa. 61.1, 2. With Luke 4, 18, 19. (for by his word
and the Divine force, and power of his holy Spirit, breathing forth his grace
therein. He is as a great; yea, the great and only Phisician of the Soul, and
his words do good like a Medicine; being words of grace, words of eternal life,
pleasant words that are like a honeycomb, pleasant to the taste, and healing
to the bones. Prove. 15.14. and 16.24. Wholesome, and sound, and healing words
are the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine that is according to
Godliness. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4) Again it is said, Behold, my Servant whom I uphold,
mine Elect, in whom my soul delights: I have put my holy Spirit upon him? he
shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles, etc. Isa. 42.1. And as the great
King, the Great God and our Governor. He is Gods Christ or Anointed, whom he
has set upon his holy hill of Sion. Psalm. 2.2, 6. And anointed with the Oil of
gladness above his fellows. Psalm. 45.6, 7. And as the most holy, even the most
holy High Priest, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from Sinners. He
may be understood to be the Anointed, or Messiah, spoken of by Daniel. Dan.
9.24. When he says, To Anoint the most holy. And so that he was Consecrated
that way also, as well as by the word of the Oath; (Though the former was
tipyfied in Aaron and his Sons; Sanctified, and Consecrated with the holy
anointing Oil, powered upon, and anointing them. Exodus 30.29, 30. Levit. 8.12.
And the latter exceeded them. Heb. 7.20, 21, 28) To Minister before the Lord
for ever. Sure it is that, Through the Eternal Spirit he offered up himself as
the spotless Sacrifice. Heb. 9.14. And with reference to this anointing him,
and furnishing him with the fullness of the holy Ghost. The Spirit of wisdom,
and of understanding; the Spirit of counsel, and of might; the Spirit of
knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord, that rests and abides upon him, and
makes him quick of understanding, and every way accomplished for his fulfilling
the will of God, in the exercise of the aforesaid Offices; He is in Scripture
called, the Messiah. Dan. 9.25. John. 1.41. And (which is the same by
interpretation) the Christ. Both those words [the Messiah] which is an Hebrew,
and [the Christ] which is a Greek word, signifying in English, The Anointed
one. And so what the Psalm has, The Lord and his Anointed. Psalm. 2.2. The
Apostles (in Greek in Acts. 4.26) Calls, The Lord and his Christ. And because
the anointing was a consequent and declaration of Gods choice, of such a person
to be King, or Priest, or Prophet: therefore the Rulers of the Jews, add as an
Epethite to the Christ, The chosen one of God. Luke 23.35.

And all this honor and office was to be put upon him of necessity. That he
this Son of Man might be Gods Salvation to the ends of the Earth. Isa. 42.1, 6.
and 49.6. The Savior of the world. John 4.42. The Savior of all men, but
especially, of them that believe. 1 Timothy 4.10. Not only, or not so much from
temporal, and bodily evils and bondages; as from Spiritual, and Eternal: from
Sins, Matt. 1.21. And from the Wrath of God, and curse of the Law, and power of
Satan. Gal. 3.13. 1 These. 1.10. Heb. 2.14. 1 John 3.5, 8. As afterward may be
more fully considered, when we, if God grant us to come at it, consider the end
of this his Exaltation. As also, That in all this, God might be glorified. As
it is said, God has given him a name above every name; that at the name of
Jesus, every knee might bow of things in Heaven, and things on Earth, and
things under the Earth; and that every tongue might confess, that he is the
Lord; to the glory of God the Father. Phil. 2.10, 11. Yea, and further, so it
was behoveful, and needful, that he should be lifted up, to fulfill the
Scriptures, in which it was fore-prophesied of him, that thus he should be
Exalted: for there he is called, The mighty God. Isa. 9.6. The Immanuel, God
with us. Isa. 7.14. And that he should be called forth, to the satisfying Gods
Justice for us, by his death, and sufferings, is largely showed. Psalm. 22. Isa.
53. And in other places. And so it is said, He dyed for our Sins, according to
the Scriptures. And that he was buried, and rose again the third day, according
to the Scriptures. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. And therefore, when he opened the Scriptures
to the Disciples, and their understandings, to understand them: He said unto
them, So it behoved, that Christ should suffer, and rise again from the dead;
and that repentance, and remission of Sins should be preached in his name. Luke
24.46, 47. And so for his Ascension to Gods right hand, and sitting there, till
all his foes be made his footstool. Psalm. 110.1. With Act. 2.33, 34, 35, 36.
Yea, both his sufferings, and the glory that followed, was fore-signified by
his Spirit to the Prophets. 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. But yet we may not think, that it
was the Prophets foreseeing, and foreshewing these things that was the proper
cause of their being ordered of God to be done: no, but they therefore
foresaw, and fore-shewed them, because God had ordered them, to be so done;
and they were so ordered of God.

1. Because he loved us, and was loath that we should perish: As the next verse
informs us. Where it is said, God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son; rendering, that as the reason why he must be so lifted up. Because
God so loved us, as to give him, to be our Savior; therefore accordingly, he
must be lifted up, as God in his love to us had designed him. And Gods love led
him so to design.

2. Because our needs required it; we were so fallen, and lost by our sins and
iniquities, that no other way could be sufficient for us, to succor and save
us. But these things being included in the end of his being lifted up, viz.
That whosoever believes on him, might not perish, but have everlasting life. I
shall God willing, further consider them there. Only adding, that

3. He must be lifted up, as to his glorious Resurrection, and Exaltation in
Heaven (which is most properly, the lifting of him up, in this sense here
spoken of) because as God had promised to him, that he would uphold him, and
his right hand should be with him, and help, and strengthen him, and he would
give him for a Covenant to the People, for a light to the Gentiles. (And to
such glory, as is fore-spoken of, as foreshewed in the Scriptures of the
Prophets.) So he also deserved all this glory; and it would have been
unrighteousness to him, had he not been lifted up in that manner. He was worthy
(for his being slain for us) to receive of God, Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing. Rev. 5.11, 12. And God is a
just God, and without iniquity. He can do no unrighteousness; and therefore to
be sure, none to his only Son, whom he called in Righteousness, both to his
work and service, and to this honor and glory, in the reward and recompense of
it. Isa. 42.5, 6. and 53.12. Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. And thus he was to be, and is
lifted up, really, and personally in himself, by God his Father acting upon
him, which was the first way. The second follows.

CHAP. VII.
Of the second way of lifting him up. Viz. By demonstration of him, and his
glory unto men; ^y whom that was, and is to be performed, and wherein.

SEcondly, he was to be lifted up (and must be so) in the demonstration of him
to men, in order to the lifting him up in their hearts, and esteems: and that
was to be, and was done.

1. Principally of God, both Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

2. Of God his Father, and so he was lifted up by him, in his bearing testimony
to him, by commending him unto men, as his only begotten Son, peculiarly owned,
and approved of him; and this he did diversely, as

1. In his audibly witnessing to him from Heaven, that he is his well-beloved
Son, in whom he is well-pleased, and whom he would have men to hear. And this
he did, both to the Baptist with visible Testimony, also accompanying it; as
the opening of the Heavens, and descent of the holy Ghost upon him, in a
visible appearance, like a Dove; As God, when he sent John to Baptize, had
foretold him, he should see as a demonstration of the Person of the Son of God,
and the Savior of the World. Matt. 3.17. John. 1.32, 33, 34. As also to the
three Disciples, who went up into the holy Mount with him, and see him
Trans-figured before them; as is mentioned in Matt. 17.1, 5. Mark. 9.2, 7. Luke
9.28, 35. And by the Apostle Peter. 2 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18. As also he did bear
witness to him, when by an audible voice from heaven, he said, He had both
glorified his name, and would glorify it again. When the People some of them
said that it Thundered, others, that an Angel spoke to him. John 12.28, 29. But
these things were known to few.

2. In his speaking and working, by him such things as never any spoke or did:
for the words that he spoke, he spoke not from himself as man alone; but of or
from the Father who dwelt in him; and he it was that did the Works. John 14.10.
Whence he says to Philip, Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father
in me; or else believe me for the works sake. ver. 11. With Chap. 15.24. and
7.46. And that God did magnify him in this, and lift him up among men. The
Apostle Peter testifies. Act. 2.22. Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God by
Miracles, Wonders, and Signs, which God did by him. etc. As also,

3. By his raising him from the dead, glorifying him, and maintaining his cause
and name, against all oppositions, and gathering in a Church to him, and
upholding it in the midst of Persecutions, etc. Of which things I shall not
enlarge.

2. Of God, the Word, or Son also, even by himself or his Divine, Being, or
Deity, exerting and putting forth it self, and so glorifying him as the Son of
Man. And so it behoved him, and he did it. Both

1. In Work. As in his working glorious Miracles. Thus its said, upon his
turning Water into Wine, at that Marriage in Cana of Galilee. This beginning of
Miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth his glory. But more
fully in his rising from the dead, and ascending into Heaven, and giving gifts
from thence unto men: as some Apostles, some Prophets, etc. Whence he says, No
man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my self. I have power to lay it
down; and I have power to take it up again. This Commandment have I received
of my Father. John 10.18. For as it is said, that he was raised again from the
dead by his Father, and his glory: So also it is said, that he rose again, in,
and by the power of his divine Spirit. And that he died, rose, and revived,
that he might be Lord, ((...) (or Lord it) over the quick and dead. Romans 14.9.
And he rose again the Third day according to the Scriptures. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4.
Being put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the Spirit. 1. Pet. 3.18. And
so that he Ascended and went up on high, and gave gifts unto men. Psalm. 68.18.
Ephesians. 4.8.9.

2. In his Word. Preaching forth himself, and his own excellencies. As he
says, I am one that bear witness of my self, and my Father that sent me, he
bears witness of me. Though he said, If I bear witness of my self, my witness
is not true. As implying that of himself, as man only, he bare not witness of
himself: if as Man only, he had so done, his Witness might have been slighted.
But he, as the Word, though made flesh, witnessed of himself; as in his works,
so in his word too; and his witness, as witnessing so was true. For he knew
whence he came, and whither he went. John 5.31. and 8.14, 18. And so he
declared himself in the Manhood, as the Son of man, or the Word made Flesh, to
be the Son of God, to be in Heaven, and come from Heaven, and to know the
things of Heaven. John 3.11, 12, 13, 16. And so when he said, here he must be
lifted up; we may understand him to say, in such intimations and declarations
of his excellencies as those were. So he testified of himself, that he is the
Light of the World. John 8.12. and 12.46. The bread of Life: the bread that
came down from heaven. The living bread. His Flesh meat indeed, and his Blood
drink indeed: Necessary to be fed upon, to the obtaining everlasting life. And
such as (...) gives everlasting life to all that feed thereupon. John. 6.35,
48, 50, 51, 55, 56. etc. That he knows the Father, and is known of the Father.
John 7.29. and 10.15. That he gives the water of Life, which whosoever drinks it
shall be in him a spring of living waters, springing up unto eternal life. And
causing Rivers of living waters to flow out of his belly, or inward man; as
being the Baptizer with, and giver of the holy Ghost. John 4.14. and 7.37, 38,
39. Act. 1.5. With John 15.26. That he is The good Shepherd. The door of the
sheep, knowing his sheep, and giving to them, in their following him Eternal
Life. John 10.3, 9, 11, 15, 28, 29. That he is the Resurrection and the Life.
So as that, He that believes on him, though dead, he shall live; he that
lives and believes on him, shall not dye for ever. John 11.25, 26. That he is
The way, the truth and the life. John 14.6. The true vine. John 15.1, 4. And
many the like. But chiefly he is, and was lifted up. (And that I might have
referred the two former to the testimonies of the Father, and Word, as being
brought to us, and our cognizance by him)

3. By the holy Spirit, whose business it is to witness of Christ, taking his
things and showing them, and so glorifying him. John 15.27. and 16.14. And so
it is prophetically said of him, That when the Enemy shall come in like a
stood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a Standard against him; (which
Standard, or Ensign is Christ, of the Seed of David, of the Root of Jesse.
Isa. 11.1, 10, 11.) And put him to flight. Isa. 59.19. And he was to lift him
up, and has, and does diversely. as,

1. By fore-testifying glorious things of him. As that he, as the Seed of the
Woman; and so, as the Son of Man should bruise the head of the Serpent.
Overthrow his plot against us, and our welfare, and take away his acquired
power, and jurisdiction over us; and open the way for us into Paradise, and so
to God again. Genesis 3.15. That he, as the Seed of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of
Jacob, and so as the Son of Man should be the blessing of, or bringer forth of
blessing to all the Nations or families of the Earth. Genesis 22.18. and 26.4. and
28.14. With Gal. 3.8. That he as proceeding out of the Tribe of Judah should be
the Shiloh (the peaceable one or peacemaker.) Unto whom should be the
gathering of the People. Genesis 49.10. That he should be the Prophet raised up
from among the People (and so as the Son of Man) whom all the People should
hear in all things that he should say unto them. Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18. That he
should be as the Seed of David, and so as the Son of Man, the Great King and
Governor, upon whose shoulders the Government should be. The Wonderful, the
Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, and the Prince of Peace. Of
the increase of whose Government, and Peace, there should be no end; upon the
Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order, and to establish it with
justice, and with judgment, from henceforth, and for ever. That he should be
Gods firstborn, higher then the Kings of the Earth. Having an everlasting
Throne and Kingdom, Preaching peace to the Heathen; bringing forth Judgment to
them, and affording glorious rest, and blessing to all that trust in him. Psalm.
2.6, 12. and 89.3, 4, 19, 20, 25, 26, 27. and 132.11, 17, 18. Isa. 6.9, 10. and
11.1, 10. and 42.1, 4. Zech. 9.9.10. That he should be a Priest for ever after
the Order of Melchisedeck. Psalm. 110.3. And many such excellent and high
commendations; as may be seen in what he fore-signified to, and by the
Prophets, of his Sufferings, and of the Glory that should follow, in all the
Scriptures. 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12. With Luke 24.27. And so the Apostle says,
speaking of the perfection of the Sacrifice, and Priesthood of Christ, Whereof
the holy Ghost is a Witness to us: for after he had said before, This is the
Covenant that I will make with them: After those days says the Lord, I will
put my Laws into their hearts, and in (...) minds will I write them. He adds,
And their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Heb. 10.15, 16, 17. As
it is also said, that in ordering the Sanctuary or holy place with the
Ordinances of it, The holy Ghost this signified, that the way into the holy of
holies, was not yet made manifest, while the first Tabernacle was standing.
Heb. 9.8. In a word, Whatever things the holy men of God did foreshew, of the
coming of the Just One, and the things to be found, and effected by him; they
spoke not of themselves, but as they were mo^ed thereto by the holy Ghost.
Whence they who resisted them in their Testimony, resisted the holy Ghost. 1
Pet. 1.10, 11, 12. and 2 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. Act. 7.51, 52.

2. In preparing and Sanctifying that blessed Body taken by him, in which he
was made the Son of Man. Luke 1.35. And appearing visibly to Descend and rest
upon him in it, in the likeness of a Dove, as a Sign and signification of his
being the Christ. Mat. 3.17. John 1.31, 32, 33. In his anointing, filling, and
working in, and by him, in all his Doctrine and Miracles, assisting and
strengthening him in all his temptations, sufferings, and services. Matt. 4.1.
Luke 4.1.14.18, 21. Mark. 3.29, 30. And in his raising and carrying up his body
into Heaven. For in the Eternal Spirit he offered up himself, without spot to
God. Heb. 9.14. Romans 6.4. But these things were evident some of them, but to
few. Therefore I add, that he witnessed to him more openly.

3. In his gifting, and furnishing the Apostles, and Prophets, and Servants of
God, for their work, and service in the Gospel: and for that purpose,
miraculously descending upon, and working in many of them, strengthening, and
helping them; yea, doing great Miracles and Signs by them, and through their
Doctrine, and Miracles, working upon the World, to convince them of sin, for
not believing on him, etc. As our Savior said, When the Comforter shall come,
even the holy Ghost; he shall bear witness of me; and he shall convince (or
reprove) the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment, etc. And in that
he did Baptize, or Wash and Sanctify the Apostles; so preparing and fitting
them for their holy Work and Service, lead them into all truth, glorify
Christ, taking of his things and showing them. John 15.26, 27. and 16.8, 9, 13,
14, 15. Act. 1.5, 8. and 2.2, 3, 4, 17, 18. and 4.31. And that the holy Ghost
that God gave to them that believed on or obeyed Christ, was a witness to him,
and to his glory, is said, Act. 5 32. And this also was a Testimony from God
the Father: as it is said, God bare them witness by Signs and Wonders, and
diverse Miracles, and gifts of the holy Ghost. Heb. 2.4. As also the holy Ghost
bears witness to the hearts and consciences of men, concerning him. Romans 8.15
16. 2 Cor. 3.3, 6, 8, 18. Causing the believing heart to see his glory, as in a
glass, with open face, to the changing it into his likeness from glory to
glory. But this he does chiefly.

4. In his Doctrine, and teaching in, and by the Gospel, in his Revelation of
him, to, and by the Apostles, and to the World and Churches gathered out
thereof. As to them also the Spirit has said Great and Glorious things, as may
be seen in those Epistles to the Seven Churches. Rev. 2. and 3.

And thus the Three in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost bare
witness of, and to, and therein lifted up the Son of Man: and so is he lifted
up of God; and must be fully lifted up at his glorious coming, and Kingdom,
when he shall appear in his own glory, and in the glory of his Father, and of
his holy Angels. Luke 9.26. For the Great God, the blessed and holy Potentate,
who only has immortality, dwelling in the Light, which no man can approach
unto, and which no man has seen, nor can see (to whom be honor and power, for
ever and ever, Amen) will in his time show him. When he shall come and appear,
sitting on the right hand of God, with Power and great Glory; and p^ss^ss the
great and glorious Kingdom which God has promised to possess him of and to
Adm^nister by him: but ^^s^e ms to be beyond what this Text speaks of; which
speaks of his being lifted up, that men might in believing on him, not perish,
but have eternal Life. And so of that which is in order of Nature, if not also
of time, before men's believing on him. And these particulars, chiefly of the
Spirits witnessing to him, and lifting him up, were, and are needful; and such
as must be.

1. That he might receive the Glory promised. For God said, that he would
glorify him. Isa 49.7. and 55.5. And God cannot lie: Yea, he has sworn by his
holiness, that he will not lie unto David: his Seed shall endure for ever, and
his Throne as the Sun (which is all glorious, bright, and lightsome) before
him. Psalm. 89.35, 36. Yea, and

2. That men might run unto him, and believe on him. As it is said, Kings shall
see and arise, Princes shall also worship him, because of the Lord that is
faithful, and he shall choose thee. Isa. 49.7. And thou shall call a Nation whom
thou knew not; and Nations that knew not thee, shall run unto thee, because
of the Lord thy God, and for the holy one of Israel, for he has glorified
thee. Isa. 55 5. But unto this it was, and is needful also, that he be lifted
up.

2. Subordinately, by Creatures, and here we might consider,

1. The holy Angels; they have lifted him up in their honorable Testimony of
him as the Son of Man; The Word made Flesh: They having also seen this Mystery,
and peeped down curiously to pry into it. 1. Tim. 3.16. 1 Pet. 1.12. And they
have brought down honorable messages and discoveries concerning him. He being
as the Son of Man, the Ladder upon which they Ascend, and Descend. John 1.51.
Rev. 19.10. And so we find the Angel Gabriel lifting up, and commending the
Messiah in his work and business. Dan. 9.24, 27. where he speaks, both of the
cutting off the Messiah, and of the fruits and consequents thereof; as the
finishing transgression, making an end of Sin; making reconciliation for
iniquity, bringing in everlasting Righteousness, etc. The Angel Gabriel also
brought down an honorable Testimony of him in which he lifted him up in. Luke
1.26.31, 32, 33. Where he said to the Virgin concerning him: That He should be
great, and be called the Son of the highest; and the Lord God should give him
the Throne of his Father David, and he shall Reign over the house of Jacob for
ever: and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, etc. As also, an Angel lifted
him up to the Shepherds at his Birth; Saying to them, Fear not, for I bring
you tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you (You men
in distinction from us Angels) is born this day, in the City of David, a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Luke 2.10, 11. Yea, A multitude of the
heavenly Host, then also immediately being with that Angel honored, and lifted
him up at his Birth; Praising God, and saying, Glory to God on the highest; and
on Earth, peace, and good will toward men. Luke 2.13. Angels also witnessed to
his Resurrection. Mat. 28.2, 5, 6, 7. Luke 24.4, 5, 6, 7, 23. And to his
Ascending up to Heaven, and return from thence. Act. 1.10, 11. Yea, and of his
Glory there received; as is evident in those Doxologies, or Glorifyings of him
mentioned. Rev. 5.11, 12. and 7.11, 12. Worthy is the Lamb that was stain, to
receive Power, Riches, Wisdom, Strength, Honor, Glory, and Blessing.

2. I might add also, That all the Creatures in Heaven, and Earth, and under
the Earth, and such are in the Seas, do exalt and lift him up: for so John
tells us, he heard them all saying, Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, be unto
him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb, for ever, and ever. Rev. 5.13.

But I only briefly mention those, and come to those Creatures that are most
concerned in him, and his praises, even our selves, Men. And so he has been,
is, and must be lifted up. By

3. Holy men, his holy Apostles and Prophets; as also, by all his Messengers,
Servants, and Saints; even his whole Church: through the helpfulness, and by
the power and strength of the holy Ghost, as instruments in his hands. And so
he was lifted up, and exalted.

1. By the holy Prophets, which were before his coming. For, To him give all
the Prophets witness, that through his name, all that believe in him shall
receive the forgiveness of sins. Act. 10.43. And the Apostle Peter speaking
again of the Death, Resurrection, and Exaltation of Christ, tells us, That all
the Prophets from Samuel, and those that followed, spoke of those days. A^^
3.24. Namely, those in which those things were done, and accomplished. And that
they Prophesied of the grace brought now unto us. 1 Pet. 1.10. Whence also the
Apostle Paul says, That he testified to small and great; saying no other
things then those which Moses and the Prophets did say, should come to pass.
Viz. That Christ should suffer, and be the first that should rise from the
Dead, and show Light to the Gentiles, and to the People. Act. 26.22, 23.

2. By John the Baptist, who was the immediate forerunner of Christ: a Prophet,
and more then a Prophet. Being the Man sent of God to bear witness to Christ
the Light. That messenger sent before his face, to prepare the way for him. And
his work and business was in bearing Witness of him, to exalt and lift him up,
that all men through him might believe. And he did highly lift him up, and bare
an honorable testimony of him; as that he was before John: and he himself not
worthy to unloose the latchet of his Shoes. That He is the Christ, the true
Light, the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World; the Baptizer
with the holy Ghost: the Bridegroom that has the Bride, etc. John 1.6, 7, 8,
9, 15.

3. By the holy Apostles also, whose office and business it was, to be
witnesses to him. John 15.27. And to Preach and proclaim him, so as to set him
forth, lift him up, exalt, and magnify him, in, and unto all things. And they
by the holy Spirit; and the holy Spirit, in, an by them and their Ministry,
according to the Doctrine of the Prophets, fore-given forth by the holy Spirit
concerning him ( Romans 1.1, 2, 3) have highly extolled, and lifted him up.
Preaching him,

1. As to his person. The Son of God. Even the same that according to the
Spirit, and Divine Nature was in the beginning with God, and God. He by whom,
and for whom, all things were made, whether in Heaven or Earth, visible or
invisible; Thrones, Dominions, Principallities or Powers: all things were
Created by him, and for him; and that by him all things consist; he being
before them. That he is the Heir of all things, the express character of the
Fathers Person, and the brightness of his glory. The Wonderful; the Councellor;
the Mighty, or great God, and our Savior; The Immanuel; God with us. John 1.1,
2, 3. Col. 1.15, 16, 17. Heb. 1.2, 3. 1 Timothy 3.16. Tit. 2.13. Isa. 9.6. That he
is the Christ, the Messiah. He that was prophesied before of; and promised by
all the Prophets of God, from the beginning of the World. The only excellent
person designed of God, and promised from the beginning, to be the Author,
Procurer, and Dispenser of all grace and blessing to us. John 1.41, 45. Mat.
1.21, 22, 23. 1 Pet. 1.20, 21. The very Christ. Act. 9.20, 22. He that was in
the form of God, not thinking Robbery, to be equal with God; but was sent of
God in the nature and fashion of a man, to be the Savior of the world. Phil.
2.6, 7. John 3.17. Gal. 4.4, 5. 1 John 4.14.

2. As to his work and business; that it was totally for us, and our good; a
work of exceeding advantage to us, and necessity for us. Not to Condemn the
World, but that the World might be saved by him. John 3.17. Not to judge the
World, but to save it. John 12.4, 7. And that by taking away its Sin. John
1.29. And that by the Sacrifice of himself. Heb. 1.3. and 9.26. Giving his
flesh for the life of the World. John 6.51. And so that he might by his death
destroy him, who had the power of Death, the Devil; and deliver those, who by
reason of the fear of Death, were all their lifetime subject to Bondage. Heb.
2.14, 15. That he might abolish, or evacuate the destructive power and force of
Death, and bring life and Immortality to light. 2 Timothy 1.10. Taking away Sin,
and destroying the works of the Devil. 1 John 3.5, 8. That so he might bring us
to God. 1 Pet. 3.18. As it follows here; That whosoever believes ^ him, might
not perish, but have Eternal Life.

3. As to his abundant Love, Charity, Goodness, and Grace, in all this, such as
passes Knowledge. Ephesians. 7.18, 19. And therein the love of God the Father in
appointing, preparing, sanctifying, and furnishing him, to all this great
business and undertaking. John 3.16. and 1 John 4.9, 10, 14. It was by the
grace of God, that He tasted Death for every one. Heb. 2.9. And his own grace;
even, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ; it was to abase himself. And when
rich, to become poor for our sakes; the we through his poverty, might be made
rich. 2 Cor. 8.9. And so to lay down his life for us, even when, and though
ungodly, and enemies, worthy of no love at all, much less of such and so great
love, 1 John 3.16, 17. Romans 5.6, 7, 8. John 3.16. Love worthy admiration,
acceptance, and imitation by us, Ephesians. 5.1, 2, and 3.18, 19. Stronger then
death; such as many waters could not quench it, nor the floods drown it, Cant.
8.6, 7.

Fourthly, In the preciousness of his Abasement, Obedience, Blood, Death,
Sufferings and Sacrifice for us: That however he was therein made low and
despicable among men, and became an offense to the worldly-wise, and
honorable; yet He in, and by them was a most acceptable Sacrifice to God, an
offering of a sweet smelling savor, 1 Cor. 1.22, 23. Ephesians. 5.2. That for which
we all have great cause to love and admire him, and flee for refuge and
sanctuary to him. He having therein made peace for us, slain the enmity, broken
down the wull of partition between God and man, and between Jew and Gentile,
wrought Reconciliation, or that where-through we may be reconciled or made at
one with God. Col. 1.20. Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20, 21. having therein
given himself a Ransom for all. 1 Timothy 2.6. and being become there through the
Propitiation for our sins; yea, for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.1, 2.
and the [(...)] propitiatory or Mercy-seat through faith in his blood for
remission of sins that are past through the forbearance of God, and for the
declaration of his righteousness therein; that he is just, and the justifier of
those that believe in Jesus, Romans 3.25, 26. There being therein Redemption, and
through that Redemption a free Justification [(...)] to or for all and upon all
that believe, v. 22.24. There-through the handwriting of Ordinances that was
against us being blotted out, and what was contrary to us taken out of the way,
and nailed to his Cross, and Principalities and powers thereby spoiled and
triumphed over by him, Col. 2.14, 15. So that great is the power and virtue of
that his despised and reproched Cross: So as that it is accepted of God far
before and above all the Sacrifices and Services ordained by him in the Law of
Moses; they being not able to take away sin. But this one Sacrifice is so
powerful and prevalent a purgation and expiation of it, that Christ has by
that one Sacrifice once offered, perfected for ever those that are sanctified.
So that the Consciences of the comers to God there-through are purged from dead
works to serve the living God, Heb. 1.3. and 9.14. and 10.2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 14.
So as that there-through we may have access to God in the holy of holies, and
may draw nigh to him, and call upon him with full assurance of faith and
confidence, Heb. 10.19, 22. His precious Blood being the Blood of sprinkling,
for sprinkling the heart from an evil conscience, and speaking better things
then the blood of Abel, Heb. 12.24. Therefore also the Cross of Christ the
only thing to be gloried in by us, Gal. 6.14.

Fifthly, In the exceeding greatness of that Glory that God has given him, as
a reward of his sufferings, and hard service sustained against the World and
Satan for us. Wherein also is further evidenced the exceeding preciousness of
his Blood and Sufferings; the infinite value of them, and the force and virtue
they have in them with him. They set forth his Glory to be far above all the
glory of the world; yea, or the glory of Moses, or any of the former glorious
ones; then the Glory of Solomon, and the Glory of his Ministration: Far
transcending that of the Law, as being more powerful in the discoveries of it;
for transforming the beholders of it into his likeness; so as when we see him
as he is, we shall there-through be made like him, 2 Corinthians 3.3, 8, 9, 18.
1 John 3.2. Col. 3.4. For they declare that God has glorified him with his own
self, filled him with all his fullness; so as all the fullness of the Godhead
dwells in him bodily; and so as that in him we are complete, Col. 1.19. and
2.9. Oh let us go out and see this King Solomon (this excellent Prince of
Peace, the Peace, and Peacemaker, of whom, and of whose Glory Solomon of old
was but a type and figure; and the glory and luster of his Kingdom, but a type
and figure of the the Glory of his, which passes all our conceptions and
expressions) let us go forth I say, and behold him with the Crown wherewith his
Mother (the infinite Wisdom, Love, and Grace of God, as also his Disciples who
have heard and received the Word of God, and kept it, who are to him as his
Mother, Brethren, and Sisters, Matthew. 12.49, 50) have crowned him in the day of
his espousals, and of the gladness of his heart. When being espoused to the
nature of man, he received the holy Spirit, and poured it forth upon them,
Cant. 3.13. Matthew. 22.1. Acts 2.33. But indeed it is not to be fully seen and
known till the great day of his appearance, the time of the appearing of the
glory of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.13. 1 John 3.2.

Sixthly, In his perfect and complete Furniture wherewith he is furnished, for
executing and performing the works of his glorious Offices, and bringing about
the end of them, the salvation of man, the eternal salvation of all that obey
him; in which they present us as completely provided for of all things
pertaining to life and godliness, as given to him, and dwelling in him for us.
I shall here only touch upon something thereof in some few Particulars. As

First, They declare him to be the great Prophet, and as such fully and
perfectly accomplished with ability, fitness, and faithfulness, for teaching us
the knowledge of himself, and of God, and of all things. As being filled to
that purpose with the fullness of God; the gift of the Holy Ghost being so
immeasurably received by him, that he has the seven spirits that are before
the Throne, Rev. 1.4. and 3.1. The fullness of the Holy Ghost, and of all
spiritual gifts, for, both giving forth to men, and enabling and moving men to
receive the exact and perfect knowledge of God; and for gifting whom he
pleases to be Apostles, Prophets, or otherwise useful for perfecting the
Saints for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying the body of Christ,
till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the acknowledgment of the
Son of God unto a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the age of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12, 13. Col. 2.3.9. That it is He that has prevailed to
open the book in the right hand of God, and un^rose the seals, and discover and
declare the hidden Wisdom and secret Mysteries contained therein, Rev. 5.1, 6.
The great Apostle fai^hful in all things to him that appointed him as Moses in
all his house, accounted worthy of more honor then Moses to be more acquainted
and intimate with God even as his Son in his bosom; and so fullier furnished
for declaring his Glory, and glorious grace and good will; and more faithful,
even as a son in his own house built by himself. Whereas Moses was faithful but
as a servant therein. Wherefore (as the Holy Ghost also says) to day if ye
will hear his voice, (even his that is Gods own Son, the heir of all things, by
whom also he made the worlds; his, who is the express character of his Fathers
person, and the brightness of his glory, giving forth the fullest and brightest
discovery of God, and of his holy mind and will, and speaking to us from
heaven) harden not your hearts, etc. Heb. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 7. with 1.3. and 12.25.

Secondly, As the Priest in, and High Priest over the house of God, the most
authorized and consecrated person, consecrated with the Word of Gods Oath, and
after the power of an endless life by a sacrifice once offered for ever; and
that never needs to be iterated, made a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedeck; an everlasting Priest in the virtues of his once endured Death
for us; and therefore able to save to the utmost all that come to God by him,
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7.25. A Priest upon
the throne, and so both a King and Priest; the true Melchisedeck being both
King of Righteousness, and after that King of Peace; working, performing, and
commanding righteousness and so commanding and prevailingly making and giving
Peace; far greater then Aaron, Levi, or Abraham. Such a Priest as we needed,
and it behoved us to have; being holy, harmless, undefiled, and separated from
sinners, and made higher then the heavens, Heb. 7.1.26, ^7. A great High Priest
entered into the heavens, even into Heaven it self by a greater and more perfect
Tabernacle, and by virtue (not of the blood of others, as Aaron did into the
figure of the heavens only, but) of his own precious blood and sacrifice.
Where he now appears in the presence of God for us, having obtained eternal
redemption, Heb. 4.14. and 9.11, 12, 24. A faithful High Priest, and therefore
made like is brethren in all things, that he might be so, to make atonement and
reconciliation for the people, and to succor and help the tempted, Heb. 2.17,
18. To which end also he is both perfectly furnished with knowledge of our
cases and conditions, by reason both of his exceeding quickness and
powerfulness, as the Word of God for searching into all things, and piercing
even to the dividing asunder the soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow;
being a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart: So as there is not
any creature that is not manifested in his sight, but all things are naked and
opened, (as things anatomized) and laid perfectly before his view, Heb. 4.12,
13. The Spirit that rests upon him, making him quick of understanding, Isa.
11.2, 3, 4. And also as having had an experimental feeling of our infirmities
and temptations, as man in himself, having himself suffered and been tempted,
yea, tempted in all points like to us, yet without sin, (and so the more
acceptable and prevalent in his mediating and interceding with God for us.) And
also perfectly merciful and compassionate toward us, ready to plead for us,
and help us, Heb. 2.17, 18. with 4.15. and 5.1, 2. So as we have great ground
of encouragement (from this consideration of his Priesthood, and its
perfection, and his fitness, by the virtues of his Sacrifice, to make the
worshippers of, and comers to him, and to God by him perfect) to draw nigh, and
come with boldness to the throne of grace, with true hearts, and full assurance
of faith to ask and receive grace and mercy, to help us seasonably in all our
trials and temptations, Heb. 4.14, 16. and 9.14. and 10.19, 22.

Thirdly, As a King he is set forth, as furnished with the most sovereign
Authority over all creatures in heaven, earth, and under the earth; all things
being put under him, and the Throne, and power of God given him in the manhood:
So as also to be every way accomplished to be the Lawgiver, Savior, and
Judge. He being endued also with all the fullness of the Spirit of counsel and
might; which resting upon him, renders him both infinitely quick in
understanding in the fear of the Lord; and perfect in Righteousness in all his
Government, and the exercise of it. Girded up in his loins with righteousness,
and in his reins (even in all his thoughts, purposes, and desires, from whence
issue all his words and motions for action) with faithfulness, Isa. 11.2, 3, 4,
5. Having a white horse under him, as supported by his own Righteousness; or,
as riding on the Heavens, and having them at his command for the help of his
subjects, and riding swiftly and prosperously in all his Government, Deuteronomy.
33.26, 27. being called faithful, and true, and in righteousness judging and
making war; His eyes as a flame of fire discovering and trying all things: And
on his head are many Crowns. Either as denoting his superlative Power or
Jurisdiction over the many Countries brought into an acknowledgment of him, yea
Kings and Kingdoms: Or the many great Victories gotten by him over his enemies
(whether evil spirits or evil men engaging themselves against him) and gotten
by his truth against error and impiety: Or also the many praises ascribed to
him. And he has a name (Dignity, Title, Power) which none knows but himself,
(as signifying that he is exalted above all blessing and praise, Neh. 9.5. and
that none can set forth all his praises, Ps. 106.2. And he is clothed in a
vesture dipped in blood; either because all his appearance in his Government to
the spiritual eye is such, as in which is manifested the virtue of his most
precious Blood, Sufferings, and Sacrifice for us: Or because it represents the
overthrow of his and our enemies. And his name is called the Word of God, as
being the great speaker forth, and Interpreter of the knowledge of God to us.
And he has a sword that goes out of his mouth; A sharp cutting word, full of
killing, convincing efficacy to all that stands cross to him, which is
therefore said to go out of his mouth; with which he is furnished to smite the
Nations, even all Nations over whom he has power, to rule them with a rod of
iron. Such a force and power as is able to (and at his pleasure does and will)
break in pieces what is against him. And he also treads the Wine Press of the
wrath of Almighty God, and on his vesture, and on his thigh he has this Name
written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. Even the most absolute and Sovereign
Lord and King, and with the foresaid Sword out of his mouth. He and his
followers or Disciples fight against, and shall subdue his enemies, the Beast
and false Prophet, and all their power, either worldly or pretendedly
religious, that stands opposite against him, Rev. 19.11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 21.
And this suits with what the Prophet Isaiah prophesied concerning him, as the
Son of man; the great King sprung up as a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and as
a Branch out of his roots; that he should with righteousness judge the poor,
and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth; and smite the earth with the
rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his mouth slay the wicked, Isa. 11.1
-- 4. A mighty King endued with righteousness to punish sinners, and destroy
the wicked and wickedness, and give peace, safety, and quietness to the good
and righteous, both in inward and outward man as he pleases; yea, both here as
he sees good, and hereafter fully and for ever at his glorious appearing, and
in his everlasting and most blessed Kingdom, Isa. 32.1, 2. with 2 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5
-- 10. 2 Timothy 4.1.

Seventhly, As for his fullness of grace and truth, for his saving and
satisfying all that obey him; he being set forth as the Author of eternal
Salvation, upon the account of, and in the virtues of his most precious Death,
or Blood of his Cross, and in the exercise of his glorious Offices and
Authority, Heb. 5.9. They have declared that in him there is forgiveness of
sins in his blood, even plenteousness of redemption, for forgiving all
trespasses, and cleansing from all sins and unrighteousness, Col. 1.14. and
2.14. Ephesians. 1.7. with Psalm. 130.4.6, 7. 1 John 1.7, 9. and 2.1, 2. and the
fullness of all other spiritual blessings in heavenly things, Ephesians. 1.3. Election
is in him, ver. 4. Predestination to grace or glory, ver. 5. Acceptance into
favor and fellowship with God, ver. 6. All spiritual wisdom and understanding,
Both as to himself for manageing his government, and furnishing men in their
looking and listening to him according to his good pleasure, ver. 8, 9. Col.
2.3. And for making us wise and of an understanding heart, Isa. 42.1. 1 John
5.20. All fullness of glorious power for strengthening with all might, Col. 1.10,
11. and subduing all things to himself, Phil. 3.21. And what ever else may be
named, we might distinguish this grace into.

First, Personal Graces and Perfections fitting him for his personal exercise
of his glorious Offices; as Love, Mercy, Truth, Righteousness, Patience,
Meekness, Gentleness, Strength, Power, Wisdom, Holiness, etc. 2 John 3. Jude
21. 1 John 2.1. 1 Timothy 1.14, 16. Matthew. 11.29. 2 Cor. 10.1. Phil. 3.21. and
4.13. 1 Cor. 1.24. Acts 3.14, etc.

Secondly, Communicative Grace, or Grace treasured up in him for us, to be
imparted to us; such as Wisdom, Righteousness, Holiness, Redemption; the Spirit
of God, and all spiritual Gifts, Efficacies, or Virtues; as Love, Joy, Peace,
Patience, etc. Gifts for Usefulness also and Edification, as Knowledge,
Utterance, Prophecy, etc. All the fullness of them dwell perfectly in him, and
all for our benefit and advantage; Col. 1.19. 1 Cor. 1.30, 31. Ephesians. 1.7, 8.

Eighthly, As to his glorious appearance, and the effects of it, or what he
shall then manifest and bring to to pass, they lift him up very highly, also
testifying That

First, He shall come again in great Majesty and Glory, attended with all his
mighty Angels, and in the Power and Glory of God his Father, to be glorified in
his Saints, and admired in all them that believe on him, 2 These. 1.7, 8, 10.
Jude 14. 1. These. 4.14, 15, 16.

Secondly, He shall raise up the dead Saints, and change the then living, and
destroy their enemies, the ungodly and wicked, and the man of sin, by the
brightness of his appearing, 1 These. 4.16. 2 These. 2.8. 2 Pet. 3.7.

Thirdly, He shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory, and judge the world in
righteousness, Matthew. 25.31. Psalm. 96.13. Acts 17.30. And then

Fourthly, He shall possess the Saints his followers of the Kingdom with him;
who shall reign with him a thousand years, without any opposition threatening
them; and after the total destruction of all enemies, they shall reign for ever
and ever, without disturbance or opposition in the New and Heavenly Jerusalem,
in inexpressible joy and happiness, Dan. 7.26, 27. Rev. 5.10. and 20.6, 10. and
22.5. Matthew. 25.26.

Such, but far more excellent and glorious is the honor and glory that the
Apostles in their testimony ascribe to him: Lifting up the Horn, the horn of
his people, the praise of all his Saints, and his Kingdom and Dominion, Psalm.
148.14. (for 1. Largeness, 2. Righteousness, 3. Peace, 4. Prosperity, 5. Glory;
and 6. Endless happiness) beyond all expression. Of which I shall not enlarge
here particularly to speak. And so must and ought he also to be lifted up.

Fourthly, Of their Followers, the Ministers and Servants of the Lord in his
Gospel, in the exercise of their several Gifts and Administrations. They that
stand in his house and Courts, are to praise his name, and make his praise
glorious, Psalm. 134, 1, 2. and 135.1, 2, 3. Not preaching and exalting
themselves, and seeking their own glory and honor, to be adored and worshipped
of men, and called of them Rabbi and Master: as Lords of their faith, and
ruling over Gods heritage; but preaching Jesus the Lord, and themselves
servants for Jesus sake. As the Apostles did, 2 Cor. 4.5. being followers and
imitaters of them and of the Prophets; continuing in their Doctrine, and the
form of wholesome and sound words, that they have delivered according to the
furniture and assistance of the Holy Spirit to that end afforded them, upon
whom they are to depend, and by whom to be acted and ordered therein, Acts
20.28, 31, 35. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3, 4.

Fifthly, Yea, and the Bride, and whole Church, and all that hear and receive
his words, (as all ought to do) and are professed followers and Disciples of
him, and his Doctrine ought to exalt and lift him up, seeking his glory, 2
These. 1.12. Psalm. 99.5, 6. Rev. 22.17. Living to him (as all ought also to do)
who dyed for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.15. And this,

1. In their hearts, sanctifying him there, 1 Pet. 3.15. That is, thinking
highly and honorably of him, blessing and lauding him with all that is within
them, Psalm. 103.1, 2. without grudging or murmuring in their hearts against
him; but keeping judgment, and doing righteousness, according to the testimony
of God by his Holy Spirit concerning him, Psalm. 106.3. and accordingly in their
hearts liking, loving, and desiring after the knowledge and enjoyment of him,
trusting in, and cleaving to him with purpose of heart, Psalm. 31.23. Cant. 1,
2, 3, 4. and 2.4, 5. and 5.7, 8. and 8.6, 7. 1 Cor. 16.22. Isa. 26.8, 9. Phil.
3.7, 8, 9, 10.1 John 3.23. Acts 11.23, 24.

2. In their word speaking nothing but what is high, holy, and honorable
concerning him; Holding forth the word of life, and blessing and speaking well
of his name, Psalm 47.6, 7. and 98.1 -- 4. and 66.1, 2, 3. and 100.1, 2 -- 4, 5.

3. In their Life and Conversation; for there also he may be lifted up, and
glorified, and magnified of us; yea, both in life and in death, Phil. 1.20. As
therein also he may be blasphemed, dishonored, and denied, as is implied, 1 Timothy 6.1. Tit. 2.5. and 1.16. But surely he ought not to be denied, blasphemed,
or put to reproach by us, or by occasion of us. He has not so deserved of any
man, but to be blessed and highly honored: And that is best done, when to a
high commendation of him in our words, we add also such a conversation and
carriage, as speaks him excellent in our esteems and experiences of him. When
we show that he is upright, and that there is no unrighteousness in him, Matthew.
5.16. 2 Thessalonians. 1.12. Psalm. 92.15. 1 Pet. 2.9, 11, 12.

Now though the lifting him up by his Father, in the acts done to him in his
personal body, in his calling him to, upholding and accepting him in, raising
him from, and rewarding him for and after his Sufferings, and the obedience and
service done and performed by him for us, be the main and most fundamental
lifting him up; absolutely necessary with respect to us, and our Regeneration
and Salvation: Yet I apprehend, That the lifting him up also, as to
manifestation and commendation of him to, and in the eyes of, others, both by
the Spirit of God, and by men; especially his holy Saints and Servants, that
desire and are set for his Glory, and the good of others, is here also with the
former way and acts directly included and intended. And indeed as to his being
lifted up of God, both Father, Word, and Spirit, it must be so, as we have
partly said; because it was so purposed and decreed of God. It was his purpose
and grace given us in Christ Jesus, before the world, that is made manifest now
by his appearance, in what God has wrought by, and done to him for us, 2 Timothy
1.9, 10. And as for man's exalting him, and lifting him up in his ministration
and service in the Gospel, and in heart and life, it is no more then God
requires of us; and his love, and the excellency in and love of Christ to us,
obliges us to, and challenges of us. And therefore so it must and ought to be
also, Psalm. 96.3, 4. But because that must be lifted up, the necessity of his
being lifted up, has direct and main respect to the end whereto he is to be
lifted up; that is, That whosoever believes on him may not perish, but have
eternal life. As also the necessity that he be so lifted up, As Moses lifted up
the serpent in the wilderness, has reference thereto. Therefore, I shall not
more fully speak to the necessity of his being lifted up, and so lifted up,
till after the speaking to those two following Points. The Son of Man must be
lifted up, that is the second Point. The other two follow in order: The manner
how, and the end to which he must be, and must be in such manner lifted up. For
I shall also leave the Use of all this, till we have considered and viewed
those Points also, they both appertaining to the full view of this (which is
the main) Point.

CHAP. VIII.
The third Point; That the Son of Man must be lifted up, as Moses lifted up the
Serpent in the Wilderness. Where several Analogies and Agreements between them
are considered.

As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness: In which may be implied;

1. As verily and certainly as that was done, so must this be done also; and
indeed that lifting up of the Serpent, being a type and figure preaching forth
this lifting up of the Son of Man, must not be made frustrate, for then as a
type it should have failed, and been false. Where the shadow goes before, the
body follows. And where the type and figure was foreordained to instruct into
the truth that was to be revealed; there the truth also thereby signified, must
in its time take place, and be accomplished; all things written of him in the
Law of Moses also, whether Prophecy, or Type, and Figure, must be fulfilled,
Luke 24.46. But not only so, but also

2. As -- so; As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness; So, even after
such a sort and manner, must the Son of Man be lifted up. There is
agreeableness, correspondency, and answerableness between the one and the
other, as may be seen in many Particulars: As,

1. In the occasion of it: There the people walking in the Wilderness, were
disobedient, murmured against God, despised his mercy, bounty, and goodness,
and provoked him in wrath to send fiery serpents among them, to bite and kill
them; and as a remedy there against, that Serpent was commanded to be, and
accordingly was lifted up. And so here, men in the wilderness of th^s world
being ransomed by Christ out of that sentence of Condemnation, that lay upon us
all for our first Fathers Transgression, and under a state of much mercy and
bounty from God; yet not without trials and temptations are found sinning
against God, and despising the Heavenly Manna Christ Jesus, and the knowledge
of God in him, and discontent with Gods dealings through the temptations of sin
and Satan; and so fall under his power, and are obnoxious to destruction. This
occasions a necessity of lifting up the Son of Man, both in his exaltation by
God, and unto men for their healing: Yea, our first Parents, and we all in
them, being tempted, (though in a Paradise) listening to the Tempter, and
siding with him; to a discontent with Gods allowance to us in the Creation,
because one Fruit was forbidden; and to a desire of, and coveting after what
was unlawful and forbidden us, fell under the power of the old Serpent the
Devil, and Satan: So as by him to be stung and wounded to death, even a death
of our souls and spirits from the life and favor of God, and of both body and
soul to be exposed to, and filled with misery and mischief to destruction; and
as a remedy against that Bite, it was necessary Christ should be lifted up on
the Cross, and dye for us, and be raised up again, and exalted to a state of
Power and Glory, for raising us up; and so he is, and there-through, even
through those things done to him in his personal body, we are healed: As it is
said, Through his stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.5. 1 Pet. 2.24. But as a
remedy against what we meet with from Satan in our selves, in our own personal
despisings of Christ, and Gods bounty and goodness toward us through him, and
provocations to anger against us, was, and is it needful, that he be also
further lifted up by way of demonstration, both by God and his Spirit, and
servants for our helpfulness there against; That whosoever believes on him
might not perish in a second Death.

2. In the place of Moses lifting up the Serpent; That was in the Wilderness;
So must the Son of Man be lifted up in the state of this world; that is, as a
desolate forsaken wilderness, void of all good order and fruitfulness, full of
briars, thorns, Wolves, Tigers, all that is evil and confused: Through which,
while the Israel or followers of God walk, they meet with, and are exposed to
many trials and temptations, affections and troubles, from the barrenness of
goodness, and good men that they find in it, and from the many evil men, and
the unclean, covetous, oppressive, and wicked carriages both among themselves,
and toward them: Here in this day and state it is behoveful that the Son of Man
be lifted up, for the comfort, healing, and helpfulness of his followers
against the evil Spirits and Serpents, and their venomous stings (...) were
Romans 3.19) That we might receive the Adoption of Sons. Gal. 4.4, 5. That he
has made him, who knew no sin, to be sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God, in him. 2 Cor. 5.21. That he has delivered him up for
our offenses, and raised him again for our Justification. Romans 4.25. Raised him
from the dead, and given him glory, that our faith and hope might be in him. 1
Pet. 1.21. And all this, and what is contained in it, done and perfected of
God, in Christ for us; so as he therein has prepared his dinner, his Oxen and
Fatlings are slain, and all things are ready; nothing for us to do, but come to
the Wedding: and therein taking on the Wedding Garment, sit down, and eat, and
drink of this Provision, and that will so heal us, as we shall be fit to go, or
walk after him, and serve him. So that if thou confess with thy mouth, Jesus
the Lord, and with thy heart believe, that God has raised him from the dead
(that is, if thou believe this understandingly, and affectionately) thou shall
be saved. This will put a man into a right mind, to seek, and hope for all
grace, and blessing from God; and so in that faith to call upon him, and it
will make him to love, and in love obey and serve him. Romans 10.8, 9, 10, 12.1
John 4.19. There is nothing for the Ministers to do for the healing and saving
men, but to open and publish this grace, and therein call, invite, and exhort
them to look to, and obey it; and warn them of, and reprove them for neglecting
it, etc. Not to prepare any thing of their own, nor put men upon preparing any
thing for their own Salvation, and healing. Nor for any man to do, but in the
hearing this, to look upon it, and mind what it discovers, and yield up to what
it requires, and calls for (which the Ministers are to help them to understand,
and discern) for their healing. Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all
the end^ of the Earth, Even as Moses did not put the people upon looking into
their stings, and seeking, or preparing for themselves any Salves, or
Medicines: but only lifted up the Serpent, and directed them to look to it for
healing.

4. The Serpent as Moses lifted it up, was not made of Gold, or of Silver, or
of any more precious Metals, but only of Brass; a more vulgar, and
contemptible Metal, and of less price. And that formed through the fire, and
by other ways of cutting, beating, and framing of it, into the form of a
Serpent: a way, no way of it self, likely or probable to heal them of their
wounds. And yet, this he lifted up, as the means and Medicine appointed of God:
and through his appointment, and the conjunction of his Divine power and virtue
with it; it was effectual for healing those that being stung of the fiery
Serpents, looked upon it. Even so Christ the Son of Man, according to the
Flesh, was not a likely person, and means, to effect any man's Salvation, and
deliverance from Sin, and Death; he being not descended of high and honorable
Parentage in the World, or endued with worldly Grandeour or greatness, or with
worldly Authority, Learning, and such like ornaments, as might commend him to
us; but born in Bethlehem Judah, of a poor Virgin, espoused to a mean man, a
Carpenter. Springing up as a tender plant, (easily to appearance, to be plucked
up, or broken) And as a root out of a dry ground (likely to come to no great
bulk, or strength) No form in him nor comeliness: no beauty, when looked upon,
to render him desirable. Isa. 53.2, 3. A mean man. Mark. 6.3. Not Learned. John
7.15. Nor attended with any worshipful and honorable persons openly, as his
Disciples. John 7.47.48. Yea, a man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs. Yet
this man is he, that being prepared for it, and made perfect through
sufferings, and Death, is both lifted up of God, to be the Author of Eternal
Salvation, to all that obey him: and is effectual thereto, through the divine
Ordination, and presence of God, in and with him. The Deity fully possessing
him: even all the fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily in him. And through
this Man (so prepared and perfected of God) is, and must be Preached unto men,
the forgiveness of Sins. And through him, all that believe are justified from
all things, from which they could not be justified by the law of Moses. Act.
13.37, 38, 39. Nor, is he therefore as the Son of Man, to be laid by of the
Builders* Preachers, Teachers, and Masters in Israel (as too many knowing him
after the Flesh, are therefore offended at him, and do lay him by) because he
was, and is the Son of Man, and was partaker with us in flesh and blood, in
firm, and tempted as we be; (yet without Sin) or because he suffered such
things in the Flesh, and appeared weak and mortal therein. Nor may any
therefore refuse to look to him, and expect salvation from him, because a Man,
and the Son of Man, made so low and weak as he was, so despicable, and unlikely
to appearance, as that the Preaching of him, and his Cross, is to the Jew a
stumbling block, and to the Grecian foolishness; even to such, as seem wise in
this World. But he is, notwithstanding that, yea, because of that, that he was
so abased, and crucified, and humbled himself so low, the Power of God, and the
Wisdom of God, and so to be eyed; hoped in, and trusted to, as the great Devise
and Ordinance of God for our Salvation, attended after an especial and singular
manner, with his divine presence and blessing. ^ Cor. 1.21, 22.23, 24. Romans
1.16. And so the Preaching of him, and his Cross, is the effectual means for
saving them that believe. Even as Moses did not, nor might lay by the Serpent,
because made of Brass; nor the people upon that account slight it, as knowing
it after the Flesh (after the wisdom of the flesh, or the outward matter, and
substance of it) but knowing it after the Spirit, as the Ordinance of God, and
accompanied with his presence, and power. He was to, and did set it up, and
they were to look to it: So ought we not knowing Christ after the flesh, but
after the Spirit (not as many deluded persons, who judging of him, and all his
ordinances and Messengers according to the Flesh; that is, after their own
carnal Wisdom; and according to the meanness of the outward, and appearing
substance, both of him and them, do therefore slight, and fall off, from both
him and them; not making use of, or reverencing them: nor looking for grace and
blessing from him, the Son of Man. But as Gods holy ones, who beheld him as
Gods appointment, and according to his Divine being, and perfection, and as
commended by the holy Spirit) so let us look to him for all help and Salvation
in those Ordinances and ways that are of his appointing.

5. As Moses lifted up the Serpent only, and nothing with it, or besides it, as
the appointment of God for healing those that were stung: no medicine, or
plaster did he commend besides, or with it: nor any other Metal however to
appearance, more precious did he add, or join to it: nor any invention of his
own, or of any other man's whatsoever, but simply, and singly lifted up the
Serpent of Brass, and directed the people to behold it. Indeed, in lifting up
the Serpent, he lifted up the Pole also upon which it was, or set it on an end;
but not as having any virtue of, or in it self; nor as any thing to be looked
to for healing, but only as a medium, or means of lifting up the Serpent, that
it might be seen; and that it, not the Pole might have the wounded peoples eyes
fixed upon it. Even so must Christ be lifted up, and nothing but He. Nothing
with him, or besides him: the simplicity of the faith of him is to be kept.
Nothing else to be Preached, ^or pointed to, for any man to fix his eye upon,
and expect help from, but only Christ Crucified, as lifted up only, and alone
upon the Cross; and so out of the Grave, to Gods right hand for us. No work of
ours, nor any other order or Ordinance of God, or Man, is to be joined with him
herein, as the thing or person appointed of God, to heal or save us; or as the
thing to be viewed, eyed, or trusted in, for forgiveness, life, or
righteousness. No other name (whether of thing, or person) given under Heaven
whereby we must be saved, but only the name of the Lord Jesus. Because, there
is Salvation in none other besides him. 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. Act. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor.
2.2. If we look for life on either side of him Crucified, we view a Thief, that
which robs him of the honor due alone to him, and us, of his grace and
blessing. Indeed the Ordinances of God are to be observed by us; even as Moses
also observed the command of God in taking a Pole, and putting the Serpent upon
it; but as that was in order to the lifting up the Serpent, not as attributing
any thing of medicinableness to the Pole, but only as a means to lift up the
Serpent; that it might be seen; which God gave the virtue to, or by: So also
Baptism, and the Supper, and Preaching, and Prayer are to be used: but not as
if they of themselves were of any benefit to us, but as Christ the Son of man
is discovered to us, and exhibited to our view, by them, or eyed in them. They
that use them or lift them up otherwise, making them the objects of their
hopes, and the things as in themselves eyed by them, abuse them, and err from
the truth. Those observations, as Preaching, namely, though otherwise, never so
eloquent, pithy, witty, zealous; and so Baptism, or the Supper, though as to
the outward observation never so right (if any way they may be practiced, so as
that they present not, or men look beside the Son of Man) they are but as if
the Pole had been lifted up without the Serpent upon it. And the eying them, or
prayer, or any thing else beside, or without Christ: but as if the Pole had
been eyed below, or without the Serpent upon it. It Is Christ only that should
be the great object of our Preaching, or commendation to people; no work,
order, or ordinance of, and for it self: nay, no zeal, humility, love, or the
like, are the things in which we are to seek our healing: they may (if right)
be of the effects, and included in the health to be sought in, and by Christ;
or pious frames, in, and for the lifting up of Christ; but not the Medicine.
It Is only Christ, that is to be showed forth to men, and looked upon, by men,
that they might find healing; and so, that they might be rightly humble,
zealous, loving, holy, etc. And yet as the lifting up the Serpent alone, did
neither hinder the honor of God (who had not been honored, if his order had
been slighted; and who was honored in giving virtue, and power, to such his
appointment; however in it self, unlikely, and unable otherwise to produce such
an effect) nor was any hindrance to the desireableness, or goodness, or to men's
actual desires, of health, and sound recovery, but was a means to satisfy men's
desires, in obtaining the good, and benefit of health. So neither does the
lifting up only the Son of Man, either dishonor; nay, but it highly honors
God that sent him, and gave him to us: (He that honors the Son, honors
the Father also.) Nor any whit detracts, or derogates it from the
desirableness, excellency, and usefulness; or the desires after, or pressing
men to desire, and follow after right holiness, charity, peace, joy, etc. which
are things only to be sought, and obtained by, and through the lifting up of,
and looking to Jesus, as so lifted up, only for us: and therefore such lifting
him up, is the direct way to, and furtherance of such virtues, and virtuous
desires, and endeavors, contrary to some men's ignorant suspicions, and false
accusations of such Doctrine and teaching. But yet there is this great
difference, that the Serpent had no worth, or usefulness in it self, to speak
of; but in order to that health, and safety through it to be effected, in the
looker on it. But Christ is not only a means to virtue in us, and to the reward
of it: but is in himself, a person of unspeakable excellency; and the enjoyment
of his favor and presence, the very end, and reward of all the virtue and
goodness to be attained to, by all his lifting up, for, and to us; and being
looked to, by us: for he is not only the Medium, or means to an end (though his
flesh, or humanity, and so the things done by it may be so looked upon) but he
is also, the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End, the First and the
Last. The Way, the Truth, and the Life. Rev. 1.8, 17. John 14.6,

6. As Moses lifted up the Serpent upon the Pole, so highly as that it might be
seen, or looked to by the people that were wounded, distinctly from all other
things; putting nothing between to hinder the sight of it, and lifting it up
above all that might hinder its being seen: Even so is Christ to be lifted up
above all other things, so as nothing may hinder the sight, and beholding of
him, by the sinful and perishing Soul; but so as he may be seen, and discerned
of it, to be the only excellent, and all-sufficient remedy for it. So has God
lifted him up above all (as well as him only, and nothing with him, either on
the Cross, or on his own right hand.) That there is nothing so high as he; no
thing to be compared to him: nothing, no person, no virtue, no frame, work,
ordinance, nothing visible, or invisible; no Angel, Principality or Power. He
is set down in the Heavenly places (or enjoyments) f^ above all Principalities,
Powers, Might, and Dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but also in the World to come. Ephesians. 1.20, 21. Yea, he is lifted up above
the Law of Moses; both as the Lord of the Law, for the Son of man is Lord also
of the Sabbath. Mat. 12.8. And as able and sufficient to do for us, that which
the Law could not, nor can do; that is, make Atonement for us; justify,
sanctify, and save us. Romans 8.3. 1 Cor. 1.30. Heb. 7.14, 19. and 10 4, 5, 6,
etc. Act. 13.38, 39. And so is he also to be lifted up by the Preachers of the
Gospel (for so is he by the holy Spirit, in the Gospel as Ministered by the holy
Apostles and Prophets) above all other things, and persons whatsoever: both as
the means to our happiness, and the Spring and Ocean of our happiness it self;
as to the knowledge, and enjoyment of him; and his glory. And they that lift up
any other thing above him, or any otherwise then in him; they do not lift him
up, as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness; nor they that put a veil
over his face, or dress the discoveries, and preaching of him, with the wisdom
of man, or of words; for that is, as if Moses should have dressed the Serpent in
some curious wrought cloth, or painted him over with Vermilion, (as the
Idolaters did their Idols) least the simplicity of their matter should be seen.
Thence the Apostle who lifted him up, as Moses did the Serpent; tells us, That
Christ sent him to Preach the Gospel, not with wisdom of words, least the Cross
of Christ should be made of no effect. 1 Cor. 1.17. And that when he came,
declaring the Testimony of God, he came not with the excellency of speech, or
of wisdom; for he determined to know nothing among them, but Jesus Christ, and
him Crucified: and that his speech, and his Preaching, was not with the
inticeing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and Power,
that their Faith might not stand in the wisdom of man, but in the Power of God.
1 Cor. 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. As implying, that the presenting Christ with such
paintings, and garnishments of speech hinders men's seeing, and beholding him,
while the eye is drawn by the wisdom of the words, from the simplicity and
nakedness of the matter; and so the efficacy of the Cross may be hindered. Like
as the healing efficacy of the Serpent might have been by any intervening
Garment, clothing it; or Paint, dawbing it over, so as the nakedness, or
substance of the Brass could not have been seen. And that the faith begot
through such wisdom of words, o^ inticeing words of Man's wisdom, is but a
human, not a divine Faith, and so could not have such divine, and saving
efficacies, as where it is divine; and such as the nakedness and simplicity of
the Truth discovered, and discerned does effect.

7. As Moses lifted up the Serpent, to, and for all the wounded Israelites,
that so, who ever of them were wounded, what ever were their wounds, might,
looking to it, live; not excluding any of them from the intent of good by it,
as setting it up for some certain number of them, only separated from the rest,
and excluding the rest; so as that, if any other then that number looked to it,
they might not get the healing benefit of it, it being not set up for them; but
it was lifted up for all, and every one of them, without respect of persons;
not as if it were for the richer, rather then for the poor; for the wise,
rather then for the foolish: and without exclusion of any. So that it could be
nothing, but men's own refusal of looking to it, or neglect of it, that would
hinder them of its healing efficacy. Even so is Christ, the Son of Man to be
lifted up, to, and for all, and every one that is stung by the old Serpent, the
Devil; who, or what ever they be, or how ever many, or great their wounds,
sins, or sorrows, without respect of persons, or exclusion of any, but
inclusion of all, that all may see a way of healing, as well as know that they
are wounded; and be induced to seek healing, in the forgiveness of their sins,
and renewing of their hearts and natures thereby: So as therein the goodness of
God may be commended to all; and all have, and see, in crediting the Testimony
concerning him, cause to thank and bless him, (as all Nations and People
frequently are called upon in the Scriptures to do. As in Psalm. 66.1. and 98.4.
and 100.1.4. and 117.1, 2) And to apply their hearts to him, in whom there is
certain, and undoubted healing for them; of which, in so doing, they shall not
fail. And that, if any perish, it may be evident, that it is through their own
voluntary neglect of that Salvation, and refusing to seek help in him. And so
shall God loose nothing of his glory, in their destruction: forasmuch as he
prepared his Salvation before the face of all people, so as all might see it,
but they refused it, and by observing lying vanities, deprived themselves of
their own mercies. And so God has lifted him up: and his holy Spirit and
Servants have set him forth, not as one that dyed only for an elect number, or
chosen people; leaving the rest as unprovided for of help; but for all, and
every one. 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. For the World. John 1 29. and
3.16, 17. 2 Cor. 5.19. The whole World. 1 John 2.1, 2. Thence his grace is said
to be saving to all men. And it is every where made men's fault, in neglecting
the Truth, the Wisdom, the Son of God, in his calls and counsels, the
rejecting, and putting him away, not answering his calls, or obeying his voice,
that they do or shall perish. As, Psalm. 81.9, 10, 11. Prove. 1.20, 22, 24, 25,
26, etc. Isa. 66.3, 4. John 3.19. 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. Yea, the very Heathens
that have least means of knowledge, are in the same way charged. Romans 1.18, 19,
20, 21, 28. And as God, and his Spirit in the Apostles, (yea, and in the
Prophets. Isa. 25.6, 7. Psa. 98.1.2, 3, 4. and 145.8, 9) have lifted him up as
a Medicine prepared for all men, sick of whatever diseases, or wounds of Sin
and its fruits, during the day of his grace; willing that all be saved, and
come to the acknowledgement of the Truth; and not willing that any should
perish, but that all come to repentance: So are we also to lift him up to, and
for all: that so all, or any to whom we lift him up may be persuaded to look to
him and be saved. And they, that upon any pretense whatsoever, (as of following
other Doctors for their reputed zeal, or learning, or number, or any
imaginations, and reasonings of their own, in which, not comprehending the
shining of the Light of Gods sayings, they wrangle against them, and by blind
mistakes, oppose them) do otherwise, they are therein faulty and injurious to
the Souls of people, and opposite to Christ's order here, who says, As Moses
lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness; so must the Son of Man be lifted up.
But our Saviors saying, shall, and must prevail against them; do what they can
to hinder it.

8. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, for the healing of the
wounded, whatever, or how many soever were their wounds, without fore-preparing
them for the virtue thereof, by other means, as of Medicines, Searching,
Launcing, or any other way, applying any thing to their wounds; but this was
the first thing, and the only thing pow^rful to heal. Viz. The Serpent lifted
up. And that was immediately, without any intervening, or preceding course to
be looked to: So is Christ to be lifted up, as the Direct means, and the
immediate cure, and Medicine for all diseases of the Soul, without putting men
upon other rules or devises, courses to prepare them for healing by him as
necessary to be first looked to, of them. Thus the Apostle says, He delivered
to the (Corinthians first of all (or (...) among the first things) That Christ
dyed for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that he was buried, and that
he rose from the dead the third day, according to the Scriptures. 1 Cor. 15.3,
4, 5. And as much less did Moses go about to heal them, and then let them see
the Brazen Serpent when somewhat amended first: So no more should any go about
to regulate or qualify any first; for Christ; as if they were too badly
wounded to be admitted to look as yet to Christ, or for Christ, though looked
to, to heal them; till they first be by the Law, or some devises of men
somewhat made better; as humble men, penitent sinners, holy sinners, or the
like: which is, as if Moses should have hindered some, from looking to the
Serpent, because so deeply, and so dangerously wounded, and their sores so
many, till they had got rid of some of them otherwise. And as such a course
would have been a dangerous derogation, from the virtue of Gods Ordinance
there: so is this putting men upon qualifying themselves by other means: first,
to better them before Christ may be Preached to them, or they directed to look
to, or behold him; a dangerous derogation from Gods order, and Ordinance here.
Indeed as there, if any being wounded by a Serpent, had denied, or doubted
whether he was wounded by a Serpent, and so needed to look to the Brazen
Serpent, it might have been necessary to persuade him, and demonstrate to him,
that he was st^ng; and so needed to apply himself to that way of cure, the
Brazen Serpent for healing: So in case men doubt, or deny that they are
Sinners, or have sinned, and have need of Christ, it may be needful to show,
and demonstrate to them, that they have sin, and have sinned, and need to look
to Christ, that they may be saved. And so men may make use of the Law as a
discoverer of Sin, to that purpose. And yet the best way to show men their need
for looking to Christ, is to lift up Christ as given of God, through his Death,
for them to be their helper, and their Salvation. So the Apostle, We thus
judge, that if one died for All, then all were dead. That Is a demonstration
most certain, and effectual, that every one needs to mind him, and to apply
themselves to him for Salvation, as being sinners; that Christ has died for
them all. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. But of that way of Conviction, they have no skill
that do not believe that Apostolical Doctrine: the denying and rejecting of
which, leads them to fall upon other courses; as necessary to prepare them, and
make them, not only to see themselves Sinners, but also endeavor to work some
reformation, and good frames in them first, before they lift up Christ to them,
and direct their eyes to him; that so they might see some cause; first, to
judge that there are at least some probable Signs of their Election in them,
upon which they may ground a hope, or confidence, that Christ dyed for them;
and so that there is in him saving virtue for healing them.

4. As to the end of their lifting up. And so,

1. As the Serpent was lifted up by Moses, as for all the stung People; so
also, for all manner of stings, and wounds received from the fiery Serpents;
yea, for those that were inflicted, as punishments for slighting other Types,
as the Manna was; for slighting of which, and for Murmuring against Christ;
therein the fiery Serpents were sent unto them, and bit them. Number. 21.5, 6.
Yea, surely had a Serpent bitten any Man for despising the Brazen Serpent,
there had been no cure for him, but in looking to the Brazen Serpent. Even so
the Son of Man is, and must be lifted up, for the pardoning, healing, and
delivering from all sins, and the misery that comes by them. Yea, for sinnings
also against Christ, and the grace and blessing in him. There is forgiveness in
him for our neglects of him, and wickedness against him, in refusing to be
governed by him: while yet it is a day of grace and patience, and men be not as
it were quite dead of their wounds; whence Christ calls them, who for some time
have loved their simplicity when instructed by him; yea, scorners, and lovers
of their scorning, and those that have been some long time fools, and have
hated and despised knowledge brought to them by him; to turn at his reproofs,
promising to pour out his Spirit to them, and make known his words. In which is
implied, that upon their turning he would forgive their former sleightings of
him, and sinnings against him; which if they had not been to be forgiven and
overlooked by him, would have hindered them of such dispensations of his Grace
and Spirit to them, Prove. 1.22, 23. As thence also the wicked are called upon
to forsake their ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and turn to the
Lord, and he will have mercy upon them, and abundantly pardon them, Isa. 55.7.
And Christ tells the unbelieving Jews, that would not come to him that they
might have life, that he would not accuse them to his Father; and that if any
man heard his voice and believed not, he judged them not now, because he came
not into the world to judge the world, but to save the world, John 5.40, 45.
and 12.47. In which saying it is evident, that the world he came to save,
includes also the now unbelieving persons in it; while it is yet a day of Grace,
he is saving them. Also by his Intercession for transgressors, as the
Propitiation for the sins of the whole world, and by renewed dispensations of
patience, forbearance, and further grace to them, as appears 1 John 2.1, 2.
Isa. 53.12. Luke 13.8. Yea, he prayed for such as actually abused and crucified
him; and in the repenting of such afterward, he actually pardoned and forgave
them, Luke 23.34. with Acts 2.37, 38, 39. and 3.19, 20.

2. As Moses lifted up the Serpent, that whosoever were stung with the fiery
Serpents, might have advantage and opportunity there-through to look upon it;
he declaring and informing them, that it was set up as a means of healing; and
that it was Gods mind for giving healing by it, that they look up to it; and
that it would not give forth any healing-virtue to them, if not beheld by them;
yea probably, if not beheld till they were healed; if they turned their eye
from it before its virtue had its force in and upon them, though the Serpent
was the same, whether beheld or not beheld. Even so is and must the Son of Man
be lifted up, that men may have an advantage and opportunity of beholding him;
he being not to be beheld, if not lifted up. How can they believe on him, of
whom they have not heard? And how can they hear without a Preacher? Or how can
they preach except they be sent? For Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the Word of God, Romans 10.14, 17. Which makes it needful, that they that know
him, and are commissionated of God, (as every one that hears has commission to
say to others, Come, Rev. 22.17.) do hold him forth, commend and magnify him
to men. It Is true, that the Apostle there in Romans 10.18. propounding that
question. Have they not all heard? answers, Yes doubtless, their voice is gone
into all the world, and their words to the ends of the earth: Alluding to Psalm.
19.2, 3, 4. Where the Holy Ghost speaks of the Heavens declaring the glory of
God, and the firmament showing his handiwork. And so of Gods Works and
Providence setting him forth, and uttering knowledge; as elsewhere it is said,
All his works shall praise him. To which also they are often called upon, Psalm.
145.8, 9. and 148. and 150. And the Lord they commend and praise, is doubtless
the same of, and to whom he says, Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the
foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the works of thine hands, etc.
Psalm. 102.25. Which the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews applies to the
Lord Jesus the Son of Man, by whom the Lord has spoken to us in these last
days, and by whom he made the worlds, Heb. 1.1, 2, 10, 11. And surely whosoever
beholds him as there lifted up and praised, so as to betake themselves to him
for help, they do and shall find mercy with him. Whosoever shall call upon the
Name of the Lord shall be saved. In every nation he that fears God, and works
righteousness, is accepted of him, Romans 10.12. Acts 10.34. They that by nature
(or without verbal or vocal instruction) do the things contained in the Law,
(that love God and their neighbor, though uncircumcised, or not under the
outward Regiment of Gods Kingdom and Ordinances) their uncircumcision shall be
accounted circumcision; that is, they shall be accepted and accounted of as
Gods Church, Romans 2.25, 26. And of those that by such means also are won in to
God, I understand in part what our Savior says, That many shall come from the
East and from the West, (even such as are not the children of the Kingdom, and
born under the distinct knowledge and Ordinances of God, as the opposition to
them in the following words do manifest, wherein he adds) and shall sit down
with Abraham, and Isaac in the Kingdom of God, when the children of the Kingdom
(such as are born and brought up in the professed Church, and so are
professedly under Gods Government or Ordinances) shall be cast out, Matthew.
8.12. But I say, notwithstanding whatever of this nature may be true, however
God in his lifting him up in his Providence and Works, and the manifestations
of him implicitly therein, may do for the rendering him visible to men, that
they may behold him, look to him, and be saved by him. Yet it concerns us as
our duty, and is that which God requires of us, that we so lift up Christ in
our distinct Preaching of him to men, that men through our ministration may
behold him in the distinct express declaration of him, and be saved from their
errors, ignorances, and iniquities; which while they by their wisdom know him
not in the wisdom of God, as manifested in his works and providence, they run
into. As to that purpose, and for that cause it has pleased God to appoint the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. It was not
another light John bare witness to, then that which enlighteneth every man
coming into the world, and that shined in the darkness before he bare witness
to it. It was not made another, in, or by his witness, only more plainly
declared and pointed to. It was the same that was in the world, though the
world knew him not, that came to his own, and by his own was not received;
which whosoever received, (whether of the world or of his own) were made the
sons of God. It was the same Word which was in the beginning with God, that in
due time was made flesh (to bring us through his Sufferings in the flesh unto
God) in whom was the life, and from whom the light came that always shined, and
in all the world. But God to help men to discern him, (whom otherwise in his
wisdom, or more wise way to the view of the world (as the way of his Creation
and Providence is) they usually overlook and know not) has ordered gifts to
men for a distinct and plain preaching him in a way seeming to the world more
foolish, for their Salvation. And in this foolishness (even the plain
ungarnished way) of preaching, He is, I say, to be so held up or set forth, as
men may have opportunity or advantage to see him, as given in the flesh to the
world to be their Savior, according to Gospel-revelation; with persuasions
also to men to mind and look to him as the great and only one, in whom there
is certain healing for them; and as one who being neglected by them, or not
looked to to the end, they cannot be healed, cannot be forgiven and saved from
their sins, and Gods wrath and judgments, though he be the same in himself,
seen or not seen, looked to, or not looked to, believed in, or not believed in;
Yet he is not the same to us, that is, he gives not forth his virtues otherwise
then as lifted up, he is looked to, and believed on by men, (as to persons that
are in capacity, as being of years, or otherwise of discretion, as such only
in a sense agreeable to Scripture speaking, may more properly be said to be
come into, so as to be of the world) nor can he be otherwise, or further then
as lifted up to them, beheld by them, Isa. 45.22. Mark 16.15, 16. Heb. 2.1, 3.

3. As Moses lifted up the Serpent, Not to the end that God might take occasion
to punish them the more for their necessitated or wilful neglects of it, or as
a thing intended of God to that end; but for this gracious end, That when a
Serpent had bitten any man, however often, or seldom, deeply, or slightly, he
might look to the Brazen Serpent, and live. Though in case any man out of
pride, or scornfulness, or other principles neglected it, he might be worthily
left to dye of his wounds, and was without excuse if he then perished. Even so
the Son of Man is, and must be of men lifted up, not to the end, that men might
harm themselves by him, and be left without excuse, if either through defect on
Gods part of effectual Grace to enable them, they cannot (as some erroneously
hold) or through wilfulness on their part, in neglecting the grace and power
given them, they will not look to, and believe in him, and so perish; But to
those gracious ends, that they might, when through the deceits of Sin and the
Devil they fall into sin and misery, look up to him, and be healed by him; Not
perish, but have eternal life, both believe and live. Though if when he is
lifted up to those gracious ends, any man neglect to use the power and liberty
given him of God to look to him, and in the help of his grace in such looking
to him, met with to believe in him; or having begun to believe, withdraw again,
and so through unbelief perish; he is the cause of his own destruction, and is,
and will be without excuse in Gods presence, when he comes to judge him, Isa.
5.3, 4. Hosea 13.9. Matthew. 22.12. Romans 3.4, 19. Now that Gods ends in ordering
Christ to be lifted up, and so in lifting him up are so gracious, and not (as
some represent them) to be a snare to them (otherwise then in case they
wilfully reject him when lifted up to those gracious ends, that such a thing
shall be the event, as is implied, Isa. 8.14. 1 Pet. 2.8.) that they might
perish. I say, that Gods gracious ends in it, are directly that men might
believe on him; and that whosoever so do, might not perish, but have eternal
life, both the next words, and the two following Verses show. The next words
are, That whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have eternal life.
And the next Verses confirm that saying, For God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn
the world, but that the world through him might be saved. Mark that Negative;
Not to condemn the world; and then the Affirmative, But that the world through
him might be saved. Such the gracious end of God being acted by love in it to
the world; though the event is like the event that might be to the people from
the Serpent lifted up (if any were so foolish for their bodies, as many in the
world are for their souls) namely, He that believes is not condemned, he
obtains the gracious end of God even as there it came to pass, that if a
serpent had bitten any man, when he looked to the brazen Serpent, he lived,
Numb. 21.9. But he that believes not is condemned now, or already, because he
has not believed on the Name of the only begotten Son of God. Not because it
was Gods end in giving Christ, that any man should refuse him, and be
condemned, but because he neglected Gods gracious end, which was, that through
him he might be saved, John 3.16, 17, 18. as follows Verse 19. This is the
condemnation (the reason of the unbelievers being condemned) that light is come
into the world, but men loved darkness rather then light. But this I might add,
as

5. The last agreement, viz. As to the event. It came to pass there upon Moses
lifting up that Serpent, that if a Serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld
the Serpent of brass, he lived. As implying, that not till then had it its
effect to revive or cure; and so not at all, if never looked to; or if before
perfect recovery it was turned from, that may possibly be implied too; but if
any looked to, and beheld it, he lived. No matter from what part of the Camp,
whether East or West; or whether he stood so near it, as to behold its express
form; or at such a distance, as he had but a confused sight of it, whether his
wounds were more or fewer, deeper or sleightier, etc. when he looked he lived.
Even so here, when any man sees and believes on Christ lifted up of God, and
in the Gospel, not till then or otherwise, but then he is justified from all
things, from which he could not be justified by the Law of Moses: Whatever or
wherever he is, or whether his sight be more distinct, or more dim and
confused, so be it his sight be hearty, he lives with God, or in his sight, and
living and believing, he shall not dye for ever, Acts 13.39. Gal. 3.7, 9, 26,
29. John 1.12, 13. Acts 10.34, 43. John 11.25, 26. But I only mention this,
and proceed now to

CHAP. IX.
The fourth and last Point. The end of the Son of Man's being lifted up, viz.
That whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have eternal life. Six
Observations drawn from hence. The first of which concerning men's danger of
perishing, opened.

Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, is, That whosover believes on
him might not perish, but have eternal life. He does not say indeed, that Gods
end is simply, that every one might have eternal life, without respect to their
believing, or whether they believe or not: But yet he says Verse 17. That the
world through him might be saved. Which is as much as that the world through
what he has done, and does for them, might in looking to, and believing on
him, (would they so do) be saved. As also it is said, He gave his flesh for the
life of the world, John 6.51. That is, that the world set free by his death,
sustained in his flesh from the first death, so as out of it to (as all shall,
1 Cor. 15.21, 22.) be raised, might also in feeding thereon live, and not dye
the second Death. Nor does he say, that every one might believe on him, and be
saved, and have eternal life; but it is said, that John bare witness to the
light, that all men through him might believe, John 1.7, 8. And the Apostle
says, God wills all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge or
acknowledgment of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. And another Apostle, that God would
not that any man should perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet.
3.9. And God sent the Prophet Ezekiel to say to the People, As I live I have no
pleasure in the Death of the wicked, but rather that he should turn and live;
which is all one, as if he had said, that he might believe, and have eternal
life: for of such a life the Prophet doubtless is to be understood. But he
says here, that every one that believes, or whosoever believes on him, might
not perish, but have eternal life. In which we may note these six Points, or
Observations employed and signified. Viz.

1. That men (even the World, as the next verses mention) are in themselves
generally in danger of, or in the way to perishing. (...) there needed no
endeavor for preventing it, if no danger of it.

2. That God has no pleasure or likement, that they should perish; but rather
that they should have eternal Life. His using such a means, or providing such a
remedy, to prevent the perishing, and that men may obtain the life eternal;
clearly implies that in both its branches.

3. That the Son of Man is the only person, or Medium by whom we may be
preserved from perishing, and obtain eternal life. And he is the Medium God
has appointed to those purposes: This is clear in the whole scope of the
Verse, and in the verses following.

4. That thereto it is needful (even for escaping perdition, and obtaining
eternal life) and it is Gods good will that men believe on him, the Son of Man,
so ordered of God for them.

5. That it is the gracious mind of God, that every one that believes on the
Son of Man should not (and accordingly, whosoever believes on him shall not)
perish, but have eternal life.

6. That in order both to men's believing on him, and also to their not
perishing, but having eternal Life; in their so doing, it is Gods gracious mind,
and in it self needful and necessary, that He, the Son of Man be so lifted up,
as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness. Of these in order, and with
convenient brevity, or enlargement.

Obser. 1. That men (even the World) are in themselves genera^ly in danger of,
or in the way to perishing. This is evidently declared in the Scriptures of
truth. Yea all that God has done to Christ in abasing, and raising him; and
all that he does through Christ, in his words and works; in his calls,
counsels, repoofs, corrections, etc. are declared to be done primarily, and
directly, while it is a day of his grace, and patience toward any, to prevent
or keep men from perishing, which would have been, and would be needless, and
groundless, if they were not without it in danger of perishing. Far be it from
us to make God, the God of Wisdom, or only wise God, to do, or say so much in
vain, or needlessly, or without ground or cause. Nor is that perishing simply a
bodily dying, which God does nothing to prevent, that it should not at any
time, or at all come upon us; but a perishing from Gods presence, so as to be
utterly lost, miserable, and undone.

Man was wholly and universally fallen into sin, and misery, even under the
sentence of Death and Condemnation, the first Death, in the first Adam, and
therein we were in danger to have perished; because

1. As the people here in the Wilderness were bitten by the fiery Serpents, and
their bite was so poisonous, venomous, and perilous, that it caused Death: Number.
21.6. So there the old Serpent the Devil, and Satan enticing and tempting man
to sin, through Adams, and Evah's listening to, and acting according to his
temptation, he got power over them, and all in them; that is, all men to bite
them to Death; by bringing them under the sentence of that righteous Law,
wherein God has denounced death to them in case of their acting, so as he
enticed them. For therein.

2. All have sinned, and are come short of the glory of God, or are deprived of
it. Romans 3.23. By one man sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and so
Death passed over all men, because all had sinned. Romans 5.12. The wages of Sin
being Death. Romans 6.23. Not only a bodily Death, but a Death of the whole
person that sinned, in being deprived of the favor and presence of God. Psalm.
30.5.

3. And from this, no man could deliver himself, nor be delivered by any other
Creature; the sentence of God and his Law standing against us, and binding it
upon us; which no mere Creature could bear upon himself, so, as to redeem us
from it; nor had any power enough to raise us up from under it: for who can
stand under, or prevail against God's anger. Psalm. 98.7, 8, 9, 11. and 130.3.
Nah. 1.6. If Christ had not dyed for us, yea and risen again, we had all
perished in this Death, and there had been no Resurrection out of it. 1 Cor.
15.12, 18, 21, 22. But we are redeemed from this first death, by Jesus Christ;
having therefore given himself a Ransom for all, and dyed for all, and brought
all to be under his gracious Lordship, and dispose; having so satisfied the
justice, and pacified the wrath of God for that offense, as that, whereas all
had sinned and came short of the glory of God, they are all justified by his
grace, (as to that) through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. And as by
one offense, the Judgment was unto all men to Condemnation: So through the
Righteousness of one, the free gift is unto all men, to justification of life.
1 Timothy 2.6. Romans 14.9. and 3.23, 24. and 5.18. So that no man shall perish in
this first Death for ever, but all shall be raised again therefrom. For, as in
Adam all dye, so in Christ all shall be made alive. 1 Cor. 15.22. They shall
not use that Proverb in the Resurrection, and Judgment to come; That the
Fathers have eaten sower Grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on edge: the
Soul that sins it shall dye. Ezekiel. 18.2, 3. The Condemnation is not, nor
shall be then, that Adam sinned; but, That light came into the World, and men
loved darkness rather then light. John 3.19. Prove. 1.24, 25, 29. Though as to
the taking guilt off from the ignorant and unbelieving conscience, in respect
of that first Sin also (Men in their ignorance and unbelief, often charging
themselves with the guilt of that Sin of Adam, so, as to think themselves
therefore under Condemnation from God, and in danger of perishing) as also, for
purging out the corruption of Nature there-through entered, the Son of Man is to
be lifted up in the Preaching of him to men; who, though so delivered from that
first Death, as that they shall not perish in it: yet, as they come up into the
World to be capable of choosing the good, and refusing the evil, are generally
in danger of perishing.

2. In a Second Death, so as not to have eternal life. For,

1. God being of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, evil may not dwell with
him; fools may not stand in his sight, nor any unclean thing inherit his
Kingdom. Psalm. 5.4, 5. Hab. 1.12. 1 Cor. 6.9. And we are all as an unclean
thing; and all our righteousness, as a menstruous, or filthy cloth. Isa. 64.6.
None Righteous, no not one; altogether are become unprofitable. None that does
good, no not one. Romans 3.10, 13. None therefore are fit to come into Gods
Kingdom, and to have eternal Life without a Regeneration, or new Birth, John
3.3, 5. Which we naturally run from, siding with evil; and falling into, yea
walking in new disobediences against God, and so making our selves obnoxious to
his judgment upon our own personal accounts; for our own personal
transgressions. For,

1. We all naturally have a heart deceitful in us, and desperately wicked,
inclining us to those ways that lead to Destruction. Jer. 19.9. For out of the
heart of man proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts,
covetousness, wickedness, deceits, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy,
pride, foolishness; all these evil things come from within, and they defile the
man. Mark 7.21, 22, 23. We are naturally carnal, sold under sin. Romans 7.14.

2. The World is full of baits, allurements, and snares to draw us away unto,
and entangle us in such sins, as expose us to Gods Wrath, and Judgment, again,
the riches, pleasures, honors, pomps, and vanities of it, are apt to ensnare
us through the lust that is in us. 2 Pet. 1.4. 1 John 2.15, 16. And the persons
in it being sinful and vicious, are apt to infect and defile one another;
inticeing, counselling, yea, and sometimes commanding to sin. Psalm. 1.1. Prove.
1.10, 11. (...). 3.4, 5. and 6.7, 9. Mich. 6.16.

3. The old adversary and enemy the Devil with his many Angels, evil and wicked
Spirits, subtle and powerful to entice and move to evil, goes about like a
roaring Lion, seeking to devour: tempting, and alluring to sin; and prevailing
with such as are heedless of them, and unskilful to discern them, or their
enmity and wickedness, and to resist them. 1 Chronicles. 21,1. 1 Pet. 5.8. Rev.
20.2, 3, 8. There is none so strong or good, that this Adversary will not, so
far as God permits, set upon to tempt. Mat. 4.1, 2. Luke 4.2, 13. and 22.33.
And he blinds the minds of all those that believe not the truth, and thereby
gets power over them. 2 Cor. 4.4. Act. 26.18.

2. There is none can mend himself, or his condition toward God, so as either
to obtain his favor to Justification. If any could, it must be, by offering
him Sacrifice, or doing him service, such as he requires in his Law; for we
are become so altogether brutish, and void of goodness in our selves, by our
fall, which we increase by new compliances with Satan, that we can of our
heads, and by our own inventions find out, or imagine nothing well-pleasing in
his sight. Jer. 10.14. 2 Cor. 3.5. Romans 7.18. The Lord knows the though of Men
(yea, of the wise) that they are vain; empty of any righteousness, goodness, or
suitableness to him. Psalm. 94.11. 1 Cor. 3.19, 20. And therefore it must be in
man's learning and keeping Gods Law if in any thing; but man is unable of
himself to keep Gods Law, he being carnal sold under sin; and the Law holy,
pure, and spiritual. Too high for him in his falls state. Romans 7.14. Or so,
as to cleanse himself. For who can bring a clean thing, out of an unclean? Not
one. No Creature whatsoever. Job. 14.4. And that is another reason too, why the
Law cannot help us; nor we help our selves, or one another by it; it is too weak
because of the Flesh. Romans 8.3. By the deeds of it, can no flesh living be
justified in the sight of God. For by the Law is (not either satisfaction for,
or cleansing from, but) the knowledge of Sin. Romans 3.20. Which we daily
generally commit, there being not a just man upon Earth that does good, and
sins not. Eccles. 7.20. 1 King. 8.43. Nay, instead of satisfying for, or
cleansing us from our sins, it occasions sin, more to abound, and become more
sinful. Romans 5.20. and 7.8. Sin taking occasion by it, fills, men with all lust
and concupisence. So that as a whorish Woman that cannot forbear to play the
harlot, seeks and plots more desperately to fulfill her lust, and falls more
under the danger of the Law there through, by being married to a strict and
severe Husband, that cannot abide the least motion or inclination to such
uncleanness, and watches her at all times; then if she had no husband at all:
so is our case under the Law of works, for justification and life: they that
are of the works of the Law (thinking to be justified thereby) are thereby more
condemned, and ^all more under the curse. Gal. 3.10. It stands cross and
contrary to us, like the fiery flaming Sword in the hand of the Cherubim,
turning every way upon us. Genesis 3.22. Col. 2.14. And while men trusting in
Moses, for like refuge to come to Christ for it, Moses will accuse them. John
5.40, 45. Nor can any man by that, or by any devise of his own or others,
defend and keep himself, or be kept from the power of Sin and Satan; so, as
not to fall by them. If they could; Christ and his word would not be needful
thereto for them, which may not be granted. Gal. 2.21. and 3.21. It being his
office to succor men in temptations. Heb. 2.27, 18.

3. Yea, God is holy, and will not only, not admit to eternal life, those that
are unclean, and sin, but will also Judge the World in Righteousness, and
punish the sins of it, taking vengeance on the evil doer. And rendering to every
one according to his works. Heb. 9.27. Jer. 17.9, 10. Romans 2.6, 11, and 3.5.
And of this he has given evident, and abundant demonstration; both that he
perfectly hates sin, and that he will severely punish it, where not pardoned,
and purged. As,

1. In his casting down the Angels that sinned, not spar^ng them, though high
and glorious creatures; but throwing them down to hell, and reserving them in
chains of darkness, to the Judgment of the great day. 2 Pet. 2, 4. Jud. 6.

2. And in his casting man out of Paradise, and inflicting upon us all the
Sentence of Death, upon the account of his ow^ offense; we being all in him,
and in him offending. Romans 5.12, 18, 19.

3. And in his not sparing his only begotten Son, when ^e stepped in between God
and us, to Ransom and deliver us from perishing in the first Death. Though he
was his only begotten Son; yet he pleased to bruise him, and make his Soul an
offering for sin; and did not release us from the punishment of it, to
destruction, upon his only praying and interceding for us, without his
suffering to the shedding of his Blood, or pouring out of his Soul unto death;
and therein being made a curse for us. Isa. 53.4, 5, 6, 10. Gal. 3.13. Romans
8.32. And surely, if sin be so odious to him, that he would not let it pass
unpunished in his own Son, when but imputed to him, and undertaken for by him,
for us, how can it be expected, that any other person, not saved from it by
him, but abiding in it, and committing and practicing it to the death
(especially also, against Christ's gracious calls, and counsels, and endeavors
to reclaim us) shall escape his Judgment? If such things were done to the green
tree, what shall be done to the dry tree? As himself said, Luke 23.31.

4. And in the great and terrible day, that he has appointed, whereof he has
given faith or Assurance to all men, in his having raised up Christ from the
dead. Act. 17.30, 31. And the dreadful punishments, and destructions which he
has decreed, and threatened then to execute upon the wilful and impenitent
sinners. There is a Judgment appointed to be after Death: as well as there was
one pronounced before it. Heb. 9.27. Romans 5.16. An Eternal Judgment. Heb. 6.3.
A day of the Destruction, and Perdition of ungodly men. 2 Pet. 3.7. The
Judgment of the great day. Jude 6. When Christ shall be revealed from Heaven
with all his mighty Angels in flaming fire to take vengeance on all that know
not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 These. 1.6,7,
8. When all the workers of iniquity shall perish; being destroyed with as
everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his strength, or mighty power. When all that are proud, and all that work
wickedness shall be like stubble, and the day of the Lord that burns like an
oven, shall utterly consume them, and neither leave them root nor branch, Mal.
4.1.

5. Yea, and in those many terrible judgments and destructions of ungodly
sinners, which God has oftentimes, and in all ages and places, signally
executed in this world, are demonstrations of the severity of his anger against
sin, and of the power of his wrath prevailing against all the policy or
strength of the sinner to withstand it: and as certain Types, Tastes, or
Ensamples of the Eternal vengeance in the great day to come, to be executed and
endured. Such was the overflowing of the Old World, the World of the ungodly
with a Flood, in the days of Noah. 2 Pet. 2.5. The burning up of Sodom and
Gomorrah, and the adjacent Cities with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, for
their great wickedness. Setting them forth as ensamples of suffering eternal
Vengeance: as the Apostle says, Jude 7.^ 2 Pet. 2.6. The overthrow of Pharaoh
in the Red Sea; the destructions of Saul, Nabal, etc. The destruction and
desolation of Jerusalem, and the like. Psalm. 9.16, 17.

Yea, and that men are not only in danger of, but in the way to perishing,
naturally, and generally in, and of themselves is evident too; for if we mind
the ways men generally walk in, we shall find they are such, as God has
threatened his Judgments, to and revealed his wrath from Heaven against. Romans
1.18. Both so as to exclude from the Kingdom, and the Glory to come; and so, as
to destroy with everlasting destruction, such as walk in them: for are not the
generality of men, either proud persons, and such he has denounced destruction
upon, being hateful and abominable to him. Mal. 4.1. Isa. 2.11.12. Prove. 2.17.
Or covetous, and such God abhors. Psa. 10.3. Or Idolaters, or Fornicators,
or Adulterers (at least in heart) Mat. 5.28. Or abominable defilers of
themselves with mankind, or effeminate ((...) 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. delicate, sost
persons) or Thieves, or Liars, or Extor^ioners, or Drunkards, or Revilers, or
Murderers, or the like. None of which, may have any part in the Kingdom of
God, or of Christ; but in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the second Death. A death infinitely more dreadful then the bodily Death,
however inflicted, though in the most lingering, painful, and tormenting manner
that ever was devised or heard of, being the punishment prepared for the Devil
and his Angels. 1 Cor. 6.9.10. Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5, 6. Rev. 21.8. and 22.15. Mat.
25.41, 46. At the best are not men too generally walking and passing their
times (as our Savior says of the old World, and of the Sodomites in the days
of Noah and Lot) in eating, and drinking; marrying, and being given in
marriage, buying, selling, building, planting, with a neglect of the safety of
their Souls: and yet upon those that so walk, Destruction will come as the
Flood and Fire did upon the men of those days, there mentioned by him. Luke
17.26, 27, 28. etc. Yea, what need we further Testimony then that of the
Apostle, proving all men both Jews and Gentiles to be under Sin. Romans 3.9, 19.
Their throat is an open Sepulcher, with their tongues they have used deceit,
the poison of Asps is under their lips, their mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness, their feet are swift to shed blood, destruction and misery are in
all their ways, and the way of Peace they have not known, there is no fear of
God before their eyes. And whatsoever things the Law says, it says to them
that are under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and the whole world
become guilty (or obnoxious to judgment) in the sight of God. This to the first
Point, which tends to show us

Use. 1. Our miserable state in our selves; that we might be low and little in
our own eyes, and not lift up our selves and walk either proudly and stoutly,
as if all were well with us, and we in no danger of seeing evil; or slothfully
and securely in not earnestly looking out for a remedy; yea, against that it is
useful to show us.

2. Our need, great need of a Savior; and to inquire diligently after him, and
accept him heartily, being discovered and Preached to us: to which end also God
added the Law for discovering of our sins, that so we might look after, accept
and embrace the Savior, whom he had fore-promised to us. Gal. 3.19, 22, 24.
Yea, the very promise and declaration of that Savior shows us to have been
miserable: Yea, and yet if we neglect him to be in a most miserable condition:
for in that one died for all. It Is most brightly testified, that All were dead.
Yea, and in that it is such a one that died for us, as Gods only Son, it
signifies and testifies yet more, The greatness of our misery in our selves and
of that death we were fallen into, that put us into a need of such a ones dying
for us 2 Cor. 5.14. But that will fall in, in the third proposition, or
observation.

CHAP. X.
The second Observation briefly spoken to, and some Objections against it
answered.



1. By his own assertion under his oath, that we might be the more confirmed in
it; as was noted above, in Ezekiel. 33.11. Where he swears, As he lives, he has
no pleasure in the death of the Wicked, but rather that he turn and live. And
sure, if not in the wickeds, in no man's death; seeing it is the wicked that he
every where threatens with Death. As he says to the wicked in the same
Chapter. Verse. 8 Thou shall surely die. And, The Soul that sins, it shall
die. Chap. 18.3, 20. And the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. ver.
21. And yet he says, and swears, that he has no pleasure; none neither
secret, nor revealed, that the wicked should die.

2. And his holy servants assert the same, who have had his mind, and grace in
their hearts, and declared it faithfully. The Apostle Paul asserts, That God
wills all to be (or that all be) saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.
1 Timothy 2.4. And the Apostle Peter, that God is not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance. 2 Pet. 3.9. And the Prophet
Isaiah represents the Lord, calling all the ends of the Earth to look to him,
and be saved. Isa. 45.22.

3. The many addresses that God, in, and through Christ by his Word and Spirit
makes unto sinners, to call and bring them to Repentance, that they might live,
and not die; are so many evidences, and convincing demonstrations of his love
to Mankind: and that he has no desire or delight that they should perish, but
have everlasting life. For we may not think such a wicked, and impious thought
of the Almighty, who is love, and charity, truth, and goodness it self; as if
he should pretend one thing, and intend another. That he signifies one thing to
be his desire and will outwardly; and desires and intends, the contrary
inwardly: and so dissembles with his lips, seeing he protests the contrary,
Viz. That, the opening of his lips are right things. That he speaks right
things, and wickedness is an abomination to his lips. That his words are all
right, and that there is nothing froward, or preverse in them. Prove. 8.7, 6, 8.
Isa. 45.19. Far be it from us to think, that he is like to the wicked, whom his
Soul abhors, to cover hatred with deceit: As is said, Prove. 26.26. Now
thinking holily of God, and according to truth we shall perceive the desire he
has of men's welfare abundantly testified in his addresses to us, diverse ways.
As

1. In his calls and counsels frequently given us. As its said, Wisdom cries
out, she lifts up her voice in the streets; crying, how long ye simple, turn at
my reproofs, etc. Prove. 1.20.23. And does not Wisdom cry, and Understanding
lift up her voice? Can that be denied? Is not that evident? and that to men
indefinitely, yea, and to the worst of them: therefore it follows, that she
stands in the top of high places, where, and whence she may best be heard, and
cries, To you O men I call, and my voice is to the Sons of Men. O ye simple
understand wisdom, and ye fools, be ye of an understanding heart. Prove. 8.1, 2,
4, 5. And so, Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die O house of Israel. Ezekiel. 33.11.
Yea, this was one great end of our Saviors coming into the World, in order to
his saving the World. Viz. To call sinners to Repentance. Mat. 9.13. John 12.47.

2. In his promising them great and glorious things, upon their hearing, and
obeying his calls. Turn ye at my reproofs: behold, I will pour out my Spirit
unto you, I will make known my words. Prove. 1.23. So in Prove. 8.32, 33. Blessed
is the man that hears me: watching daily at my Gates, waiting at the posts of
my doors. For whosoever finds me, finds life: and shall obtain favor of the
Lord. Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find. Mat. 7.7, 8. And
abundance the like.

3. In his threatening sinners, if they will take the course to perish, and will
not listen to his counsels. As, Because I have called, and ye refused; I
stretched out my hands, and no man regarded: I also will laugh at your
calamities, I will mock when your fear comes. Prove. 1.24, 26, etc. O wicked
man thou shall surely die. Ezekiel. 33.8. And many the like.

4. In his reproving, expostulating, and reasoning the case with men, that he
might persuade them to their own good. Why will ye die O house of Israel? Ezekiel.
33.11. Ho, every one that thirsts, come to the waters, and ye that have no
money: come, buy and eat, yea come, buy wine and milk without money, and
without price. Why will ye lay out money for that, that is not bread, and your
labor, for that, that satisfies not? etc. Isa. 55.1, 2, 3.

5. In his chastening men also, for their follies, in neglecting and refusing
their own mercy, in order to their awakning to Repentance, that they might
live. As he says, I smote them thus and thus, yet they turned not to me says
the Lord. As implying, that he smote them to that end they might turn. Amos
4.6, 7, 11. All these things does God twice, and thrice with men, that he might
keep them from going down to the pit, etc. Job. 33.29.

6. In his exercising long patience, and forbearance toward them, with much
bounty and goodness to the same end, that is, To lead them to repentance. As is
expressed. Romans 2.4.5. With 2 Pet. 3.9.15. Isa. 30.18. Waiting that he may be
gracious. Yea,

4. The next Observation is an evident confirmation of the truth of this;
Namely, the gift of Gods only Son, the Son of Man: for if he gave his only
begotten Son to be the Savior of the World; evident it is then, that he loved
the World: and if he loved it, he desired not, that it should perish, but
rather, be saved through him, and obtain eternal life. But that is true, as it
is said in ver. 16, 17. And as we may see also in our speaking to that
observation.

1. Object. But the Scripture says, that the World goes to Destruction. 1
Cor. 11, 32. Or shall be condemned.

Answ. True, but that is, because it goes contrary to what God would have it;
it disobeys, and rebels against his will, and does that which pleases him
not. Isa. 66.3, 4. John 3.19, 20.

2. Object. But God hated Esau before he was born, therefore had pleasure in
his Death, and perishing.

Answ. It is not said, that God hated him before he was born; but only that the
Elder people (Esau namely, and his Posterity) should serve the younger; that
is, Jacob and his. See, Romans 9.12. The other of hating Esau was said in
Malachie's time. Mal. 1.2. long after Esau was dead; and was said of his
Posterity when he laid their Mountains wast.

3. Object. But the Apostle adds this of Esau's being hated, to that said,
before they were born, as a demonstration of its truth: and therefore that
saying, also refers to the same time.

Answ. 1. That follows not, for it confirms the truth of the former saying,
though understood of Esau nationally, and in Malachie's time: For Gods laying
Esaus Mountains wast for his hatred against his Brother; and therein testifying
hatred against Esau in his Posterity, when as he more gently chastised Jacob in
his posterity: was an evidence of Gods resolving to make good his purpose of
making him a servant to Israel, as nationally considered: Gods destroying the
Elder, for not serving the younger, was a demonstration that his place was, to
have been subject to him: but if we should refer this hatred to the same time;
yet then

2. Less love, is in Scripture called hatred: and so Gods less love, in respect
of purpose to show him grace, and give him honor and privileges, might be
called his hatred; and stand well enough, with a desire of his Salvation, and
that he might not perish. As we are willed in such a sense, to hate those,
whose destruction yet we may not desire; yea, whose good and happiness we are
greatly to desire, and endeavor; as our Fathers, Mothers, Brethrens, etc. whom
we are to hate, that is, love less then Christ; so as to be willing to
displease, or forsake them, for Christ's sake. Luke 14.26. So may God be said to
hate in such a sense also.

4. Object. But God raised up Pharaoh to destroy him.

Answ. 1. That is not so said, but that he might show his power in him, and
make his name to be declared in all the Earth. And that he might do, and yet
desire his Salvation. Yea, (as Origin, in his Philocal. also notes) He might
order those Judgments to him, and harden him, that he might bring them upon
him, to the bodily death and destruction, to awaken him to Repentance; and to
prevent his perishing hereafter. Sometimes God punishes men here to Death, that
they might not perish for ever. 1 Cor. 11.31, 32. But granting him to be
perished.

Answ. 2. I answer further, that its true, that there is a time, when patience
abused ends in vengeance: and the day of Mercy, may be followed with a day of
Destruction. And then, he that in the day of grace would rather that the wicked
turn and live; will afford them no more space, or grace to turn; but will laugh
at their calamity, and mock when their fear comes. Prove. 1.22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27. Yea, and yet further.

Answ. 3. Gods ways are oft-times unsearchable, and his judgments past finding
out; when as yet, his Word is right, and all his works are done in truth. Romans
11.33. Psalm. 33.4. We are not therefore to doubt of, or deny his words, because
we cannot always comprehend his ways.

5. Object. But he may make some Vessels to dishonor.

Answ. 1. That he may do, and yet in their humbling themselves under his
Judgments show them mercy; as well as destroy those whom he was framing to be
Vessels to honor; as is signified in Jer. 13.11, 14. With 18.3, 4, 6, 11. He
can make another Vessel of what is marred, as easily, as the Potter can turn
again, and make a new Vessel of what is broken upon the wheel. And he may make
any a Vessel to dishonor, that will not obey his calls and counsels, as well
as make any a Vessel to honor, that through his grace cleanses himself from
what defiles. 2 Timothy 2.21.

6. Object. But the Lord made all things for himself; and the wicked for the
day of Wrath. Prove. 16.4. Therefore, he made some to destroy them.

Ans. 1. The words may be read: And the Wicked are for the day of Wrath. Where,
by day of Wrath, may be understood, a time of Wrath against others; the wicked
then are fit for God to make use of, as rods to scourge with. For Wickedness
proceeds from the wicked. See Isa. 10.5, 6.

2. And the wicked must go to wrath, notwithstanding Gods not desiring, or
delighting that they should so do, in case they will be, and persist to be
wicked, contrary to Gods desire. I do not say, that the wicked abiding wicked,
are not appointed to wrath: but I say, that God would not, that men should be,
much less persist to be wicked, but rather, that they turn to him, and be
happy. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts,
etc. Isa. 55.7.

Use. This then commends the love of God, and shows that he is Charity: and
that men's Destruction is not of him, but of themselves. And it affords Motive
to all, to seek and submit to him, in order to their happiness: yea, it invites
the wicked also to repentance: as that, that is most pleasing to him. And that
they may do so, and meet with mercy; it is good for them to mind, where God has
provided safety, and acceptance for them, which leads to the next Observation.
Namely,

CHAP. XI.
The third Observation briefly spoken to, showing Christ to be the only
Medicine for our Misery, and way to happiness, appointed of God for us; and
what an inducement that consideration is, to love God, and accept of Christ.

Medium of Gods appointment, in whom we may have Salvation, and life
everlasting.

This also is positively, and abundantly asserted in the Scriptures: for there
we find

1. In the Scriptures of the Prophets, that David spoke of Gods raising up a
King over men; who should be, and be Proclaimed to be Gods Son set upon his
holy Hill for the good of Men, so, as that the Kings and Judges of the Earth
should have cause of rejoicing in him: and yet of trembling too, because of his
infinite power, and terrible Judgments; breaking in pieces as a Potters Vessel
all that rebel against him: but, all that trust in him should be happy. Psalm.
2. Yea, all Nations are exhorted to gladness upon the account of his Victories
and Reigning. Psalm. 47. and 97.1, 2, etc. and 98.1, 4, etc. Yea, they only
point to one, that should be the Seed of the Woman; the seed of Abraham, of
Isaac, of Jacob, of David; a root of Jesse, etc. Who should yet be the Mighty
God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. Genesis 3.15. and 22.18. and
26.4. and 28.14. Psalm. 89.3, 4, 19, 20. Isa. 9.6. and 11.1, 10.

2. In the writings of the Apostles, the accomplishment of those Prophecies is
declared to be made, in the raising up Jesus; He being the Son of God, sent
forth by him, made of a Woman, and made under the Law. Act. 13.32, 33. Gal.
4.4. Made in the similitude of sinful flesh; and an offering for sin, to
condemn sin in the flesh. Romans 8.3. Delivered up to Death for our offenses, and
raised again for our Justification. Romans 4.25. That there is Salvation in no
other, nor any other name given under heaven, whereby we must be saved. Act
4.11, 12. The Law being not able to help us, being too weak and unprofitable.
Romans 8.3. Heb. 7.14, 19. and 10.4, 5. God therefore prepared a body for his own
Son, and made him therein the Son of man, that he might be able to do that for
us, and to us, that none other could: that He in the nature of man might bear
our sins, and make satisfaction to Gods Justice therein, and atonement for us;
and offering up himself to God as a spotless Sacrifice through the eternal
spirit receive into himself the fullness of the grace and blessing of God his
Father; that as the head of us men, he might derive it to us and we receive it
from him: both Light and Teaching, for renewing our minds, and directing us
unto peace and happiness, and Spirit to inliven quicken, and strengthen us to
walk in the way he directs us in unto them. And for working all the works of
God in us; and giving protection and defense against all adversaries, and
adverse power, and whatever grace and blessing may be necessary for us, and
advantageous to us: which as the Great High Priest in the virtues of that, his
Sacrifice appearing in the presence of God for us, he obtaines to be given us.

And who so fit to be man's Savior as such a one, as is also man? and so as our
kinsman had right to redeem us, and having proved our infirmities and miseries
can pity and Sympathize with us, and will not terrify, or affright us? And
what man could be able to satisfy Gods Justice by any Sacrifice: yea, though
of himself, and obtain his grace and blessing for us, or be able to receive the
fullness of Gods grace and blessing for us, and derive it to us; besides him
that is also God, Gods only begotten Son? such a one being our Prophet must
needs be able to speak forth the mind and counsel of God to us, being one with
him, and in his bosom, and so acquainted fully, and most certainly with all his
secrets (as we have before considered) Heb. 1.2, 3. And is most worthy to be
hearkened, and diligently attended to, in all things by us. Heb. 2.1, 3. and
3.1, 7. and 12.25. Such an High Priest must needs be great with God, as well as
pitiful to us; who is both the Son of God passed into the Heavens, and made
higher then the Heavens, and is holy, harmless, undefiled, and separated from
sinners; and yet has had experience of our infirmities and temptations. Heb.
4.14, 15. and 7.26. And such a King and Lord as is Gods only begotten Son; is,
and must needs be able to Protect and save us, from what may harm us; and being
one chosen out from the People will be ready to hear, and save, when we call
upon him; and to redeem us poor men from the deceits and violences of Satan
and his instruments; and account of our lives as precious; and come down like
showers of blessing upon the humble and obedient Subjects. Psalm. 2.6. and
89.19, 20. and 72.4, 5, 6, 14. and 20.9. And what need is there, or can there
be, of any other Savior, when he is so every way fit, powerful, and
all-sufficient for us? therefore He, and He alone is propounded to us: and to
Him alone, God and his Spirit, and his Servants, direct and call us. None else
did God elect and choose to this office and service, but him who alone was
crucified for us, Isa. 4^.1. 1 Cor. 1.13. To none else has he given nor will
give his honor and glory, Isa 42.8. None else has received a name above every
name into which we may be baptized for the forgiveness of our sins, and the
gift and blessings of the Holy Spirit to be given us, Phil. 2.10, 11. 1 Cor.
1.13. Yea, seeing it has pleased God, that all fullness of grace and blessing,
and of the Godhead should dwell in him bodily, what can all other things and
persons of themselves be, and as in competition with him, (or any other ways
but as in subserviency to him, and as made use of by him, as instruments for
conveying grace and virtue to us from him) but meet emptinesses and vanities?
Col 1.19. and 2.9. Psalm. 4.2. Jo^. 2.8. Surely as the Brazen Serpent was the
only Medicine prepared for the cure of the stung and wounded Israelites; and
the River Jordan the only remedy for Naamans Leprosy: So this Son of Man
being such a one, may well be the only Salvation for us miserable sinners.

Use 1. And this may be a sufficient testimony and evidence to us, both of the
exceeding greatness of our misery needing such a remedy, as was hinted in the
first Observe And also that God loves us, that he has raised up such an horn of
salvation for us in the house of his servant David, Luke 1.69. Herein is the
love of God manifested to us, that ^e sent his only begotten Son into the
world (and made him the Son of Man for us) that we might live through him.
Herein is love, no^ that we loved God, but God loved us, and gave (this) his
Son to be the Propitiation for our sins, 1 John 4.9, 10. This, this was a far
greater testimony of his good will to us, and that he desired not our
perishing, but eternal happiness, then if he should have sent down Angels to us
in our particulars, to tell us he loves us. He did send diverse of his Angels
with gracious messages, and his Law was given by the disposition of them. But
the best news that any of them ever brought, was what they brought concerning
this Son of man, and his being appointed, sent forth, and empowered of God to
save us: Luke 2.10, 11. That this Lord of men and Angels looked after us, as
the good Shepherd, and came to deliver us from our destructions. If God said to
Abraham, that he knew he feared him in that he withheld not Isaac his only Son
from him, Genesis 22.12. How may not we then much more perceive the love of God to
us, in not withholding, but sending down his only begotten Son from Heaven,
and making him the Son of Man, that he might save us? This is Love indeed
passing all parallel; yea, all knowledge. Surely we need not (as the Pharisees)
seek after another or greater sign from Heaven, that God desires not our ruin,
but our salvation and happiness; but may well rest in this unspeakable gift of
God, as a sufficient demonstration thereof to us; accepting it with all
reverence, love, and thankfulness. This is a faithful saying, and worthy all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy
1.15. To save us from the curse of the Law, from the wrath of God, from the
state of death and destruction, from the power, malice, and rage of the Devil;
and in a word, from all that might harm us: And had that been all, it had been
very much; but it was not all, he sent him also to bring us back to him, and so
to eternal life, glory, and happiness, 1 Pet. 3.18. John 3.16. Surely this may
engage us also,

Secondly, To think well of God, to land and bless him perpetually as our great
Benefactor, our merciful Father, our mighty, yea, almighty Helper; as one that
so desired our good, so loved the world, as to send us such a one to save us.
He may well expect from us, and we give to him upon this account all possible
love, thanks, dutifulness, and ready obedience. He is worthy to be honored by
us, that had such a respect for us. Well may we cry out with admiration, Lord,
what is man that thou should so magnify him, and that thou should so set
thine heart upon him, as to send thine own and only Son (not by Adoption and
Regeneration a Son only, but by eternal and divine Generation thine only
begotten Son) to be the Son of Man, and so in Relation and of Kindred to him,
to help and save him when none else could help him. This was the Lords own
doing, and greatly worthy our admiration, Psalm. 118.22.

3. And well may we accept of and confide in such a one as this Son of Man,
Gods only Son, as a person fit and meet, and All-sufficient to save us, and to
bring us to Heaven and Happiness. Good encouragement may this consideration
give us (as well as it shows us a necessity, there being Salvation and Life in
none other for us) to hearken to him, and give up our selves, which full
assurance of faith, and expectation of good success to his direction and
dispose We need not fear but God will be with him to help him in, and carry him
on with success in all his undertakings for us, seeing God is in him, and he is
God. When God sends any on any gracious message, he uses to accompany them, and
give them good success. So he was with Moses and Aaron, when he sent them to
Pharaoh, and gave them a command to bring Israel out of Egypt, and they
effected it in his name; notwithstanding the many threatening difficulties and
discouragements they encountered with; though they were but Gods servants,
neither of them his proper Son. Indeed they led not the people into Canaan,
because they failed in their faith in; and obedience to him, not sanctifying
him before them at the waters of strife. He sent Joshua therefore to lead them
in thither, expelling and driving out the Gentiles to divide the Land to Israel
for their Inheritance. And God was with him therein, and did not fail him nor
forsake him or them that followed him, and obeyed his commands, but made them
successful by his assisting presence. He was with Gideon also, when he sent
him against their enemies; so as with a small handful, by unlikely means, he
vanquished an innumerable number of enemies. And what should I mention David,
Cyrus, and diverse others?

Now if God strengthened his servants always in their obedience to him in what
he sent them to do, how shall we question or doubt the Sufficiency and
prevailing powerfulness of his only Son, with whom, and in whom he was
reconciling the world to himself, and is still after a more wonderful way of
presence, and union of Being, then with any of them? Surely we may have high
expectations of Life and Salvation by him; He being sent of God to such
purposes to and for us; He being neither liable to sin, (as Moses, Aaron, and
many others did) nor has death any place upon him, much less dominion, as it
had over all them, so as that he should fail there-through in his undertakings,
till he has perfected what concerns us. Indeed his undertakings, or the things
God sent him to do, are and were of a far higher nature, and heavier then ever
he sent any others about; As to take away sin by the Sacrifice of himself,
Destroy the power of Satan, Abolish death through his own death, And to save
our souls: But by how much his work was, and is greater, by so much is his
person more excellent and glorious. And why then should we not thankfully
entertain and embrace him, depend on and trust to him, yielding up our selves
to his guidance with greatest confidence, and fullest assurance both of his
sufficiency and faithfulness? For in that he is Gods Son, his only Son, he
has his power, and virtue, strength and all sufficiency, rendering him able to
save us. And in that he is his only begotten, he has in him his perfect
likeness and similitude; and therefore God being Love or Charity, full of
goodness and faithfulness to us, he is so also, being the express character of
his person, the brightness of his Glory. And being our Kinsman and our Brother,
and become so on purpose for our good; what may we not expect of compassion and
faithfulness; from him upon that account also.

Object. But if the Son of God was in his love sent to be our Savior, and he
so able and willing to do the work he was sent about, how is it then that all
are not in the issue saved from perishing, nor have eternal life? But so many
and great multitudes (as the Scriptures imply) perish? If he will save us, who
can hinder him therein? seeing he being Gods only Son, and coming in his Name
and Power, is Almighty to do what he pleases for and to us?

Answ. He was not sent or came to save us, so as to bring us to eternal life
absolutely by his omnipotent power, otherwise then in a way of willing
obedience to him performed by us, being endued by him with capacities for such
obedience. He is able to save us to the utmost, and he is willing; but he
expects that we should come and seek to him in the grace wherewith he prevents
us, that we may be saved by him, and live with him, and through him, as is
agreeable to what we observed in the next place, viz.

CHAP. XII.
The Fourth Observation considered, and therein the necessity and nature of
believing on the Son of man unto Salvation, with its desirableness, and
acceptableness God.



This also is plain and evident in the Scriptures; as in 1 Cor. 1.2^. It
pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe. Gal.
3.22. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by Faith of
Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. Mark 16.16. He that believes
and is Baptized shall be saved: and he that believes not shall be Condemned.
And in this Chapter, ver. 18. He that believes on him is not Condemned. But he
that believes not is condemned already, because he believes not on the name
of the only begotten Son of God. So that believing is necessary to Salvation,
and to escape perishing; he that believes not being threatened with
destruction. Yet, we may here lay down two or three cautions to prevent mistake.

Caution 1. First, that these things are to be understood as to actual
believing, with respect to persons capable thereof, those namely that are
adult, or of years of discretion; not of Infants incapable of hearing, and of
understanding; as for them they being cast upon God and his mercy from the
Womb, they may be interpreted, and by Grace reputed as believers and trusters
in God; not being capable of acting, much less actually acting any distrust in
him: as Psalm. 22.9. Thou art he that did take me out of my Mothers Womb, thou
made me hope upon my Mothers breast. So in Psalm. 71.5, 6. To which also may
be applied that of our Savior. Mat. 18.6. Whosoever shall offend one of these
little ones that believes in me, etc. The like may be said of Idiots, however,
that they may not be reputed as unbelievers, not having capacity of believing;
otherwise it should be a sign of reprobation.

Caution 2. Secondly, that actual Faith or Belief in Christ, is not required in
persons of discretion, further then according to the means of believing that
God affords them. They are not reputed unbelievers further then they refuse or
receive not what is presented to them to believe; or might and would be, if
that which leads thereto were not rejected by them. Christ requires not an
explicit belief of what they have, or might have no explicit declaration of.
In that case, if men by nature keep the Law, their uncircumcision shall be
accounted Circumcision, as was noted before, and as is said, Romans 2.26. He that
in every Nation (by whatsoever means God affords them for it) fears God and
works Righteousness is accepted of him. As Cornelius was in his Prayers and
Alms before Peter had spoken any thing of the Doctrine of Christ to him. Act.
10.1, 2, 3, 34. Those sayings, He that believes not shall be damned. And he
that believes not is condemned already; are to be understood of those to whom
he is Preached. As to say, Go ye into all the World, and Preach the Gospel to
every Creature. He (that is, He that upon your Preaching) believes, and is
Baptized shall be saved. And he that (upon your Preaching it, or its being
Preached) believes not, shall be damned.

Now that believing is requisite and necessary (as before is opened) to
Salvation. Yea that,

(...) To obtaining the Salvation promised in the Gospel, according to the
choiceness and fullness of that Salvation, believing on Christ is absolutely
necessary, and thereto, the Preaching of Christ also to men, that they may
believe. The reason is,

1. Because God will have his Son honored by men, even as He (the Father) is
honored in their coming to him, and believing on him for life and Salvation,
Joh. 5.22, 23. Now herein men honor Christ, in giving to him what God has
given him, viz. The honor and glory of giving eternal life; and in that
persuasion coming to him, seeking and accepting it of him, and herein men
dishonor him, in thinking unworthily of him, rejecting, and putting him away;
and refusing the life and grace he tenders to them. It is but a just reward and
recompense of his Sons abasement, and sufferings for us; that we give him that
honor to own him for our Savior, and seek and trust to him for his Salvation.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, riches, etc. Rev. 5.12. To
be the Savior and supplyer of us. And to receive of us the acknowledgement of
his power, riches, strength; wisdom, etc. In our coming to him, for the
exercise of them, for, and dispensation of them to us, according to our needs.
To which end,

2. God has not ordered that Christ should have all the weight of our sins and
sufferings, and then we to have the benefits and procurements immediately put
into our hands, or made over to us, and to our enjoyments; but God has given
all things into his hands, power, and riches, strength, and wisdom, honor,
glory, and blessing, even to him that bare, and suffered all the evil for us;
as, He is therefore worthy. Phil. 2.10, 11. John 3.35. and 13.3. He gives us
eternal life, but he gives us it in his Son: so as that to the receiving
thereof, we must receive him, and submit our selves unto him, and his
Government. As it is said, This is the Record that God has given of his Son.
God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. He that has the
Son, has life; and he that bath not the Son, has not life. 1 John 5.11, 12.
And so it is said, That God has blessed us with all Spiritual blessings in
Christ. Electing us in him, Predestinating us to the Adoption of Sons in him,
that we have in him Redemption, the forgiveness of sins, and are accepted in
him Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. And so, that we should be strong in the grace in
Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy 2.1. So that He is the Treasury, as well as the procurer
of all Grace and Blessing for us; and we are to come to him for it: then that
charge, Ye will not come to me that ye might have life. John 5.40. And that to
the end.

1. The provision of Life and Righteousness, and all blessing might be sure and
steadfast for us; for it is the will of him that sent him, that of all that
which he has given him, he should loose nothing, but should raise it up at the
last day, John 6.39. He will keep that, that is committed to him. 2 Timothy 1.12.
Life and Righteousness were given us in the first Adam, but he fell and lost
them: and were they put into our keeping, we might loose and forfeit them
irrecoverably too, and provoke God to take them from us. But Christ will not
fail. Isa. 42.4. Nor will God take away his mercy from him. Psalm. 89.33. So
that if we fail and forfeit, yet it abides sure in him so, as seasonably and
soundly returning to him we may be restored again. As also that,

2. He might gather us into an unity in him, by drawing and gathering us from
our selves, and from our own natural conditions, places, or objects of hope and
trust, and ways of walking into him; that we all centring in him, and having
our hopes, trusts, and rejoycings in him, and walking in him we might be made
one among our selves; and not be as it were many, scattered and dispersed from
him: so it is said to have been the good pleasure of God, in the dispensation of
the fullness of time, to gather together in one, all things in Christ, which are
in Heaven, and which are in Earth, even in him. Ephesians. 1.10. And that He is our
peace who has made both one, and has broken down the wall of partition
between us, having abolished the enmity in his flesh, to make in himself of
twain, one new man; so making peace. Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16. Satan by drawing us
from God, had drawn us into divisions after diverse Gods, and into diverse ways
of Worship, or profaneness; and into dissentions, hatreds, and oppositions. God
is a God of love, unity, peace, and concord; and therefore will have all that
live under his Government, live in peace, unity, and love, agreeing together in
one; and therefore has put all his riches of grace and glory into him, that
all faces might be turned toward him, all hearts knit to him, and meet in him,
and so be at one. As it is said, Christ died not for that Nation (of the Jews)
only, but to gather together into one, the children of God that are scattered
abroad. John 11.51, 52. This was of old figured in the Unity of the Temple and
Altar in Israel, to which all the Tribes out of all quarters were to repair.
Again that,

3. That he might make us an holy People, that are to live with him for ever.
He is a holy God, and his design in saving us by his Son, is to save us from
our sins, disobedience, filthiness, and foolishness; and so to make us a wise,
clean, gracious, and good people: a people redeemed from all iniquity, and
purified to be a peculiar people for himself, zealous of good works. Tit. 2.12,
13, 14. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Luke 1.74, 75. His design is not, that we should still
live in our sins, which had so far provoked him to anger, as to sentence us to
Death, and to condemn us to Hell. It is not possible that he should allow us to
live with him, in that which is so hateful to him: Yea, so hateful, that his
own only begotten Son might not obtain a release of us, from the punishment
incurred by it, but by his dying and suffering the curse of the Law threatened
against us for it; no, without holiness we may not see God: nor live in his
sight. Now to have given us happiness, and life everlasting by Christ, without
coming to him, and so to God who is in him, had been to make us happy in sin;
for what is sin but a distance, or going of the Soul from God! And what is
living in sin, but living at a distance from God, in a neglect, or disregard of
him? But now the believing in Christ, and so in God by him (for he that
believes on him, believes not on him, but on him that sent him. John 12.46)
Is the way to be holy, pure, good, wise, excellent; for this believing in him,
has in it a beholding of his excellencies which are of a conforming efficacy
to him. 2 Cor. 3.18. Yea, herein the Soul is drawn from all polluting, defiling
objects, which spoil, besot, and bruitifie the Soul, and debauch it, to live on
him, and in fellowship with, or dependence on him: the fountain of all
cleanness; washing it from all filthiness; the fountain of wisdom cleansing it
from all foolishness, and bruitishness, and filling it with heavenly wisdom and
understanding: the fountain of all power, healing it of its weaknesses, and
infirmities, and inabling it to resist temptations to evil, and to walk in
every good way, and perform any service to which he calls it: The fountain of
all goodness, delivering it from all bad and evil dispositions and desires, and
filling it with the contrary, of all nobleness and excellency, healing it of
all baseness, and unworthiness, and spiriting it for all noble, and truly
excellent undertakings and performances. In a word, in coming to him, it comes
to all righteousness, purity, and goodness, and in depending, and living on
him, it derives all excellent, clean, holy, and good virtues, qualities, and
dispositions from him, rendering it suitable to God and his holiness. Yea, and

4. Everlasting, or Eternal Life, being, or standing in the knowledge of God,
and of him whom he has sent, Jesus Christ and that knowledge being not to be
had, or attained to, but in the Souls coming to Christ, and depending on him
and his teaching; drinking that in. (He being otherwise in himself unknowable,
and invisible, but as that word from his bosom declares him; and that image of
his invisible Majesty, represents him. John 1.18. Mat. 11.27. Col. 1.15. Heb.
1.1.2.3.) Its not possible we should have eternal life, or not perish or want
of it, but in believing in, and depending on him, as making known himself to
us, and his Father in him. Wherefore life eternal being only in him, and not
injoyable by us, but in and with him; and the way to unity and holiness which
he designs in those that live, being only attainable by believing in, and
living upon him, therefore he also calls us to him to behold, listen to,
believe, and trust in him: as to this end also Christ calls us to himself, that
in believing on him, we might not perish, but have eternal life. Isa. 42.1. and
45.22. and 55.1.4. and 65.1. Psalm. 2.10, 11. Mat. 11.28, 29. John 7.37.38, etc.

Quest. But what then, is this believing on him, that is so necessary to our
salvation, and living for ever?

Answ. We may partly understand, that in what is said of the use and necessity
of it: yet to speak a little more distinct^y of it, I shall thus describe it,
viz. It is the Souls betaking and yiedling up it self to Christ, in a
persevering attendance to, and dependence on him; with hearty trust and
confidence in him, for all grace and blessing; arising from an hearty belief
of, or credit giving to Gods testimony of him; effected of God in a serious
listening thereto: and from the perception of his excellencies declared therein.

In which description, I have endeavored to take in all those various terms
which the holy Ghost uses in the Scriptures to express its Nature by: as also
to show its true Principle, and spring from which it is produced, and by which
it is maintained, in its proper subject. For here,

1. That from which it springs, or flows, is said to be an hearty belief, or
credit giving to Gods testimony concerning him, and the perception of his
excellencies, as therein discovered; or rather, that testimony it self, and his
excellencies as therein discovered, for the believing in, or on the Lord, is an
effect of the believing God: and therefore that phrase or saying, Abraham
believed in the Lord. Genesis 15.6. Is by the Apostle rendered, Abraham believed
God. Romans 4.3. As implying, that then God is heartily believed in his Testimony
when he whom he testifies of, is believed in; as also, that the believing in
the Lord is an evidence, and product of believing God.

2. Here is mentioned also, the several causes of this persuasion, and so by
consequent of that perception, and believing on Christ that follows upon it. As,

1. The principal and first cause, the Author and begetter of this faith,
belief, or persuasion, and of all that follows upon it, is God himself
testifying of Christ. As it is said, Ye are saved by grace through faith, and
that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Ephesians. 2.8. And, this is the work
of God (both that which he requires of us, and that which he works in us) That
ye believe on him whom he has sent. Joh. 6.29. Yea, and our Savior further
testifies it to be the work wrought of God, in saying, No man can come to me,
except the Father that has sent me draw him. v. 44. And No man can come to me,
except it be given to him of my Father. Ver. 65.

Of him descends, and comes down every good and perfect giving. And
therefore, both this persuasion, and all therethrough effected: But he works
mediately, and so here is,

2. The subordinate and mediate cause of this persuasion and believing, on Gods
part; which is the same that is also the object believed, even the Word and
Testimony of God; the very clearness, excellency, and evidence of which, as
manifested of God to the heart, persuades the heart to embrace and credit it:
As by the light of the sun a man sees the sun; so the goodness and truth of
Gods Testimony is seen by its own brightness, and that draws in the heart to
receive it. By his word God wrought at first in making the world, and by his
word he works, in making new creatures. And that this is that by which he works
in the heart, and persuades it to believe on Christ our Savior, himself
testifies, in saying, John 6.45. They shall all be taught of God; every one
therefore that hears and learns of the Father, comes to me. Thence also his
word, the Testimony he bears of Christ, the Gospel, is called the word of
faith, Romans 10.8. But yet this produces not this believing without some act of
man, which is, and may be called,

3. The subordinate cause or means on man's part, that without which this
believing is not effected; and that is expressed to be a serious listening to
that word. Whence that in Isa. 55.3. Hear and your souls shall live. And in
Romans 10.17. Faith is of hearing, and hearing is of the word of God. They that
stop their ear lest they should hear, deprive themselves of the efficacy of God
and his word, even of the Spirit of God breathing and working in the word, and
are justly left of God to their perverseness and unbelief, Matthew. 13, 14, 15. I
add the word serious, to signify, that it is not a careless, formal hearing,
but a diligent attentive hearing. Such as our Savior signifies in that double
expression; Every one that hears and learneth (so hears as also to learn)
of the Father, comes to me. Such a hearing as includes that which Moses called
on the people to do, when he said, Set your hearts to all these words, Deuteronomy.
32.46. Or as that in Heb. 2.1. A giving earnest heed to the things spoken in
the Gospel. And this leads to the next, viz.

3. The proper subject of this persuasion, belief, and so also of the
perception; and all that follows upon it, and that is the heart, as it is said,
With the heart man believes to righteousness, Romans 10.10. And indeed when men
set their hearts to attend to Gods words, and to consider them, God will
persuade their hearts; and the heart persuaded and believing, is there-through
both framed to do righteousness in believing on Christ, and also is accepted
and justified of God therein, and the man accounted of God righteous. And in
both these senses the words may be understood, that with the heart man believes
unto righteousness. Many there are that profess and say they believe, and are
persuaded of the truth of Gods word; and yet they are far from believing on
Christ, (as their lives make manifest in many of them) because they believe not
with the heart; their hearts are not set to, or engaged in the matter. They may
learn so much of the form of Knowledge, in subserviency to some other designs,
(as of getting a livelihood, honor and respect with men, ease from troubles of
mind, etc.) as that they may draw nigh with their mouths, and honor him with
their lips, and yet their hearts be removed far from him, going after their
covetousness, or what they mainly design, Isa. 29.13. Ezekiel. 33.31. And these
attain not to righteousness. They neither render to God and Christ that which
is right, just, and meet, viz. that honor, fear, faith, trust, and affection
that he is worthy of: Nor are they therefore justified and accepted of God as
righteous persons. But when men so receive Gods Testimony as to believe on
Christ, their minds, wills, and affections are all engaged therein, and through
the presence and operation of the Spirit of God (which is always ready to help
and save, and to that purpose to effect what he requires, and is needful to
their Salvation in them that attend to him, and as he is preventing them by his
grace, yield up themselves to him) they are strengthened and framed to all the
acts and exercises both conducing to, and contained in this believing on Christ
the Son of Man. Which are also in this description expressed, both

4. The acts productive of, and the acts contained in the believing on Christ.

1. The acts productive of it, are

1. An heart-perswasion or belief of the truth of God, or of the word that he
speaks and testifies concerning Christ; as of him we have largely showed that
he testifies. This is properly the believing God, and the believing Christ,
and the believing his Prophets and Servants in their testimony, as speaking
forth the word of God, and of Christ; and they that so do, are in the way to
prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. This is that by which the faith or belief of the
Patriarchs is expressed, Heb. 11.13. They see the promises afar off, and were
persuaded of them. And they whose hearts are persuaded of God to believe his
testimony, ( as God will persuade Japheth, or the perswasible, as some render
Genesis 9.27. those that meekly hear and attend, Psalm. 25.8. James 1.18, 19 --
21.) in them also is certainly effected,

2. A heart-perception of the Excellencies of Christ: Eor as God in his
Doctrine bears witness to his Son, the Son of Man; so there is nothing to be
said of Christ, because nothing in him but what is excellent; for in him all
fullness dwells; and he is fairer then the children of men; the chiefest (or he
that carries the banner) among ten thousand. The most powerful, wise, just,
holy, merciful and gracious one. And the entrance of Gods word concerning him
gives light (discovers the excellencies in him, the Forgiveness of sins,
Redemption, Spirit and Spiritual Blessings, the Grace and Glory in him) and it
gives understanding to the simple: It gives sight to discern the light, and
what is discovered in and by it: It opens the eyes of the blind, and makes wise
the simple, Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9. and 119.130. And so the Soul perceives the
excellencies of Christ; That he is the excellent and precious one; Beautiful
and glorious, excellent and comely, Isa. 4.2. however he appears to others,
whose eyes are not opened; but they are yet spiritually bl^^d, or are blinded
of Satan for their not believing, 2 Cor. 4.4. Yet the enlightened Soul sees
him worthy to be adhered to above all other things and persons; worthy above
all to be loved, and to be believed on. Thus the Apostles (whose eyes were
blessed because they see) saw in him as the glory of the only begotten of the
Father, full of grace and of truth: And therefore pronounced of him, Thou art
the Christ, the Son of the living God; and whither should we go, thou have the
words of eternal life, etc. John 1.14. and 6.68, 69. Matthew. 16.16. Now from
this persuasion of the truth of Gods Testimony, I say, and this perception of
his Excellencies discovered therein, flow.

2. The acts contained in the believing on Christ, wherein the believing on him
properly stands, and is exercised, which the Scripture variously expresses. To
take in all which, I say,

1. It Is a hearty betaking of the Soul, or of a man's self to Christ. In which
expression I include and intend what our Savior or the Evangelists expresses
in two used by them, viz.

1. The receiving Christ; which has respect or reference to his being given of
God to us, and coming in his name, and tendering himself to us to be our
Savior, Helper, Healer; and in order thereto, our Prophet, Master, or Teacher
our King, Commander, Protector and Defender, our precious Sacrifice, and
perfect High Priest; yea, our Lord and our God. Now he that betakes himself to
him, receives him with all acceptance as such a one; as the great gift of God
and of himself, unto, and for all those exercises of his authority over us; and
grace toward us, unto which he is given, and which he tenders: And this is
interpreted in the Scripture it self, to be believing on him, or on his name,
John 1.12. He came to his own, and his own received him not; but to as many as
received him, he gave power to become the sons of God, even to them that
believed on his name. This phrase also our Savior uses to signify the
believing on one, John 5.43, 44. And so he that believes on him, receiving him
as the Prophet and Teacher sent of God, receives also his sayings,
instructions, reproofs, counsels, etc. and receiving him as the Lord and King,
receives his commands; yea, receiving him as the great High Priest receives
him, so as to come to God by his Sacrifice; yea, receiving him as God receives
his sayings and commands as the most sovereign and absolute sayings and
commands of God: To which also tends,

2. The coming to him. This also is included in believing on him, and so in the
betaking a man's self to him; yea, so as to go from all other to him. For
receiving him as such a one, the Soul comes to him, or betakes it self to him
from all others that may stand in competition with him, to be taught,
instructed, counseled, commanded; and so to be helped, healed, protected and
saved by him, and to obtain blessing from God by his Sacrifice and Mediation.
And this phrase also is often used to express and signify the believing on
him: As when it is said, Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life, John
5.40. He that comes to me shall not hunger, John 6.35. If any man thirst let
him come to me and drink; which in the next verse is, He that believes on me,
John 7.37, 38. and many beside. Now this coming is,

1. First and principally of the heart and inward man, liking, prizing, loving,
and looking to him for all grace and blessing; and such is the believing heart,
a heart drawing nigh, or cleaving to him with purpose or resolution, Heb.
10.22. Acts 11.24. As the unbelieving heart is called an evil heart withdrawing
or departing from the living God, Heb. 3.12. and 10.39. An heart removed far
from the Lord, Isa. 29.13. or departing from him, Jer. 17.5, 8.

2. Secondarily, as the way to, and an effect of the former, it contains and
leads to a coming to him in his Ordinances, and the appointments of God, (as to
the Assemblies and Societies of Gods people where he is spiritually present,
and exercising his power, and dispensing his grace and blessing) in a bodily
coming thereto, Matthew. 18.20. 2 Cor. 6.16. Rev. 1.13. Heb. 10.24, 25. Psalm. 133.

II. It Is a yielding up a man's self to him; which as it is also included in the
receiving Christ, the admitting or entertaining him in his Doctrine, counsels,
reproofs, commands, and so in the exercise of his Priestly power with God, and
Princely Authority over us and all things; so it also has in it that resigning
up a man's self to his gracious guidance and government, which is required of
us, and that obeying him, which is to be exercised by us; as is implied in that
saying, Heb. 5.8, 9. That being made perfect, he became the author of eternal
salvation to all that obey him; which is put there for that which here and in
other places is believing on him: Obedience to him in yielding to his counsels
and commands, and so in being ruled and governed by him, being a necessary and
indispensible fruit or exercise of the faith, or believing on him to which the
promises are made; exercised also and practiced by the ancient and approved
believers recorded in the Scripture, whose faith we are to follow; as is to be
seen in Heb. 11.7, 8 -- 17. Whence the unbelievers are called the children of
disobedience, and judgment threatened to them as such, Ephesians. 5.6. Col. 3.6. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. This expression of yielding a man's self to the Lord, we have
in 2 Chronicles. 30.8. Yield your selves (or as the Margent has it, Give your
hands) to the Lord; who is stretching out his hand to us to succor and supply
us, to pull us out of the snares of sin and Satan, and to bring or lead us
into his Sanctuary, etc.

III. It Is an attendance to him also, called in Scripture sometimes, a looking
to him, as seeking and expecting all grace and blessing from him, Isa. 45.22.
Psalm. 34.5. and a waiting upon, and for him, in observing all his Ordinances
and Appointments, and him in them all, and to receive commands, counsels, and
help from him, and waiting patiently upon him for them. Whence those
expressions of, Wait on the Lord, and wait I say on the Lord, Psalm. 27.14. and
37.34. And they that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength, etc. Isa.
40.31. Yea, and in this waiting, a diligent listening to him, and observing his
sayings, and looking for his help, Psalm. 85.8. and 130.5, 6.

IV. It Is a dependence or reliance on him; as believing him, and him only
able, willing, and faithful to help and save: And this includes in it (as also
the betaking a man's self to him does)

1. A renouncing it self and all confidence in it self, its own power,
strength, wisdom, righteousness, worth or merit, as altogether weak and
unprofitable to help, save, or satisfy it, denying a man's self, Matthew. 26.24.
And

2. A rejecting all confidence or dependence on others, whether things or
persons, besides Christ and God in him; as believing also an utter
insufficiency or unfaithfulness in them, and every of them, to help, save, or
satisfy us (either by way of mediation for obtaining favor, or dispensation
of favors obtained; either as to teaching and counsel, or as to power and
strength for defense and safety, etc.) that in vain salvation is looked for to
the hills or mountains, or any thing besides him, Jer. 3.23. And also,

3. In betaking and yielding up it self to him; there is a leaving it self
wholly with him to his guidance, government, dispose and ordering; as believing
it shall find what it wants, or is good for it, in, and with, and from him,
Psalm. 62.1, 2. and 121.1, 2. and 84.11, 12. Romans 8.32. And

4. Going forth to act and obey, bear and suffer what he orders (not in its own
wisdom and strength, or in other creatures, but) in his light and direction,
strength and sufficiency expected and given; as it was said to Gideon, Go forth
in this thy strength, namely, that which God in looking upon him gave him,
Judge. 6.14. So David says, I will go in the strength of the Lord God, and make
mention of his righteousness, and of his only, Psalm. 71.16. And they shall
walk up and down in the name of the Lord, Zech. 10.12. Yielding up themselves
to obey and follow him, and relying on him for his direction and guideance
therein to go before them, showing and leading them in the way; and for his
strength to enable, support, and save them harmless therein: As Israel did,
when they followed God in the wilderness, through the sea, and over Jordan.
This is also called a staying on the Lord, or on his arm or name, or a leaning
thereon, Isa. 10.20. and 50.10. Cant. 8.5. or on the worth and prevalency of
his Sacrifice and Mediation for all our acceptance. And this with trust or
confidence. And so

V. It Is a committing a man's self, and way, and all his concernments to the
Lord, with an hope, trust, expectation, and confidence that he will not fail or
forsake him; so as to check all arising fears either of Gods failing, or of any
man's or devils prevailing against him. I will trust and not fear; for the Lord
Jehovah is my strength and song; and he also is become my salvation, Isa. 12.^.
We may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man can do unto
me, Psalm. 56.3, 4 -- 10, 11. Heb. 13.56. Fears and doubtings, though they may
be in believers, yet they argue want or weakness of faith, or of believing on
him, Mat. 8.26. and 14.31. Psalm. 42.5, 6. This for the acts of this believing.
But we have also in this description.

5. The extent of the exercise of this faith; and that both,

1. For matters or cases; and that is for all grace and blessing. The promises
both of the life that is, and of that which is to come, being all in him; and
in him, yea, and in him Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. with 1 Timothy 4.8. We are in our
selves empty, and destitute of all things, and of all ability to help our
selves in or unto any thing, poor, miserable, wretched, blind, and naked, Rev.
3.15, 16, 17. Nor is there help any where else in any thing to purpose for us.
He only is the Savior ordained and perfected of God for us; His merit,
righteousness, and worth only procures all; and he only dispenses all by his
Word, Spirit, and Divine Power and Providence: And in his way only, even in
listening to his word, and obeying his counsels and commandments, all good and
blessing is to be met with and received of us.

2. For duration: And so in all this is included continuance or perseverance.
For in these kind of speeches that is implied: As when it is said, He that
believes not is damned; or the wicked man shall dye; its meant, if they
persevere to do, or be so. So it is here: He that continues to the end shall be
saved, Matthew. 24.13. He that abides in him sins not; that is, misses not
the promised blessing, 1 John 3.6. But he that abides not in him, is like a
branch that abides not in the Vine; that withers, and is gathered, and is cast
into the fire and burned, John 15.5, 6. And thus much about that believing that
is required of us, and is needful to our Salvation.

Now that this believing is both required of us by, and is acceptable unto God,
is also evident.

1. That God requires it, these following Considerations, among diverse others,
make it evident.

1. In that God calls to, and commands it. Look to me, and be ye saved, all the
ends of the earth, Isa. 45.22. And the same is implied in all those calls and
commands to make a joyful noise to the Lord, to serve him with gladness, etc.
Psalm. 47.1. and 62.1, 2. and 98.4. and 100.1, 2, 4. Yea, in 1 John 3.23. it is
expressly said, This is his commandment, that we believe in the name of his Son
Jesus Christ, and love one another.

2. In that he has given forth his word, and raised up a multitude of
Preachers of it, Psalm. 68.11. Men and Angels, and all creatures in their kinds
praising him, and preaching forth his excellencies, Psalm. 145.9, 10. and 148.
John heard them do so, though few have so good a hearing as he had; and
therefore perhaps some may deny it. Rev. 5.13. Especially his holy ones, the
holy Apostles and Prophets, and their followers, out of whose mouth God has
ordained praises, Psalm. 8.2. And this for the obedience of ^aith in all
nations, Romans 1.5. and 16.25, 26.

3. In that he gives his holy Spirit to work in, and upon men, to strive with
or judge in them; as is implied in his saying, My Spirit shall not always
strive with man, Genesis 6.3. See also Neh. ^.20 -- 30. 1 Pet. 3.19. and 1.12.
Acts 7.51. And in this Spirit and wisdom it is, that Wisdom is said to cry
without, and call to men; yea, and to stretch forth her hand; which signifies a
putting forth her strength, and tendering her help to men, to turn them to her
self, and bring them in to God, Prove. 1.4 -- 5. and 1.20, 24.

4. In his reproofs and judgments, (even to and upon the Heathen) for not
calling on his name, (to which believing on him is necessary, Romans 10.14:) it
being excellent in all the earth, and declared by his wondrous works, Psalm.
79.6. Jer. 10.25. Psalm. 8.1 -- 9. and 75.1. Mal. 1.11, 14. And for not
glorifying him as God, nor being thankful to him, but withholding the truth in
unrighteousness; seeing what was to be known of God was manifested in them, and
God showed it to them; so as they knew, but liked not to have him in their
knowledge, Romans 1.18, 19, 20, 21 -- 28. Yea, for not believing God, as now the
Jews believe him not, Romans 11.30. All imply, that God requires that men believe
him, and believe on him, as made known to and among them. But much more evident
is this, in his often reproofs of Israel, among whom he was more signally made
known, ( Psalm. 76.1, 2. and 147.19, 20.) in his faulting and judging them for
not hearing and hearkening to his voice, law, and words, but rejecting them;
and for not liking to have him for their God, the object of their stay, trust,
and confidence, but turning adulterously from him after others, Psalm. 81.9, 10,
11, 12. Isa. 66.3, 4. Jer. 2.5 -- 13. and 6.19. and 7.25, 26. though using more
special means with, and toward them, (so as he vouchsafed not to any other
Nation) to make them cleave to himself, Jer. 13.11. Yea, his very condemning
men both here and hereafter, for their not believing on the Son of Man, is an
evidence that he would they should have believed on him, John 5.40. and 3.18,
19 -- 36.

5. Yea, in a word, all that I have said on Observe. 2^. about Gods desire of
men's Salvation and living, rather then that they dye and perish, are evidences
of the truth of this also, that God requires that men believe on his Son, the
Son of Man, as evidenced and lifted up by him; and that their so doing is
acceptable to him; for so much as that believing on him is necessary to that
Salvation, and living with him.

2. As for the acceptableness of it, his requiring it, and using or vouchsafing
means and power for it, and his threatening and punishing men for not improving
them thereto, and profiting by them; so as to practice it, evidence that also.
But much more clearly is this evidenced to, and in them that believe.

1. In his forgiving their sins, as it is said, To him give all the Prophets
witness, that through his name whosoever believes on him, shall receive
forgiveness of their sins, Acts 10.43.

2. In his justifying them as righteous there-through: as it is said, By him
all that believe are justified from all things, from which they could not have
been justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13.39.

3. In giving them the privilege to be his Children; as it is said, To them
that received him, to them he gave this power to become the Sons of God, even
to them that believe on his Name, John 1.12. And, Ye are all the Sons of God by
faith in Christ Jesus. Gal. 3.26.

4. In blessing them; as it is said, So many as are of faith are blessed with
faithful Abraham: being reputed as his Children, Gal. 3.7, 9 -- 29. And in a
word.

5, In that they shall not perish, but have eternal life: And so this Point of
the acceptableness to God of men's believing on Christ, is confirmed by the next
Observation, and what is contained in it: Which we shall nextly consider;
reserving the Use of this Observation in its several branches, to afterward.

CHAP. XIII.
The fifth Observation, having two branches; the former of them is here
explicated, what the perishing is from which the believer on the Son of Man is
preserved; and how he is preserved from it.



This the next Verse also confirms; wherein it is said, God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him
should not perish, but have everlasting life. And in Verse 36. where it is
said, He that believes on the Son has everlasting life. And in Chap. 6.40.
where it is said, This is the will of him that sent me, that he that sees
(beholds) the Son, and believes on him, should have everlasting life, etc.
But here it is to be minded, that he says not, that whosoever believes on him
should not be sick, or poor, or tempted, or dye in Prison, or on the Gallows,
or any such like violent death by men, and their authority, or any thing of the
like nature: For any of these may, and sometimes do befall those that believe
on him. For Hezekiah was sick, and so was Lazarus, the brother of Martha and
Mary, whom Jesus loved, John 11.1 -- 3 -- 11. And so was Epaphroditus, Phil.
2.27, 30. And Lazarus that begged at the rich man's door, was poor; and God has
chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, Jam. 2.5. And both Christ
himself, and his Saints Paul and Peter, and many of his Worthies were tempted.
And we account them happy that endure temptation; and so they are: For when
they are tried, they shall receive a crown of life, which God has promised to
t^em that love him, James 1.12. and 5.11. Heb. 2.18. and 11.37. And many
Confessors of his Name and Truth have dyed in Prison, or been put to shameful
deaths for his Names sake; as in Heb. 11.35, 36, 37. besides many other places
of Scripture may be seen.

Let no man therefore think himself unhappy, or not approved of God and of
Christ in his believing, because of such things (as Satan is busy to tempt
some to think, 1 Pet. 5.8.) they being not the things which God sent his Son to
keep those that receive and believe on him from. Neither let any man promise
himself, that in his believing on Christ he shall be saved from such things
befalling him, otherwise then he sees good to save him therefrom; lest missing
of his hope and expectation therein, he should be offended, John 16.1, 2, 3.
Think not, says our Lord, that I am come to send peace on earth, but a sword,
etc. Nor is it said, That whosoever believes on him should have a rich and
prosperous life in this world, free from crosses and exercises; for that is
included in the peace which Christ would not have us think that he came to send
upon earth. Peace in the Hebrew and Scripture Language signifying prosperity:
No, nor a long life upon earth, or great promotions and honors with men. Much
less is it said, that they should live here for ever. No, we see Death is
common to all: Abraham is dead, and the Prophets be dead, and so be the
Apostles; and all others must have their share in that: Yea, some that have
been the best, have dyed the youngest. As Enoch was translated far short of
that age to which others then lived. But that that is said, is, That whosoever
believes on him should not perish, but have eternal life. Where the profit and
advantage of believing on Christ is set forth.

1. Negatively; He shall not perish.

2. Affirmatively; but have eternal life. Concerning which advantages I shall
speak to these four following Enquiries: The former two whereof are touching
the former part: The latter two, touching the latter.

1. What is this perishing from which the Believer on Christ, is, and shall be
saved or preserved. And, 2. How he shall be saved from this perishing: These
about the former part: Then in the latter. 3. What that eternal life is that
the Believer on Christ shall have. And, 4. How, and when he shall have that
eternal life.
1. As for this perishing, it may be understood to be either 1. From the way:
Or, 2. In the end.


1. A perishing from the way; as it is said, Psalm. 2.11. Kiss the Son lest he
be angry, and ye perish from the way when his anger is kindled but a little. In
such a sense it is said of the Prodigal; This my son was lost. The Greek word
signifies (and is sometimes rendered, yea, in this John 3.15, ^6. it is so, for
the word here used is the same in its root with that there) was perished. He was
quite gone out of the way, the way of life and peace. Now he that credits the
testimony of God concerning Christ, so as seeing his beauty and goodness he
believes on, receives, comes to, attends, and relies on, and trusts in him,
shall not perish or be lost (much less wholly lost) from the way; but being in
it, shall be preserved therein, shall continue in the Son, and in the Father, 1
John 2.24. 2 John 9. They who believe not on the Son of Man, as evidenced to
them of God, they do, and are in danger to perish from the way continually;
they that do not know, come to, and close with him, know not the way of peace,
Romans 3.18. they find not the way that tends to life, Matthew. 7.14. Though they
seek wisdom they find it not, scorning to seek and accept it of him in his way
of giving it, Prove. 14.6. Though they may have a zeal of God, and follow after
righteousness; yet not seeking it by faith, (the belief of Gods Word and
Testimony concerning him, and so in a way of looking to, and depending on him)
but as it were by the works of the Law, they attain not to the righteousness
that they seek, Romans 9.31, 32. The labor of the foolish wearieth every one of
them, because (though they labor and toil in their own wisdom never so much
yet) they find not the way into the city, Eccles. 10.15. Yea, he that believes
not on him, Satan gets power to blind his mind, that the light of the glory of
the Gospel of Christ should not shine into them, 2 Cor. 4.4. And the Gospel
being hid from them, they are lost, verse 3. Lost out of the way of
understanding. And if men have known something of the Grace of God, and come to
Christ in some measure; yet if they go not on to believe and exercise faith in
him, they are in danger to be lost, and perish out of the way of truth and
righteousness: Every condition is likely to destroy them from it; as to say,

1. Let God try and exercise them with affliction, poverty, and temptations
that lie heavy upon them; they are in danger to perish out of the way of truth
and life; and to say with Jobs wife, Curse God and dye, or rather to do so, Job
2.9. As it is likely what counsel she gave her Husband, she would have her self
practiced, had she been in his case. Asaph (or the Penman of Psalm. 73.) was in
danger so to have done when he came to that in ver. 13, 14. Verily in vain have
I cleansed my heart, and washed my hands in innocence; for I have been plagued
all the day long, and chastened every morning. Thus they that receive the word
like seed in a rocky ground, in the day of temptation fall away, wanting depth
of earth, or rooting in their faith, Matthew. 13.5, 6 -- 20, 21. So Israel in the
day of temptation did in the wilderness; The word that they heard being not
mixed with faith in them, nor they trusting on his salvation, Heb. 4.2. Psalm.
78.22, 23. and 106.12, 13. Jude 5. For if the faith or believing on the Son of
Man fail, then they fail of receiving his light, direction, strength, or of the
prevalency of the light and life given, so as not to walk aright in the way of
God; and then they must needs turn out of it into crooked paths; as is implied
in Psalm. 125. That they do who trust not in the Lord, ver. 1, 2, 5. whereas if
the faith or believing on the Son of God fails not, (for the faith, or that
object of faith never fails any man that trusts to it) then he therein receives
that understanding and discretion that delivers him from the way of the evil
man that walks in crooked paths, and from the way of the evil woman that
flatters with her tongue; yea, such understanding as causes to hate every false
way, Prove. 2.10, 11, 12 -- 15. and Psalm. 119.104. And if a man should through
temptations get a fall in the way as Peter did, when through fear he denied his
Master; yet he will get up again, and go on in his way, his faith not failing,
as Peter did: for Christ will help him up again, to whom he looks, and in
whom he believes; not imputing the weaknesses of his believing, though
reproving them: And so he shall go on in his way still, Luke 22.31, 32. Matthew.
14.30, 31.

2. If God orders persecutions for the Gospel sake to befall, unless the Son of
Man be believed on, and looked to, and received in his instructions, counsels,
and grace extended, a man will perish from the way, from attending to, and
walking with God in Christ in the way of his commandments; for he will want
strength and courage to persevere, and so will turn to the world again; either
through fear of what will come, ( the fear of man proving a snare, Prove. 29.25.
as it did to Israel, who for fear of the Giants and strong Nations in the Land
of Canaan, turned back in their hearts, Numb. 14. and were reputed as
unbelievers, and destroyed therefore in the Wilderness; ver. 10, 11 -- 22, 23.
and as it was to Peter in the case abovementioned) or else through the feeling
of troubles that come upon them and press them: Like to many of the Israelites
in the Wilderness, whose souls were discouraged through the difficulties they
felt in the way, Numb. 21.4, 5. But where the Son of Man is believed on with
the heart, trusted to, and relied upon, he gives strength and courage both
against the fears and feelings of evil, and makes Conquerours over the world,
and its frightfullest and sharpest Persecutions; as its said, The Lord will
give strength to his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace, Psalm.
29.11. And this is our victory whereby we overcome the world, even our faith:
Who is he that overcomes the world, [even the frowns and malice of the world]
but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? 1 John 5.3, 4. In this the
Servants of God have been more then Conquerours over all adversities: Neither
tribulation, or distress, persecution, famine, peril, nakedness, or sword have
been able to separate them from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus. But
for his sake they have been, and have endured to be killed all the day long,
and to be accounted as sheep for the slaughter, Romans 8.35, 36. By faith they
have grappled with, and overcome the greatest difficulties; as it is said, Heb.
11.29, 33 -- 37. Through faith they went through the Red sea as on dry ground,
which the Egyptians assaying to do were drowned: Through faith they wrought
righteousness, subdued Kingdoms, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of
lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the Sword, waxed
valiant in battle, put to f^ight the Armies of the aliens. Women received their
dead raised to life again: others were tortured, not accepting deliverance,
that they might obtain a better Resurrection. Others had trials of cruel
mockings and scourgings: yea moreover, of bonds and imprisonments. They were
stoned, sawn asunder tempted, [or as some render the word, burnt with hot
Irons] They were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins, and
goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented: of whom the World was
not worthy: they wandered about in deserts, and mountains, in dens and caves of
the Earth, etc. Such great things, both fears and tormenting afflictions, have
they been strengthened under, and preserved from perishing from the way by,
through believing on the Son of Man. Whereof also we might add many pleasing
examples and instances (of Christian fortitude, namely, through this faith) if
we would rifle the writings of Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen, Nicephorus and
others, of the constancy of the Christian Martyrs, and confessors in all ages,
both under the Jewish, Heathen, and Antichristian persecutions; but I shall not
be so tedious.

3. In case of sin, fallen into through heedlesness, or giving way to
corruption, through want of exercise of faith; or through the discovery of, and
sight of the woeful sinfulness of our natures and lives, and the great appearing
difficulties in the way of God; the unlikeliness of ever getting victory over
corruption, or obtaining such renewedness of heart and life, as might fit for
the inheritance, in case I say, of such considerations causing discouragement
through want of exercise of believing on Christ the Son of man; some have
perished out of the way and said, There is no hope. Jer. 18.12. As Cain, Judas,
and others the Israelites in the Wilderness also Number. 14. were a Type of these.
But in believing on the Son of Man, and exercisiing faith in him, and his
blood, sacrifice, mediation, plenteousness of redemption in him, fullness of
Spirit, his engagement and promise to help and succor us every where, and his
power, and faithfulness to perform it, and the like. Men have and shall be
preserved from perishing from the way of the Lord, and helped to hold on their
way with cheerfulness and confidence, notwithstanding such discouragements. As
through faith, not only Abraham, the Father of the faithful, against hope
believed in hope, according to what was said to him. Romans 4.18. But also Rahab
the harlot perished not with them that believed not; but though an harlot,
found favor and mercy, a Type and pattern of sinners, through believing on the
Son of man finding forgiveness, and heartned to walk on among Gods people to
the enjoyment of the heavenly Inheritance: as David, and Peter did after their
falls. And so Paul and others, notwithstanding what they see, and proved of the
sinfulness of their natures, which they often bewailed and complained of; as in
Psalm. 38.17, 18, 22. and 51.1, 5, 15, 16. Romans 7.14, 23, 24, 25.

4. On the other hand, prosperity, riches, and fullness, often prove occasions
to turn men out of the way, and cause them to perish from it, while their
hearts are lifted up thereby into a forgetfulness of God; and into pride and
high-mindedness; or are overcharged with the ca^es and encumbrances of the
World; or ^nsnared with the ease, pleasures, and friendship of it, which their
prosperity gives them opportunities and advantages for, as is intimated in
those warnings given in that case. Deuteronomy 6.10, 11, 12. and 8.7, 8, 12, etc. And
those predictions in Deuteronomy. 32.14, 15, 18. Which are confirmed also in the after
event. Hos. 13.5, 6. And so much our Savior says, and signifies of those that
receive the Word, as Seed among the Thorns: Who by the cares of the World,
deceitfulness of riches, and love of other things are choked, so as not to
bring forth fruit to perfection. Mat. 13.7, 22. And against this our Savior
cautions his Disciples, that their heart might not at any time be overcharged
with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and that day come
upon them unawares. Luke 21.34, 35. The love of riches, honors, pleasures,
etc. do often cause men to turn away from Christ to save them, and preserve
them: like the young man, who though very earnest in running to Christ to know
of him what he might do to have everlasting life; yet when he heard, Sell all
that thou have and give it to the poor and follow me. Rather forsook Christ to
keep his riches, then his riches to follow Christ, and obtain everlasting life.
Math. 19.16, 17, 21, 22. But now, where the Son of Man is believed on, prized,
come to, depended and relied on, and his counsels entertained with sure belief
of them, as right and good; there a man is, and will be helped to look upon
better riches, pleasures, prosperity and honors, and in compare of them, to
look upon these as empty and uncertain: and to judge Christ worthy the parting
with them all for him, and trusting to him for his care and provision according
to his promise, will notwithstanding all threatenings of their loss follow after
him; and trusting to him for the better, and more durable enjoyments, behave
himself as a Pilgrim in all these enjoyments here. Thus we find, that though
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had great riches, yet they perished not out of Gods
way, by occasion of them; but by faith in Christ, believing on him, kept his
way and charge; and behaved themselves in the midst of their enjoyments, as
strangers and Pilgrims in the Earth, declaring that they sought another, even
an heavenly Country. Genesis 13.2, 6. and 24.35. and 25.5. and 26.12, 13, 14. and
30 43. and 32.10. With Heb. 11.9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16. And Moses, though brought
up in Pharaohs Court as the Son of Pharaohs daughter; yet through faith
believing on the Son of Man, he was not snared so as to perish from the way
thereby; but refusing to be called, the Son of Pharaohs daughter, chose rather
to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season; esteeming the reproaches of Christ greater riches, then all the
treasures of Egypt: for he had respect to the recompense of reward. Heb. 11.24,
25, 26.

5. In case of Gods giving honor, power, and authority to men, they are in a
danger to (and often do) perish from the way; either neglecting, and
sleighting, and so missing it; or if they were somewhat in it before, they
wander out of it, not believing in the Son of Man to steer them evenly and
uprightly in it; as is to be seen in many Kings and Princes that are, or have
been corrupted, by power and greatness. Instances we have in Saul, and Vzziah,
Solomon, and other Kings of Judah, and Israel; but now, if any such believe on
the Son of Man, and in God through him, he will preserve them from perishing
from the way; as may be seen in David, Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah,
though they all had their stumbles and falls in the way: and this is that that
is employed in the second Psalm, when he says, Be wise now therefore O ye
Kings, understand (or be instructed) ye that Judge the Earth. Serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice before him with trembling. Kiss the Son lest he be
angry, and ye perish out ^f the way; if his wrath be kindled but a little.
Kiss, that is, embrace, honor, submit to believe on, the Son; even him that is
set upon Gods holy hill of Sion, to whom God said, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee. Gods Son, this Son of Man, the Lord Jesus. But then in
adding, Blessed are all they that trust in him. He implies, that they who do so
in an exercise of faith, in, or believing on him, they shall be happy in this,
that they shall be preserved from such perishing out of the way as befalls
others that do not kiss, or believe on him. I may also add,

6. In case of Gods honoring, and lifting up men with great spiritual gifts
and favors, as knowledge, utterance, experience, and such like privileges. The
heart not exercising faith in the Son of Man, and living upon him as nothing
in, and of itself notwithstanding them; and as needing always to be found in
him; upheld, and supplied by, and presented in him, is in danger to perish out
of the way. As is implied in that counsel, and warning of the Apostles to the
Gentiles. Romans 11.20, 21. Thou stand by faith, be not high-minded, but fear:
for if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not
thee. And as was exemplified in Jerusalem. Ezekiel. 16.16, 17, 18. That trusting
in her own beauty and excellency, received from Christ her husband, and not
living upon, and trusting only to, and in him played the harlot, and perished
from the way; as is to be seen in the following verses there: and in Jer. 2.5,
6, 7, 31. Whereas the living by the faith of the Son of God, and exercising it
by believing on him, preserves, and saves therefrom; as the Apostle Paul, and
all that in all ages lived by faith, in their enjoyments of Gods gifts,
favors, and privileges, were. Gal. 2.20. Heb. 10.38.

7. In case of difficulties, and seeming hardness in the words, or works of
God, or Christ, so as we cannot find them out, or comprehend them by our
understanding, from want of believing on the Son of Man many perish from the
way of truth and righteousness. So we find, that Israel fell in temptations and
provocations, not knowing Gods way, erring in their hearts, through unbelief of
his words, not mixed with faith in them. Psalm. 95.10. Heb. 3.15, 16, 18. with
4.2. When Caleb and Joshua that believed, followed God with a full heart, and
were not offended at any of his ways. Asaph had like that way to have slipped,
but that going into the Sanctuary of God through believing what he there met
with, he was recovered. Psalm. 73. Jeremiah also, though he would reason with
God of his judgments, yet holding fast faith, and believing that God was
righteous in all his ways, was not in danger of miscarrying. Jer. 12.1. Yea in
a word, Great peace have they that love Gods Law, and nothing shall offend
them, either in Gods words or works: for they believe that his word is right,
and all his works are done in truth. Psalm. 119.165. with 33.4. That God is a
Rock, his work perfect, and all his ways judgment; a God of truth and without
iniquity: just and right is he, Deuteronomy. 32.4. But a most eminent instance of this
we have in Christ's Disciples. Joh. 6. where at a hard saying of his, about
eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, many of his Disciples were so
offended, that they perished from the way, turning back from, and no more
walking with Christ, and that because they believed not; hung not upon him, as
the Christ, tho Son of God, trusted not to his leading beyond what they could
see and comprehend with their own understandings, as one they were persuaded
of, that he would not deceive or mislead them. Whereas, Peter and the other
Apostles being asked, If that offended them also, and if they would go away
too? replied, Whither shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal Life: and we
know, and are sure, that thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God; and
would not depart from him. Joh. 6.60, 61, 64, 67, 68, 69. Abraham also
believing according to what was said, and giving glory to God, staggered not
through unbelief, either at the strangness, or greatness of what was promised;
or at the unlikeliness of its being performed, and so turned not out of the
way; however, he may be said to have tripped in it, by listening to Sarahs
advice, Genesis 16. Romans 4.16, 17, 18. Whereas, Israel in the Wilderness (as is
noted before) not believing for the words sake, nor for Gods sake upon the
account of his power and faithfulness, but judging by sight and appearance, and
accordingly believing, or distrusting, turned aside and perished from the way,
many of them.

And to say no more, in case of temptations, generally men not believing on
Christ the Son of Man, and so on God, are in danger to perish out of the way,
being overcome of their lusts, and of Satan. And so all the diverse ways of
the people of Israel falling into sin, and perishing from the way, as by
lusting after evil things, by Idolatry, by murmuring against Christ, by
tempting Christ, and by fornication, mentioned, 1 Cor. 10. are resolved
generally into their unbelief, as the grand root and cause of them. Heb. 3.19.
Jude 5. When as they who hold fast faith in Christ, and depend on him
continually, are thereby preserved from every evil way. As it is said, He that
abides in him sins not. He that sins (wandreth from the way) has
neither seen him nor known him, 1 John 3.6. Thus the believing on him preserves
from perishing from the way; whereas, they that believe not, are apt to perish.
So,

1. Either by running out of the Doctrine and way of truth, into false
Doctrines and Heresies of Damnation being with specious pretenses, and
appearances presented to them; as through want of stable rootedness in Christ,
and dependence on him the Galatians were in the way to have done; and as God
often has left them to do, who believed not the truth but have had pleasure in
unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. Either fear of men, or desire of their
favor, or will to be rich, or the appearing probability of falsehood cause
those that believe not in Christ, to err from the faith, into by-ways of
Judgment. 1. Tim. 6.10.

2. Or else by running into ways of worldiness uncleanness, covetousness,
discontents, and unrighteous practices; as the Israelites into lusting after
evil things, Idolatries, Fornication; and as Demas that forsook Paul, having
loved this present World. 2 Timothy 4, 10. And of both these ways of perishing out
of the way, the Apostle John warnes the believers in, 1 John 2.15, 16, 17, 18,
19, etc. First of perishing from the way, by loving the world, or the things of
the world: the lust of the eyes, the lust of the flesh, or the pride of life.
ver. 15.16. And then of the Deceivers (...), and Antichrists, when he says,
ver. 18. Little Children it is the last times, and as ye have heard, that
Antichrist should come, even now there are many Antichrists, etc. Of whom also
he warnes, 2 John 8. Look to your selves that we loose not the things that we
have wrought. And as a preservative against both, prescribes the faith of
Christ, or the believing on him, 1 John 2.24, 25, 28. Let that therefore which
ye have heard from the beginning abide in you, if that which ye have heard from
the beginning abide in you, ye also shall continue in the Father, and in the
Son: (namely, so as neither by the love of the world, nor by the Antichrists to
be drawn out from them) and this is the promise which he has promised, eternal
life. And in 1 John 5.13. These things have I written to you that believe, that
ye may know that ye have everlasting life, and that ye may believe on the name
of the Son of God.

2. There is also a perishing in the end, and that is a sad perishing indeed:
its sad to perish from the way, for that also leads to perishing in the end,
and will end in it, unless rich and mavelous grace and mercy prevent, but yet
by mercy it may be prevented, the lost may be found again, as is implied and
signified in the parables of the lost Sheep, and the lost Groat, and the lost
child found. Luke 15. The last of which though he lay and perished with hunger,
yet came to himself again, and being made sensible of it, and remembering his
Fathers house, arose and returned to it. So as it is said of him, This my Son
was dead, but is alive again; was lost but is found: Namely, he was perished out
of the way to happiness, but is now brought back into it, and found in it
again. But they that perish in the end are lost for ever: as it is said of
Amalek, His latter end is, that he shall perish forever, Number. 24.20. There is
indeed a perishing in the end, in a sense which may be of less mischief, yea
for mercy Viz. When men perish in the end of their designs and undertakings,
for that may be in order to their being led to Repentance: of such a perishing
diverse passages may be understood, in which the holy Ghost led his people, to
pray against their enemies; as Let the wicked perish at the presence of God,
Psalm. 68.2. Let them be put to shame and perish. Psalm. 83.17. And diverse the
like, which may possibly be taken in such a charitable, as well as in some
cases in a harsher sense; but to perish in a proper sense, as to men's persons
in the end is horrible, and inconceivably miserable. Whether it be,

1. At the end of their lives; so as their hopes become as the giving up of the
Ghost: and when they part with their breath, their hopes utterly fail them; and
they go from this life, to the dreadful prison, to be there reserved against
the day of Wrath, and then to be brought forth to a worser state of misery, and
destruction. As it is said, The Hypocrites hope shall perish; whose hope shall
be cut off, and whose trust shall be as a Spiders web, Job 8.13, 14. As it was
with the rich man who f^red deliciously every day; but at his death was carried
into Hell, there to be tormented, till Death and Hell give up their Dead to be
judged at the great day, as it is said, Rev. 20.13, 14. Luke 16.21, 26.

Or whether it be at the end of the World; at the great Judgment when Christ
shall sit upon his Throne, or Tribunal seat, and pass that dreadful Sentence
upon the unbelieving, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels. Whereupon, they shall go into everlasting
punishment; and perish with an everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his Power, Mat. 25.41, 46. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. To
either of which those sentences of the Psalms, about the wickeds perishing,
may be also applied; especially, those perishings from their hopes and designs
here, not awakning them to timely Repentance. Indeed, it may seem that some
that shall perish in that great end of the World, the Day of the Lord, may not
be quite perished from all hope till then, by that saying of our Savior, That
many shall say at that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and
in thy name cast out Devils, and done many wonderful works; to whom he shall
say, Depart from me, etc. As if they should plead at that day with some hope of
finding mercy: but plain it is, that they who believe not on Christ, but live
and dye in their unbelief, shall dye in their sins. John 8.24. Their sins
unpardoned, and fast bound upon them; and they bound over to suffer the
punishment of them: and that in the final Judgment in Soul, and Body reunited.
The fearful and unbelieving shall be cast into the Lake that burns with fire
and brimstone, which is the second Death. An horrible end, decreed to the
workers of iniquity; and such as cannot be expressed: and therefore the Apostle
Peter says, What shall their end be, that obey not the Gospel? As implying it
to be unutterably miserable. 1 Pet. 4.17. But in none of these senses shall the
believer on the Son of Man perish; Neither, in that which is his hope and
design as a believer, which is the glorifying of God, and the Salvation of his
Soul. And if he perish as to any other hope, and design which is carnal; which
as a man yet subject to infirmity, and in many things offending, he may (as
Abraham did in his hope and design of bringing about Gods promise, by his going
in unto Hagar, and the birth and life of Ishmael, Genesis 16) such perishings of
such hopes and designs, though causing some grief, shall not hurt them. It may
be said of such, as it is of the hay and stubble, built upon the good
foundation, which shall be burnt, and the builder of it suffer loss but himself
shall be saved, so, as by fire, 1 Cor. 3.12, 15. The believer himself, as to
his great hope and design shall not perish; nor shall he, his Soul perish, as
they that draw back; but his believing is to the Salvation of that, both in his
Death, wherein he has hope; that will not make him ashamed, or fail him. Prove.
14.32. Romans 5.5.6. And in the Judgment, when he shall be adjudged to, and enter
into everlasting life, Mat. 25.35, 46.

Qu. 2. As to the Second Quer^ How the believer shall be saved from this
perishing; either from the way, or in the end, in his Death, or in the
Judgment. We may say,

1. He shall be saved from perishing from the way, by Christ.

1. By his giving in light and truth, faithfully to direct him, and show him
the way that he should go in. As it is said, The meek will he guide in
judgment; the meek will he teach his way. And what man is he that fears the
Lord? him shall he teach the way that he shall choose, his Soul shall dwell at
ease (or lodge in goodness) shall not fall into snares and mischiefs, Psalm.
25.8, 12, 13, 14. And in beholding him, who is Gods Servant, upon whom he has
put his Spirit, to bring forth Judgment: He, that is Christ, will not fail to
teach him, and to bring forth Judgment into truth, or victory, Isa. 42.1, 3, 4.
Christ being come a Light into the world, that whosoever believes on him,
should not abide in darkness, but see the light of Life, John 8.12. And his
word being believed, and abid in (as it is in believing on the Son of man)
keeps from sinning against him, Psalm. 119.11. Yea, it cleanses their way, and
makes it more perfect, ver. 9. And so gives a continuance in the Father and in
the Son, both in dependence on them; and in their favor and protection from
what might harm them, whether it be the World, or any Antichristian principles,
or Doctrine, 1 John 2.24. And that because Christ also therein, and therewith

2. Gives in his holy Spirit to work in men, both a right discerning of his
truth, and love, and affection to it; and so conformity to him, in, and by it;
his Doctrine being a ministration of Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. Yea, his words are
Spirit and Life, John 6.63. And he has promised that they that believe on him
as the Scripture has said, to them he will give, so as they shall receive his
holy Spirit, Joh. 7.37, 38, 39. Act. 5.32. We have not now his blessed Body of
Flesh, to see and converse with sensibly, or to show, and testify our love to,
as his Disciples, and Mary had: but instead thereof, he has left us his words,
and therein his mind and Commandment; and we may show love to him therein:
though we cannot anoint his head, kiss his feet, take his body in our arms
(which his enemies might do, and one that pretended love to him in some such
actions, betrayed him) yet we have that in which we may testify love, even his
word, we may attend to him in that, hear him, and hugg him too, as it were
therein; take that and lay it up in our hearts keep it in our breasts and
diligently observe, and follow it. And he that has his Commandments and
keeps them, he it is that loves him: and he that loves him, shall be loved
both of the Fathe, and of him; and he will manifest his own self to him,
praying the Father for them; and sending his holy Spirit to lead, and guide
them into all truth; and abide with them for ever, John 14.15, 16, 17, 21. And
he will so glorify Christ to the Soul, and show it things to come, as to make
afflictions and persecutions light and bearable to it, and give it peace and
comfort in them; and carry them above, and keep them from being harmed, by the
prosperity and allurements of this World, or by any baits or temptations. It
being the spirit of wisdom, will make wise, and fill with such discretion and
understanding, as will preserve from the way of the evil Man, and of the
strange woman; and so from every false way as was noted before, Prove. 1.23. and
2.10, 11, 12, 15, 16. Psalm. 119.104. and 17.4. And the Soul that trusts to, and
follows its conduct shall not miscarry. To these ends also,

3. He preserves them, by mediating with God his Father from them, that the
weaknesses and infirmities; and through infirmity, neglects and wanderings from
him being seen, confessed, and turned from, might not be imputed, to hinder or
withold his grace and Spirit from being given forth to lead, instrust,
reprove, reduce, comfort, and work the works of God in them, till it perfect
what concerns them, Heb. 7, 25. And there-through he saves them to the utmost.
So he helped Peter, Luke 22.31, 32.

4. By the exercise also of his glorious power and authority over all things;
he keeps off what might be too hard for us, in our depending on him; he will be
faithful to us, and will not fail, nor be discouraged, Isa. 42.1, 4. He will
not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able: but with the temptation
will give an issue that we may escape. 1 Cor. 10.11, 12. Surely the wrath of
man shall praise him, and the remainder thereof, he can and will restrain,
Psalm. 76.11. Yea and,

5. By ordering merciful, and faithful corrections and Chastisements to us to
break us off from our purposes, and hide pride from us, to purge away our sins,
purify and make us White, and so to be partakers of his holiness, that we
might be kept from going down to the Pit, and our life might see the light; and
that we being made holy might see the Lord. Job 33.16, 17, 29. Dan. 11.35. Heb.
12.10, 11. Thus he delivers the believer on him from every evil way, and
preserves him to his heavenly Kingdom. 2 Timothy 4.18. And then,

2. He preserves him from perishing in the end.

1. By receiving his Spirit when it departs hence, washing it in his precious
Blood, and presenting it pure and glorious to himself. Ephesians, 5.25, 26. Psalm.
49.15. Acts 7.59. Rev. 6.10, 11.

2. By redeeming him from the power of the Grave, raising him up from death,
and redeeming the body from all corruption and mortality. Psalm. 49.15. Romans
8.23. 2 Cor. 4.15.

3. By his adjudging him, being raised to a better condition, fully blotting
out all sins and trespasses, through the virtue of his most precious Blood.
Acts 3.19. Mat. 25.35, 36, 46.

And thus being preserved and saved by him, they shall not perish from the way,
nor in the end, but shall have Eternal Life, of which we have nextly to
consider.

CHAP XIV.
Of the second Branch of the fifth observation, what Eternal Life is, and how
the believer on Christ shall have it.



1. It Is not this natural life; for that with all its enjoyments must and will
have an end, and its good to mind that, and the shortness and hiddenness of the
time of it, and the hiddenness, and often times suddenness of the coming of
death, that we may not trust to this life, or rest in any of its enjoyments,
but be moved more diligently to seek after and lay hold of that which is indeed
Eternal life; concerning which I may add, that

2. It Is more, and has more in it then can be now either fully expressed or
conceived, only some hints of it we have in the Scriptures, and according to
them we may understand something thereof; and so we find that it is variously
set forth and spoken of in the Scriptures; as sometimes,

1. By the causes of it, or that from whence it springs and issues, and so,

1. Jesus Christ himself is called Eternal Life, the life of the believer; when
Christ who is our life shall appear. Col. 3.4. I am the Way, the Truth and the
life. Joh. 14.6. The bread of life, that he that eats shall live by, and shall
live for ever. Joh. 6, 51. The resurrection and the life. Joh. 11.25. Yea
expressly that Eternal life that was with the Father, and was manifested to us.
1 John 1.2. And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding heart to know him that is true, and we are in him that is true,
even in his Son Jesus christ, this is the true God and Eternal life. 1 John
5.19, 20. And its true to say, That he that believes on the Son of man shall
have him, as in Heb. 3.14. Now are we partakers of Christ, if we hold fast the
beginning of our Confidence steadfast to the end, we have and shall have him
here with us, and for us; I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine. Cant. 2.16.
and 6.3. And he says, I will be with thee; I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee. Deuteronomy. 31.6, 8. Josh 1.5. with Heb. 13.5. And we shall have him for ever
with us, and be ever with him in the new Heavens, and new Earth, and new
Jerusalem in the world to come. Rev. 21.3, 4. with 1 These. 4.16, 17.

2. The favor of God in Christ is life; In thy favor is life. Psalm, 30.5. And
this he shall have that believes on Christ the Son of man. He that finds him
(who is the wisdom of God) finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord.
Prove. 8.34. And this is such a life as nothing can happen to the believer on
him, that can extinguish it, or prevail against it. I am persuaded neither
Life, nor Death, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.38,
39. That we believing on him, should not be failed by him, or deprived of his
favor to us, that is without all peradventure included in it.

3. The knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ is Eternal life. This is life
Eternal that they may know thee, the only true God, and him whom thou have sent
Jesus Christ. Joh. 17.3. And this they who believe on the Son of man shall
have, for they shall receive the holy Spirit, the Spirit of the Father and of
the Son that shall teach them all things, so as they shall not (in the issue)
need to say one to another, Know the Lord, for they shall know him from the
least to the greatest; as is expressly promised in the Covenant or New
Testament, whereof Jesus Christ is the Mediator, and which he has undertaken
to see performed to them that believe on him, and depart not from him. See Joh.
7.38, 39* and 14.26. and 16.13. with Heb. 8.11.

2. Sometime for the effect of Christ, and of the knowledge and favor of God,
both as enjoyable here through faith, and as enjoyable hereafter in the full
fruition, when those that see now darkly through a Glass, stall see as they are
seen, and know as they are known. 1 Cor. 13.12. And that effect is the living,
joyful, happy state of the Soul, and so of the whole man for ever; as it is
said, He shall live for ever, and he shall never die. Joh. 6.51, 58. and 11.25,
26. Which is spoken of the Spiritual and Heavenly life, or state of the Soul,
here and hereafter joyful and happy, never to have end, but especially of the
state both of the body and soul together hereafter, and it includes and
contains in it both.

1. A continual living in a state of forgiveness and acceptance with God, which
is a truly joyful and happy state, in which the Soul has cause of real joy and
gladness; as it is said, Blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven, and
whose sins are covered; Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute
sin. Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is the man who knows the joyful sound. Psalm. 89.15.
And happy is the man who has the God of Jacob for his help, etc. Psalm. 146.5,
6. A state in which the Soul is passed from death to life, and shall not come
into condemnation. Joh. 5.24.

2. A continual in dwelling of the the Spirit of Life, as a Spring of Spiritual
Life and motion toward God, and for him, even the Spirit of God, which is the
Spirit of life, and the operation and efficacy of him in the Soul (though not
always sensibly felt here) as it is said, He that drinks of the water that I
shall give him, it stall be in him a Spring of living waters springing up in
him unto Etetnal life, Joh, 4.14. So as this Spring shall never fail him that
believes going on and continuing to believe on the Son of man.

3. A continual state of safety from all evil, so as to its being destructive
or hurtful to the Soul, or in due time affective, and a state of Title to, and
Interest in, yea and enjoyment of all that is good, in a first fruits, and by
Spirit here, and fully and actually, and for ever hereafter there shall no evil
happen to the just. Prove. 12.21. All things are the believers, 1 Cor 3.21. And
all things shall work together for his good. Romans 8.28. Psalm. 25.10. The Lord
God is a Son and a Shield, and he will give grace and glory, and withold no
good thing, etc. Psalm. 84.11.

4, Nor shall this happy state be ever taken from him; but though through
workings of the flesh, a man may not be always sensible of these things, nor
have always actual rejoicing while here; yet his state is always such, and
shall hereafter appear, and be most sensibly and perfectly such; for this life
here begun by Christ and by his Spirit, never shall terminate or end, but
increase, and be more full as to the enjoyment and perception of it in the
abiding believer on the Son of Man, till it be most immutably perfect. They
that seek God shall Praise him, their hearts shall live for ever. Psalm. 22.26.
Death shall not put an end to this life; when the body dies, the man even then
shall be in a living state of the Spirit or inner man, in a truly happy and
joyful condition, though it appear not upon the body of man, or to the view of
the natural man, much less shall it terminate after death to the Spirit made
perfect; for it being with Christ, shall be in a better state then while here.
Phil. 2.21, 23. To be dissolvd and to be with Christ is far better then to be
here; much less shall this life cease, fail or terminate in the state of the
resurrection; for that state is most properly and fully called Eternal Life.
Mark 10.30. In the world to come Eternal life; because then neither Soul nor
Body shall die any more; but then,

1. The body shall be in an eternally, unchangeably happy and blessed state of
life, a glorious body, like the glorious body of Christ. Phil. 3.20. Raised up
in honor, incorruptibility, power and glory, so as it shall never feel, or be
capable of feeling hunger, thirst, pain, weariness, weakness, decay, sickness,
old age, or any other trouble any more forever: For there shall be no more
death, neineither sorrow nor crying, etc. for the former things are passed
away. Rev. 21.3. with 7.16. 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44.

2, The Soul and inward man shall be perfect in its knowledge of, conformity
to, and joy in God, and in Jesus Christ our Lord; For then we shall see as we
are seen, know as we are known: Then that which is perfect being come, that
which is in part shall be done away. 1 Cor. 13.10, 12. Then we shall have
fullness of joy in Gods presence, and pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore.
Psalm. 16.12. 1 John 3.2. There shall then be no more ignorance or envy, nor
sorrow, nor care, nor whatever may render the Soul in the least defective in
its happiness; but the favor of God and of the Lamb as a clear River of pure
waters, pure and immixed, and never failing, shall fill it perpetually with all
Heavenly and Spiritual fruitfulness in every good thing. Rev. 21.4, 11. and and
22.1. Isa. 11.9.13. Deuteronomy. 33.23. Yea,

3. The whole state of the man both in Body and Soul, and with respect both to
God and Men, a state of perfect freedom from all evil. Nothing in themselves to
treuble or disquiet, and nothing from without themselves either of wrath and
curse from God (he shall neither inflict any evil upon, or withold any good
from them; but as one perfectly well pleased with them perpetually fill and
satisfy them with his favor, and blessing, afford them his fellowship, and
the fellowship of the Lamb, and whatsoever so happy a Spring may pour forth to
them; and therefore) neither shall any evil befall them, either positively,
from any man, or from any other Creature, Angel, Devil, or any other thing to
molest or annoy them; the Devil and all his Instruments, their Enemies, and all
evil things being for ever removed from out the Creation, or what of it the
Saints shall have to do with (except so as they may look upon and behold their
miseries. Isa. 66.24. And as the happiness of the Saints may be seen by their
Enemies, for aggravating their miseries. Luke 13.28. and 16.23.) and all other
things and persons filled with good for and toward them, and not with any
thing that may in the least be evil and troublesome to them; nor privatively,
for they shall be in no danger to loose any thing of the good they have, or
shall have: none of those deprivations and losses that here afflict and
exercise them, shall they then be capable of being exercised and tried with; no
more Widdowhood, or loss of Children, or of Fathers, Mothers, Friends, no loss
of Riches, Honors, Pleasures, Habitations, Ornaments, or any thing; but what
they here lost or were deprived of, shall in a better manner, and more to their
comfort be restored, if they were such as appertain to the Kingdom, their
Relations, Husbands, Parents, Wives, Children, etc. shall be restored then with
Christ, though not as such Relations, or as having such dependence then on
them, as here; but in a far more perfect, satisfying and glorious manner: Nor
shall any one thing or person in the world withold from them or any of them
any one thing that they may have any need of or good by; so that their state
then shall be a state of perfect life, and that everlasting, a spiritual, and
spiritually sensible and intelligent life, an holy life, an happy and Eternal
life, wherein the shall have full knowledge of God and his favor, blessing
righteousness in the full, perfect and perpetual performance of all his blessed
promises, a full and perfect enjoyment of the Lamb, and of all the virtues and
products of his Cross and sufferings, and fellowship of his joys and glory, and
of and with one another, even all the whole company of them, in the most
perfectly united, peaceable satisfying way and manner for ever; the fullness of
the Spirit filling them all and every one with all Spiritual excellencies and
satisfactions for ever, and in that their fellowship, with Christ and one
another they shall have an everlasting full and perfect glory, glorious Kingdom
and Inheritance, such as from the beginning of the world men have not heard of,
or perceived by the Ear, or the Eye seen besides God himself; being the
glorious things which God has prepared for them that wait for him. Isa. 64.5.
A life worthy our most constant and earnest seeking after, laying hold of and
embracing. But now,

Quest. 4. How shall they that believe on Christ the Son of man have this
Eternal Life?

Answ. I may answer to this diversely with respect to 1. The way to their having
it, and 2. The manner of their having it


1. In respect of their way they have and shall have it.

1. Through sufferings and death, even as our Lord Christ himself that way
entered into his glory. It is a faithful saying (or the word is faithful) for if
we be dead with him, we shall also live with him; And if we suffer with him, we
shall also Reign with him; If we, even we, who at present believe in him, deny
him, he will also deny us. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12, 13. Through much affliction we must
enter into Gods Kingdom. Acts 14.22. No partaking of this life but through
death, and that,

1. Through a Spiritual Death, or death in and of our Spirits to false life, as
to the life of or in sin; life to the world, and to the Law, as thinking to
have life thereby, as in our own righteousness according thereunto. No living
to righteousness, and to God, but in dying to sin, and to the world; so as to
cease to be slaves or servants to them, Romans 6.10, 11. Gal. 6.14. 1 Pet. 2.24.
nor is there any living to Christ and so to God, but through dying to the Law,
as to our hopes and rejoycings in our own righteousness according thereunto,
Gal. 2.19. And in these kinds of deaths there are pains in self-denials: taking
up our cross for Christ's sake, Mat. 16.24.

2. Through the bodily Death; for neither is there any entering into the joys
and glories of Heaven, and of the life to come, so as to the actual full
fruition of them but through bodily Death and Grave (except of such as shall be
found alive at his appearing, 1 These. 4.15, 16.) that so we may be made
conformable to the death of Christ, and be planted therethrough into the
likeness of his Resurrection in our body also. For the way to this life is also,

2. Through the Resurrection from the dead; otherwise, if we should dye in our
selves to false lives, and never rise up in a true and divine life, we could
not have eternal life. The life of Christ is a life from the dead, whence he is
called the first begotten, or firstborn from the dead, Col. 1.18. Rev. 1.5.
and so all that share with him therein, are raised up to a life from the dead
too. First, raised up in their spirits with him through the faith of the
operation of God, Col. 2.12. and 3.1. crucified with Christ to self, and flesh,
and sin, and all false life; but yet so as they live: yet not they, but Christ
lives in them, Gal. 2.20. And then also at the great day of Christ's glorious
appearing, their dead bodies shall be raised up by him, and be made like his.
Thence the Resurrection said to be to those that have done good a Resurrection
to Life, Joh. 5.28, 29. and Christ in telling us that they who believe on him
shall have everlasting life; once and again adds, And I will raise him up at
the last day, Joh. 6.40.44. as implying that they must pass through death, and
be raised up again thereunto.

2. In respect of the manner of their having it, they have it as they have
Christ himself who is their life, the ground, foundation, author, and the
fountain of it, Col. 3.3, 4. and so only in receiving, abiding in, and
enjoyment of him, and so

1. They have it here in a sense, not in the fullness and perfection of the
fruition of it; for we are not capable of having it so now, and here while we
have not Christ in Person with us: but they have it now,

1. In Christ the Heir of it, and the root and spring of it, that eternal life
that was with the Father, and was manifested to us, 1 John 1.2. and 5.11, 12,
13. as they have him theirs, and have union with, and interest in him; through
whom also they have it.

2. In a first fruits of the Spirit, and of the Life that is in and by it, and
so in a begun life or happy state of forgiveness, acceptance, spiritual
quickening, etc, as before said,

3. In the promise of the whole, even of the full fruition of it to be had
hereafter. God and Christ have given it them in his Will and Testament, so as
in believing on the Son of Man, they are made Heirs of it, Tit, 1.2. and 3.7. 1 John 2.25. This is the promise that he has promised us, even eternal life, 1 John 2.25, See also Gal. 3.29. And so they have it

4. In the hope of it, Tit. 1.2. 1 Pet. 1, 3, 4.

2. In the state to come they shall have it,

1. Upon their dissolution and going to Christ, in their spirits more fully;
resting in and with Christ, and being blessed, Phil. 1.21.23. Rev. 14.13.

2. Upon their Resurrection, in the full; perfect, and perpetual possession and
fruition of it for ever, Mark 10.30. A portion infinitely desirable, and worthy
the looking after; and yet this is the portion of every one that believes on
the Son of Man, without exception. No respect of persons, no difference of
stronger or weaker believer, as to the future enjoyment or present right to,
and interest in it by and through Jesus Christ. There is neither Male nor
Female, Jew nor Greek, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, bond or free; but all
are one in Christ Jesus: and if Christ's, then Abraham's Seed and Heirs according
to promise, Gal. 3.28, 29. And yet in the rewards to be received in the
Davidical Kingdom, or the thousand years reign at the coming of Christ, and
before he deliver up the Kingdom to God the Father, and God be all in all,
there will doubtless be different degrees of Glory and Honor conferred
according to men's different works, services, faithfulness and fruitfulness in
their services, and greatness of their sufferings for him; as is hinted in
those parabolical passages: Be thou Ruler over ten Cities, be thou Ruler over
five, Luc. 19.17, 19. otherwise it would be all one to serve Christ little or
much here, to be abundant or sparing in the work of the Lord, contrary to that
of the Apostle, He that sows liberally shall reap liberally: and he that
sows sparingly shall reap sparingly, 2 Cor. 9.6. Though yet a shorter work
more singly done may have equal reward with a larger not so singly done; as the
Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard, Mat. 20. may seem to import.
Wherefore Let us be always steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the works
of the Lord, knowing that our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, Rev.
20.6. with 5.10. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. with 15, 24 -- 28.58.

CHAP. XV.
The application of the two former, viz. the fourth and fifth Observations in
part in exhortation to believe reproof for not believing, encouragements to
continue in believing on the Son of Man; and some directions thereto.

THE consideration of the two last mentioned observations, showing the
necessity and advantage of believing on the Son of Man, as also the nature of
this believing, is and may be very useful upon diverse accounts. As to

Use 1. Exhort and press all men to believe on the Son of Man, the Lord Jesus
Christ, as declared and set forth unto them in and by the discoveries, teaching
and operation of God and his Spirit vouchsafed to them. And that they may
believe on him to listen to, mind and embrace, and hold fast the Faith or
Doctrine of him, in which is the power, spirit, and hand of the Lord moving and
enabling to believe: yea begetting in the heart this faith that is so necessary
and profitable for men: For says is of hearing, and hearing is of the word of
God; not of every hearing, nor of every word, but of hearing the word of God.
From which word, hearing, or the hearing Ear also is effected and proceeds,
Romans 10.17. For no man can come unto Christ, this Son of Man, unless it be
given to him of God, unless he draws him; and he draws by his teaching men the
knowledge of him; whence it is said, every one that hears and learneth of the
Father comes unto him, Joh. 6.44, 45, 65. It is of his own good will that he
begets men through the word of truth, to be (of a contemptible vile, worthless
creature as man has made himself by his sin) a kind of first fruits of his
creatures (a more noble and prime creature to him, a new creature, a
first fruits of his future new creation) therefore it behooves men, every one
to be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath, slow to murmur and be angry
at the word of truth, and the instructions, reproofs and counsels of it,
because clashing with the wisdom and will of the flesh, the principles,
thoughts and practices of the world, and of the wise men thereof: but with
meekness to receive the ingraffed word (the word as God puts and ingraffs it
into the heart) which is able to save the Soul, being not only hearers of the
word, but doers of it as it is working (and so God in and with it) to will and
to do of good pleasure, Jam. 1.18, 19, 21. Phil. 2.12, 13. turning at Gods
reproofs therein given; from whatsoever in conceit, apprehension or opinion we
hold or imagine that clashes with the truth discovered in the word and its
instructions; that we may so conceive, judge and believe as that declares and
informs us of all things; and from whatsoever in affection, desire, purpose or
practice we naturally or through evil principles or customs affect, desire,
purpose or practice disagreeing with, and reproved by the light and instruction
of that blessed word; that so we may obey its counsel and instruction, and
affect, desire, purpose and practice what it commends and leads us to seeking
after that, and so the wisdom of God will pour out his spirit to us, and make
known his words, Prove. 1.22, 23. and so hearing, the Soul shall live, Isa.
55.3. there through attaining to know the name of the Lord, the Son of Man, we
shall be strengthened, framed and have the will set to trust in him, Psalm.
9.10. in meditating in the law and doctrine of the Lord, and exercising our
selves in it day and night, the heart will be fixed to trust in the Lord, and
to make him its hope: Yea, and therein to be rooted, grounded and fixed like a
Tree planted by the water side: so as to abide in the blasts of temptations,
and be fruitful in every good work, increasing in the knowledge of God,
strengthened with all might according to his glorious power to all patience and
long suffering with joyfulness, Psalm. 1.1, 2, 3. Jer. 17.7, 8. Col. 1.10, 11.
for the Gospel of Christ (the preaching of the cross) is the power of God to
salvation (even from unbelief, and all the power of darkness) to every one that
believes it, Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.22, 23. So as that in taking diligent heed
thereto, and yiedling up our selves to the power that works therein, we shall
be helped and framed to believe on the Son of God; its through his name that
men receive power to believe on him, Acts 10.43. and therefore it behooves all
men (as they would avoid the perishing from Gods way, and the everlasting
misery and destruction at the end; and as they would obtain the everlasting
life and happiness propounded and promised) to give serious and diligent heed
and obedience thereto; who would willingly incur pain, grief and affliction
here, or to perish by hunger, cold, prison, gallows or the like; and yet these
things are infinitely short of the evil of perishing from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power for ever: Yea, who that is traveling to
some remote place; where if he go right on to it, he shall find great riches,
honors or gain, would be willing, or through carefulness expose himself to
loose, and be lost out of the way, and to wander in a Wilderness among briars,
and thorns, boggs, and lakes; yea among wild and savage creatures, as serpents,
lions, tigers, etc. when in a diligent careful inquiry after, and attendance to
some faithful direction and guide, he might go right and safe, and attain the
good proposed, and miss that perishing by hunger, cold, the teeth of the wild
beasts that he is otherwise in danger off! and yet that perishing from the way,
and danger of finally perishing by the ways or means forementioned, are little
evils in comparison of perishing from Gods way, and by what that perishing
exposes to! who again that has proffer and opportunity of being made rich,
honorable, living pleasantly and delightfully for a long time (so long
suppose, as was the life of Methuselah) would willingly refuse and loose such
enjoyments, and incur answerable miseries! and yet this eternal life which God
has promised to give to them that believe on, and follow after the Son of Man,
is infinitely more excellent then all the honors, riches, pleasures, and most
excellent enjoyments of this world, though they might be enjoyed safely, not
only so long as the life of Methusalah; but also so long as from the beginning
of this world to the end thereof, without interruption. Oh therefore how
concerns it all men to come and believe on the Son of Man; and to that purpose
to listen to, and receive the teachings of God concerning him, that such
miseries may be missed, and such mercies enjoyed; that they may not perish in
the way, and from the end, but may have everlasting life!

Use 2. How does this then reprove the vanity, folly, pride and wickedness of
the world, which rejects and puts from them, and matter not to believe on this
most excellent one whom God to such glorious ends has raised up for us? If it
be folly and madness in men, who may in hearing their Fathers and friends good
instructions in matters of this world; live well and comfortably; have and get
yet more of the good things of this world, to maintain them and preserve them
from want and beggary, and make them live in credit and repute; to turn their
backs upon such good counsels, and thereby willingly and wilfully through their
pride, folly, slothfulness, love of bad company, or the like, bring themselves
into debt, poverty, prisons; and nothing but a Series of miseries! How much
more is it folly and madness for the world, or any of us to neglect Gods word,
and Gods Son, and that great Salvation wrought and preached, and brought to us
by so great and glorious a hand, as that of this Son of Man, being also the Son
of God, the mighty God and our Savior; and thereby to deprive our selves of
such unspeakable bliss and happiness as cannot be conceived, and plunge our
selves into such miseries as cannot be imagined? And yet evident it is that
such folly and madness the world is greatly guilty of: For evident it is that
it generally rejects and treads under foot the Lord Jesus, and the doctrine
that declares him, and is left to us by him, in which is included our salvation
and happiness, Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47. Prove. 4.13. Joh. 12.49, 50. That the world
generally slights both him and his doctrine, the bleatings of the sheep, and
the lowings of the Oxen testify: that is, the general Atheism, Profaneness,
Disorder and Wickedness, the false Religions and Worships generally practiced,
commanded or countenanced, do loudly proclaim it.

Use 3. It may also provoke such as do believe on the Son of Man, the Lord
Jesus Christ, to hold fast the faith; and so their believing on him, and by no
means to suffer themselves to be withdrawn therefrom: For let us consider with
our selves that

Consideration 1. If we turn away and fall from our dependence on him, we turn
after vain things, and things that cannot profit, because vain, 1 Samuel 12.19,
20. and so we deprive our selves of all the good in him, and plunge our selves
into all the misery that can be incurred by us. For this eternal life being in
the Son of Man, Christ Jesus, in departing from him we depart from it, and
losing him we lose it: and he being the Savior and Salvation in withdrawing
from him we withdraw from it, and lie open to all the evil that the unbeliever
may fall into. Nay, indeed better never to have known the way or word of truth,
or the holy commandment, or to have had fellowship with him, then to turn away
again therefrom; for the latter end in that case) is worse than the beginning,
2 Pet. 2.20. Luke 11.26, 27. For as all that are far from him do and shall
perish; So he does and will destroy them who go a whoring from him, Psalm.
73.27. The consideration then of the certain danger of loss and misery; yea, of
the greatest loss, because of the greatest and longest abiding good, and of the
greatest misery, because of the greatest and longest continued evil, may move
us all with all earnestness to hold fast the profession of the faith, and the
exercise thereof. And that is one consideration often urged by the Apostles: So
in Heb. 10.23, 24, 25, 26, 29, 39. Let us hold fast the profession of the faith
without wavering, not forsaking the Assembling our selves together as the
manner of some is. For if we sin wilfully after the knowledge of the truth
received, there remains no more sacrifice for sin: but a certain fearful
looking for, of fiery indignation, which shall devour the Adversary. For if
they that sinned against, so as they despised Moses Law, dyed without mercy,
under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought
worthy, that has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood
of the Covenant an unholy thing, and has done despite to the Spirit of grace.
It is a fearful [or terrible] thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
And if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. As also the
Consideration of

Consid. 2. The exceeding profit and benefit accruing from the holding fast the
faith, and believing on him and the great encouragements we have thereunto.
These may more powerfully move us to it. What is there better than safety from
destruction, and the enjoyment of Eternal life? in which there is an
everlasting enjoyment of God and Christ, and of all that is, or can be good and
desirable: and what have we to encourage to it, and assure us of it? To that
consider

Encouragement 1. We have to encourage us to this believing and holding fast
the faith, all the Trinity for us, God the Father gave his Son to that end that
we might believe on him, and be saved, and live for ever, Joh. 3.16. And he
fills, strengthens and upholds his Son in, and unto all his undertakings for
us, in order to the bringing us to that safety and eternal life and happiness,
Isa. 42.1, 5, 6. Psalm. 89.20, 21, 22. And gives his holy Spirit in and through
him, to strengthen and help us therein, against all that would harm us, or pull
us from it. The Son himself, or Word is for us in all he has done and
suffered; and in all he now does in heaven or earth: in his mediation and
intercession with God for us, and in his government of the World in the name
and power of God about us, and his ordering of his providence to us. Joh. 14,
2, 3, 18. and 16.33. and dispences his Word and Spirit to that purpose to
animate and hearten us thereunto; and therein is working in us the works of
God, for us, even what he requires of us. Joh. 14.16, 17, 26. and 16.13, 14,
15. And the holy spirit encourages us by his word and by his heavenly and
powerful working in us therewith; and gives us all motives and inducements that
may be with exhortations; counsels, promises, etc. to persuade and strengthen
us. And what shall we say to these things! If God be for us herein, who is he
that is against us? Or what is there that can be presented to our view, that
may so much discourage us, as the consideration that God (both Father, Son, and
Spirit,) are for us, may encourage us, and hearten us, Romans 8.31, 32, 33. 1 John
5.6, 9.

Encour. 2. Having God for us, we have his creatures the best of them, and all
that are on Gods side to encourage us too. We have the holy Angels to protect
and defend us therein. Psalm. 34.7. and 91.11, 12. Heb. 1.13, 14. This they will
do for us while we are here; and when we go hence, they will carry us up to
Christ, or into Abraham's bosom, to be at rest with Christ and his holy ones
Luke 16.22. We have the holy Apostles and Prophets: and so the Spirits of just
men made perfect for us, both to encourage us by their testimonies,
instructions, provocations, and all means used in their writings, left on
Record for us; animating and heartning us in believing on the Son of man; and
by their own practice and examples in all ages we have in them a cloud of
witnesses going before us as a guide to us, all witnessing to this. That the
just shall live by faith; and showing us by their examples how to exercise it
and live by it. Heb. 10.38. with 11 throughout, and 12.1. and we have the
living Saints; the holy men led by the spirit of God to encourage and hearten
us on. For whatsoever difference there may be among such in any by-opinions or
apprehensions; yet they all agree in this, That he that believes on the Son of
man, the Son of God, is in a good and right way, in the certain way to
happiness; and shall in holding fast, and not turning therefrom, be sure not to
fail of it, and we have their prayers for us, that we may therefore hold fast
and go on to the end, with manifold provocations, by word, writings and
examples to it. Yea, and many of our enemies too, though they hate us for the
the thing it self, as practiced by us; yet they preach and approve what they
hate, in their doctrines and declarations; even as the Jews approve and
magnify those Scriptures which hold forth what the Christians belie^^ though
they believe not what is in their own Scriptures, Joh 5.45, 46. and 10.34. Yea,
and we have all Gods providence therein working together for us, all things
working together for good to them that love God, all the paths of the Lord,
mercy and truth to them that keep his Covenant and his Testimonies, Psalm. 25.9.
Romans 8.28. Yea all things ours. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the
World, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are ours,
if we be Christ's, as Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, Gal. 3.29. and therefore
great encouragement have we to hold fast faith, and go on, believing in the Son
of man, the Son of God.

Encour. 3. The great profit and benefit proposed to be received and enjoyed in
beleiving on him, both the avoiding and escaping so great misery as perishing;
and the greatness of the good things contained in the eternal life to be
enjoyed, a great recompense of reward: Therefore cast we not away our
confidence; it is life, a Kingdom, yea, Eternal life, and an everlasting
Kingdom, the Kingdom and Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, an eternal weight of
glory. Heb. 10.36. 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. 1 Pet. 5.10. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Yea, and

Encour. 4. All the assurances given us of the certain fulfilling of what is
said herein; certifying us that we shall not perish but have Eternal life; in
such believing are strong Encouragements to us worthy to be minded by us. As to
say

1. We have Gods promise for it. God, that cannot lie, has promised Eternal
life to the believer, Tit. 1.2. 1 John 2.24, 25. And faithful is he that has
promised, and he will perform it, Heb. 10.23. And if we would trust an honest
man upon his word or promise, may we not much more trust God?

2. We have the oath of God. That by two immutable things, in which it is not
possible that God should lie, [namely his promise and his oath] we might have
strong consolation, that flee for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us;
seeing therein appears the immutability of his counsel. Heb. 6. 17, 18. By my
self have I sworn (says the Lord to Abraham, and in him to his seed, them that
are Christ's, Gal. 3.29) that in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying
I will multiply thee, Genesis 22.16. Heb. 6.13. And if we believe men upon their
solemn oaths, shall we not much more believe God, when to confirm our faith he
adds his oath to his promise, engaging himself thereby to the performance.

3. We have manifold evidences of Gods truth, and the truth of his Word, in
which these things are covenanted and promised: all that evidences Gods truth
and faithfulness in making good his words, increases this assurance; and that is
much, as, the casting off the Jews for their Idolatry and unbelief, according
to what, or so far as, Moses and the Prophets long since fore-signified. Deuteronomy.
31.17, 18. and 32.21, 22. and 30.1. with Romans 9, and 10, and 11.11. The calling
and bringing in us Gentiles to be his people, which was prophesied off long
before, while we were all worshippers of Idols and Devils. Yet God has made
good this against all appearing probability; even then, when that one Nation
that had the Oracles of God, and boasted themselves to be his people, and to
have him for their God, and he a greater God than all the gods of the Gentiles;
was for their sins rejected, so as to have their City sacked and burnt, their
Land laid wast, their people destroyed by famine, pestilence, sword, and led
captive into all lands, and that by those who opposed the Lord, his word, and
ways; and were ready to attribute all their successes to the strength of their
Gods or Idols, and the ruin of their enemies to the weakness of their God.
Judge. 16.23, 24. 2 King. 18.33. and 19.22. Yet even then by the preaching of
the Apostles, a few despised persons, he got himself the victory over them, and
brought in the Gentiles against all the malice of the Devils and their
worshippers to confess him and his oracles the holy Scriptures. Many other
things might be noted to confirm the truth of the Scriptures; as, (but I shall
note it as another ground.)

4. The raising up Jesus, and so sending us his own Son, his only begotten
(according to the promises and prophecies that fore-went of him) to be our
Savior, the light to lighten us Gentiles, and to be his salvation to the ends
of the earth, Act. 13.32, 47. and 26.22, 23. with Isai. 42.1, 6. and 49.6, 7,
8. And he was discovered to be the Son of God, by the testimony of the
Scriptures of the Prophets, by his own miracles and doctrine, by the voice of
God, and by the Spirit of holiness in the resurrection from the dead. Joh.
5.36, 37, 39, and 20.31. Romans 1.3, 4. He, as given of God for us, and giving
himself to be the ransom of our souls, the propitiation for our sins; the
peacemaker and reconciler of us to God, is an evident witness and assurance of
the love and faithfulness of God to us; and that in our believing on him, he
will be to us the Author of eternal salvation, and everlasting life. Isai.
55.4. 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 5.7.9. Having not spared his own Son, but delivered him
up to death for us all. How shall not he with him freely give us all things?
Rom, 8, 32.

5. The holy Spirit given us, as an earnest of the inheritance; both as gifting
the Apostles and believers at first with extraordinary and most useful gifts;
inabling them to work miracles, wonders and signs (according to the
fore-sayings of the holy Prophets, Joel 2.28, 29) in the name of Jesus;
witnessing therein to him, and to the truth of his doctrine; and also as
inlighting the mind, renewing the heart, and assuring the conscience, by his
divine and heavenly operations (in which we have included those three witnesses
on earth, mentioned in 1 John 5.7, 8. The Spirit inlightning and gifting, the
water washing and cleansing and the blood p^^ging and pacifying, and so the
spirit by all assuring the conscience) give assurance of Gods truth and
faithfulness in making good his promises for saving the believer from
perishing, and giving him Eternal life.

Having therefore such motives and encouragements to believe, and such
assurances of welfare therein. How should we not be strengthened to believe on
him, and to follow on to believe yet more and more strongly against all
temptations and oppositions; using all means with diligence that may strengthen
us hereunto? As,

Direction 1. Mind we, and take heed to the word of faith. The Gospel, which as
it is the word of faith, and the means of believing on him at first. So it is
the means too, to nourish and strengthen the believing on him. The power of God
to salvation, to them that do believe, to save them from falling from their
faith, Romans 1.16, 1 Pet. 1.5. The nourishing doctrine and useful for growth,
as well as the seed of divine regeneration. 1 Pet. 1.23. with 2.2. 1 Timothy 4.6.
Taking heed thereto. Let us also

Direct. 2. Observe and wait upon God in his Ordinances annexed to, and for the
furtherance of the Gospel, wherein the Lord and the grace preached in him, are
witnessed and preached to us, and to be sought for of us; and which areas seals
and assurances also from God, some of them of his truth and faithfulness. Thus
the disciples are to be taught to observe all things commanded of Christ to his
Apostles, Matthew. 28.20. And the Apostle mentioning the prevalency of the spirit
of delusion upon the unbelievers or turners from the faith exhorts the
believers to stand fast and to hold the traditions which they had been taught
either by word, or by Epistle. Such as the Ordinance of the Supper, in which
the Apostle delivered to them what he had received of the Lord. 1 Cor. 11.23.
And the assembling of themselves together. Heb. 10.25, etc. as ways wherein
they might wait upon God, to preserve them from the like evil falls, and the
influences of such delusions, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12, 15. with, and in all crying
and praying to the Lord to maintain and increase our faith. Luke 17.5. Yea, and

Direct. 3. In all, look we diligently to, and upon, and so consider Jesus as
lifted up in the Gospel and it is Ordinances; like as the Brazen Serpent was by
Moses upon the Pole; that so in beholding the fullness of grace and truth in
him, the love wherewith he has loved us, and which he has testified to all,
and more especially to those that are his disciples and followers; the promises
promised in him, with his ability and faithfulness to obtain them for us and
bring about the accomplishment of them to us, and his engagement to do all for,
and in, and unto such as depend upon him, and his sufficiency for it, and
faithfulness showed already both to his Father and to us in his sufferings and
sacrifice, we may be encouraged and strengthened to hold fast and go on in
believing on him, Heb. 3.1, 2, and 12.1, 2. So the Apostles set him before
believers, to confirm and strengthen them in believing on him, Col. 2.2, 3, 9,
10, 1 John 5.11, 12, 13. And to that purpose, is the whole Epistle to the
Hebrews, and other places.

Direct. 4. Yield we up our selves to the teachings and operations of his grace
and spirit in us; To turn at his reproofs, and walk in his ways; in the
exercise of our selves, in all sobriety, righteousness and godliness in this
present World looking for the blessed hope; for to be spiritually minded (or
the minding of the spirit) is life and peace, Romans 8.6. And he the sows to
the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. Therefore let us not be
weary of well doing, for in due time we shall reap if we faint not, Gal. 6, 7,
8, 9.

CHAP XVI.
Some further usefulness of the said Observations in Cautions, and Instructions.



1. To take heed lest there be in any of us an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God; but rather (as a way to prevent it) to exhort
one another, while it is called to day: and so also to encourage one another,
Least any of us be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3.12, 13. And
let us take this heed both every one for himself, and all of us for one
another. Love to our selves may lead us to the former, and Charity to others
will lead us to the latter. For the former of these, it is needful to mind what
has been said above in the motives and encouragements to believe, and the
means to be used for helpfulness therein. To which I shall add

1. Take heed to the things heard in the Gospel, Lest at any time we let them
slip, and grow forgetful of them. For the forgetfulness of God and Christ, and
of the things said of, and by them, lead to withdraw from them, and so to
neglect and fail of his salvation. Heb. 2.1, 3. Thus it is noted that Isreal's
forgetfulness of God, and of his word and works ushered in their Apostasy from
him; as is employed Psalm. 106.12, 13. Where, after they are said to have
believed his word, and sung his praises. It follows, That they soon forgot his
works, and waited not for his counsels, as the inlet to their Apostasy, and
their afterward not believing in him for his salvation. See the same employed,
Deuteronomy. 32.15, 18. Whereas, the keeping in mind what, and how we have heard in
the Gospel, is the way to be saved and preserved by it in the faith, if we have
heartily believed, and not in vain. ^ Cor. 15.1, 2, 3. Be we not therefore
forgetful hearers of his word (in which also his mighty and famous works are
remembered and recorded) but doers of it, not deceiving our own souls. Jam.
1.22, 24. And to that purpose also

2. Take heed of forsaking the assemblings of our selves together to exhort and
speak to one another, and so to hear and be minded of the name of the Lord.
Heb. 10.24, 25 with 3.13. Mal. 3.16. And so to use and wait upon God in his
Ordinances and appointments, delivered to us to exercise our selves in, as
before was signified. 2 These. 2, 15.

3. Take heed of high mindedness, and conceits of our being so sure as that we
cannot miscarry, and God may not cast us off, or harden us, though we walk
never so carelessly. Be not highminded but fear, beholding the goodness and
severity of God, to them that fell severely, and to them that believe,
goodness, if they continue in his goodness; otherwise they also shall be
broken off. Romans 11.20, 21, 22. Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty
mind before a fall. Prove. 16.18, 19. The conceiting our selves rich, and
increased with goods, and wanting nothing, lays us open to luke-warmness and
laziness; and slothfulness casts into a deep sleep, etc. Rev. 3.13, 14, 15, 16.
Prove. 19.15.

4. Take heed of false Prophets, and Deceivers, that confess not Jesus Christ
come in the flesh; but pretending to teach us higher things, and to lead us
into a higher safer condition, than in only depending and believing on Christ
and on God in him: and so into more equality with God and Christ undermine the
simplicity in Christ Jesus, and seduce therefrom, by enticing words, as the
Serpent did Evah from her obedience. For many that way have been corrupted from
the faith, while they have been made to believe they could not be corrupted, at
least so as to a total and final falling therefrom. Mat. 7.15, 16, and 24, 4,
5.24, 25. 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. Col. 2.4.8.16.18, 1 John 2.18, 19. 2 John 7, 8, 9,
10. 2 Timothy 2.18.

5. Take heed of the World, and of the love of it: for that, if loved, will
choke the seed of the word, and steal out the love of God from the heart, and
lead us to fall away from Christ. 1 John 2.15, 16, 17. Matthew. 13.22. Luke
21.34, 35, 36.

6. Take heed of indulging any corruption, and walking after the flesh in any
of it is lusts or affections. For to be carnally minded is death, and deads the
heart to Christ, and the things of Christ. And therefore, If believers walk
after the flesh, they will dye. Romans 8.6.13.

7. Take heed of too earnest eying or looking upon discouragements; as our
sinfulness, ignorance, weakness, witheredness, unfruitfulnesse, the troubles of
this World, Gods corrections, and the like; with a neglect of minding the help
in Christ for us, and the encouragements there-against. But casting away every
weight, and the sin that easily bes^ts; let us run with patience the race set
before us. Looking off from other things unto Jesus, and considering him who
endured such contradictions of sinners, least we be weary, and faint in our
minds. Heb. 12.1, 2.3. But for this, see more in my Balaams Wish. Page 89.90,
91. And in the Penitent Prodigal, or Gods Gracious Reproof. Page 209. 210.

And indeed that Universal Particle whosoever, here used in the Text: when he
says, that Whosoever believes might not perish, but have eternal life, is of
singular usefulness to be considered against such discouragement, and the
temptations thence to withdraw from Christ, and from dependence on and
confidence in him; for it takes away all respect of persons, and signifies
Christ's impartiality, and his irrespectiveness to any other thing than what is
contained in the believing on him, in his saving from perishing and giving life
eternal. Suitable to that saying of the Apostle, Now perceive I of a truth,
that God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation, he that fears God
and works righteousness is accepted of him: with which agrees Romans 2.6.11.
and 3.22, 23, 24, 25. Gal. 3.27, 28. God has opened a door of life and
righteousness in Christ for all men; and all the earth are invited by him to
enter it; and whosoever duly enters it, finds entertainment. Psalm. 100.1.4.
Ioh. 6.37. If any man who, or whatsoever believe on, that is, accept of, submit
to, and depend on Christ; it is no matter what he is otherwise in himself,
whether great or small, old or young, Jew or Gentle, greater or lesser sinner
before conversion to him. Yea, whether rich or poor, wise or foolish in respect
of natural parts, or wordly and humanely acquired science; whether exercised
with more or fewer temptations, more or less inclined naturally to any lust or
corruption, sinful affection or passion, more quick or dull of apprehension, in
a word, what ever a man be in, and of himself, or after the flesh, that is not
considerable, as causing or hindering his acceptance with God, provided that he
believe on Christ with such a believing or exercise of faith in him, as in
which he is kept in obedience to him, so as not to walk after the flesh, but
after the spirit It Is not considerable here what a man was or what he did, how
he walked or lived before he came to, and closed with Christ. For neither for
his better walking, then is he more acceptable now, his righteousness then
being such as could not justify him in whole, or in part, nor his worser
walking then, makes him less accepted now; his former unrighteousness being not
at all now mentioned against him. For it is wholly forgiven and blotted out in
his coming into Christ, and heartily closing with, and believing on him. Nay,
no former failings or falls after the hearing of, or believing on Christ
(though hindering and disturbing a man's rest and peace for the time, and
procuring chastisements, yea, depriving of much good to a man's self, and
usefulness to others, while continued in, yet) being seen, confessed repented
of, and turned from, to the believing in, and exercise of faith in Christ
again, shall hinder his salvation, and the enjoyment of eternal life by and
through him; it being the good will of God, That whosoever believes on him
(yea, though sometimes he has not believed, or has failed or turned aside out
of the way of believing on him) should not perish, but have Eternal life. To
this agrees that of Samuel to Israel, when they had many ways sinned against
him, after he had made them his people; and had to all other their former sins
added that sin of rejecting not only Samuel from being their Judge and
Governor, But God himself also from being their King. Though (says he) ye
have done all this wickedness, yet turn not aside from following the Lord --
For the Lord will not forsake his people (any that still own and follow after
him, seeking forgiveness, mercy, and blessing of him only) for his great names
sake; because it has pleased the Lord to make you his people. 1 Samuel 12.19,
20, 21, 22. To the same purpose also the Apostle John. 1 John 1.9. If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness. And, If any man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father Jesus Christ the just (or righteous one) who is the
propitiation for our sins, and for the sins of the whole World. 1 Ioh. 2.1, 2.
Not as encouraging any man to sin, but as preventing men's sinning, and the
worst and most destructive way of their sinning; namely, in departing from
Christ, and from atten^ing to, and believing on him for salvation; because they
find sin in them warring against them: yea, or because not duly watching and
warring against it, they have actually sinned and defiled themselves thereby,
and made their case such, as that they stand in greater need of his mercy and
salvation. Remember we this then, that it is the gracious end of God in sending
Christ, delivering him to death, and raising him up again from the dead, and
exalting and glorifying him; and the great undertaking and buisinesse of
Christ. The great end unto which he dyed, and unto which he now ever lives;
that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Look we not therefore upon our selves to see what we are (as thinking to gather
encouragement to hope from what we are) in our selves out of him or without
him, or as discouraging our selves by po^ing upon our selves, and the evils in
us or befalling us, but mind we only Jesus Christ in all conditions, as the
only needful and perfect way and mean to all true rest and happiness; as
without whom the best are too bad to be saved from wrath and admitted into the
Kingdom of God; There being no other name given under heaven, either of thing
or person, whereby we must be saved, but only his. Act 4.11.12. and in, and by
whom the poorest, and meanest, sinfulness, and unworthi^est may and shall be
saved, believing on him. And indeed, this Phrase, That whosoever believes on
him may or should not perish, etc. Shows both a necessity for the best to
believe on him, as implying, that none is sufficient to keep himself from hell
and destruction, or to climb and ascend up to heaven and happiness; but need
to be saved from the one, and advanced to the other by him, in taking heed to,
leaving and relying on him; and so only, and no other way the wisest,
strongest, and most righteous (even by his wisdom, righteousness, mercy and
grace) may be saved: and also, that by him, the worst and unworthiest believing
on him may be saved and live (such the sufficiency and perfection of grace that
is in him) through his sufferings, sacrifice and mediation. Therefore I say,
neither are we to lift up our selves in our selves, or in any thing of or after
the flesh, to the neglecting him, as if we were therein or therefore Lords, and
need not come or be beholden unto him; or as if we had less need of living in,
or depending on him, nor yet so to grieve over or discourage our selves by our
unworthiness, or any poverty or sinfulness in, or of our selves, as if the
grace in him was too scant^y to help or save us. But knowing his sufficiency
for all, and freeness and openness to all cleave we with purpose of heart to
him, believing on him, and not fearing. But again,

2. From the description given in the former Observation of this believing on
the Son of man, we may further admonish and be admonished. To take heed of
resting in a false and pretended believing on him, which is not indeed and in
truth the believing on him here signified. A man may think himself to be
something therein, when he is nothing, and so deceive himself. And many so
deceive themselves (the heart being deceitful above all things.)

1. By taking an external profession of the faith, or of believing in God, and
on Jesus Christ his Son, for a real and hearty believing on him. Many profess
themselves to know God, who yet indeed deny him. And many profess to believe
on Jesus Christ, who yet in their lives proclaim that they neither know him,
nor regard him, much less have their faith in, and dependence on him. Tit.
1.16. Not every one that says to, or of Christ, Lord, Lord, is such a one as
believes on him so as to be saved from perishing, and to have or obtain eternal
life, or enter into Gods Kingdom. But they that do the will of God that sent
him; that so believe the Testimony of God concerning, him as indeed to receive
him for their Lord, and depend on, and obey him. Matthew. 7.21, 22. Many this way
deceive themselves indeed no evil liver, no fornicator, no blasphemer, no
drunkard, no coveteous person, or the like, believe on Jesus Christ; however
they may say, They believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and
Earth, and in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, for if they did, they might
have eternal life, and so enter Gods Kingdom; whereas the Scripture says, and
often assures us, that no such ill liver shall do so. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal.
5.19, 20, 21. Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5, 6. Rev. 21.8 and 22.15.

2. By taking every such profession of the faith of him, and of believing on
him, as in which men preach and profess him, and find some good effects follow
thereupon among men, to be the believing on him here spoken of. Whereas, many
shall say in that day, when Christ comes, Have we not preached in thy name, and
in thy name cast out devils, and done many wonderful works? To whom yet Christ
shall say and profess, I never knew you, depart from me ye workers of
iniquity. Matthew. 7.22, 23. Many may see and say many excellent things of him,
as Balaam did of Israel, and do many things in his name, as Judas did, and yet
not be believers on him, because not obeyers and followers of his heavenly
Counsels and instructions.

3. By taking any zealous way of profession of Religion and care to perform and
practice duties for a believing on Christ; whereas there may be much zeal and
strictness in profession, and for performing duties, when yet Christ is not
known or understood, and his grace not perceived or received, but opposed; much
less lived and depended on; but the life of men's own hands found and lived
upon. As it is said, Isai. 57.10. As the Jews who were Zealous for the
Ordinances of Moses, and the external and and lighter matters of the law, were
yet ignorant of and neglected faith, judgment, mercy and the love of God, and
such like greater and weightier matters of the Law. Matthew. 23.23. Luke 11.42.
So may it be, and is with many Christians by profession. Many of them that are
strict and zealous for outward Observations, Ordinances, Fastings, Prayers,
Walkings, Sabbaths; Yea (as Paul in his Pharaisisme was) blamelesness of
conversation in things commanded for matter of practice among men, and in
Religious exercises; yet are void of the true knowledge and faith of Christ,
and the great things of his grace, so as not to live thereupon. Many in whom
their zeal, and frames and works spring not from faith in Christ, but from
other principles, as a desire to be saved, with a thought that they must be so
upon the merit or account of their own good works, as is to be seen among many
Papists and others: and such may be said to be of works, rather then of faith,
and so far from being heirs of eternal life, that they are under the curse,
Gal. 3.10, 11, 12. Romans 4.4.

4. By taking a faith or dependence partly on Christ, and partly on other
things or objects joined with Christ, as grounds of their hope and confidence
to be this believing on him, to which the promise is made, as Christ and the
Law; Christ and the Pope, or other men, Christ and riches, Christ and our own
wisdom and policy, etc. Thus was it with the Galathians in their perverted
state, they joined Moses and Christ together, law and faith together, as the
ground of their hope, and expectation. Gal. 1.6.7. and 3.2, 3. and 4.9, 10, 11.
And such is the evil of men when they make their own righteousness good frames
and doings a ground of their confidence with Christ, and not Christ only the
root and spring of all their goodness, and ground of their confidence. And so
it is an evil of like nature to trust in uncertain riches; the friendship of
this World, the authority and power of man or our own policies (yea its a sin
when but for a comfortable livelihood or subsistence here) withdrawing from, o^
not singly depending on Christ, and God in him. 1 Timothy 6.17. Ier. 9.23, 24.
Psalm. 62.9, 10. and 146.3, 4. Prove. 3.5.

5. In a word, by taking any relyance on God and Christ, wherein the heart is
not from the belief of Gods testimony carried up to Christ, and God in Christ
to depend on him and to be guided and governed by him, to be that believing on
him. Such a relyance and staying upon God without that dependence on, and
submission for guidance to him, the Prophets sometimes tax Israel with as a
false and deceitful trust and confidence. Isai. 48.1. Mich. 3.10, 11. Ier. 7.4,
5, etc. And all such relyance is false, though it look back to what God has
done in and by Christ formerly; or to any present testimony of his mercy and
goodness, which lead to love, and submit to him as well as, (and not without
them) to expect help from him. For this believing on the Son of man is a single
hearty belief of Gods Testimony concerning Christ so, as to like, come and seek
to, rest and depend upon him, as the sole, full, complete, and perfect Savior
in all things, and in all cases and conditions, in listening to, and obeying
him in his wholesome counsels and instructions; and as the full ground and
foundation of our expectation of Gods help and salvation in such a way of
obeying him. And so He and He only, and upon his own account (that is upon
account of what He is, has done, is doing^ and is become with God for us, and
is made of God to us) is to be believed on.

1. For all forgiveness, pardon of sin, and justification therefrom; as it is
said, Through this man is preached to you the forgiveness of sins; and by him
all that believe are justified from all things from which they could not be
justified by the law of Moses, Act. 13* 38, 39. And he is set forth for a
propitiatory through faith in his blood for the remission of sins that are
past, through the forbearance of God. Romans 3.25. and being justified through
his blood; much more shall we be saved from wrath. Chap. 5.9. And in him we
have redemption through his blood the forgiveness of our sins. Ephesians. 1.7. Col.
1.14.

2. For all acceptance with God in our access to, and service of him as also
all our liberty thereto we have through him. He has made us accepted in his
beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. And having liberty or boldness to the holy of holies by the
blood of Jesus, by a new living way which he has consecrated through the vail
his flesh, and having an High Priest over the House of God. Let us draw nigh
with true hearts and full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from
an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water let us draw nigh, as
believing our welcome, and with full assurance of faith, as in respect of the
truth of the faith believed; so also in respect of confident expectation of
acceptance, coming with such truth of heart, sprinkling of conscience, and
washing of our body as grace requires and works. Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22. And
so, our Spiritual sacrifices are acceptable through Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 2.5.
For Christ is made to us of God righteousness. 1 Cor. 1.30.

3. For all spiritual blessings in heavenly things for our comfortable and
acceptable walking with God here in this life, and usefulness toward men. As
for instance.

1. For all light and knowledge of God, and understanding in all things. He
being come a light into the World, that whosoever believes on him might not
walk in darkness, but see the light of life. Joh. 8.12. and 12.46. Psalm. 34.5.
He will teach us his ways. Isa. 2.3.

2. For all wisdom, for making a right and profitable construction and use of
Gods truths and providence, and for choosing the good and refusing the evil:
and ordering our conversations aright before him and toward others, improving
all providence, mercies, chastisements and occurrences to the right and best
advantage, and acting wisely in all things. Jam. 1.5. Col. 4.3. and 2, 3. Psalm.
144.1. He being made of God wisdom to us. 1 Cor. 1.30.

3. For all sanctification and holiness. The subduing of corruptions, renewing
of our minds, hearts and spirits; and conforming us unto God. Christ is made
unto us of God, holiness, or sanctification. 1 Cor. 1.30. Ye are sanctified in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the spirit of our God. 1 Cor. 6.11.
Sanctified by the faith that is me, said Christ. Act. 26.18.

4. For all strength to walk with God and in his ways, against all
discouragements and difficulties; and to bear and endure all troubles and
exercises that he orders to us. I am able to do all things through Christ, that
strengthens me. Phil. 4.13. He shall strengthen them in the Lord, and they
shall walk up and down in his name. Zach. 10.12. Be strong in the grace that is
in Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy 2.1. who is made unto us of God redemption.

5. For all peace of conscience, and quiet of mind and spirit, He is our peace.
Ephesians. 2.24. and being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 5.1. And these things have I spoken, says Christ, that
in me ye might have peace. Joh. 16.33.

6. For all joy and consolation in our hearts and spirits from, and in God.
That ye may be filled with joy and peace in believing. Romans 15.13. By Christ we
have access into the grace of God, in which we stand and rejoice in hope of
the glory of God. Yea, we joy also in tribulations -- and not only so, but we
joy also in God through Jesus Christ, by whom also we have received the
atonement. Romans 5.2.3.11. And so.

7. For all hope in, and confidence toward God, and for the performances of his
gracious promises. Thence he is called our hope. 1 Timothy 1.1. Jesus Christ our
hope, and Christ in you the hope of Glory. Col. 1.27. in believing -- ye may be
filled with hope through the power of the Holy Ghost Romans 15.13.

8. For all useful gifts by which we may be fitted to be useful and profitable
in our Generation, in that place, of the body of Christ, in which he sets us:
For it is he who being ascended up on high, gives gifts unto men, distributing
to every one according as he will. Ephesians. 4.7, 8, 11.

4. For all supplies also of outward mercies, necessary for our present
subsistence here, so as we may seek after, wait upon, and walk with God
cheerfully and comfortably, and be useful to and among men. My God will supply
all your needs according to the riches of his glory by Jesus Christ. Philip
4.19. All the promises of God are in Christ, yea, and in him Amen, to the glory
of God. 2 Cor. 1.20. And the promises of God are some of them, for the life
that now is. 1 Timothy 4.8. Therefore the living God is to be trusted in through
Jesus Christ, and upon his account for all things, which he knows needful for
us in this life also, and not uncertain riches, 1 Timothy 6.17, 19. Whether food,
raiment, counsel, courage, health, friends, or what else he may see good for
us; with submission to his wisdom and will; and so,

5. For outward defense and safety, in our ways and services; not coveting
after, or trusting in man's friendship and defense. Psalm. 146.3, 4, 5, 6. So
Ezra was ashamed to ask a Guard of the King to secure him in his way to
Jerusalem, but sought it of God; having said to the King, That the hand of the
Lord is for good to and with them that seek him; but his power and wrath
against them that forsake htu^. Ezra 8.22. And Christ sending out his Apostles,
encouraged them to believe on him for safety in his work, telling them; All
power in Heaven and Earth is given unto me; and lo, I am always with you to the
end of the world. Mat. 28.18, 20. Let our conversation therefore be without
covetousness, and be we content with such things (such things for defense and
protection also) as we have; for he has said, I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee; so that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, I will not
fear. etc. Heb. 13.5.6.

6. For Eternal Life, the receiving our Spirits in death. Acts 7.59. Psalm.
31.4, 5. The resurrection of our bodies from the death, when he appears in
glory. John 11.25, 26, and 5.28, 29. 1 Cor. 6.14. and 15.21, 22. The glory then
to be revealed and enjoyed. Col. 3.4. 1 These. 4.15, 16. Romans 5.2. Thence he is
in the believers the hope (the ground of their hope) of Glory. Col. 1.27.

And where he is so looked to and depended on for all these things, and in a
word, for all grace and glory; that in the looking to and depending on him, the
heart and life is yielded up to him to be ordered, directed and framed by him
according to his Word and Will, through the grace brought to us by him, there
the believing is right, and such as has the promise, and shall have the
performance of Gods salvation from perishing, and of Eternal Life. And great
care is to be taken herein, that we be not deceived with a pretense of
Religion, wherein yet the heart is going after, and relying on, or hoping in
other Objects instead of Christ, and God in him, or upon other accounts then of
the grace in him, or the heart and life is not yielded up to be ordered by him.
And surely if in worldly things men are careful not to be paid with Copper
instead of Silver and Gold, or to have their Bags filled with Counters instead
of current money; and that they have not false and counterfeit Deeds and
Conveyances instead of what is good and valid in the Law, for their Estates.
How much more should we be careful in the matters of our Souls, that we content
not our selves with a faith or believing, that is not aright, a believing in
vain instead of a real unfeigned believing on Jesus Christ, the Son of man,
and the Son of God. Now that we may believe on the Son of man, as the
Scriptures have said, and as they approve, and so be preserved from perishing
and obtain eternal life the son of man must be lifted up. And so we come to

CHAP. XVII.
The Sixth and last Observation, proposed and spoken to in certain Conclusions,
the first of which, in two branches shows the necessity of Gods lifting up
Christ in himself, both as to men's believing on him, and as to their being
saved and living for ever by him.

Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness.

How that was, we have in some measure seen, and by whom He is, and is to be so
lifted up, that which remains here to be considered, is, that it is necessary
and behoveful that he be so lifted up both with reference to men's believing on
him as the next end of it: and with reference to their not perishing, but
having eternal life who believe on him and in their believing on him; which is
the last and Ultimate end, and to demonstrate this, I shall briefly lay down
and prove two or three conclusions.

Conclusion 1. That the lifting him up both by men upon the cross, as ordered
of God, and by God himself in his uniting the nature of man in him to the
eternal word and his calling him forth to, upholding him in, raising him out
of, and rewarding and glorifying him at his right hand after his sufferings was
of absolute necessity both as to men's believing on him; and as to their being
saved from perishing, and having life eternal, in believing on him. In which
conclusion be two branches:

Branch. 1. That this lifting him up was necessary to men's believing on him,
and that is clear, because otherwise he could not have been an Object to be
believed on, for any of those things which we need, in order to our salvation
and ever-living. For

1. Had he not been made one with the Word, the seed of David made the Son of
God, he had been but a Creature, and so not meet to be believed on with a
divine faith or dependence on him, either for procuring for us, or conferring
on us the things pertaining to salvation and eternal life, no mere creature
being so to be believed on by us, or able to save us; nor had he been such a
one as had answered the prophesies foregoing, concerning the person in whom we
are directed to have our trust, For he in the prophesies is described to be the
Son of God. I will declaree the decree, the Lord has said unto me, thou art my
Son; this day have begotten thee. Psalm. 2.6. And this Son is he of whom its is
said, Kiss the son lest he be angry, and blessed are all they that put their
trust in him. verse. 11, 12. The Son given, is He that is the mighty God. Isai.
9.6. and if he were not so, he should be looked upon but as a mere creature,
and so as a mere medium by whom and by which God extends his mercy and
goodness, and not as the extender and procurer of it; we are counseled and
sometimes people have been commended for believing the Prophets of the Lord,
who were but men endued with the spirit, or gifts of the spirit of the Lord. As
it is said, Believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper. 2 Chronicles. 20.20. And they
believed God and his servant Moses, Exodus 14.31. But not any where to believe
on any man that is a mere man, but always in or on the Lord Jehovah. As in the
same 2 Chronicles. 20.20. Where he says Believe his Prophets. He says, Believe in
(or on) the Lord your God, but not believe on his Prophets. And therefore if
Christ the Son of man were not also the Son of God, and God Jehovah, he were
not a lawful object to be believed in, or relied and depended on, for
procuring or conferring safety and eternal life; nay, nor for the mercies of
this life; much less those which are of that nature, that it is not possible for
any that is but a creature, to procure or confer. But we are bid and commanded
to believe on the son of man, Jesus Christ. Believe in God, believe also on me.
Joh. 14.1. And this is his commandment, that ye believe on the name of the
only begotten Son of God, etc. 1 John 3.23.

2 Had he not been lifted up by men upon the Cross as thereto appointed of God,
and so called forth to, and supported under his sufferings for us, he had still
not been an object to be believed on for life and salvation as the son of man,
because there could have been none in him for us, but we had been left under
the necessity of perishing for ever; the law of God being broken by us, and the
sentence and curse of it therethrough falling upon us, and we naked and open
thereunto. Under the Law, the figure of heavenly things, there was scarce any
thing purged but by blood, and without shedding of blood was no remission. Heb.
9.22. Shadowing and signifying the necessity of the death of a sacrifice for
our redemption from under the wrath of God, and for the remission of our sins.
But no sacrifice of the law could make an expiation, because of the weakness
and unprofitableness of them For it was not possible for the blood of Bulls and
Goats to take away sin; wherefore God rejected them, when it was said,
Sacrifice and Offerings thou would not have, but a body have thou prepared
for me. Heb. 5.6. Which was spoken prophetically of Christ the Son of God,
becoming the son of man; signifying the necessity and certainty of his being
made a sacrifice and shedding his precious blood for us, to make atonement for
us And indeed if our sins could have been purged or expiated, and redemption
obtained without the death of Christ for us, and his bearing, and therein and
thereby making satisfaction for our sins, then would his death and sufferings
be rendered vain and needless, which is horrible for us to think that God would
put his own and only begotten son to such agonies, sorrows and death without
need for them: as the Apostle implies, when he says, I do not frustrate the
grace of God; for if righteousness be by the law, then Christ dyed in vain,
that is needlessly. The end of his dying might have been brought about without
it. Gal. 2.21. Some rich man might have redeemed his brother by buying and
giving to God a multitude of those legal sacrifices for him, contrary to Psalm
49.6, 7, 8. Yea, and the Apostle by saying, if righteousness be by the law,
excludes righteousness by any other means than by the death of Christ. Taking
it for granted, that the law was the most absolute way for getting
righteousness, that ever was in the World, besides the death and sufferings of
Christ; it containing precepts and appointments ordered of God: and if that was
insufficient, surely all the riches and honors in the World could not procure
it; nor any doctrines or documents of the Philosophers or wise men of the
Gentiles, or of any people whatsoever; they being far short of God and his
wisdom, in appointing things pleasing in his sight; so that it follows that
there was a necessity of Christ's death, and of his being lifted up in such
sense as we showed before that he was exalted and lifted up therein; because
otherwise he could not have been an Object to be looked to, or believed on, for
salvation; because no salvation or redemption from death and curse, and by
consequence no eternal life, or lawful power to give it, could have been in
him but by his death and sufferings.

3. Necessary hereto also it was, that he should not himself perish in his
sufferings, as to his humanity, but be raised up again; otherwise he could be
no object still to be believed on for life and salvation. Because, had he not
risen again from the dead, but been lost and perished, therein he could not
have been as the Son of man in any capacity of helping us; nor could we have
been justified and acquitted from our sins by his sufferings; seeing his body
in which he bare our sins was the payment given to law and justice for them;
and had not that been raised, the debt had not been acknowledged as
sufficiently paid, or to have been sufficient to satisfy justice. Yea, he
being our Champion, had he perished in the conflict or combat, and not
returned Victor, we had all been routed: as it fared with the Philistines, when
Goliath was slain by David; or rather as it would have fared with Israel had
Goliath killed David. If Christ be not risen, preaching is vain; and our faith
is vain, we are yet in our sins. 1 Cor. 15.14.17. Nor could he as the Son of
man have been in a case to relieve or help us any further, much less to keep
us back from perishing and give us eternal life. For from a person dead, while
dead, what help can be expected?

4. Nor could he be an Object to be believed on, or we have had any ground to
believe on him for procuring for us further grace or dispensing it to us for
preserving us from perishing in the second death; or for directing and leading
us in the way to, or bringing us to the enjoyment of eternal life, if he had
been only raised to live as a private person, or in a mean condition as before
on the earth again, without being exalted to Gods right hand, and invested in
the nature of man, and as the Son of man with those Offices of the great
Prophet and Apostle, and High Priest of our profession; the great King of
Saints and Nations, and Lord of all creatures. If he had not been glorified
with the glory of God, and filled with his fullness. If he had been here on
earth still, he should not have been a Priest, seeing there were Priests that
offer gifts according to the Law. Heb. 8. Nor would the comforter have been
sent to his Apostles and servants, seeing it behooved him to present himself to
God as the perfect sacrifice, and become the great High Priest, even in the
Heavens themselves, appearing in the presence of God for us, and making
intercession for transgressors, and for all that come to God by him; that he
might purge the Heavens themselves from the effects and cries of our sins
there: and sprinkling the virtues of his precious blood there, in the presence
of God, make an atonement, and obtain and receive the holy spirit for us to
shed forth upon us, and to remove the guilt of our sins from before God, that
it might be dispensed to us to lead us into his truth. Joh. 16.7. and 14, 16,
17. Heb. 9.24, 25, 26. Act. 2.33. And so as the great Lord and King command
deliverances, honors and blessings to us, we could not have him as an Object
to look to, to forgive us our sins, to give us the holy spirit to support our
spirits, renew our natures, guide us to death, raise us up from death and give
us the Kingdom; if he were not empowered to do all these things, and all things
else for us, our faith in him for all these things would be otherwise in vain.
But now being in all things beforementioned lifted up; made the Son of God in
the nature of man, delivered up to death for our sins, as a ransom and
atonement for us; and therein supported and accepted, and therefrom raised and
revived, exalted to Gods right hand, and there glorified. He is a complete
Object of faith to be believed on; being every way able to help and save us.
One, who in his death and Resurrection has delivered us from perishing in the
first death or judgment for the first offense, and as exalted at Gods right
hand, able to save us also from the wrath to come, and so from the second
Death, (and so he will all that come to God by him) through his exercise of his
glorious Office of High Priest with God for us, and of his Prophetical and
Kingly Offices toward all men, and especially those that believe, and of his
Lordly authority over all Creatures in Heaven, Earth and Hell, for our behoof
and benefit, and to give Eternal Life to all of us that believe on him, being a
person also both willing and faithful, as his ready undertakings and sufferings
of such things for us, evince; and as his glorious Offices to such purposes put
upon him, and received by him in a sense enjoyne or require of him.

I might add hereto, that as all this exaltation, and lifting up of the Son of
Man, was necessary to render him an Object to be believed on: So was it also
necessary for the discovering him to be such an Object, which is necessary also
to the begetting belief on him; for God being true, and one that could not lie,
could not, nor would not have discovered that as an Object to be believed on
that were not such, his making peace was the ground as well as the matter of
his preaching, in preaching, Peace. Nor could there therefore have been any
sending forth of the Spirit with such a discovery, to enable and move to
believe it. His personal lifting up in those ways and particular, being the
foundation of all the rest; nothing of the rest could have been without that;
but I only hint it, and pass to the second Branch.

Branch 2. That his being so lifted up and exalted in those real Acts done to
himself, as is before mentioned, was necessary for his saving us from
perishing, and for his giving us Eternal Life in believing on him, and this is
evidenced both in what is said before in the fifth Observation about the way of
his saving us from perishing, and our having Eternal Life, and also in what is
said on the former Branch. And indeed this evinces it in general, and as to all
the particulars included therein, that that being Gods grand design in giving
him, as the next Verses show; [God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
Everlasting Life; for God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world,
but that the world through him mtght be saved] yea, and of his lifting him up,
as this Verse says, [That whosoever believes on him should not perish, but
have Eternal Life] it follows, that either these things before mentioned, were
necessary to be ordered and done to him to those ends, or else those ends might
have been otherwise brought about; and so they were ordered and done to him
needlessly, and in vain; which would impose upon the infinite wisdom or goodness
of God, and imply that which neither may be conceived, nor conceded or granted;
For if there had (says he) been a Law (and by consequence any other way) that
could have given life, doubtless Righteousness should have been by it. Gal.
3.21. But besides, that all these things were necessary to be ordered and done
to him for his saving us from perishing, and giving us Eternal Life, may be
seen also by induction.

For his being taken into unity of person in the Divine nature that was
necessary to his saving us from perishing in the first Death; for otherwise his
power and ability, his worth and excellency would have been too small to have
done and suffered what was needful for our Redemption therefrom, and for Gods
acceptance as sufficient thereunto. It was the work of an Infinite and
boundless strength, such as the finiteness of a Creature, or mere man could not
reach unto, to stand under, and bear upon himself the weight of man's Sin and
Death, and by bearing to overcome them, and to satisfy Gods justice for the
sin, and abolish the death, required a Sacrifice of an infinite merit and
worth, no mere man had either strength or worth enough for such a thing, not
strength to endure and overcome such agonies and death; nor worth to be taken
for a sufficient ransom or price of Redemption for all men, no nor for any one
man; for no man (that is but a man) can give to God a ransom for his Brother, a
price to God sufficient for him, that he may not see death. Psalm. 49.6, 7, 8.
But the Lord (Jehovah, He that is God also) will Redeem my Soul, says David,
from the hand or power of Hell, or of the Grave; for he will receive me, Verse
15. Nor can any mere man or Creature be able either to raise up the body out of
the first death and Grave, or to deliver or preserve us from the second death,
that we should not perish in that; for he that would preserve from that, must
have virtue in his Sacrifice, to take away by obtaining for us, and dispensing
to us the pardon of our following sins committed by us in our own proper
persons against the light and truth of God, and prevail with God for. Grace and
Spirit to be given to us, and give it to us too, to inlighten, inliven, and
raise from Spiritual death; discover the evil of sin, and the deceits of
Satan, so as to enable the Soul to see and avoid them, and obtain and give
grace for repenting of any such sins, and forgiveness of them thereupon, and
for renewing the Heart; yea, he must be able to deliver from the power of
Satan, and his policy, or else he cannot deliver from perishing, either from
the way to life, or in the second death in the end, as the issue of perishing
from the way. Much less can any mere Man or Creature be able to give to us, or
possess us of Eternal Life; because to that it is requisite, that the doer
thereof obtain for us, and give to us the Spirit of Life, and power from God to
quicken and enliven us to hope in, and love God, and there-through to be Holy
to God, and preserve in that holy state against all Oppositions and Enemies;
yea, and to raise the dead, and possess them of the everlasting Kingdom, and
the fullness of God, and of Divine joys and satisfactions therein, which be
works of Omnipotency, agreeable only to Divine Nature and Majesty.

2. For his being called forth to, and suffering death for us, the necessity
thereof we have seen before in order to our salvation. We must have perished in
the first Death and Judgment, had not he endured it, and given himself the
ransom for us; much less could he have offered up himself a spotless Sacrifice
through the Eternal Spirit, to make a purgation of our sins, and obtain Eternal
Redemption for the taking away the following sins, committed by us against the
Grace and Mercy of God, exercised toward us, and extended to us in our several
persons, and making reconciliation for us; nor could there have been an
improvement of his Sacrifice, by making intercession or mediation for preparing
us for, and bringing us to Eternal Life. Indeed there could have been no sins
of that nature last mentioned, and therefore nothing to save from them, nor any
Oblation or Offering of him self, had he not suffered for his offering himself,
supposes a suffering first. Heb. 9.24, 25, 26. And therefore without this, that
would have found no place; nor any thing that follows thereupon unto Eternal
Life; for which no Room had we perished in, and never been raised from the
first death

3. And without his Resurrection, neither had the Redemption from the first
Judgment been perfected; that Death had not been Abolished or Evacuated, and he
that had the power of it destroyed, nor the Resurrection from it obtained. Much
less could he have received in the Nature of man any power or authority to
meditate with God, and work in and with men, in order to the preserving the
Sinners from perishing, or for the obtaining and giving to any, or bringing
them to Eternal Life. These being the works of a living, not of a dead Person.

4. Nor could he have appeared for us as the great High Priest, in the presence
of God for us, in the Holy of Holies, upon the Mercy Seat and Cherubims of
Glory, set down on the Throne of Majesty on the right of God, unless he had
been Exalted with Gods Right Hand being raised again. And without that he could
not have sent forth the Holy Ghost, and given Gifts to men for making him
known; nor meditated with God for men, that their Sins might be forgiven, their
Consciences purged, their Hearts purified, and so they prepared and fited for,
and brought by him through the Resurrection of the Dead, and by his just Doom
and Award as the great Judge of all unto Eternal life.

Yea, in a word, seeing it is his being every way perfected through his
sufferings, and so being made the Author of eternal Salvation to all that obey
him, that renders him a meet Object to be believed on, and affords sufficient
ground thereto. That which was needful to render him an Object to be believed
on, must needs be understood also to have been needful or necessary to his
preserving from perishing, and giving eternal life to any: For if he be able to
preserve from perishing, and to give Eternal life without these things, then
would he also without these things be an Object meet to be for them believed
on. And so what was said on the former Branch, proves the truth of this also.

CHAP. XVIII.
Another Conclusion proving the necessity of his being Lifted up by way of
Demonstration to men, by God and men, both unto mens-believing on him, and
abiding in that believing.



This I shall speak to in two Branches, either of which is also evident and
manifest.

Branch 1. Necessary it is for men's believing, that he be so lifted up by way
of Demonstration, for necessary it is for men's believing on him that they know
him, and understand good ground and reason for believing on him. For Faith or
Believing is not only an Act of the Heart, and will closing with an Object,
coming to, seeking help of, and relying and trusting upon it for that help, but
also of the understanding. Such an Act of the Will aforesaid as proceeds and
springs from the Understanding, Discerning and Perceiving, good reason and
ground for what it does therein; as may be seen in what was Noted in the Acts,
and things included or contained in believing on him, and as may be seen in
what both the Prophet David says, in saying, They that know thy Name will
trust in thee, Psalm. 9.10. And in what our Lord Jesus Christ says, in John
6.44, 45. That no man can come to him (namely to seek and help, and Salvation
in and from him, believe in him, and depend on him for it) except the Father
that sent him draw him: And that that drawing is by the Fathers teaching, so as
that Whosoever hears and learns of him comes to Christ: For Hearing and
Learning of him, pertains to the right informing of the understanding in the
things Taught; as also in that its said, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing
is of the Word of God, Romans 10.17. Only here it is to be minded, that we speak
of Explicit Faith, or Actual Believing; and not of an Implicit Believing, or
of Gods gracious Imputation of Faith to Children, or the like, ^^cepting them
in their not Acting against, as if believing on him. For certain it is, that
the actual Faith that is by hearing, is such as proceeds from an information of
the Understanding, and so an apprehension of some good cause or reason to
Believe the thing informed of, and in or upon the Object commended to us in
such Information. Clear it is that no man believes on any thing, or Person,
for any help, or good to be received therefrom; unless he apprehend there is
Ability and Probability of finding help or good from it. Now no man can come to
or believe to find such great effects as preservation from Destruction, Misery
and Wrath, deserved by our sins, and threatened of God to us because of them,
and a being raised up from Death and Grave, to eternal Life and Happiness, from
an ordinary man, that nothing differs from another, but is in the same state of
Sin and Death; and of the same Infirmity and Impotency with others: Nor from an
ordinary Prophet, or good man, that is also and confesses himself a sinner,
and subject to like Passions with others, and standing in need of Gods
Salvation for himself as well as others; much less from any man appearing, and
traduced, and judged by others (and they also Persons of great Repute with men
for Wisdom and Piety) to be not only an ordinary man, but also a Worsman, or
greater Sinner than many other men. And yet so was the case with our Lord
Jesus, the Son of Man (in respect of these last Expressions) for he in his
appearance nothing differed from other men being born of a Woman, growing up by
degrees in Stature, Wisdom and Favor, as others, and subject to like
infirmities of Humane Nature, as Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, Sadness; and
therefore also Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, Resting himself as others; and so
found in Fashion as a Man, and in the Habit of Men, of other ordinary Men; nay,
below most men, being poor as to his Parentage, Education, and Enjoyments, not
having whereon to lay his Head, Mat. 8.20. Yea (though not confessing himself a
sinner personally yet) repreached, and traduced as a sinner, John 9.24. A
Wine-bibber, and a Glutton, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners. Mat. 11.19. A
Sabbath-breaker, a Samaritan, and one that had a Devil, and acted in his
extraordinary Miracles by the power of the Devil, John 5.16.18. and 8.48. and
9.16. Mat. 12.24. A Deceiver, and Seducer of the People, and a Blasphemer, Joh.
7.12. and 10.33. Mat. 27.63. And therefore impossible it was that any man
should come to him, and believe on him, for so great things as Salvation from
Sin and Wrath, and for Eternal life, unless he was some way lifted up and
commended as a Person far beyond and above that outward Appearance and Opinion
of him. Nor however he might be lifted up and commended to men by either Spirit
or men, yet unless those commendations of him should be true, though they might
beget a believing on him (for even such as have been indeed Deceivers and false
Christ's, have through some false Prophets commendations of them, or their own
pretensions and boastings of themselves, been believed on by men, as is implied
also, Mat. 24.5.23, 24. John 5.43.) yet the believing on him in such case,
could neither be Divine nor profitable to Salvation. But here the commendations
necessary to beget a right and Divine believing on him, and to nourish it, are
and must be true, and those effects are worthily expectable from him, as we
have seen in the former Proposition and Conclusion. And it was necessary that
such commendations should be given him by such as rightly knew him (for none
other could indeed rightly commend him) and none knew him fully but God his
Father (as it is said, No man knows the Son, but the Father, Mat. 11.27.) And
his holy Spirit which searches all things, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor.
2.10, 11. And himself, who knew whence and what he was, John 8.14. And
therefore it was necessary, that these in the first place should exalt and lift
him up by their Testimony, and Witness of him unto men. And so (as we see
before) the Father bears Witness to him, John 5.32.36, 37. And he Testified of
himself, John 8.14.18. And the Spirit bears Witness of him, both in the
Scriptures, John 5.39. and by and in his miraculous Gifts and Operations, and
the mouths of his Messengers and Instruments, by whom he chose to speak, John
15.26, 27. and 16.13, 14, 15. Heb. 2.4. 1 John 5.6. It was necessary, I say,
that by these he should be Demonstrated and Lifted up above what he otherwise
appeared to be, and above what men of themselves apprehended him to be; and all
that have apprehended or do apprehend of him aright, are and have been begotten
and brought to those right apprehensions of him, by the Testimony of Gods
divine Teaching. Whence it is said to Peter, confessing him to be The Christ,
the Son of the Living God, Flesh and Blood has not revealed this unto thee,
but my Father that is in Heaven, Mat. 16.17. And to the Jews, murmuring at him,
No man can come to me, except the Father which has set me draw him. And to the
Disciples, No man can come to me, except it be given him of my Father, John
6.44.65. Which Gift is given in and by his Teaching and Demonstrating him,
Verse. 45. And, No man can say (that is knowingly and heartily say) that Jesus
is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. But forasmuch as God is
pleased ordinarily to Speak by men (his immediate and audible speaking after
the manner of God, being unbearable to men) to which purpose he has Revealed
himself to men, by Dreams, Visions, Angels, and by his Word ordered by such
ways to men, whereby he made them Wise men and Prophets; and last of all by his
only Son made the Son of man, has given forth his Word, and the knowledge of
it, and the Holy Spirit with it, to open it to them, and fit them to declare it
to others; therefore as such ways of giving forth his Word, and the knowledge of
Christ to men was needful and necessary for Lifting him (the Son of man) up,
that they might believe on him: So also the Witnessings and Declarations of
such men, that by Christ and his Spirit, and by such other Ways and Means as
God formerly made use of, were fitted for it, were necessary for the holding
him forth, Commending and Lifting him up to other men among whom they are, and
to whom God sent them; and so it was necessary there should be the Ministry of
men, even of the Prophets and Apostles, to Commend and Lift him up to men: And
they being Dead and gone, though their Words as to the main and substance of
them be left still with us, in which they have Lifted up, Praised, and
Commended him in their faithful Declarations and Expressions, of what by Divine
Inspirations and Teachings concerning him they knew, and those their
Declarations are needful to be minded by us. Yet forasmuch as all cannot Read
their Writings left to Posterity, nor all that do Read them, do know or
understand them, or what is said or signified in them; therefore needful it is,
not only that some men should be helped to Read, but also that some by the help
of Gods Spirit (which is the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, or Revelation
in the knowledge of Christ, and opens his Words and gives understanding, Job
32.8. Ephesians. 1.18, 19. Prove. 1.23.) in such means as he is pleased to make use
of, and breath in, should be helped to understand them, and be gifted to
declare their understanding of them, and the knowledge of him according to them
to other men, that they also may hear and believe on him through the help of
the same holy Spirit, going along with the Instructions given them. And so he
being ascended on high, gave Gifts to men, and he has given, as some Apostles,
some Prophets; so also some Evangelists, or Gospel Preachers, some Pastors and
Teachers, for perfecting the Saints for the work of the Ministry, for the
Edifying the Body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and
acknowledgment of the Son of God to a perfect man, etc. Ephesians. 4.7, 8.11, 12.
And it was needful he should give such Gifts to men, to the end that he might
be Lifted up by men in the Exercise of them. Yea, and that they be faithful to
men, therein making it the great Business, Work, and end of all their exercise
of their Gifts, and so of all their Ministry and Conversation, to Lift up and
Magnify the Son of Man, to glorify Jesus Christ our Lord; by and from whom
they have all their said Gifts, and all their Mercies and Enjoyments bestowed
upon them, Heb. 13.7, 8. 2 These. 1.12. Yea, and of all that know and believe in
him, to confess him with their Mouth, and magnify him both in Word, and Work,
calling in others to him: And so it is said, The Spirit and the Bride, say come;
and let him that hears, say come, Rev. 22.17. And this Witnessing to him, and
Lifting him up, as the Son of God, the Christ, the Savior of the World, the
Lord, the Ransom of our Souls, who has given himself the Ransom, or Price of
Redemption for all; the Testimony in due time, the Reconciliation, and
Reconciler, the Propitiatory or Mercy Seat, through whom God does cover the
Sins of men through Faith in his Blood, and the Propitiation for our sins, and
for the sins of the whole World: The Peacemaker, and Peace between God and man,
and between men and men: The great Prophet and Apostle, Light and Leader of men
into the Truth, true Knowledge, Faith and Worship of Cod, the great High Priest
over the House of God; the Mediator of God and man, that makes Intercession for
Transgressors, and for all that come to God by him; the great King of Saints
and Nations; the Procurer and Giver of Remission of sins, and of the Holy
Ghost, and of all Spiritual Grace and Blessing; the great God and our Savior,
who has the Fullness of God; yea, all the Fullness of the Godhead dwelling in
him Bodily, and has the Government of all things committed to him, so as he
has all Power and Authority over all things in Heaven and Earth, and has the
dispose of all Mercies for this Life and that to come, Spiritual and Corporal;
the only Way to the Father to be worshipped by us, and from the Father to
Convey all Grace and Blessing to us; the Resurrection and the Life, yea, the
All: I say, the lifting him up as such a one, is exceeding useful and
behoveful, yea, necessary for begetting in men's hearts an exceeding high
apprehension of him, so as to render him precious to them, more precious then
the fine Gold of Ophir, or the Mountains of Prey, and to lead them to account
all things loss and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of him; and so to
come to, and believe on him. And though in all Ages, nor in all Places there
has not been given forth a like Express and full Testimony of and to him, as
there is given in these Ages and these Places wherein we live, having the
Testimony of the Apostles, and of the holy Spirit by them; nor where we have
that, is there in every one the same fullness of understanding, firmness of
belief, and clearness of declaration of what is said and contained therein. Yet
this in the fullness of it, and all that is in it, is very needful and behoveful
for bringing men in to believe on him explicitly and firmly, against (and
because of) all the oppositions of the Devil and evil Spirits, and of the
reason and wisdom and stubbornness of the Flesh, and carnal Heart, and the
course and principles of the world tending to keep men therefrom, as to men's
more distinct, full, and comfortable exercise of Faith in him. Indeed, as it is
not of absolute necessity to Salvation and Eternal life, that every one have
the same fullness and comfortable exercise of believing; so also neither is it
of absolute necessity that they have every one the same clearness and fullness
of understanding, and persuasion of the commendations pertaining to him. Yea,
as to Gods power to save men through him, I cannot assert a necessity of a
distinct knowledge of the Name and particular Acts of Christ at all (for
doubtless many who died before his Incarnation, and had no distinct knowledge of
his Person and personal Acts in the flesh were saved, as well as many Infants
and others since) But yet generally needful it is that he be so far Lifted up
and made known, and there-through that the heart be so far persuaded of his
Being, Fullness, Power, Excellency, Sufficiency, as that the heart see him the
only excellent and sufficient Object of Faith and Confidence, the only powerful
One to be looked to, and hoped in by us, or else he cannot be distinctly
believed on to Salvation, and Life everlasting: Where there is no Vision the
people perish, but (where there is so much as that people may see the Law and
Doctrine of Christ, or the Mind of God concerning them through him) he that
keeps the Law is happy. Even that of the Law, that concerning him, or by and
through him is made known, Prove. 29.18. with Romans 2.26, Acts 10.34. And where
men have the clear knowledge of him to declare to others for their helpfulness
in believing on him, and they conceal it from men, woe to them for so doing, 1
Cor. 9.16.

Br. 2. As the Exalting and Lifting up of Christ by way of Declaration of him
as aforesaid, is necessary for men's believing on him for Life and Salvation at
the first, and further then he is made known in his Being and Excellency, no
man can have any Faith in, or belief on him: So this is necessary also to the
abiding and growth in him, and recovery of the Back-sliders to Faith in him
again, that he be still and always Lifted up and Magnified in the Eyes of men,
even of those that have begun to believe, or have formerly believed on him. For
if by any means, the Lifting of him up, and the Preaching and praises of him
being withheld or neglected; the Serpent foist in high thoughts of some other
thing or things, as better and fuller then he, or as necessary besides him, and
the Grace, in and by him for our Life and Salvation, or for our Welfare and
Happiness either here or hereafter, so as the thoughts or mind be corrupted
from the simplicity in him. And he begin to appear or be looked upon as less,
Full, Precious, and Desirable the soul is in present danger to be withdrawn
from him and be gone; ceasing to believe and depend on him, or to do so singly
and rightly for the Salvation and Life that is in and by him; which occasioned
the Apostles godly jealousy of the Corinthians, least by any means as the
Serpent beguiled Eve, their minds should be corrupted from the simplicity in
Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. and so they should fall from the sincerity and
stedfastness of their believing. And where there is a decay and danger of
falling off, there can be no expectation or possibility of present growth, and
going forward in the Believing: nor can any thing possibly recover the decayed
and backslidden soul to its believing again, but the undecieving the soul, and
so purging out of it those low and unwholesome thoughts and apprehensions it
has Sucked in of Christ, to the poisoning of it from its believing on him; and
how can that be done but by a fresh and more convincing Discovery of the
Excellencies and Perfections in Christ, or the truth of the Testimony of God
concerning him, formerly doubted of or rejected by the soul in its departing
from him? Therefore we find the Lord and his Apostles lifting up of the Son of
Man, not only to and for the drawing in men to believe on him. But also,

1. To preserve them in the Faith, and so to keep them from withdrawing and
falling from him, and to hearten them to abide in him, and continue and go on
in their believing on him. Thus our Savior himself to instruct and strengthen
his Disciples to abide in him, sets before them his own Excellencies, as the
true Vine; and the Privileges and Benefits they should derive from him, in
abiding as Branches in him, John 15.1.4.7, 8. The Apostle Peter too thought it
needful for him, to put the Believers in remembrance of the Grace in Christ
Jesus: As how? Through the knowledge of him all things are given us, pertaining
to Life and Godliness: And that they were no cunningly devised Fables that were
Preached to them by them, concerning the Power and Coming of the Lord Jesus:
and put them upon taking heed to the Words of the Prophets, and commandments of
the holy Apostles of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus: Of whose coming again,
and faithfulness to perform his promises therein, he also minds them that they
might not be Led away with the error of the wicked, and so fall from their own
stedfastness, 2 Pet. 1.3, 4.16.18 and 3.1, 2 10.14.17. So also the Apostle John
to persuade to abide in believing on Christ, sets before the Believers what a
one Christ is, and the great Grace in him, and the Testimony of God concerning
him, 1 John 1.1, 2, 3.9. and 2, 1, 2.24, 25, 26.28. and 5.10, 11, 12, 13. That
knowing they have eternal life in him, they might believe: That is, go on to
believe on him.

2. To persuade to and promote growth in their believing on him, that they
might be rooted and grounded in him, and be established in the Faith, abounding
therein with thanksgiving: and that they might grow in Grace, and in the
knowledge of Christ. See to this purpose, Col. 2.2, 3, 4.6. Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19.
and 3.8.17, 18, 19. and 4.16. 2 Pet. 5.6. with 3.18. and many other places.

3. To recall and recover such as began to decline, and turn aside from him to
other things, and so as the Apostle Peter wrote the things above mentioned, to
secure from declining after false Teachers, 2 Pet. 2.12. etc. So the Apostle
Paul understanding that the Galathians through some false Apostles, lifting up
Circumcision, and the Observation of Moses Law as necessary to Salvation,
thereby obscuring and darkning of the Grace in Christ, were greatly endangered,
insomuch that he was afraid he had bestowed on them labor in vain: To preserve
and restore them, makes it his business to lift up, or set forth Christ and the
Grace in him, so Traveling in birth again till Christ might be formed in them,
Gal. 1.4.6, 7. and 2.16.20, 21. and 3. throughout, with 4.4, 5.11, 12.19. and
5.2, 3, 4. Even as Christ also for recovering the Angels, of the Churches of
Ephesus, Sardis, and Laodicea, to their first Love, Life and Zeal, sets himself
before them, and wishes them to remember whence they were fallen how they had
received, and heard, and counsels to buy of him Gold tried in the fire, etc.
All which implies a need of continuing to lift up to the Son of man to the
preserving in, promoting of, and recovering to the believing on Christ. So also
the Apostle Paul for recovering some of the Corinthians from their denial of
the Resurrection, as also to preserve the rest in the belief of that Article
and dependence on Christ, for the Benefit included in it, and promoting all
their stedfastness and growth in Piety and good Works, minds them of the Gospel
fore-preached to them by him concerning Jesus Christ his Death, Burial, and
Resurrection, his answering and giving us Victory over the Law, Sin, and death,
etc. 1 Cor. 15.4.58.

CHAP. XIX.
Two other Conclusions showing the Fullness and Sufficiency of this means, for
begetting and preserving in the Faith of Christ, and for bringing to the
Salvation and Eternal life to which it is appointed.

WHen two things are so ordered and disposed, one for and toward the other, as
that one be the way and means to the other, and that other the end whereto that
way and means is directed, in case that which the means to the end be some
rare, singular and costly thing; it may be supposed that when such a means is
made use of for and toward that end there was some necessity for it, either as
to the absolute or at least the most excellent attainment thereof, as well as
also that the end to be attained was of great usefulness, excellency or
necessity. But much more is it requisite in such a case, of the excellency and
necessity of that which is the end, that what is ordered as the means, should
be apt, proper and sufficient for the attainment of that end; for otherwise the
means would be useless or in vain, and therefore I here add. That

Conclusion 3. The lifting up of the Son of man in the sense aforesaid, is a
full, perfect, proper and sufficient way or means for prevailing with men (in
their giving up or attending to it) to believe on him, and for preserving and
increasing the Faith of those that do believe.

I put in that parenthesis, in their giving up or attending to it, because
Faith is of hearing; where men stop the Ear, and close the Eye, and harden the
Heart, left they should see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and
understand with their Heart: There is no marvel if under the most excellent
means they be not converted and healed, or believing follow not. Yea, and where
there is no taking heed to the things heard, that they slip not out: No marvel
if the believing begun be so far from increasing, that it come to nothing. The
aptness, fitness and perfection of a means is sufficiently evidenced, if being
duly applied it produce its effect. No man judges a Medicine unfit or
defective, that cures not the Malady without using or applying it; if but set
in the Window, looked on with the Eye, or taken in the hand, yea, or but tasted
and spit out again it heals not the Distemper: If it fail not to heal when ever
duly applied, its an approved Medicine, and may have a Probatum est written
upon it. The waters of Jordan were manifested to be an apt, proper and
sufficient remedy for Naamans Leprosy, in that it healed him perfectly upon
his seven times washing in it; though had he either gone away in his rage and
not washed at all, or washed but four or five or six times in it, and not seven
times as he commanded, his Leprosy had not been cleansed. The like we might
say of the Brazen Serpent that healed in being looked upon, though its bare
setting up, or being felt on, would not have done it. Now that to such as give
up and attend to the Gospel, its a means of begetting, preserving and
increasing Faith, it may be thus evidenced.

1. In that its the way that God has appointed; and its to be certainly
believed that what God orders, is, and must be proper and sufficient for the
end whereto he orders it; his work being perfect, and all his Ways judgment,
Deuteronomy. 32.4. We may not so injure the infinite Wisdom and Goodness of the only
wise God, who is Love and Goodness it self, as to think that he would direct
his Creatures to improper or insufficient means for their attaining the most
excellent and necessary end; as if he either could mistake himself, or would
impose upon and delude us. Now that this is the means of his appointing, is
evident in this, that the Gospel was ordered by him to be Preached: For the
obedience of Faith in all Nations, Romans 1.5. and 16.26. And that it Pleased God
by the foolishness of Preaching, to save them that believe. To whom also it is
the Power of God for that purpose, Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.21. Even to save them
from unbelief and disobedience. Yea, its called the Word of Faith, Romans 10.8.
both as its the Word that is to be believed, and as it begets and nourishes
Faith where entertained. As also the Preaching of the Cross, is said to be the
Power and Wisdom of God to the called (to such as obey the call) both to lead
and strengthen them to, and direct and uphold them in believing on Christ and
God by him, 1 Cor. 1.22r 24. As also it is that Faith where-through the
Believer is kept by the Power of God, to the Salvation ready to be revealed in
the last days, 1 Pet. 1.5.

2. In that in and by it all things are given us of God, pertaining to Life and
Godliness, both to quicken to and in believing and preserve in it, and lead out
to the right worshipping of God in the exercise of it, 2 Pet. 1.3. as to say,

1. A discovery of all such things or Objects, as may move the heart to embrace
Christ, and preserve it with him, taking it off from all other things. For
therein is declared as was also noted before.

2. The excellency of his Person, that there is none like him for us to believe
on, he being the Son, the only begotten Son of God, one with God; yea, God over
all blessed for ever, Amen, John 1.1, 2, 14. and 3.16. Romans 9.5. One by whom
and for whom all things in Heaven and Earth were Created and made, and are by
the word of his Power upheld, Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.2, 3. One that was in the Form,
and has the Riches and Fullness of God, Phil. 2.6, 7. 2 Cor. 8.9. And therefore
one mighty in Power; Wisdom, and Fullness, for performing his undertakings for
us to save us, Isa. 9.6.

2. The greatness of his Love and Grace toward us, in coming forth from his
Father in the fullness of time, to seek and save us; to that purpose emptying
himself of all his Riches and Glory, and taking on him the form of a Servant,
the fashion of Men; yea, bearing our Iniquities on his Body on the Tree,
becoming poor, a man of Sorrows and acquainted with Griefs; yea, made sin and a
Curse for us, to redeem us from sin and Curse, and to enrich, bless and make us
Righteous; to that purpose Dying the accursed and shameful Death of the Cross
for us, Gal. 4.4. and 3.13. Phil. 2.7, 8, 9. 1 Pet. 2.24. 2 Cor. 8.9. Isa.
53.4, 5, 6. 2 Cor. 5.21. Which may persuade us of his willingness to save and
bless us.

3. That all this was done to him, and suffered by him for the World, the whole
World, for all and every one, and not only for some few, out of love to the
world, and Grace to every one, God being not willing that any should perish,
but that all should come to Repentance, and so to the knowledge and
acknowledgment of the Truth, and to be saved, John 3.16, 17. and 12.47. Romans
5.18. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15, 19, 20, 21. 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. Heb. 2.9. and 4.9, 10, 14.
Ezekiel. 33.11. 2 Pet. 3.9.15. And so reaches to, and includes every of us.

4. That all this he did by the Will and Appointment of God his Father, in
Obedience to and in Union of mind and will with him, and therefore with his
Likement and Acceptance, who sent him, gave him; made him of a Woman, and under
the Law; yea, made him Sin and a Curse for us; laid upon him the Iniquities of
us all, pleased to bruise him and put him to Griefs, and made his Soul an
offering for sin; upheld him in all, and was well-pleased with him, and
therefore also bare witness to him in both Life and Death, but especially in
Raising and Exalting him, as was formerly showed: For He raised him from the
Dead (it being indeed impossible that he should be held of Death, Acts 2.24.)
and gave him Glory, that our Faith and Hope might be in God. He delivered him
for our Offenses, and raised him again for our Justification; and did all
things needful and abundant to him in Glorifying him, that he might be our
Savior, the Author of eternal Salvation to all that obey him, John 3 16, 17.
Gal. 4.4. 2 Cor. 5.19, 21. Gal. 3.13. Isa. 53.5, 6, 10, 11. and 42.1. Romans
4.25. 1 Pet. 1.21. Heb. 5.9. For (as,

5. It is also declared in this Doctrine) He being such a Person in himself,
who did and suffered such things, and doing and suffering them for us all by
the will and appointment of his Father, and in Union of will with him; his said
Abasement, Sufferings, and Death, were accepted and owned of God, as (and so
are) a sufficient Ransom or Price of Redemption for all. Both for freeing all
from perishing in and under that Death and Condemnation, which came upon all in
the first Adam, and for his Transgression (out of which therefore all shall at
last be Raised up by him) and also for Freeing, Discharging, and Delivering
from Curse and Death eternal, upon the account of their personal sinnings
against the Law, Goodness, and Grace of God in and through him, all or any that
upon Convincement thereof in the day of Grace, heartily repent and turn to God
by him. Yea, of such Value and Force was and is his Obedience and Righteousness
therein with his Father; that upon account and in the virtue thereof, he is
both the Propitiation for our sins, that believing, have him our Advocate with
the Father, taking away our defects, sins and failings from before him, so as
we walking in the Light as God is, therein we have fellowship with God, and God
with us, and his blood cleanses us from all sin; yea, if through temptation
sinning, we confess it, he is here-through just to forgive us, and to cleanse
us from all unrighteousness. And also he is the Propitiation for the sins of
the whole world. So as he obtains here-through a day of Grace and Patience
toward them, and keeps off destruction therein from them; and obtains the
holding open, as it were, of a door of Repentance to them, and a Readiness in
God to accept of any of them in heartily repenting and turning to him. Yea, he
here-through obtains all that Goodness, Bounty, Long-suffering and Patience
toward them, which is afforded them; with whatsoever Calls, Counsels, means of
Repentance and Grace, with Dispensations and Operations of the Holy Spirit, to
Move, Lead, Excite, Provoke, and strengthen to Repentance and Faith, are
afforded to them that they might be Saved, 1 Timothy 2.6. Isa. 53.4, 5, 6, 9, 10.
Heb. 2.9. and 9.26. and 10.5.10. Romans 3.24. and 5.18. 1 John 2.1, 2. and 1.7,
9. Acts 10.43. and 13.38, 39. Psalm. 68.18, 19, 20. Yea,

6. And also (as it declares) by virtue hereof, and as a reward, therefore God
having taken him up, and he being gone into Heaven to Gods Right Hand, whereon
he has set him, and where he has glorified him (even the Man Christ Jesus)
with himself, with the Glory he had with him before the world was; all
Authority in Heaven, and upon Earth is committed to him, and all the fullness of
the Godhead bodily dwells in him. So as he is the Great God and our Savior;
the Savior of the World, even of all men, and especially of all those that
believe. Having the Power of forgiving sins and justifying from them, all that
come to, and believe on him: As also all Power of Teaching and Guiding into and
in all right Ways, and preserving from all hurt and evil; of doing us good by,
and seasonably bringing us out of all Troubles, Afflictions, and Death,
subduing all Enemies within or without; working all good for and in us, and
filling us with all Good and Blessing. In a word, of doing all things to, and
for us that may prevent our Perishing; and promote our eternal Happiness, Phil.
2.9, 10, 11. Isa. 53.12. John 17.4, 5. 1 Pet. 3.22. Acts 5.31. Col. 1.19. and
2.9. Mat. 28.18. Isa. 9.6. and 63.1. Tit. 2.13. 1 Timothy 4.10. Ephesians. 1.3. etc.
As also,

7. That he is unspeakably Merciful, Gracious, and Loving to Mankind, ready to
do us good and save us; yea, actually doing great good to and for all, and
ready to do all good to all that will listen to and be ruled by him, having
received his Power and Offices to, that purpose; and that having engaged and
promised to God and men, to do whatever may be requisite to the Salvation and
Eternal Life of all that listen, look to, and obey him; he is also Infinitely
Faithful to both, for performing all his Engagements and Promises to them, Heb.
2.17, 18. and 3.1, 2. and 4.14, 15. and 5.9. Isa. 42.1, 2, 3, 4. Yea, and
further that

8. He abides for ever an everlasting, unchangeable Priest after the order of
Melchisedeck, and an everlasting King, whose Kingdom shall continue for ever,
and his Dominion have no end, nor shall his Divine Power as God ever alter. So
that he is perfectly able to save to the utmost, and for ever, all that come to
God by him, being unchangeably the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb.
1.10, 11, 12. and 7.1, 24, 25. and 13.7, 8. to whom that in Psalm. 146. may be
applied. Where having asserted the happiness of him that has the God of Jacob
for his help, and whose hope is in the Lord his God, upon the account of his
Power and Greatness showed in his having made Heaven and Earth, the Seas and
all therein; and of his Faithfulness in keeping truth for ever; and of his
Mercy and Goodness in Executing Judgment for the Oppressed, giving Food to the
hungry, loosing the Prisoners, opening the Eyes of the Blind, raising up those
which are bowed down; loving the Righteous, preserving the Strangers, relieving
the Fatherless and Widow, and turning upside down the way of the Wicked: All of
them works of Mercy and Goodness to men, and such as argue his special Care
over them that have him for their God. He shuts up all with the consideration
of his Eternity, or Ever-abiding; saying, The Lord shall reign for ever, even
thy God, O Sion, to all Generations, praise ye (lift ye up) the Lord. Whereto
we may yet add,

9. That herein is declared how by his Death and Sacrifice, he has purchased
and obtained; and in his Word and Testimony promised and assured, not only
supply of all good things and defense from evil, so as he sees good in this
Life and World, but also a glorious and perfectly happy state and blessed
condition for ever in a World to come, in an everlasting Kingdom to be brought
in and manifested by him, as the certain and infallible Portion of all that
love and look to, and believe on him, and wait for him. Such as is beyond all
our present Capacities to conceive of, much more to express and set forth to
the understandings of others, so as the Excellency and Glory thereof may be
perceived by them, Ephesians. 4.14. Isa. 53.12. Romans 2.7, 10. Rev. 2.26, 27. and
3.21. Jam. 1.12. and 2.5. Heb. 6.12, 13, 18, 19. Isa. 64.5. 1 Cor. 2.9. And in
those things are contained all that may allure the heart to seek after and
believe on him; yea, and to further that also, there is further in this
Testimony of him.

10. A discovery of our unspeakable Wretchedness, Lostness, and Misery in our
selves; and the Emptiness, Weakness and Insufficiency of all other Things and
Persons, to Help, Save, and Satisfy us. None other in Heaven or Earth having
been Crucified and Died for our sins, nor is any else Exalted of God to Relieve
and Save us. There is none of them therefore that have in them Redemption,
Remission of sins, Deliverance from wrath and vengeance. None of them have the
fullness of the Holy Spirit, and of the Godhead in them, nor any thing thereof,
but as he extends of it by them; and so no Thing or Person else has Power,
Riches, Wisdom, Strength, Honor, Glory and Blessing, but only he, who is
judged of God and all his holy Angels, worthy to receive of God all fullness.
This Voice is in this Testimony, to take us off from all other things that
might detain or withdraw us from him, viz. All flesh is Grass, and all the
goodliness of man is like the Flower of the Grass; the Grass withers and the
Flower fades, but the Word of the Lord (even that word that in the Gospel is
Preached to us, the Word made Flesh) abides for ever: That we might only look
to, and believe on him, Isa. 41.29. with 42.1, 2, 3, 4, 8. and 40.6, 7. Acts
4.10, 11, 12, 1 Pet. 1.24, 25.

11. With this Doctrine and Exaltation of the Son of man therein, is also the
Presence and Power of the Holy Spirit, whose Word it is, and whose work and
business it is to Lift up this Standard in, and by all Means and Mediums, for
Working and Begetting, Confirming and Strengthening, Increasing and Giving
growth to this Faith or Belief on the Son of man. He, I say, is present in and
with it, to make it Powerful and Effectual to, in, and upon the Heart of the
Hearer, that in hearing he might believe and live. That he in hearing, opening
the Mouth to take in this Word of Faith, he might strengthen and cause the Soul
to Eat and feed upon Christ held forth therein, Ezekiel. 3.1, 2. Whence it is
called, The Ministration of the Spirit; and the Words of Christ said to be
Spirit and Life, because of the Spirit Ministered therein, and therewith which
Spirit quickneth and gives Life; whence also it is a Ministration of
Righteousness and Life, 2 Cor. 3.6, 8, 9. John 6.63. The Spirit is Ministered
not in the works of the Law, but by the hearing of Faith, Gal. 3.2. In the
lifting up of the Son of man, or report given in the Gospel of and concerning
him, is the Arm of the Lord revealed, Isa. 53.1. And this Spirit being the Arm
of the Lord, must needs be powerful for all that it is given or put forth to,
either for begetting, preserving, strengthening or increasing this Faith, or
believing on the Son of man. Whence it is also called the Spirit of Faith, We
having the same spirit of Faith we also believe, and therefore we speak,
knowing that he that raised up the Lord Jesus, will also raise us up by him, 2
Cor. 4.13, 14. And God has not given us the spirit of Fear, but of Power, and
Love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7. As implying that it is the Effect and
Fruit of the holy Spirit working in, and received by men, that they believe and
stand strongly and steadfastly in the Faith, though under Temptations and
Oppositions to the contrary. Whence it also follows as a further Conclusion.

Conclusion 4. That the lifting up of the Son of man in the sense aforesaid, (
viz. the Magnifying and Exalting him in the view of men) is the proper and
effectual means, though not for putting any thing into Christ for us, more then
God has put into him, and upon him, in his real Exalting and Lifting him up in
his Person (for in that respect he is complete and perfect before the Preaching
and Testifying of him. The preparation for the poor was perfect before God gave
the word, and raised up the multitude of Preachers, Psalm. 68.10, 11. Even as
the Serpent was perfect in it self as to what Moses was to make it before he
set it up on the Pole) Yet for the conveying Grace and Blessing to men, and
putting his Salvation and Life Eternal into them.

This in part was spoken to, and its truth showed in what was said above to the
way of Christ's saving the Believer from perishing from the way: And in what we
said of the Believers receiving, and having Eternal life, yet something we
shall further here note. And so, I say, this way of Exalting though it puts
nothing into Christ, but only ascribes and attributes to him what is in him;
yet it brings something into men, even of Gods salvation, to preserve them from
perishing from the way of Life and Righteousness, and so from the second Death
in the Conclusion, and of the Eternal life that is given us in him. And this
may be further Evidenced and Confirmed from the Titles given to the Gospel, as
that its called the Word of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. The Gospel of Peace,
Ephesians. 6.15. The Gospel of our Salvation, Ephesians. 1.13. The Word of Life, Phil.
2.16. The Word of Righteousness, Heb. 5.13. Yea, The Words of Eternal life,
John 6.68. Which Names are given to it, not only because it declares what God
has done in Christ for Reconciling us to himself, and making Peace: Or what
Peace and Peaceableness is in the Heart of God toward us, or what salvation,
righteousness and life are given us in him; but also because it is it self the
way, Medium, or power of God for reconciling the hearts of men to himself, and
creating peace in them, Isa. 57.17. and of saving, quickening and giving life,
Number. 1.16. James 1.21. 1 Cor. 15.2. Psalm. 119.93. Isa. 55.3. etc. Let us view
the effects and fruits produced thereby in Men.

1. Therein, and thereby Christ gives forth his voice and divine light to
declare and discover to Men where and what they are, what case and state they
are in, and where their safety lies, and which way they may attain it: Yea,
what not? that may be useful for Men to see and know, for saving them from the
powers of darkness, and what ignorance and error expose them to: Thus as Christ
is called the Light of the World, so his word that declares and lifts him up,
is a light too, a light to our feet, and a lanthorn to our steps. Psalm.
119.105. Whatsoever makes manifest is light, Ephesians. 5.13. and this word manifests
God and Christ, Sin and Righteousness, Life and Death, and all things; and
therein also is the voice of God and Christ calling to us to awaken and stand
up from the dead that Christ may give us light; that so our feet may be
directed into the ways of peace, Ephesians. 5.13, 14. yea, this makes the Preachers
of, and walkers in it, Lights too to Men, as the Baptist who bare witness to
Christ, as the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World, and lifted
him up, as the true light, the Christ, preferring him before him, as one who
was before him, was therein a burning and a shining light, Joh. 1.6, 7, 8, 9,
28, 29. and 5.32, 33. And the Apostles whose work it was to witness to, and
preach forth Christ and his excellencies, were called the light of the World;
and were sent forth to open men's eyes by their word, and turn them from
darkness to light, Matthew. 5.16. Act. 26.18. For with this voice and light in
the exalting of Christ, is given forth.

2. A certain divine force, power and operation of, and by the spirit to
inliven, quicken, and so indue the hearer and receiver thereof with a capacity,

1. Of seeing and discerning the light, and hearing the voice of the Lord,
discovering and directing into the way of peace and safety; and so saving from
the way of error and deceit that leads to destruction; thence the light of
Christ, which he gives in and by his Gospel, declaring and preaching him forth,
is called the light of life, Joh. 8.12. as giving sight also and perception
where admitted; yea, even some that receive or retain it not, are said to see
and hear, and to close their eyes, least they see with their eyes, and stop
their ears, least they should hear with them, and to harden their hearts least
they should understand and be converted, etc. Matthew. 13.15. Acts 28.26, 27. and
the Apostle Paul in that of Acts 26.18. above cited, was sent to give them
sight by the Gospel, as well as light; a power to see what is showed them, that
they might flee from the evils and dangers of perishing discovered, and follow
after the life proposed, and so for hearing his voice: The hour comes (says
our Savior) and now is, wherein the dead hear the voice of the Son of God, and
they that hear shall live, Joh. 5.25. Yea Christ in his word by his divine
power and force is giving also,

2. Understanding to the heart, as is employed in that even now mentioned
passage, in Matthew. 13.15. and in Act. 28.26, 27. as also is employed in wisdoms
call: O ye simple understand wisdom; and ye fools be ye of an understanding
heart: as implying that she is in her calls ready at hand, in their hearing,
and consenting to her, to give them to be wise, and of an understanding heart;
Prove. 8.4, 5. See also Psalm. 119.130. The entrance of thy words gives light,
and it gives understanding to the simple, and Psalm. 19.7. The testimony of the
Lord is sure, and makes wise the simple; yea and here-through,

3. He is turning the heart to the Lord, or there is that given forth which
tends to (and will in the receiver) turn and convert the heart to him; as it is
said, The Law of the Lord is perfect (even that Doctrine which sets forth the
Lord, as well as is given forth by him; for it is both) converting the Soul; It
has power, virtue and tendency in its instructions; and is offering and
effecting it, though men winking with the eye, and stopping the ear, least
they should see and hear, and understand, and be converted, deprive themselves
of the efficacy of that conversive force, and are not converted; as many whom
the goodness of the Lord leads to repentance, through their hardness and
impenitency are not led by it, Romans 2.4, 5. and some whom God was purging, he
says, were yet not purged, Ezekiel. 24.13. But the eyes that see, and the ears
that hear be blessed. Matthew. 13.16. So as they shall see and hear more, the
mysteries of the Kingdom shall they understand, Ver. 17. Thus also Paul, who
was a chosen Vessel to lift up the Son of Man by carrying his Name among the
Gentiles and People, was sent (as we see in what was before quoted from Act.
26.18) to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God; as many were actually and effectually so turned by him; 1 These. 1.9, 10.
by which it is evident, that the power and presence of Christ by his Spirit,
was in, and with his Preaching to that purpose. And truly when any are so
turned to God in Christ, they are then in a state of salvation, and are
partakers of no small or despicable a portion of that saving from perishing,
for which Christ is lifted up, being now out of the ways of falsehood and
destruction, and in the way to happiness, being reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.18.
Romans 5.10. and so in the way of life and righteousness, wherein in the further
or still lifting up the Son of Man, and not otherwise. He is yet saving and
giving life.

1. By pow^ing out further of his Spirit, and making known his words, so as to
give them to understand the mysteries of the Kingdom, the Name of God in
Christ, his secret and his Covenant, Matthew. 13.11. Prove. 1.23. Psalm. 25.12, 14.
Joh. 17.6, 7, 8. wherein Christ becomes to the Soul wisdom, induing it with a
principle of wisdom by his words put into it, which wisdom entering into the
heart, and making knowledge pleasant to the Soul, gives it such understanding
and discretion, as saves and preserves it from the way of the evil man, and
from the evil or strange Woman; yea, from every evil way, Prove. 2.10, 11, 12,
15, 16. Psalm. 119.104. Yea, and there is in it the spring of life and
immortality, a tree of life to them that find it, and makes happy every one
that retains it, Prove. 3.13, 18. for she leads and frames the heart to hope
and trust in the Lord, and believe dependingly upon him, as somewhat known and
understood in his Name and goodness; yea, she yet further leads to the riches
of the full assurance of understanding to the acknowledgment of the mystery of
God the Father and Christ, bringing the Soul into his marvelous light, 1 Cor.
1.30. Prove. 22, 18, 19, 20. Psalm. 1.2.3. with Jer. 17.7, 8. Ephesians. 1.13.18, 19.
Col. 2.2. 1 Pet. 2.9.

2. By justifying and acquitting from all fore-past trespasses, and blotting
out all offenses, and interesting in all the blessings and promises in Christ,
wherein Christ is made to the believer righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. with Act.
10.43. and 13.37, 38, 39. Gal. 3.29. and so the Soul is saved from the state of
death, and condemnation in which it was still turned into God, and is
translated into a state of life, and brought to be a subject of Christ's
gracious Kingdom, and an Heir of his Glorious Kingdom, Joh. 5.24. Col. 1.12,
13, 14. Tit. 3: 6, 7. yea, and herein He by this his word saves it from fears
and droopings, giving it peace with God through Jesus Christ. Romans 5.1. Heb.
2.15.

3. By giving in to the Soul the spirit of holiness, washing, renewing and
making it a new creature in Christ Jesus, and changing it into his image and
likeness, wherein also he saves the spirit of the believer from the bondage of
sin and corruption, and is bringing it into an Heavenly freedom and liberty to
righteousness, giving it so to behold the glory of the Lord with open face, as
in a glass as transformes it by degrees into his image, from glory to glory, as
by his spirit; 2 Cor. 3.18. and so the new man is renewed in knowledge after
the image of him that created it; the old man being put off, and the spirit of
the mind renewed, to the putting on the new, through the learning of the truth,
as it is in Jesus: Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.21, 22, 23. and in this Christ is made to
the soul sanctification in a sense, and in some part redemption.

4. By giving it liberty and freedom from the Law, and the servitude of it as
a Rule of righteousness or justification, and as to its ceremonial and typical
observations, even by the truth, as it is in Christ known and received; and
giving it liberty to God, and the privilege and title of the Children of God,
which are given in by the Faith of Jesus Christ to them, who through the
lifting up of him, are begotten to believe on his name; and therewith also the
spirit of adoption framing it to childlike love, reverence, confidence, and
boldness, to cry Abba Father, Joh, 1.12, 13. Gal. 3.26, 27, 28, 29. and 4.4, 5.
Romans 8.15, 16. and his Children find a place of refuge in him. Prove. 14.26. And
in this also Christ is made to the Soul redemption; and in a sense
sanctification, as to sanctify, signifies to devote to God to be in a choice
relation to him, 1 Cor. 1.30.

5. By begetting in the heart a lively hope of glory, and of the glorious
inheritance, which he does through the lifting up of Christ, as one raised from
the dead, through the power of the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.2, 3. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Romans
15.13. and we are saved by hope, as by an anchor sure and steadfast, keeping the
Soul from being blown away, and dashed upon, and split against the Rocks, Romans
8.24, 25. Heb. 6.19, 20. from and with which hope also is effected joy in the
Holy Ghost; in which the heart is saved through this lifting up of the Son of
Man from its fears and griefs also, Romans 52, 3. We rejoice in hope of the glory
of God; and not only so, but we rejoice also in tribulation -- yea, we joy also
in God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, by whom we have received the atonement,
Romans 5.3, 11.

6. Yea, upon any loss or decay of these things, the holy spirit in the lifting
up of the Son of Man, drawing the eye from its idols and iniquities, to which
it was wandered, to behold and believe on him again, restores the Soul, and
renews his pardoning and justifying acts, with renewed peace, and other
gracious effects, and so He,

I. Saves the Soul from perishing, in a threefold way.

1. In pulling it out and delivering it from its sinful, fearful, perishing
estate at the first; turning of it in to God and Christ to believe on him, Tit.
3.4, 5.

2. In keeping it from falling back again into Sin and Guilt, and Disquiet, in
preserving it in believing: As we showed largely in Branch 2. Romans 1.16.

3. In recovering it from Falls and Lapses, and Restoring it again; as by this
way he recalled the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.4, 5. And the Angel
of the Church of Sardis from his Spiritual deadness, by remembering how he had
Received and Heard, Rev. 3.2, 3, Yea, and the Angel of the Church of Laodicea,
is called from his Lukewarm state by the proposal of Christ before him, and the
good things in him, ver. 14.15, 16, 17, 18, 20. Yea, and herein also he,

II. Gives Eternal Life. In that,

1. He hereby imparts the Spirit of Life (as is forenoted) with the Fruits and
Operations of it in newness of Life; as Righteousness, Peace, Holiness, Hope
and Joy in the Holy Ghost: Yea, all the Fruits of the holy Spirit; in which he
manifests his presence, and in which the virtues of the Divine and holy Nature
are evidenced, are effected or infused in, and by his glorifying Christ, and
leading the Soul in to him; as Love, Joy, Peace, Patience, Meekness,
Temperance, etc. Gal. 5.22, 23. 2 Pet. 1, 5, 6, 7. with John 16.13.14, 15. Yea
here-through,

2. Christ who is Eternal Life it self, lives in the soul and dwells in it,
even by this Faith in which he the Son of man is lifted up, Gal. 2.20. Ephesians.
3.16, 17. And

3. Inasmuch as Eternal life stands in, and springs from the knowledge of God,
and him whom he has sent, Jesus Christ, as is said John 17.3. And God is not
known clearly, but by and in Jesus Christ, the Image of his invisible Majesty,
and brightness of his Glory. And he is known in and by his being Lifted up,
Discovered and Commended of God to us by his holy Spirit in his Testimony: It
follows, that Eternal life is herein given also in a first Fruits of it here,
as the soul is also hereby Built up to the Inheritance, Acts 20.32.

4. Yea, surely and the fullness of Eternal life it self, as it is to be
possessed in Soul and Body hereafter in the Kingdom to come, what is it? but
the influence and effect of Christ's being fully and perfectly Lifted up by way
of discovery of him, and his Glory, in his personal appearing, when he who is
the only Potentate who dwells in the Light, which no man has seen or can see,
shall manifest him, 1 Timothy 6.15, 16. When he appears, we shall be like him
(perfectly like him) for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. And that
Lifting him up and Appearance in his Glory, shall probably be accompanied with
the greatest Conversions; a Nation born in a day, Isa. 66.6. Zech. 12.10, 11.
and the perfectest Salvation. But that is a distinct way of discovery of him,
from what is afforded in this day.

Of how great Necessity, Excellency, and Usefulness then is the Lifting up of
the Son of man in this consideration also, and so in both of them; both as
lifted up of God in himself, and with God himself; and as lifted up of God and
his holy Spirit, in, and through the Ministration of the Gospel to, and by men:
Both that they may believe, and to them that do believe on him, that they may
still believe, and be saved. And so that the Son of man must be lifted up, and
how, and why he must be so lifted up, is sufficiently showed; Though who can
sufficiently lift him up? Let us now view what use we may make of this also.

CHAP. XX.
The Application. First by way of Instruction from the last Conclusions,
showing the excellency and glory of the Gospel, with diverse inferences
therefrom.

ANd first with reference to the last Conclusions, about the necessity,
behoof-fulness and fullness of the Son of Man's being lifted up, by way of
demonstration and commendation of him to Men; forasmuch as the Gospel is that
Doctrine in which He is of God and his Holy Spirit, and Servants so lifted up:
it tends to commend greatly the Gospel, and its ministry to us, as a marvailous
Doctrine, and of exceeding worth and benefit, worthy to be received with all
acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15. Well might the Apostles call it the marvailous light
of God; as that phrase in 1 Pet. 2.9. may be applied thereto, and the glorious
Gospel, or Gospel of the glory of the blessed God, 1 Timothy 1.11. forasmuch as
therein such glorious and excellent things are discovered, no other Doctrine
could or ever did discover the like, seeing the glorious Son of God, who is the
glory (even the brightness of the glory) of God, the King and Lord of glory is
herein set forth and lifted up, both as to his Person; the glorious things
undertook and performed by him in his Life and Death and Resurrection
therefrom; the glory given to and received by him as a reward of his said
glorious undertakings and performances; and the glory in which he shall appear
again at his return: And herein also the glory of God, even of the Father, the
God and Father of glory, is gloriously and brightly displayed, both as to his
glorious power in supporting Christ under all his sufferings; and in raising
him from the dead; and setting him at his right hand; and in treading down in
and by him the power and strength of the adversary; and triumphing gloriously
over him: His glorious and most excellent wisdom in devising and bringing
about this glorious work to the bafling of the wit and policy of Satan; yea,
the Gospel is the revelation o^ the mystery of God, wherein are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and whereinto the wisest and most
intelligent Angels desire to pry, manifesting God to be the only wise God, Romans
16.25, 27.1 P^t. 1.12. Col. 2.2, 3. Yea, and his glorious Holiness too, is
discovered in his condemning our sin in the flesh of h^s Son, so as not sparing
him, as being made a Sacrifice and Ransom for us, though his only begotten;
and through him revealing his wrath from Heaven, against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, that withhold the truth in unrighteousness, a most
dreadful punishment and endless destruction, being herein declared as appointed
for the refusers of his blessed Son, the glory also of his truth and
righteousness in not failing to perform the promises made to the Fathers of his
raising up such a Savior for us and bringing in by him grace and blessing to
us, which rather than he would fail to make good, He made his only Son to be
flesh and blood, yea, sin, and a curse for us. The glory of his greatness, that
could not accept any sacrifice as satisfactory to his Justice, though of all
the Bullocks upon a thousand Mountains, or whatever else might be proposed or
offered, less then the Sacrifice of his only begotten Son, as able to make
Peace and Atonement with Him for us; as also in that such great and glorious
things are there-through prepared of Him for us, and preached to us, even his
glorious and everlasting Kingdom, with all its glorious contents and
enjoyments; in all which his work appears wonderfully great, honorable and
glorious, and in all this the wonderful glory of his grace, mercy and love is
manifested to us; both the grace of the Father, in his exceeding love and
charity toward us in the gift of his Son for us, when we were become so
sinful, and such enemies to him, and so unworthy of love and mercy from him, as
cannot be expressed; and of our Lord Jesus Christ in condescending to such a
low abasement, and such unspeakable sufferings for our sakes, to keep us from
perishing in our sins and miseries, and that he might prepare us for, and bring
us to everlasting life and happiness, whereof also a very great discovery is
made to us in the Gospel, though no words can express all that is therein
comprehended, and to be enjoyed by us.

A glorious Doctrine indeed, that has such glorious contents, or discovers
such glorious things; and that too to such a glorious end, as the bringing us
back to God, and so to his Eternal glory, to which he herein calls us by Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 5.10. 2 These. 2.14. and for the preparing us for, and bringing
us, to which it is filled with such excellent virtue and gracious efficacy, as
renders it worthy to be called also the Gospel of the grace of God; forasmuch
as therewith the grace and spirit of God is ministered also, as is showed in the
foregoing Conclusions, and as is said in 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8. where the Apostle
also asserts it to be far more glorious (as well as far more gracious) than the
Law of Moses, being such as by representing the great grace of God, gives great
liberty and boldness to all that entertain it, yea, and represents therein the
glory of God after such a wonderful attractive manner, as is able to change the
beholders thereof into its likeness from glory to glory, as by the spirit of
his Majesty, ver. 16, 17, 18. Yea, in a word (as is foreshewed) its gloriously
powerful to draw the Soul to, and keep it with Jesus Christ to believe on, and
love, and cleave to him, to the delivering it from sin and death, and giving to
it Eternal Life; yea, all things pertaining to life and godliness, are
administered to us through this knowledge, 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. as has been already
more largely evidenced; and therefore we may further infer from hence diverse
things, with reference to the excellency of this glorious Gospel; as,

Infer. 1. That its a great and wonderful mercy of God to any Person or People,
to bring this blessed Doctrine in the openness and plainness thereof to them,
and to lift up the Son of Man, therein to and before them, and to continue it
with them, a mercy to be received with all acceptance and thankfulness, and
with all diligence and care to be improved, so as to render to God for it
fruits suitable and answerable to it, in all sobriety and humbleness of mind in
our selves, as being in and for all things infinitely indebted to his grace,
without which we are nothing, nor could have done any thing to preserve us from
perishing; and in all righteousness toward men, and holiness and godliness
toward the Lord, who has showed such light and mercy to us; this is that
mercy of which the Apostle speaks, when He says, That the Gentiles might
glorify God for his mercy, as it is written, for this cause will I give thanks
to thee among the Gentiles, and sing unto thy Name, Romans 15.9. For when this
Gospel comes, and is given to a Person, Family or People, God is therein
granting them repentance (even of all former sins and disobediences against all
former means and mercies) unto life, as St. Peter said to the Brethren of the
Circumcision; Act. 11.18. discovering good ground and reason for it, and
affording power and motive to it in the name of Christ; yea, and a door of
Faith too is therein opened, for their coming in to, and actually, and
distinctly believing on Christ, Acts 14.27. That thereby they may come and be
made of the same Fold with other distinct Believers, fellow Citizens with the
Saints, and of the Household of God.

A People no more at a remote distance from him, but near to him, even of the
same Body with other Forebelievers and partakers of the promises in Christ,
even of the choicest Favors and Privileges of the Saints promised to and
covenanted with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the holy Ones: Yea, to be
Built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and to be joined to the
Saints by the same precious Corner Stone Jesus Christ; and so to become in the
Unity of the Spirit with them an holy Temple, and an habitation for God by his
Spirit, Ephesians. 2.13, 14, 19, 20, 21, 22. and 3.5, 6. And so to be of the Royal
Priesthood, the Chosen or elect Generation, the holy Nation, the peculiar
People, 1 Pet. 2.9. I do not say, that all that hear the Gospel are made so;
but I say, they have the Door opened to them, that in Hearing and Believing,
they might be made so. Yea, when this Gospel is brought to a Person, Family, or
People, Salvation it self comes therein to them, and life, even Eternal life:
As it was said to Zaccheus, Luke 19.9. This day is salvation come to thy house:
For the Gospel is the Power of God to salvation to every one that believes
(for which believing also God therein opens the Door, and Ministers Grace, as
is before showed) Romans 1.16. And therefore also it is sometime called as the
Word of salvation, Acts 13.26. So also the Salvation of God, Acts 28.28. Be it
known unto you, that the salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles, and they
will hear it. And, How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which
began to be published by the Lord himself? etc. Heb. 2.3. For as God is
discovering and setting before us to move to Repentance, and quicken to Life,
the great Salvation, Redemption, and Deliverance from under the first Death and
Judgment, so as that none shall perish therein, and upon that account mearly,
Romans 5.10. That none might keep themselves out from hoping in, and coming to
God because their first Fathers sinned, and they inherit their guilt and filth
without remedy: And also that Power and Readiness in God and Christ, upon the
account of his perfect Obedience, Sacrifice and Righteousness, to save or
deliver the Believers from the Guilt of new sins fore contracted in, and by our
personal disobediences during the time past of Gods forbearance, though
committed against former and other lesser manifestations of God, and of his
Power and Goodness, Will and Commandment (as in the Works of Creation continued
and his Providence mercifully ordered; and especially in the Dispensation of
the Law and Prophets) that none might Pine away in the conscience of such sins,
and be kept out thereby from believing and hoping in God, and in that hope
Worshipping him; and to accept them graciously, and justify them freely from
all things, from which they might not otherwise (no not by the Law of Moses) be
justified, and so to save and preserve them from the Wrath to come, and from
the snares of Sin and Satan which lead thereto. So also in the Preaching and
making known this great Grace, he is saving the Receiver of it (who closes not
his Eye, nor stops his Ears against, but obeys its discoveries) from the power
of Satan and Darkness, and Translates him into the Kingdom of his dear Son, and
preserves him unto everlasting Life, as is before showed. This is the Medium
and Instrument, whereby he effects this Salvation in and upon men; yea, even
those who by former and lower Dispensations of the knowledge of God are wrought
upon, so as they do there-through, Fear God and work Righteousness (as they
that by Nature, or without outward verbal Instruction do the things contained
in the Law, their Uncircumcision shall be counted Circumcision: That is, they
shall through Christ though not distinctly known, be accepted of God, Romans
2.26.) Yet they by the coming of the greater Means, the more open revelation of
the Gospel of Christ in its distinct and clear sound, may be and are in
receiving it saved by it; that is, they are delivered from former Ignorances,
Mistakes, Fears, Griefs, and Dangers, which the lesser means of Light sufficed
not to remove. So we find that Cornelius, though an Angel of God testified to
him, that his Prayers and Alms were accepted of God; and by the Spirit in the
Scriptures, he is recorded to have been a Godly (or as we render it, a Devout)
man, one that feared God, and gave much Alms to the People, and Prayed to God
continually. Yet was directed to send for Peter, that he and the other Gentiles
with him might hear the word of the Gospel by him, and believe and be saved;
for so it is said, He shall speak words to thee, by which thou shall be saved,
and all thine house, Acts 11.14. with 10.1, 2, 3, 4. and 15.7. So that
Salvation both to those who never before rightly understood, closed with or
obeyed any other means of knowledge, and of the Fear of God vouchsafed to them
(as appears not that any other of Cornelius Kindred did, however its evident of
the Jailer, Acts 16.28, 29. and of some of the Corinthians being Fornicators,
Idolaters, etc. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.) And to those also who under and by former
and lesser means are wrought upon, and in complying with God in them are
accepted of him, is the effect of the Gospel. And they have a great and
wonderful mercy afforded them, who have the clear lifting up of the Son of man
vouchsafed them; that is to say, the Word of the Gospel of Christ: It being a
fuller saving Manifestation, and a more quickening Word and Discovery, as now in
the fullness of it come forth since the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ,
then by any other way of Gods bearing Witness to himself (as he left not
himself without Witness to the Gentiles in times past, when he suffered them to
walk in their own ways; and they had not the Scriptures or plain
Gospel-preaching, Acts 14.17.) Yea, or then in the Prophets, or John's
Ministration (which Ministration of John, Cornelius is said to have known,
though he was not thereby made a Circumcised Proselite, Acts 10.36, 37) was
afforded. For this Doctrine is also called the Word of Life, not only as most
plainly discovering Life given us from the Dead, through the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, but also as infusing a spiritual Life into the receiver
thereof, begetting him to a lively hope; as is said, 1 Pet. 1.3. And to be a
kind of first fruits of his Creatures, as Jam. 1.18. Whence that Exhortation,
ver. 19. Let every man be swift to hear. Yea, and the Wisdom of God thence
exhorts, Lay fast hold of Instruction, and let it not go, keep her for she is
thy life, Prove. 4.13. And the Words of Christ are said to be Spirit and Life,
John 6.63. Yea, Eternal Life. For so Christ himself said, I know that his
Commandment (namely which I speak) is everlasting Life, John 12.49, 50. So
Christ knew it whether others know so, or believe that his Knowledge was right
or not. Thence also the Jews putting away this Word of God, are said to have
judged themselves unworthy of Eternal life, Acts 13.46. And must it not needs
be so, when the Holy Ghost tells us, that Christ himself is herein offered or
given to men, to be Gods salvation to them, as in the very next Verse the
Apostle implies, when having told the Jews, that they would turn to the
Gentiles; he adds, For so has the Lord commanded us, saying, I have given thee
for a Light to the Gentiles, that thou might be for salvation (or as in Isa.
49.6. My salvation) to the ends of the Earth, verse. 47. As implying that Christ
(to whom and of whom the Lord in the Prophecy, speaks) is given in, and with
the Gospel; and that both as a Light to them that sit in darkness to discover
the way of safety to them (and how great a Mercy is that) and also to be for
their salvation: Namely both to pull them out of Death, and the power of Satan,
and to lead and keep them in the path of Peace and Righteousness, that they
might not perish, but have Eternal life. And what is tendered to men in the
tender of Christ? Or what do men receive in receiving him? Is it not God in
him? Yea, all the Promises of God, and Fullness of the Godhead, and his Grace
and Blessing, as he says himself: He that receives you receives me, and he
that receives me, receives him that sent me, Mat. 10.40. And the Apostle
John, 2 John 9. He that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, has both the Father
and the Son. And in 1 John 2.24, 25. If that which ye have heard from the
beginning abide in you, ye shall continue in the Father, and in the Son; and
this is the Promise which he has promised us, Eternal life. Well therefore
might the Apostle call the giving of the Gospel to the Gentiles, The riches of
the Gentiles, Romans 11.11, 12. Seeing (as he there says) in its coming,
Salvation is come to them, to provoke the Jews to jealousy: Whereupon he adds,
If their Fall be the Riches of the World, and their diminishing the Riches of
the Gentiles, what will their fullness be. Wherein is the fall of the Jews, the
Worlds riches, or their lessening the riches of the Gentiles, but in that
Salvation which is the Gospel, with the Contents and Benefits of it ( the
Blessing of Abraham, as it is called, Gal. 3.14.) is thereby come to, and
abides with them. Surely, this is the greatest Riches or Treasure of any man,
or of any People, that they have the Gospel, seeing they therein have
Salvation, and Life, Eternal life, the Blessing of Abraham, Christ; yea, and
God himself in Christ. In a word, The Kingdom of God and of Heaven as the
Gospel is also so called) brought herein to them: So as in receiving and
retaining it, all those inestimable Riches and Benefits are received, and
retained by men. Well might Solomon say, There is Gold and a multitude of
Rubies, but the Lips of Knowledge are a precious Jewel, Prove. 20.15. as if he
would say, a more excellent Jewel then any of them all. Oh then that we
Gentiles did know the Mercy and Goodness of God, and prize it accordingly! That
we did understand, and mind, wherein our greatest Interest and Happiness lies!
Surely not in having the Riches of this World, or Trading for them; nor in
having Power, Empire, Dominion and Rule; nor in Learning, worldly Wisdom and
Policy; nor in any of those things which the other Nations were preferred in
above Israel; but in having the Portion of Jacob, the knowledge of God and
Christ, his Doctrine, Oracles and Mysteries, brought to us, and left with us:
And therefore that should be our great business, not (as it is) to seek after
Empire, Rule, Honor, Riches, and worldly Greatness; nor to satisfy our Lusts
and Appetites, in the ways of the Heathen, in Surfeiting and Drunkenness,
Chambrings and Wantonness, Strifs and Envyings: But, in minding and receiving
the Lip of Knowledge, the Word of God, the Gospel of Christ. Oh therefore that
we may repent of our Vanities, and believe the Gospel, and give the obedience
of Faith to it, as to that end its Preached to, and among all Nations, Mark
1.15. Romans 1.5. and 16.26. For,

Infer. 2. They that receive and retain this blessed Doctrine in which Christ
is lifted up, so as they obey and walk therein, are very happy and blessed
Persons, in an excellent State and Condition; as our Savior said to the Woman,
who admired the Womb that bare him, and the Breasts which gave him suck, that
they were blessed: Yea, says he, rather blessed are they that hear the Word of
God (the Gospel of Christ, or the Preaching of him wherein he is lifted up) and
keep it; that is, so as to mind and remember it, as a thing they believe and
prize; and observe to practice, to do and obey what it instructs to, Luke
11.28. And needs they must be so (as appears by what is already said) seeing
they therein receive and have the Salvation of God, and Life, even Eternal
life; and therein the Riches, the Blessing, the Promises in Christ Jesus, yea,
Christ and God himself. Oh then! how blessed are they that know (understand,
own, and experiment) the joyful sound, the Gospel of Christ, the Preaching of
Peace, and of good things in his Name: They shall walk, O Lord, in the Light of
thy Countenance, in thy Name they shall rejoice all the day, and in thy
Righteousness shall they be exalted, Psalm. 89.15, 16. and well they may, seeing
they are actually of Gods household, fellow Citizens with the Saints: Yea, Gods
holy House and Temple, in which through Christ he dwells, his People, his
Children, his Inheritance; and God, and Christ is theirs, his Royal Priesthood,
his chosen Generation, his holy Nation, his Jewels and Treasure, his Garden of
Delight, those in whom God and Christ take pleasure; his pleasant Plant, his
Spouse and Darling, the dearly Beloved of his Soul, a People near and dear to
him, whose God, in a choice sense he is. And Blessed are the people whose God
is the Lord, those whom he has chosen to himself for his Inheritance: They be
those who receive, retain, and obey the blessed Doctrine, wherein Christ is
Exalted and Lifted up: These are in a First Fruits Regenerated and Saved, and
are in the way to enjoy Eternal life. Its theirs already as to Title and
Interest, and holding fast what they have received, they shall not fail of the
full Enjoyment of it. For this is the Testimony that God bears of his Son,
that God has given us Eternal life, and that this Life is in his Son; so that
he that has the Son has Life (and he that has the Doctrine of Christ, has
both the Father, and the Son, 2 John 9.) Whence the Apostle adds, These things
have I written to you, that believe, that ye may know that ye have Eternal
life, and that ye may believe; that is (go on believing) on the Name of the Son
of God, 1 John 5.11, 12, 13. Knowing that ye have Eternal life, that ye are in
as good a State and Way, as ye can be in here, that ye may persevere therein.
There is no other thing that can better the Believers condition, for in Christ
he is complete; the letting his Doctrine go, to seek any thing else to better
him, is the way to deprive himself of all his Welfare: And by observing lying
Vanities, to forsake his own Mercies: For, He that transgresses, and abides
not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God, 2 John 9. nor Life, 1 John 5.12.
Therefore the great thing that the Gospel-Believers and Obeyers have to do, is
to hold fast what they have, and go on in the way that they are in till Christ
come. As is said, Rev. 2.24, 25.

Infer. 3. And surely since the Doctrine that lifts up Christ, is so excellent
a Doctrine, and is of so great usefulness to Men where it comes, and of such
blessed an advantage to those that receive it, it most be a choice privilege,
and an high honor for any to be betrusted with and employed of God in this
Doctrine, to be acquainted with the contents of it, and to have it committed to
them, and they furnished to declare and preach it, and to be the servants of
God and Christ therein, for they are betrusted with exceeding great riches and
precious treasures, as the Apostle says, We have this treasure in earthen
Vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7. It Is a treasure they are betrusted with, the choice
commodities of Heaven are put into their hands to dispense in subordination to
Christ; therefore the Apostle mentions it as a great grace bestowed upon him to
be an Apostle, We have received grace and Apostlesh^p by Jesus Christ, Romans
1.5. And to me who am less than the least of all Saints is this grace given,
that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians.
3.8. See how he valued and highly esteemed this favor of Christ, also in 1 Timothy 1.13, 14. Where speaking of the glorious Gospel of the blessed God
committed to his trust, he adds, And I thank Christ Jesus my Lord; for that he
has enabled me, and counted me faithful, putting me into the Ministry; an high
favor, especially to be conferred on worthless persons who have deserved the
quite contrary (as there he adds of himself) whither we respect.

1. God and Christ, who betrust and employ them in it. Its an high favor to be
Gods and Christ's Banner-bearers, Stewards, Ministers: Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. His Ambassadors sent and employed
by him in his choice Messages, even to treat with the World about their making
peace with Heaven, and to woo and take a Spouse and People for Christ out of
the World, to be united with him, and live with him in joy and happiness for
ever, 2 Cor. ^.18, 19, 20. An honorable employment, an office worthy to be
magnified, Romans 11.13. Or,

2. Men, in respect of them they are betrusted with their choice commodities
which God has prepared for, and gives forth to them; they are in a fort
betrusted with their Souls, to seek them in the name of the Lord, and to be
instruments of the greatest good to them, even salvation and life everlasting,
to watch for them, and woo them for their utmost happiness, and thence they
are in a subordinate sense to Christ, called Saviors. Obad. 16. Yea, they have
their choice riches and jewels in their hands, or Ministry to dispense to them
for their enriching; the choice medicine of Gods own providing for them to
administer to them. They are in the name and stead of Christ, in and to the
World, in respect of Ministration, and have his glory and power given unto them
in his name unto men, to open the eyes of the blind, and to turn them from
darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may
receive remission of sins, and inheritance among the sanctified by the faith
which is in him: Joh. 17.22. Act. 26.18. with Isa. 42.6, 7. Indeed these things
agree principally to the Apostles, but they also reach to others, as they share
in, and take part of the same ministry, which is one and the same committed in
whole to the Apostles, and in parts and parcels to the succeeding Ministers of
this Gospel-doctrine; So as they are all in their measure (the Apostles more
immediately and fully, others more mediately, and as deriving by them) Gods
instruments for converting, regenerating, or begetting Children unto God; yea,
and of bringing them forth, and nursing them up with his Heavenly Doctrine.
Yea, and with respect to

3. Both God and men; they are as Angels ascending and descending upon the
Ladder, that reaches from earth to Heaven, namely, the Son of Man, the
Mediator of God and Man, Genesis 28.12, 13. with Joh. 1.52. 1 Timothy 2.5. through
and upon him they have access to God to behold his face, see his glory with
open face, as in a Glass; hear his voice, be acquainted with his secrets,
decrees and purposes, his will and mind concerning men; and to receive
commissions and commands, messages and errands from him to them, a very high
favor and privilege: Yea, they are (and have liberty) in their minds and
spirits to dwell in Heaven, and converse therewith. And then they are
messengers from God to men, upon the same Ladder, to bring down and impart his
mind, words and commandments to them: and take care as tutelary Angels, of
them, that no harm befall them, who will be guided by them, in what they say
from God and Christ to them; Rev. 1.20.

An high honor in each respect it is sure, and in its place far greater then
to be Kings and Princes in the world, though not as to the commanding obedience
in their own name, or requiring worldly respect and worship to be given them;
for in that respect they are to be as servants to all, as Christ the great
Prophet, Apostle, Gospel-preacher and Angel of God was, but their honor and
dignity is merely heavenly and divine, in things pertaining to God, and to the
souls of men, except only for order and decency among men; in which yet they
are servants to God, and are not to defire to share in his honor and glory
from men with him, but only to seek the honor of him that sends them, Joh.
7.16. and yet in respect to

4. Themselves, they want neither honor, comfort or safety herein desirable by
them. For, 1. As for honor, its honor enough that they are Gods servants in
so high and excellent employment, and that he is not, nor will be honored with
disrespect to them, if faithful to him, they that honor God, and receive his
word by them, do also necessarily honor them, as conveyors of it to them, and
for their works sake highly respect them, as our Savior says: If any Man will
serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also my servant be;
(that is, where he is received, entertained and honored, there is his servant
for his, and his message sake also) If any Man serve me, him will my Father
honor, Joh. 12.26.

2. As for comfort, they have it in the very matter of their employment; the
Doctrine committed to them, and delivered by them, that affords them with
others the comforts of Heaven, it being tidings of great joy to all people, and
they preach nothing to the world of that nature, but what they have and may
have a share with them in, like the Ox that trod out the Corn, they may eat of
what they labor in; and then,

3. As for safety, they serve a Master so Great, as is sufficiently able, and
so Good, that he will not fail to uphold them, and save them in all
difficulties, and against all dangers in their faithful serving him. And surely
both as betrusted with God's name and honor, and as betrusted with, and
employed about Men's highest concernments, it behooves them to be,

1. Faithful, both to him and them, to do the will of God and Christ, and speak
his words, he gives them faithfully, so as not to conceal the words of the Holy
One, Job 6.10, Psalm. 40.10. but to make known the whole counsel of God and
Christ to them, as Christ did to his Disciples, Joh. 15.14, 15. And the Apostle
Paul to the Churches, who shunned not to declare to them the whole counsel of
God, Act. 20.26, 27. Yea, and to declare it, as God orders them to do it, with
such plainness, putting away the hidden things of dishonesty or guile, flattery
and wisdom of words, that may obscure and darken the truth, and tender the
cross of Christ ineffectual: Not casting a Veil over their Faces, as Moses did,
hiding from men the messages, which they carry, that they may not see to the
end, and tendency of them, (though what Moses did was done in faithfulness)
but, using all openness and freeness of speech, sincerity and soundness of
doctrine, without adding ought thereto, or diminishing ought therefrom, or
changing or altering any thing therein, but as of sincerity, and as of God
commending themselves to every man's conscience, and approving themselves, as in
the sight of God and Christ, who employ them, 1 Cor. ^.17, 18. and 2.1, 4, 5. 2
Cor. 2.17. and 3.12, 13. and 4.1, 2. Not seeking or pleasing themselves, but
seeking to please God, and profit men; yea, and please them too for their good,
that they might be saved, 1 Cor. 9.19, 22. and 10.33. Romans 15.2, 3. Not seeking
Riches, or Honors to themselves, nor for any Pleasures of the Flesh, or
Enjoyments of the World; nor for Ease, Liberty, or any thing turning aside from
either their attendance to God, or faithful discharge of their trust toward
him, or toward men, nor dealing unfaithfully with the Word of God, as Persons
partial in his Law, but leaving themselves to God to provide maintenance, and
give honor to them, as he pleases, and contenting themselves with what he by
his providence orders them, to do the work and service to which he calls them;
not making merchandise of Gods Word, and of the Souls of men for gain, honor
or livelihood, and so deny the Lord who bought them; but seeking only the
honor that comes of God; and the glory of God, and good of men in all things,
depending on God and Christ, contentedly to honor and reward them, who also
will do it abundantly, as shall be good for them here: but most fully
hereafter, when the great Shepherd shall appear from heaven, 1 Pet. 5.4.

2. Greatly diligent and industrious, not giving up themselves to sloth and
idleness, or to follow the lusts and appetites, or entangle themselves with the
affairs of this World, but that they may please him that imploys them, seeking
diligently by prayer and supplications to God, for themselves and all Saints,
and more especially for those, that they are more especially betrusted with;
and giving attendance to reading, meditation, etc. that they may in their
converse with God, know and perceive his mind, and receive the word from his
mouth, and be strengthened to declare it faithfully and boldly unto men, not
fearing their faces, or being flattered from it by them, and to be useful to,
and have cause of joy in them, in their service, toward whom also they are to
use great diligence, and therefore they are compared to, and styled by the name
of Laborers, to signify that they must not be idle and loyter, and give
themselves to ease, carelessness and effeminacy, they are to digg, and plow, and
sow, and plant, and water, and do all the work of the Lords husbandry, which
the people are, and of his building, Vineyard, and Garden, which his Church is:
Yea, as Shepherds, they must watch their Flocks, and that by Night and by Day,
least any ravenous Beast devour them, or disease infest, or any Thief steal
them, or any harm from one another come to them. Yea, and so much the more as
the souls of men are more precious then their bodies, about which the earthly
husbandry, building, and other acts and manufactures are employed: the loss of
the soul is of wonderful great concernment, and God will require it of
whomsoever the loss of it proceeds, if he would require the blood of men at
the hands of men, as is said, Genesis 9.7. Surely much more will he require the
Souls of men, at the hands of men, with whom they are betrusted, if lost by
their negligence; seeing he has valued them so highly, as that he has not
spared his own Son, nor Christ his own Life and Soul, but has poured it out to
death, to save them. And shall thy Brother for whom Christ dyed, perish through
thy meat? For thy sloth, thy ease, thy will or pleasure? Surely, if this were
considered, it would make men careful how they undertake the Ministry, and
having undertaken it how they discharge it, it would make them watch and labor
with diligence, least any should miscarry through want thereof, or through want
of skill (the product of sloth and idleness, or some such miscarriage) and so
the blood of their Souls should be required at their hands, as God threatened
the Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 3.17, 18, 19, 20, etc.

3. Great humility and lowliness of mind, bewaring of pride, least being puffed
up, they fall into the condemnation of the Devil: Indeed, while they look upon
the height and honourableness of their Employment, their Liberty to, and
Intelligence with Heaven, the secrets they see into above others, and the
excellent discoveries they have, and make of the great and high things of the
Gospel, and the like, they may have Temptations to be proud and lifted up, and
many there are that are apt to miscarry that way; but it is a dangerous deceit,
a Rock earnestly to be shunned, and indeed none have cause to be less proud:
Considering,

1. The exceeding height and weightiness of their place and work, and their
exceeding imbecility of themselves, as of themselves for the discharge thereof:
This made Paul cry out. Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16.
Especially considering too the great woe will befall them, as guilty of
betraying Cods Name and Honor, and his great Design, the work and business of
highest consequence; and as guilty of the lose of Souls that are most precious
in Gods sight, if through their miscarriage they be lost and perish. Oh
therefore with what care and humbleness of mind should they walk! Indeed their
honor is great, and their reward will be great, if faithful and successful,
but the difficulty of doing their work aright, and obtaining the reward, and of
walking worthy of their honor, should keep them lowly and humble: As also,

2. That they have all that honor, not of desert, but of Grace, and all their
fitness for it, help and success in it, not of or from themselves, but from him
that calls and imploys them, they have nothing but what they have received, and
received not as of Merit, but of Grace, and what they must also give an account
of, 1 Cor. 4.6, 7. 2 Cor. 5.10.

3. That in all their Service, and for all success, they need to lean upon
another, even Christ, and be helpen by him, they cannot fly up to Heaven by
their own wings; their Wit, Learning, Industry, etc. will not inform them of
the mind of God; it must be from God himself, and they cannot lift up
themselves into the sight and hearing of him, so as to receive messages from
him, but only by the strength and length of the Ladder, that is erected for
their ascent, if they neglecting to look to rely and lean upon that, aspire to
know and understand otherwise, thinking by their own Wit, Learning, Philosophy,
etc. to attain it, they will perish from the way, and fall in their attempts,
and be destroyed, Isa. 40.30. and when they have by Christ, as the Ladder
mounted up and ascended, and received information, they cannot profitably to
themselves and others descend again, but on the same Ladder; on, and by the
strength, support, and assistance of the Son of Man, John 1.52. Genesis 28.12. So
that no cause to be high-minded, but with humility, and the fear of the Lord,
depend on Christ for all things, both toward God, and toward men; see Prove.
22.4. And indeed,

4. The very things they see and speak of, may move them to be humble, and not
lift up themselves, either in the sight of God or of men: For, do they not
behold the glory of God, in the view whereof how low are they, so as they
cannot utter what they see and hear; how vile and short are they then in
comparison of him, with whom they have to do; the sight of his Glory and
Majesty, his infinite Holiness, and Purity, how might it make them cry out with
the Prophet Isoiah, Chap. 6.5 Woe is me, for I am a man of polluted Lips, etc.
The greatness of his Goodness, How can they see and not be abased to see how
far they fall short of answering it? And the greatness of his Terror, How
should it not make them fear, least they should fall under it? 2 Cor. 5.9, 10,
11. Yea, the greatness of his Humility Preached by them in the Grace he showed
to us men, is such as may both instruct them to imitate him therein; seeing
that is the Way by which he obtained his Glory and Honor, and did so much
Service to his Father, and good to us men, and is declared to be our way to
Honor too, Prove. 15.33. Mat. 23.12. And may cast shame upon us, if after the
so great Humility of so honorable a One, we be proud and haughty; who have
nothing of our own that is fit to be gloried in; and are infinitely short of
what he was in all the good we receive from him, and do through him, Yea, and

5. It Is not the place of Ministry, and the excellency of the Work and Office
committed to a man, not the Office of an Apostle, or Prophet, much less of an
inferior Minister of the Gospel, nor the excellency of Gifts and Furniture for
discharging it, that is any man's Justification, or the thing for which God
accepts him; but his being found in Christ, believing on him, and obeying him
faithfully in what ever place God sets him; or rather Christ himself as so
believed in, and obeyed by him, It Is not either the Hearer, or the Preacher of
the Word, that is thereby Justified, but the doer of it. Yea. and

6. For, and by Pride, and other Miscarriages, many highly Honored and
excellently Gifted Persons, have fallen from their highest Places, to deepest
Miseries. The Angels who lest their first habitation, were thrust down to Hell,
and are reserved in Chains of Darkness, to the Judgment of the Great day, 2
Pet. 2.4. And, Judas who had a part in the Apostleship, yet falling down
headlong, burst asunder, and all his Bowels gushed out, Acts 1.17, 18. And
Christ shall say to many that will plead, They have Prophesied in his Name, and
in his Name cast out Devils; depart from me, I know you not, ye workers of
Iniquity, Mat. 7.22, 23. Such a consideration moved the Apostle Paul, (and may
move us and others to the like Care and Practice) To be at down his own Body,
and bring it into subjection, lest having Preached to others, he himself should
be a Cast away, 1 Cor. 9.27. As also on the like consideration of Gods dealing
with the Jews, he gives us this advice; Thou stand by Faith, be not high
minded but fear; for if God spared not the natural Branches, take heed lest he
also spare not thee, Romans 11.21, 22. For which is

Infer. 4. Seeing the Gospel Doctrine is that in which the Son of man is Lifted
up, and therefore of such Excellency as is fore-shewed. It follows too, that
they who withhold. Abuse, or hinder the Preaching of the glorious Gospel, are
in a sad way, and expose themselves to great Condemnation. I say,

1. Such as being betrusted with it, do withhold it; whether they do as Onan,
because they know it is to raise up Seed to their Elder Brother, spill it on
the Earth: Because not they, but Christ shall have the glory, are unfaithful
with their Talent, conceal the Words of the Holy One. Or like the slothful
wicked Servant, hide their Talent in the Earth; and refuse (or after they have
begun, turn aside from) Preaching the Word, and Doctrine of Christ. We read
what our Savior says, shall be the Judgment of such Persons, viz. Take away
the Talent from him, and bind the unprofitable Servant hand and foot, and cast
him into the outward Darkness; where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth,
Mat. 25.18, 24, 28, 30. Thence the Apostle having a Dispensation of the Gospel
committed to him, cries; Woe is me, if I Preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. If
a man fitted for it, for the love of this World embracing it like Demas, and
desirous to follow the Riches, Honors, Pleasures of it; or to avoid the labor
and work of Preaching, Winning and Watching over Souls; or to avoid the Crosses
and Sufferings that attend it here, keep silence or forbear and decline from
Preaching it, as God opens doors and gives him opportunities: Surely such a man
greatly displeases God, as one injurious to, and dishonouring him, as if he
were an hard and unjust Master, and his Service disadvantagious, and he wrongs
the Souls of men, from whom he withholds what is for their Profit and Benefit:
And therefore this high Calling is upon no such ground to be Omitted,
Neglected, or Turned away from, but it is to be accepted willingly, and
discharged faithfully and diligently, in Eye to, and confidence in Gods
Greatness and Goodness to uphold and bless in it, and reward for it.

2. But much more are they faulty who abuse the Gospel. And so they do who

1. Corrupt or Pervert it; as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 1.7. Making it another
thing then what it is in it self, and from God; like Wine mixed with Water: Or,
Silver become dross, Isa. 1.22. Or Meat mixed with Poison, while the Name of
God, and the Son of man is neglected, waved, or laid by, and Dreams and Fancies
instead thereof Preached. The Grace of God in its Freeness, Fullness, and Extent
not held forth; but a Mingle-mangle, or Hotch-potch of Grace and Works: Christ
and Moses, or some other Name or Doctrine in stead thereof declared; such as
puts men upon waiting for, and expecting some Almighty and irresistible
Operation and Force of Spirit, to Convert and Assure them. But in the mean
time, the Gospel of Christ, which is the Power of God to Salvation to them that
believe, Waved and Rejected by them, and Preached against, even the Love of God
to the World; and so the Discovery of the Son of man, and the Grace in him for
sinners; and for all men, in which the Power and Spirit of God breaths, and the
Saving and Enlivening force is offered. Men are taught to neglect that, and the
Power and Force working in it to look for another and greater, til by Stifling
and Crucifying, that they perish. Like the Jews that rejected Jesus, and the
Grace discovered in, and by him, to look for another Messiah of far more Pomp
and Splendor then he. Or, as if some should have Taught the Wounded
Israelites, to have looked for some immediate Power beside the Serpent, instead
of looking to the Serpent, through which God puts forth his Almighty Power for
their Healing. They who so do, are to be avoided as poysoners of Souls, in
stead of good and skilful Physicians: Or as the Corrupters of the Fountains,
and Springs, of all true Piety, and acceptable Devotion to God, Tit. 3.3, 4.
Yea, such as bring not this Doctrine of Christ, we are not to receive to House,
or bid God-speed to, for they are evil and deceitful Workers, Messengers of
Satan, and Instruments, or Authors rather of Perdition, bringing in Heresies
of Damnation. Especially such as deny the Person and personal Works of Christ,
and turn them into Allegories, their Doctrine is the Poison of Dragons, and the
cruel Poison of Asps, quite contrary to the Doctrine of Christ Crucified; the
sincere Lifting up of the Son of man, and therefore they that bid such
God-speed, or show them any countenance, and wish them success, are therein
partakers of their evil works. Against these, we may see what Woes are
thundered, in 2 Pet. 2. and Jude 4.19. And that For them (and those after to be
mentioned under this Head) is reserved, the blackness of Darkness for ever.
That is, the saddest portion in Hell, and Misery. For these are like the evil
fallen Angels (especially if having known the Way of Truths they turn aside to
be of these) fallen from Heaven, and become Seducers of men from the Way of
Truth and Righteousness; Causers and Provokers of others men's destructions; the
Instruments or Messengers of Satan, to keep or delude men from Christ Jesus the
Son of man, that they by neglecting or putting away from them, him and his
Salvation set forth in the Gospel, and by looking to, or for other false
Medicines, might die of their Wounds: Yea, by these Satan insinuates his strong
delusions, that men might believe Lies, and be damned; so that they are most
Diametrically, or Point-blanck opposite to Gods Grand design, and men's great
Good and Happiness. And therefore as Christ and his Apostles, were earnest and
frequent in warning of such as these; so there are none that the holy Prophets
and Apostles, speak more terribly against, as showing them to be men of swifter
and greater destruction then others; as may appear in Jer. 23.9. etc. And in
those Chapters of Peter and Jude, above mentioned. Oh what care therefore
should be taken of falling into this number! And of hearing, and being
perverted, or subverted by them! Take heed what ye hear. Beware of false
Prophets; look to your selves, for many Deceivers and Antichrists, are gone out
into the World, that turn men from Christ and his Truth, his true Church and
People, and lead them to destruction.

2. Such as Preach the Truth, but walk contrary to it, in Pride, Wantonness,
Fraud, Uncleanness, Covetousness, Voluptuous, Riotous Courses, or the like;
causing men to stumble at the Gospel, and speak evil of it. These therefore are
Enemies to the Cross of Christ too, as the former are in their Doctrine, and so
much the greater as they are, the more specious in theit Conversation; (as the
Pharisees were to Christ) so these also under pretense of Friendship, betray it
like Judas, and expose it to its open Enemies to be Decried and Crucified,
Rejected and put away, even those that Preaching it, Phil. 3.18, 19. yet have
their Bellies their Gods, and mind Earthly things, whose end therefore is
destruction too among the forementioned; both occasionally to others, and
finally to themselves.

3. They that do hinder the Gospel and Gospel-preachers, forbidding them that
would and are fitted for it, and sent forth with it to speak it to others, that
they might be saved; against such, wrath has come and will come to the utmost,
1 These. 2.14, 15, 16. For these men are herein such as please not God, but are
contrary to all men (or at least to the good of those men from whom through
their cause it is withheld) filling up the measure of their sins. Whether they
be

1. Such false Teachers that like the Pharisees and Lawyers of old, take away
the Key of Knowledge, the Vision of all, the Preaching of the Grace of God that
brings Salvation to all men, the Preaching of the Cross of Christ, as seen and
testified to by all the Prophets of God, and by all his holy Apostles, and that
gives Light to all other matters of Doctrine and Practice, and concerns all men
as laying a good Foundation for their Faith and Repentance, and all right
Obedience unto God; neither entering the Kingdom themselves, nor suffering those
that would to enter it, in so Receiving and Believing the Grace of God in
Christ toward them, as to be renewed into a Conformity to him, and Submission
to his Government by it: Yea, shut the Kingdom of God against men, while they
will not have that Preached to them that should let them see their way into it,
and persuade them to walk in it, and enter by it, Mat. 23.13. Luke 11.52. Or,

2. Such as exercising some power amiss, do by violent and compulsive courses,
hinder the Preaching and Preachers thereof; whether that power misexercised be
Ecclesiastical or Civil; and so whether they that abuse their power to such
purpose, be led by some blind Zeal for some false way, and against the Truth it
self, opposing it as Error and Falsehood. Like the Council at Jerusalem, who
forbad the Apostles to Preach in the Name of Christ, and the Resurrection of
the Dead, being Sadduces themselves that denied the Resurrection, and therefore
also the more zealous against Christ and the Doctrine of his Resurrection that
Establishes it. Putting them into Prison, and Scourging them for their so
Preaching, Acts 4.18. and 5.28.40. Though such doing it in Ignorance of
unbelief, and upon convincement thereof repenting, they may obtain Mercy as St.
Paul did, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14. But doing it maliciously and against Light and
Knowledge, their case is exceeding sad and dangerous: Or whether it be out of
Will and Zeal to some fond Ceremonies, Will-worships, or devised and imposed
Observances that they forbid the Preaching of the Truth, except they will fall
down and Worship them in submitting thereto, like that in Rev. 13.16, 17. Where
the Beast and false Prophet cause all that will Buy or Sell (that is Trade in
Religious exercises) to receive a Mark in their Right Hand, or in their
Forehead, or else they shall be prohibited therefrom; if not also either
Bodily or Civilly killed [the fear of falling under the guilt of receiving
which Marks, caused some that I know, rather choose to be as civilly Dead, then
to keep their Places and Liberty of Preaching therein upon the terms of
Conformity proposed. Whether they did well or ill therein, God will judge; but]
surely all Hinderrers and Letters of the Preaching of the Gospel, are so far as
guilty of it fighters against God and his Grand design, and therefore in a way
to misery and destruction: And therefore it concerns all to beware of so doing,
lest by any Humor, Faction, Ambition or false Principles whatsoever or
undue-standing upon needless disputable matters, they incur the guilt thereof.

Infer. 5. They that under any pretense, or for any cause reject and put away
the Gospel, and the Preaching of Christ from them, must needs run upon their
own misery and destruction in so doing, because they put away or neglect their
own Salvation; even that in which God is offering and bringing Salvation, Life,
and his Kingdom (which is Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost) to
them. Whether it be that they only disregard and neglect it through mindfulness
of other matters, as those who being Bidden to the Wedding-Dinner turned away
some in their Farms, others to their Merchandise. Or those in the Supper, who
prayed to be excused, because they had bought Oxen, hired a Farm, or Married a
Wife, Mat. 22.5.7. Luke 14.18, 19, 20, 23. Or whether out of unbelief of the
Message, or zeal against it, or for some other false way deride, abuse and
persecute the Messengers and Preachers of it, Mat. 22.6, 7. Or whether they
pretend to entertain it, but yet deny the power of it, and will not suffer it
to unstrip them of their own rotten Rags (their Carnal confidences, hopes, and
rejoycings in themselves, their own wisdom, Righteousness, Fleshly privileges,
and conceits of Righteousness, gathered up some other way; as from some
Applications of promises to themselves, or practice and performance of
Religious Duties: And not from beholding and eyeing the Grace of God in Christ
Crucified, as also their Wills, Purposes, and sinful conversations) that they
might be clothed by, and with Christ and his Virtues, the true Wedding Garment,
in which God will accept us. Like the man that came to the Feast, but took not
on the Wedding Garment, Mat. 22.11, 12. who therefore was taken away, bound
hand and foot, and cast into the outer darkness, verse. 13. Yea, which way
soever it be, or upon what account soever (whether love of the World, or fear
of sufferings from men) that men reject the Gospel, and so the Son of man as
lifted up therein, they inevitably run themselves upon their own mischief; both
as not receiving the only Medicine prepared for them, for their escape from
death and destruction (For, How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
Salvation! Heb. 2.3. As the wounded Israelites must needs die that neglected
the Brazen Serpent, and its lifting up, it being Gods only Medicine) And also
as provoking God further against them for slighting his Goodness, despising his
Wisdom, and its Design and Device; setting light by his Son, the choice Object
and Evidence of his Love: For if they that despised Moses Law, died without
mercy, under two or three Witnesses; of how much forer punishment shall he be
thought worthy, who has trampled under foot the Son of God, and counted the
Blood of the Covenant wherewith he was Sanctified an unholy (or common) thing,
and has done despite to the spirit of grace; for, we know him that says
vengeance is mine, and I will repay: Heb. 10.28, 29, 30. Surely herein the
reason and cause of men's destruction is evident, and the greatness of it seen
to be right and reasonable; seeing they suffer not, but by and for putting that
away, which would have made them safe and happy. But of this more afterward.

Infer. 6. Lastly, Seeing the Gospel is such a glorious Doctrine, and of such
great good and advantage to men, as its a great mercy to a Man or People, when
God sends it to them: So it must needs be a heavy judgment, and argue great
displeasure against a People, when God takes it away from them; for, is it not
his taking away his grace and peace from them? May not I-chab^d, The Glory is
departed, be said in that case, as when the Ark of God was taken from Israel;
for Salvation and Life and Gods Kingdom is gone then (as our Savior said to
the Jews, by way of threatening, showing the greatness of Gods wrath against
them, for their rejecting him and his servants, and Gospel ministered by them;
Therefore I say unto you, that the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and
given to a Nation that will bring forth the fruit of it, Matthew. 21.43) And, is
not the taking away Gods Kingdom a sad loss to a People! seeing therein is
contained all spiritual and eternal grace and blessing; a sad and fearful
judgment, and that which above all here is to be deprecated and avoided, as
laying open to eternal destruction; whether it be, by sending strong delusions,
that men may believe a lie, and they all be damned that received not the love
of the truth, that they might be saved, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. suffering those
strong delusions to be so publicly embraced and enjoined, as to justle and
thrust out the Gospel; as is most grossly and most grievously seen in the
Mahumetan Countries, and in the Papacy, though God is not wholly leaving
himself without witness to them; or, by suffering barbarous and wicked Enemies
to overrun a Nation or Country; or, by taking away his Servants, either to
send them elsewhere, as when the Apostles, the Jews being left to their
obstinacy; were sent to the Gentiles, Act. 13.47. and 28.28. Surely it is every
way a heavy judgment, and to be much cried and prayed against, as Psalm. 12.1,
2. Well might the Prophet Amos, from the mouth of the Lord, signify that the
Famine of hearing the Word of the Lord, is a worse Famine then that of bread
and water, Amos 8.11, 12. For this is but of sustenance for the body and bodily
life, and that is but a momentany and uncertain life, which must however dye and
depart, that is endangered thereby in a bodily death, out of which there will
be a Resurrection again, and in the state of which the Soul mean time may be
blessed, Rev. 14.13. but the other is of the sustenance and salvation of the
Soul, and the removal thereof lays open to the loss of Eternal Life; and
indangers the inevitably falling into everlasting destruction, out of which is
no recovery or redemption. Oh how greatly behooves it us then to pray, and pray
earnestly for our selves, and for our Nation, that however God may please to
correct and chasten us, yet he would be pleased to continue with us his
glorious Gospel, and not take that from us: and that he would vouchsafe to give
or restore it to the Places or Nations that are without it, or have it not so
clearly with them, as we have it, blessed be God for it. And let this suffice
for the first Use, the Discovery of the Excellency of the Gospel-Doctrine, and
the Inferences therefrom.

CHAP. XXI.
A Second Use. The Excellencies of Christ hence inferred, and that is viewed:
First, As the Excellencies of the choice Creatures are ascribed unto Him; and
so He, the firstborn of every Creature.

Speak with the Tongue of Men and Angels, use the most powerful demonstrations
Logic can make, and the most persuasive arguments Oratory can invent and make
use of, yet if there be nothing of the Son of Man in it, nothing of Christ, and
him crucified, it avails nothing to our Salvation and enjoyment of Eternal
Life. But He alone discovered (and the better the more nakedly, and with the
less artifice and use of those Sciences) is able to effect all in us; for God
has made void the wisdom of this world; the wise, the Scribe and the Disputer
of this World, are with him mere ciphers, 1 Cor. 1.18, 19, 20. Deceive men they
may (and therefore the Apostle cautions us to beware, least any man spoil us
through Philosophy and vain deceit, Coll. 2.8) but save men from perishing they
cannot, much less advance them to Eternal Life: No, its this Object held forth
in the Gospel, that is the life and virtue of it, which is the Son of man
Christ Jesus, Romans 1.3. and 16.25. and therefore seeing the Gospel is so
excellent by his being the matter of it, how excellent is He himself, who is
its matter? He must needs be more precious than the Gold of Ophir, more
glorious and excellent than the Mountains of prey, Isa. 13.12. Psalm. 76.4. That
has in him not only the excellencies of all the Creatures, but all the
excellencies of God also. Gods great glory, and man's utmost happiness, all
meeting in him. If when Ahasuerus proposed the Question, What shall be done to
the man whom the King will honor? Haman reasonably thought it would be no
small matter which would be done to him; How much more may it be thought and
believed, that He whom God not only will honor, but honor above all, must
needs excel in all things that may commend him? Yea, He honors him with his
own, with all his own honor and glory; which he will not give to any other
besides him, either thing or person: Surely he must needs be infinitely and
inexpressibly honorable and glorious; seeing God is infinitely honorable and
glorious himself, and honors him not according to the dictates of the wisest
and highest Creatures (with whom he takes no counsel in this, or any other
matter) but according to his own wisdom, understanding and goodness, which are
all infinite and boundless; unless then we could by searching find out God,
yea, and find him out too to perfection (whose Excellency is higher then the
Heavens; so that, What can we do? Deeper then Hell; and therefore, What can we
know? Longer then the Earth, and Broader then the Sea, and so altogether
Incomprehensible) we cannot find out, and fathom all the Glory and Excellency
of this Man, the Son of man, the Lord Jesus. Well may it therefore be said of
him, that He has a Name above every Name, and that none knows but himself,
Rev. 19.12. And as himself says, None knows him but his Father, Mat. 11.27.
Yet many, and great, and glorious things are said of him, by his holy Spirit,
That searches out all things, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. And
Takes the things of Christ, and shows them to us, John 16.13, 14, 15. Things
that commend him highly to us, though yet, his Name (which is) only Excellent,
Psalm. 148.13. Is Exalted above all Blessing and Praise, Neh. 9.5. So that when
we have searched, and said all we can, in, and from what is Recorded of him by
his holy Spirit, yet we may conclude, as in Psalm. 106.2. Who can declare his
mighty Acts? Who can set forth all his Praises? God has so poured out Himself,
and his Fullness, and the Fullness of all things therein as it were into him,
that he is All and in all, in the new Creature, or Creation, Col. 3.10. It has
pleased the Father, that in him all Fullness should dwell (and it has pleased
all Fullness to dwell in him) yea, All the Fullness of the Godhead dwells in him
bodily, and in him we are complete, Col. 1.19. and 2.9, 10. All things in
Heaven and Earth, has God pleased to gather together in one, even in Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 1.10. That if any thing in either, or all things in both of them,
may like us, and satisfy us, we may have them fully and transcendently in him.
Let us essay to View something of his Infinite Perfections. And so

1. We may find him as the Son of man, the Firstborn (or most Choice and
Excellent) of every Creature, and to be before all things: As he in whom the
choicest Virtues, of all the choice Creatures, are transcendently met. And well
they may, seeing by him all things were made and by him received their several
Beings, Forms, Properties, and Virtues. We may take a brief view of some of the
prime of them, as they are used in Scripture Speech, to be as his Shadows, or
Representations of something of his Excellencies; Who is the beginning of the
Creation of God, Rev. 3.14. The Wisdom in, and by which all things were made,
Psalm. 104.24. Prove. 3.19, 20. and 8.22, 30. And here let us view,

1. The Creatures made before man. Of which

1. The Light was the first we read of distinctly mentioned. And, Truly the
Light is sweet, and of great good in the Creation, comfortable and very useful,
discovering all things else; and rendering them visible, and affording Direction
and something of Capacity for our Working, Walking, and comfortable Fruition of
other Creatures. And he is the Light of the World, the true Light, lightning
every man coming into the World; the Light of Life, giving a right and true
discovery of all things, and affording Direction to us, and Capacity for our
right demeanor of our selves toward them, and comfortable Enjoyment of the
Benefits in, or by them; inlightning the mind, and inlivening the inward man,
John 1.9. and 8.12.

2. The Earth with its Furniture and Garnishments, is used also to represent
some of his Excellencies. For he is both as the Fruitful Soil, that brings
forth and gives Fruitfulness to the Vegetables there-on. For in him the Trees
of Righteousness are Planted, and do Grow (he being in the most choice sense,
the House of the Lord) Psalm. 92.12. John 2.21. Col. 2.9, The fruitful Hill, or
Horn of Oil, Isa. 5.2. Yea, his Garden and Vineyard, with all their pleasant
Flowers, Spices and Fruits, have their Rooting in him, Col. 2.6, 7. And Grow in
the Grace and knowledge of him, 2 Pet. 3.18. Cant. 4.11, 12.16. and 2.2, 13. He,
the Word, falling into the Earth, the Humanity, and Dying in the Manhood,
brings forth much Fruit, that grows from and in him, John 12.24. Yea, he is
both the Root and Offspring of David too, Rev. 22.16. Though Growing as a
tender Plant, and as a Root out of a dry Ground, Isa. 53.2. The Branch out of
the Root of Jesse, Isa. 11.1, 10. with Romans 15.12. The pleasant Plant, the Man
whose Name is the Branch, Zech. 3.8. and 6.12. The Branch of the Lord Beautiful
and Glorious, and the Fruit of the Earth, Excellent and Comely. No such Branch,
or Root, or Fruit, as he, Isa. 4.2. The True Vine, John 15.1.4. Whose Grape and
Juice chears both the Heart of God and man, Judge. 9.13. The Apple Tree amongst
the Trees of the Forest, whose Shadow is fragrant and delightful to sit under,
and whose Fruit is pleasant to the taste, Cant. 2.4, 5. Yea, the goodly Cedar
of Lebanon, so strong and durable, and the Palm Tree so Tall and Straight
growing up, though under Weights and Pressures, are Emblems of him and his
Kingdom; he being the Head of the Righteous, the First and Prime of them, Psalm.
92.11. The Green Olive Tree also in the House of God is he, rarather then any
other, trusting as man in the Mercy and Bounty of God (and so Living by the
Father that sent him, John 6.57.) For ever, Psalm. 52.9. He is the choice Flower
in Gods Garden; and his Cheeks are said to be sweet Flowers, Cant. 5.13.

Again, In the solid parts of, and in the Bowels of the Earth, he is
represented by what is therein Excellent. Whether it be what is hard and
durable only, or what is also precious; the Stone for strength: He is the Stone
and Rock of Israel, Genesis 49.24. 2 Samuel 23.3. The Rock of Ages: The Foundation
of Gods Building, that cannot be moved; the sure Foundation, the precious
Corner Stone, with whom what is united, and upon whom whosoever trusts, shall not
be ashamed, 1 Pet. 2.4, 6. Isa. 28.16. Yea, if their be any Pearls in the
bottom of the Sea, Gems, Jewels, or precious Stones, or Metals, in the Bowels
of the Earth; he is far more Rich and Precious then they. He being and
affording that which in the Spirit is called, The Gold of Ophire, and the
Stones of the Brooks, the Almighty, that is the Defense, or Gold; of those that
acquaint themselves with him, and receive the Law from his Mouth. As in him
also we may find plenty of Silver, or Silver of Strength: His Word being as
Silver, seven times purified in the fire, Job 22.22.24. Psalm. 12.6. Yea, The
words of his Mouth, are better to the Soul then Gold, then much fine Gold; yea,
Then thousands of Gold and Silver, Psalm. 9.10. and 119.71. He is the Pearl of
Price, which the wise Merchant sells all to purchase, counting as Loss and
Dung, the most goodly and glistering Pearls besides, that he may win him, Mat.
13.44, 45. Phil. 2.7, 8, 9. Yea, He and the knowledge of him, is that Wisdom
that is better then Pearls and Rubies; not to be valued with the Onyx Stone, or
Topaz of Ethiopia, or what ever other Gems and Jewels: All things that can be
desired, not being comparable therewith, Job 28. Prove. 3.14, 15.

3. If we View the Waters. He is the Ocean of Goodness, and of plenteous
Redemption: Into whose Depths he will cast all his Peoples sins, Mich. 7.18,
19. The Spring and Fountain of Living Waters, Jer. 2.13. The place of broad
Rivers and Streams, much more safe then the Seas; for therein goes no Gally
with Oars, nor gallant Ships, Isa. 33.21. And the Waters which he gives, far
transcend all others in Virtue and Goodness; both for Cleansing, for they
cleanse the fowlest Spots, make clean such as the house of David, and
Inhabitants of Jerusalem; Persons guilty of bloody sins, like Scarlet or
Crimson, Zech. 13.1. Isa. 1.10, 18, 21, 22. And for Fructifying, for they cause
the Trees of Righteousness always to be green, and to bear forth precious and
prosperous Fruits, Psalm. 1.2, 3. Ezekiel. 47.7, 12. And for Quenching the Thirst,
for they cause the Drinkers of them to Thirst no more, John 4.14. Rev. 7.16,
17. Yea, they also produce a multitude of Fish, Souls trusting to and Swiming
in the Goodness of God, as manifested in him. Yea, and they give Life and
Healing to all they come to, Ezekiel. 47.7, 8. And what are not healed by them,
are like Marshes and Miry places, the Sinks of sin. And these Waters are
Christ, and the knowledge of, and abundance of Grace in him, John 6.35. and
7.37, 38, 39.

4. View we the Air, and there we shall find the Clouds useful for shading from
the heat, and the Rain and Dew thence refreshing the Earth, and producing
Fruits therein. And is not Christ a Cloud of Protection and Shadow to his
Servants? Isa. 4.4. And he shall come down like Rain on the mown Grass (those
that are taken down and cut off from their Carnal confidences, and Fleshly
rejoycings in themselves) and as the showers that water the Earth. So as in his
days, the Righteous shall flourish, Psalm. 72.6, 7. Yea, and his Doctrine is as
the Rain, the small Rain, and as the Dew to the tender herb, or heart; because
his Name is therein Proclaimed, Deuteronomy. 32.1, 2. And his Spirit poured out, is
like Water upon the thirsty, and his blessing like floods of water upon the dry
Land, Isa. 44.3, 4. so as he causes to grow, as among the grass, and as the
Willows by the water courses. And He will be as the Dew to Israel, a sweet
refreshing, so as he shall grow as the Lilly and cast forth his roots as
Lebanon, his branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive Tree,
and his smell as Lebanon, Hos. 14.5, 6. Yea, and he makes them that are in him,
and partake of him, to be as the dew too from the Lord, and as the showers upon
the grass, (as he is held forth in and by them) that tarryeth not for man (to
help forward by his Art and industry) nor waits for the Sons of men, Mic.
5.7. In the Air also is the cool refreshing breath, and the winds that
sometimes bring clouds and rain, and sometimes drive them away; sometimes
carries on men's endeavors, and sometime breaks down what resists. And his
Spirit is as the wind which blows and breaths where it lists, and brings
forth the Clouds that have rain in them, his gifted Servants, Joh. 3.8. Isa.
5.6. and showers of heavenly doctrine and blessing. And it is sometime like a
mighty rushing wind, too strong for all that make resistance there-against,
Act. 2.2. and 6.10. And he drives away from, or brings storms upon men, as he
sees fitting, Rev. 7.1, 2. Yea, Christ by his Spirit sometimes fills the Soul
with a fresh Gale, and carries it on with a full Sail of assurance of faith and
hope, while they as Vessels swim upon the Ocean and Streams of his Goodness,
and commit themselves to his care and assistance, Coll. 2.2. Heb. 6.11. and
10.22. Yea, and in the Air there be Thundrings and Lightnings too, representing
his Voice, and the discoveries of Himself, and his wrath; while He thunders
from heaven upon his enemies, 1 Samuel 2.10. and answers his people by terrible
things in righteousness, in the secret place of thunder, Psalm. 65.5. and 81.7.
Yea, and He makes his Servants and Disciples too sometimes Boanerges, Sons of
Thunder, Mark 3.17. And his Lightnings (his sudden, forcible discoveries of
himself, his truth, and judgments) inlighten the earth, Psalm. 97.4.

5. The Fire also represents him who was as devouring Fire in the sight of the
Children of Israel, Exodus 24.13. and, who sits as the Refiners fire to purify
the Sons of Levi, that they may offer a pure offering, Mal. 8.3. And surely He
is that light of Israel that is for a Fire, and his Holy one that is for a
flame, to burn and devour his thorns and briars (the wicked amongst and against
them, with all wicked works) 2 Samuel 23.6, 7. Ezekiel. 2.6. and 28.24. Mal. 4.1.
Heb. 6.8. Isa. 10.17. Yea, his Law is a fiery law, Deuteronomy. 33.2. And his word as
fire to give light, warmth, and helpfulness for purifying, melting, and burning
up what is meet for such operations, Jer. 23.29. and his spirit a Spirit of
burning, Isa. 4.4. wherewith also, as also with fiery trials and afflictions,
he baptizeth; Matthew. 3.11.

6. View we the Heavens; there the bright and the morning star very comfortable
to them that watch for the Morning, and the Sun pleasant for the eye to behold,
are to be seen, and He is the bright and the morning star, Rev. 22.16. The Day
spring (East, or Morning) that has visited us, to give light to them that sit
in darkness, and the shadow of death, and to guide our feet into the ways of
peace, Luc. 1.77.78. A great light, Matthew. 4.16. Yea, He is the glorious Sun of
righteousness that shall arise to those that fear him, with healing under his
wings; and as the Sun in the Firmament has rejoiced, and does to run his
course, Mal. 4.2. Psalm. 19.6. Yea, He is far above the Sun in excellency; for,
the Lord God is a Sun and a Shield too, and will give grace and glory, and no
good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11.

7. View we the Animals and living Creatures, what excellencies or usefulness
is in them, that be not far more excellently in him; the meekness of the Lamb,
its cleanness for Sacrifice to God; goodness, sweetness and wholsomness for
food, and profitableness for clothing to men; its patience in suffering, etc.
are far more excellently in him; the Lamb of God, the spotless Lamb, and
without blemish, that takes away the sin of the World, Joh. 1.29. 1 Pet. 1.19.
Joh. 6.51.53, 55. a Lamb against the ravenous Beasts, who though hated and
hunted by them, bears all with patience and meekness; dumb before the Shearers,
and when led to the slaughter opened not his mouth, Isa. 53.7. and at the last
overcomes them, Rev. 17.14. The strength and courage of the Lion, and the
comeliness of his going, that turns not away from any, being found in him
too, who is therefore styled the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, that has
prevailed. Prove. 30.30. Rev. 5.5. Yea, he overcomes the old Lion and Dragon,
and all the Beasts of prey, which rise up against him. The stately Unicorn and
his erected Horn is but an emblem of Him, and his Kingdom, having the strength
of the Unicorn, Numb. 23.22. and 24.8. and his glory, and strength called his
Horn, shall be exalted like the Unicornes horn, Psalm. 92.10. The Roe and the
young Heart leaping on the mountains, is he in the liveliness of his love, Cant.
2.9, 17. and 8.14. The Hen or any other Bird most loving to her Chickens or
young ones, are short of him too in his desire to gather Souls under him for
his defense, and in keeping warm and safe those that trust under the shadow of
his wings, Matthew. 23.37. Psalm. 91.3.

II. View we Man, Gods prime workmanship at the first, Genesis 1.26. and Christ's
delight, Prove. 8.31. and we shall find no excellency given Man, wherein Christ
excells not; View we,

1. His Body, with its Members; they are made use of to express, or rather
figure his excellencies, who also was made Man, and took an humane body now
made glorious: under the names of Man's bodily members, he has discovered his
perfections; but so, as far surpasses all that is in other men's bodies; for, his
Head is as the most fine gold, to signify the preciousness of his Deity and
Authority, his Rule and Government, and how exceeding rich and precious his
thoughts and inventions; 1 Cor. 11.3. Psalm. 139.17, 18. His locks bushie and
black as a Raven, his thoughts exceeding many to us and deep, and so are the
acts and exercises of his Authority and Government over us, and for us; his
judgments also unsearchable and full of strength, youth and beauty, Psalm. 4.6.
and 92.5, 6. Romans 11.33. His eyes (or inspections) like Doves eyes washed with
milk, undefiled, pure and clean, chaste and single, and fitly set, nothing wrong
or amiss in them, he seasonably beholds our needs and wants, and discovers
either love or anger, as is meet for us. His cheeks, the appearance of his
face, as beds of spices, sweet flowers, both lovely to the view, and grateful
to the taste and smell, sweet, fragrant, precious, refreshing the inward senses.
His lips like Lillies dropping sweet smelling myrrh; his words pure and clean,
precious, refreshing the heart, and physical, and full of purging, healing
virtue to the Soul and Conscience. His Hands as Gold-rings set with the Beryll,
his powerful acts and works precious, rich, heavenly, and his power without
beginning or end. His Belly as bright Ivory overlaid with sapphires, his inward
hearty affections, and bowelly compassions manifest, pure, clean and chaste, and
most preciously rich, and enriching, as opened and disclosed in the Holy Books
or Scriptures of truth. His Legs as Pillars of Marble, his goings strong and
steady, set upon Sockets of fine gold, having their Basis or Foundation in his
Deity, or also in his precious sufferings, wherein he was as Gold tried in the
Fire for us, and all suitable to his Word and Wisdom, more precious then the
finest Gold, Psalm. 19.10. and 119.72.127. Prove. 3.14. and 8.10, 18, 19. His
(...) like Li^^^^^, excellent as the Cedars; his stature, and the growth of his
glory, and glorious Kingdom, such as is beautiful and fragrant, strong,
durable, and such as over-passeth all others, and his love and favor
marveilous, great, strong, and refreshing. His mouth most sweet; his gracious
and heavenly Doctrine sweeter then the honey and the honey comb, Psalm. 19.10.
and 119.72. Yea, he is altogether lovely, or love and desires, worthy to be
admired and beloved of us, Cant. 5.10, 16. and though he has not always one
and the same appearance attributed to him, yet its always excellent and
glorious.

In Dan. 10.6. his Body appeared like the Beryll, of a sky-colour, to signify
his heavenliness, and the heavenliness into which he brings his Church; his
face as the appearance of lightning, terrible to his enemies, and exceeding
bright, pure and glorious in its sudden transient manifestations. His Eyes as
Lamps of Fire; his inspections such as discover things in the dark, and burn up
things combustible, and such as are saving to his People, Isa. 62.1. Yea, his
eyes behold, his eyelids try the Children of men, Psalm. 11.5. His arms
(wherewith he works) and his feet, (wherewith he walks) like in color to
polished brass, strong, bright, glorious and pure, for his work is perfect, and
all his ways are judgment, a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right
is he, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Or, as Nebuchadnezar expressed it, His works are truth, and
his ways judgment, and such as walk in pride, he is able to abase, Dan. 4.37.
The voice of his words, like the voice of a multitude. Such firmness in his
sayings, and testimonies that are as much or more to be believed, then what is
testified by a multitude of witnesses: In Rev. 1.14. its a little otherwise.
His head white like wool, white as snow, to show him to be from of old, from
everlasting; Mic. 5.2. The everlasting Father, Isa. 9.6. and his Authority and
Government to be perfectly pure, and immixed with any thing of evil: His eyes
as flames of fire; his views such, as perfectly discerns what is in the dark,
and makes it evident, burning up the evil. His feet like unto fine brass, like
as if they burned in a Furnace, which may signify (beside what we noted on them
in Daniel) the fiery trials that he orders in his ways and providence, for
purifying his members in their goings; and yet the durableness of his ways and
meanest, and greatliest suffering members, that are not thereby consumed, but
consume what opposes his walkings. His voice as the sound of many waters,
which signifies a multitude of witnesses, as before. In his right hand seven
Stars, to signify his holding and upholding by his power, and favor, his
shining Ministers, and disposing them as he pleases. And out of his mouth went
a sharp Sword; his quick and piercing Word, with its Instructions, Reproofs,
and Judgments: And, his countenance, as the Sun, when it shines in its
strength; his favor affording most excellent, and full light of understanding,
warmth, and chearing of heart, and effecting fruitfulness in all good things,
when it shines forth; such is He, as he is represented in the similitude of a
man; yea, as He took a body of flesh for us, so He therein and therethrough, is
the body or substance of all things, that typed him out: Col. 2.16. But, let us
view him also in the Perfections of,

2. Man's inside, as made of God. God breathed into Man the breath of life, and
Man became a living Soul. Life is common to Man with other Creatures, and is a
great excellency of the Creatures endued with it, making them therein to excel
the inanimate. Christ not only has life in himself, but is the life, the life
of the Soul, the Resurrection and the Life: Joh. 11.25. The Way, the Truth, and
the Life: Joh. 14.6. Yea, all life he gives to the Soul, as well as He has it
in himself; Life of growth; for, as he himself grew in wisdom, stature, and
favor, both with God and man; so he causes the Soul to grow in grace; as He
in the knowledge of himself, comes more and more into it. The Thessalonians
being in God, and Christ, their faith and love grew exceedingly, 2 These. 1.1,
3. 2 Pet. 3.18. Life of sense and motion; He has that perfectly; for, he
beholds all things, and nothing is hid from his sight, but all things are
opened and naked before him; Heb. 4.12, 13. Though, yet through charity, none
so blind as he, not to see and observe against us our iniquities, Isa. 42.19,
20. Psalm. 130.3, 4. He hears all things; for, he that planted the ear, shall
not he hear, Psalm. 94.9. Though through charity he is often, as one deaf, to what
may make against men, so as not to testify his hearing in punishing them: Isa.
42.19, 20. But, he hears the cry of the poor and helpless; yea, he hears from
heaven: Psalm. 102.20. compared with ver. 25, 26. and Heb. 1.10, 11. He smells
the savor of his Spouses Ointments above all Spices, and her Garments as the
smell of Lebanon; Cant. 4.10, 11. He tastes the sweetness of her love more then
Wine, and eats his honeycomb with his honey, and drinks his Wine with his
milk; and finds sweetness and refreshing therein. Cant. 4.10. and 5.1. Though
he will not smell in the solemn Assemblies of evil doers, taste their
sacrifices, nor regard their Songs, or the melody of their Viols; Amos 5.21,
22, 23. He feels also our infirmities, and can be touched with his Peoples
injuries, and be sensible of their miseries. He that touches them, touches
the apple (...) patient bearing Injuries, and Evils, and going through with his
Work, so as nothing turned him back, Isa. 50.5, 6. Heb. 12.2. Temperance; for
the Honors and Preferments, Riches, and Pleasures of this World, could not
move him from his course; neither when Satan bad for his Service, the Kingdoms
of the World, and their Glory, Mat. 4.8, 9. Nor when the people would have made
him a King, John 6.15. Prudence; for its fore-testified of him by his Father:
Behold my Servant shall deal prudently, Isa. 52.13. And he is the Spring of all
these Excellencies, to all that listen to, and obey his Doctrine, giving them
to know, and understand all things, Prove. 28.5. 1 John 2.20, 27. And to discern
the things that differ, and approve the things that are excellent, Rev. 3.18.
Phil. 3.10, 11. Makes them to remember him, and in him God and his Goodness,
and what he sees good for them; by his Spirit, bringing all things to their
remembrance, John 14.26. Cant. 1.4. Gifts them severally as he pleases, with
Knowledge, Invention, and Finding out of Secrets, Prove. 1.2, 3, 4. Renews the
Affections to love good, and hate evil; and in a word, through the discoveries
of his Glory, he changes them into his own Image, making them a new man, endued
with all manly Qualities, and Virtues; Righteousness, Fortitude or Courage in
enduring Adversities, and going on in his ways with all Perseverance,
Temperance, in denying their Lusts, and Appetites, and living Soberly and
Righteously in this present world; and prudence in walking wisely; yea, in all
wisdom to all well pleasing, 2 Cor. 3.18. Ephesians. 2.6. and 4.15, 16, 21, 22, 23.
Col. 1.9, 10, 11. and 3.10. Tit. 2.11, 12. As may be seen in his Worthies, who
through the Faith of him, have loved and wrought Righteousness; so as for the
sake thereof, to suffer and endure all things, as may be seen in that Cloud of
Witnesses, Heb. 11. with 1 Samuel 18.30. Genesis 39 1, 2, 8, 9, 21, 22, 23. Dan.
1.8, 9.12.17. and 6.4, 5. etc. Yea,

3. He had not only (even in his mortal state too) the perfections of the first
Man, as to matter of Virtue and Integrity of mind, but also in that state he
managed them far better then the first Adam did: For Adam though in a Garden of
delight or Paradise, free from Infirmities in himself, or trouble from without
him, having the abundance of all Delights or Mercies before his Eyes, every one
of which might have minded him of Gods Goodness, and the good reason he had to
love and cleave to him; yet merely by the Temptation of a Creature, fell from
his Obedience at the first onset, Evah by the temptation of the Serpent, and
Adam by her suggestion; But Christ (who though in the state before his
Incarnation, was higher then the first Adam, being the Lord in Heaven, the
Image of the Invisible God; and so owned by the Angels as the Lord at his
coming into the World, before which he also lived with his Father, in the
height of Glory and Happiness, Phil. 2.6. yet) now in his Incarnate state, had
emptied himself of all that for us; yet in this State, though made in the
similitude of sinful Flesh, and compassed about with Temptations among Men and
Devils; though led into a Wilderness, where he eat nothing for forty days, and
forty nights; among no pleasant Fruit Trees, or Objects of such Content and
Delight, but among wild Beasts, tempted by Satan, resisted him all along in
manifold assaults, and got the Victory over him, and kept his Integrity. Yea,
though all his life after he was set upon with diversity of Enemies and
Assaults, and met with nothing in the world, in a manner but Trials and Griefs,
the worst Rejections, Reproaches and Sufferings: Yea, though tempted both of
Men and of Devils, and tried to the uttermost by his Father, yet held fast his
Integrity, and was obedient to the Death, the Death of the Cross; indeed for
our sakes, though as Innocent in himself, as, and more perfect in his
conforming himself to Gods Will, then Adam; yet he was not here in the form of
the first Adam, while Innocent as to his outward man and state. He was not so
free from Mortality and Infirmity, for he was tempted in all points even as we;
with Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, Grief, Torments, etc. nor had such power in the
world over the Creatures as to his visible Form, but was in the Form of a
Poor-man, and a Servant, who had not whereon to lay his head. Yea, he was in
all the state of the fallen man, made sin, and under the Law, and bare our
Curse; in which he showed forth the exceeding greatness of his Love and
Obedience to his Father, and Charity to us men; Virtues far transcending all
that was found in the first Adams acting, though made good and upright: Yet
through Death having satisfied Gods Justice, and pacified his Wrath for us,
overcome Death, spoiled Principalities and Powers, risen a Conqueror, and gone
up to the Right Hand of God: As he was before much Higher then the first Man,
being the Lord in Heaven, 1 Cor. 15.45.50. So now also he has restored the
Nature of man in himself, from under all the Miseries that the first Adams sin
occasioned to it, and to him in it, and has Exalted it, and is Exalted in it
to far higher Happiness; and so we find in him both as in himself before, and
as Man now.

4. All the perfections of man that he first laid aside in his first appearance
for us, to suffer in the Flesh: Yea, all, and greater then all Adam had in all
the Honor God put upon him, and the Provisions he made for him in his Innocent
state. For as he made himself of exceeding rich, through his great charity and
grace to us, poor, that through his poverty we might be made rich; so to that
end, that he might enrich us, He is become in the manhood far richer then the
first Adam was: for, the Father loves the Son, and has given all things into
his hands; Joh. 3.35. So as all that the Father has is his, Joh. 16.15. and he
is Lord of all, Act. 10.36. He that was in the form of God, made himself in the
form of a Servant, and in the habit of a Man, even of an ordinary man for our
sake, having neither outward form or beauty, when we see him that we should
desire him: nor Authority and Power to command any man, but such as voluntarily
became his Disciples: but, now the Sun is not so glorious, much less was the
body of Adam in his innocence, as his body being glorified is, Act. 26.13.
Philip. 3.21. Nor, is there any Authority beside comparable with his. Adam
indeed had Dominion over Gods works that are visible in Earth and Sea, but all
Authority both in heaven and earth, is now given to him, and he does exercise
it over them. Adam knew how to call all the names of the living Creatures, but
Christ not only knows what is in them, and in men also; yea, all men, Joh.
2.24, 25. but also he knows his own name, and his Father and Fathers name,
which none else does, Joh. 7.29. Rev. 19.12. Matthew. 11.27. Adam then had
provision made for him, that he might in standing, live, and been immortal; a
Garden planted, furnished with all variety of Trees and Fruits, pleasant to the
sight, and good for food; and a River of Water running therein to water it, and
a Tree of Life in the midst of it.

And surely Christ, as he had delight in God, and fullness of glory and
satisfaction in, and with him, before his Incarnation (it being the same glory
he had with him before the World was, that now he has, Joh. 17.5) So now also
he lives in God ( yea, when in the flesh, he lived by his Father, as he that
eats him lives by him; Joh. 6.57) and it was, and surely is his meat and drink
to do his Fathers will, Joh. 4.34. and He also has planted a pleasant Garden,
and an Orchard of Pomegranates with pleasant Fruits, Camphire, Nard, Spikenard,
Saffron, and Calamus, and Cinnamon, and all the Trees of Frankincense, Myrrh
and Aloes, with all the chief Spices; and there is (or rather he is) the
fountain of Gardens, a Well of living waters, and streams from Lebanon, Cant.
4.15. And he exercises himself to dress this, as the first Adam his; and he
eats of his pleasant fruits, which it brings forth to him. Gathers his Myrrh
with his Spices, eats his honeycomb with his honey. The fruits brought forth
by his spirit in his People are the joy of his heart, and as his pleasant meat;
and he drinks his Wine with his milk; even the love of his Spouse, and of his
Children to him, which he has begot in them, by his spirit, and the
expressions of it; Cant. 4.11, 13, 14. and 5.1. Joh. 15.11. And he is all this
to us and for us. Adam again had a Sabbath to rest in; and surely Christ rested
in the Father, and in his love, even before the foundations of the World; and
rests in his love to his People, Zeph. 3.17. Yea, and having offered one
perfect Sacrifice now to God for us, is set down, and rests for ever from all
his sufferings and toilsome work and service in his Priestly ministration, at
his Fathers right hand; there expecting till all his foes be made his
footstool, Heb. 10.11, 12, 13. And is the Rest and Sabbath for us to rest in,
Heb. 4.3, 4. Mat. 11.28. Adam was made in Gods Image; and Christ is the Image
of the invisible Majesty, the brightness of his glory, and express Character of
his Person, Col. 1.15. Heb. 1.3. Adam was Male and Female, as Adam is the
common name of both, Genesis 5.1. and Christ takes on him both forms often. He is
the man Christ Jesus; 1 Timothy 2.5. Yet sometime he is represented in the
Feminine form; as Wisdom has built her house, and hewed out her seven
Pillars, Prove. 9.1, 2. And as he is the everlasting Father, that begets
Children to himself, and to his Father: So, he brings them forth too, through
the travail of his Soul, Isa. 9.6. and 53.10. Yet, as God see it good for Adam
not to be alone; and therefore he made him an help-meet for him out of his
side, while he was cast by him into a deep sleep: and so formed the woman for
him, and brought her to him that leaving Father, and Mother, Man might cleave
to his Wife: even so Christ also has a Spouse formed out of his side; out of
his flesh, and out of his bone, through his sleeping in death; which he has
left Father and Mother to cleave unto, and in her is his delight, Ephesians. 5.30.
Isa. 62.4, 5. Adam and Eve were naked, and were not ashamed in their innocent
state (or, as the words may be read, they behaved themselves prudently, and did
not shame themselves, Genesis 2.25) and did not see themselves naked, till they
had sinned; for, till then, they were comely through the beauty and glory of
God upon them, and their integrity and innocence; and Gods favor and
protection was their defense and cover, from any thing that might harm them:
but after they had sinned, and Christ was interposed to be their Savior, God
clothed them with Coats. So Christ also, and his Spouse are represented as
naked sometimes one to the other; and there is no shame therein. So Christ is
nakedly represented, in Cant. 5.12, 16. and so we find the Spouse his Church
set forth, as exceeding comely, lovely and beautiful, without any Ornaments, or
clothing mentioned, save upon her feet, to keep her clean, and safe in her
walking with him, Cant. 7.1, 7. Yet, at other times we find Christ represented
as clothed, not as having any thing of shame to be hid and covered; but as
Adam, before he see himself naked, was covered with the glorious Ornaments of
his own virtues, and the glory of God upon him; So it is said, The Lord
reigns, he is clothed with Majesty, the Lord is clothed with strength, he
has girded himself, etc. Psalm. 93.1. and in Dan. 10. we find him clothed with
linen, his own innocence and purity, as the high Priest that was to offer the
atoneing Sacrifice; and girded with the fine gold of Vphaz: that is, with his
truth, more precious then the finest gold; as in Isa. 11.5. Righteousness the
girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins; in Rev. 1.12.
we find him clothed with a Garment down to his Feet: The Robe of Righteousness,
wherewith he covers his whole Body, the Church, even to his lowest and
meanest Members; and girt about the paps with a golden girdle; his heart girt
with love and charity (or strengthened therewith) the bond of all perfection, as
its called, Col. 3.14. He has (as Princes use to have) changes of Raiment, in
which is much preciousness. We may find him sometimes among his People in
Garments of Salvation and Praise; Isa. 61.10. And sometimes clothed with
Garments of Vengeance, against his and their Enemies: So in Rev. 10.1. We find
him clothed with a Cloud (as threatening trial to his Church, or vengeance to
his Enemies; and with a Rainbow about his head: as mindful of his Covenant
with them that fear him, in Isa. 59.17. He is clad as a Man of War, having
righteousness on as a Brestplate, and the Helmet of Salvation on his Head,
(which he has for his Body the Church also, Ephesians. 6.14, 15) and he put on the
Garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal, as a cloak. And in
Isa. 63.1, 2. He is represented red in his Aapparel, and his Garments dyed and
stained with blood; because of the vengeance executed by him on his Enemies, as
also in Rev. 19.12. But when he is clad as a Bridegroom or Suitor to our Souls,
all his Garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, (sweet, healthful, and
purging Spices and Perfumes) out of the Ivory Palaces wherewith they have made
him glad, Psalm. 45.8. And we find his Spouse clothed and adorned by him, and
for him too, in Ezekiel. 10, 11, 12, 13. and in Rev. 19.7, 8. But of these things
I shall not speak more largely.

III. We have seen the perfections of man. Let us a little (as we may) view
also those of the Angels. He is also called, the Angel of the Covenant. Angel
is in English a Messenger, and therefore so translated in our later Editions of
the Bible, in Mal. 3.1. The Angel of Gods presence that saved Israel, Isa.
63.9. And that redeemed Jacob out of all evil; and had power of blessing: Genesis
48.16. And surely He is the highest and best Messenger, or Angel that was ever
sent of God, being his only Son. Nor can we find any excellency in the Angels,
in which he does not outstrip them: They are said to excel in strength, doing
Gods commandments: Psalm. 107.20. but they excel not, nor equalize him in
either: They cannot uphold all things by the Word of their Power, as He does,
Heb. 1.3. Nor could they stand under the weight of our sins, as He did; 1 Pet.
2.24. Therefore they give him the pre-eminence; and judge him only Worthy to
receive the Power, Riches, Wisdom and Strength, Honor, Glory and Blessing,
Rev. 5.12. Nor do they Gods Commandments, like or equally to him, who obeyed to
the death, the Death of the Cross, laying down his life at his Fathers
commandment, and delighting to do his will therein; so as to bear and take
away our sins by the sacrifice of himself, Philip. 2.8. Joh. 10.18. Heb. 9.26.
and 10.5, 6. Psalm. 40.48. Joh. 14.31. They are also intelligent and
understanding spirits, great in knowledge, and excellent in speech, 1 Cor.
13.1. yet far short of him: for, God has found folly in them, says Job 4.18.
but Christ is the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. knowing his Father, whom none
else so knows, Matthew. 11.27: and grace is poured into his lips, so as God has
blessed him for ever; Psalm. 45.2. They are also great in power, especially such
of them as are called Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 1.20, 21. but not equal
with Christ, to whom all of them are commanded to give worship. He has
obtained a far more excellent name by inheritance then they, as may be seen,
Heb. 1.5, 6. to the end. They are indeed Spirits, but ministering Spirits to
him. He is the Lord that Spirit, the quickening Spirit, so as none of them are;
2 Cor. 3.16, 17. 1 Cor. 15.45. So that in him are all the perfections, and more
then all the perfections of Creatures: Yea,

CHAP. XXII.
Secondly, That in Christ are all things Answering the Needs of Fallen man, all
things that pertain both to Life and Godliness.

All things pertaining to Life and Godliness, and they are given us in the
knowledge of him, 2 Pet. 1.3. Let us view that in either Branch.

First, All things pertaining to Life he is, and are in him for us. And that
both as

1. Necessary to the Being and Upholding of it, not only as by his Death and
Sacrifice we are (and this Old World for us is) upholden; so as that we may
subsist and Live, as it were from Death or the state thereof (which we were
Obnoxious to) under a comfortable Enjoyment of a natural Life and Being; and
have therein opportunities of seeking the Lord, Psalm. 73.3. Acts 17.26, 27. But
also in reference to a Spiritual life and happy being in, and from him. And so
whereas

First, It Is necessary to our so Living, that we be Begotten from the Dead to
live to God, he is the Begetter of men thereto, the everlasting Father, Isa.
9.6. Who Begets in his own likeness as Adam did in his, but far better Children;
because Adam Begat none, till he was fallen into Sin and Misery, whereas Christ
Begets as one acquit of sin, and raised from Death in, and unto Righteousness
and Life; an holy Seed, a blessed offspring, Children of Light, and heirs of
Life everlasting. Yea, he is the very Seed of Regeneration, as held forth in
his Testimony by the holy Spirit, the Immortal Seed, whereof the Sons of God
are Begotten; the Word preached in the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.23, 24, 25. And as he
himself is the first Begotten from the Dead, so by his Resurrection from the
Dead, he Begets from Death and quickens to a Lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. with
Ephesians. 2.1. Col. 2.12. John 5.21, 25. And this as to the Soul here, as he will
also by his powerful Voice, quicken the Dead in Body to Life again at his
Coming, being the quickening Spirit, John 5.28, 29. 1 Cor. 15.45. And in both
respects the Resurrection and the Life, John 11.25. Yea, and he gives Power to
others, and makes them Instruments to Beget Children to God, and to bring them
forth for him too, as in 1 Cor. 4.15. The Apostle tells the Corinthians he was
their Father, for in the Gospel he had Begot them, yet so as in Christ Jesus;
there is none can Beget Children to God, but in him and his Virtue. And as they
are the Fruit of the travail of his Soul, Isa. 53.10. So in, and from him
others are instrumental Mothers, to Travail in Birth with them also, Gal. 4.19.

2. The Children Born must be Nursed up, and he is the prime in Nursing what he
Begets and brings forth; for he can no more forget them then (no nor so much
as) a Mother her sucking Child, Isa. 49.14, 15. He nourishes them principally
(though he makes his Servants Instruments of Nursing them up too) with the
sincere Milk of his Word; which he also primarily is as more understandibly
discovered to the weak, in his heavenly Doctrine, 1 Pet. 2.2. Isa. 55.13. Heb.
5.13. Yea, and he comforts his Children as one whom his Mother comforts, Isa.
66.13. And surely its by manifesting himself to them, that he gives them
comfort, John 14.16, 17, 21. And in this Nursing up, and causing to live, as
the living Child must have. So

1. He is the Bread and Water of Life, John 6.35. and 4.10.14. his Flesh meat
indeed, and his Blood drink indeed. And as the living Child needs clothing. So

2. He is the Clothing and Apparel. For he as our Righteousness put on by us
in believing on him, and his Virtues as adorning us, is our Raiment and
Ornament too. Whence that, So many of us as have been Baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. And, Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans
13.14. And he bids us Buy of him white Raiment, that our Nakedness may be
covered, and that our shame may not appear, Rev. 3.18.

3. It must have harbor and Lodging. And he is the Dewlling Place for his
Children in all Generations, Psalm. 90.1. Where is sweet Peace, Rest, and
Safety, Psalm. 4.8. and 91.1. He being a house of Stone, a strong habitation to
defend, and save us from our Enemies, Psalm. 31.4. and 71.3. Yea, and he is
Armor of Defense too, A Shield to all that trust in him, Psalm. 84.11. Prove.
2.7.

4. It must have Rest and Sleep. And he is the Rest wherewith the weary may
rest, Isa. 28.12. And in him (the true and heavenly Wisdom) we may lie down,
and our sleep be sweet, Prove. 3.25.

Thirdly, Yea, all that God afforded to Israel in the Wilderness, in their
Travels, as needful for their Life, Christ is made it of God to us; the Bread
of God that comes down from Heaven, that gives power to eat of it self, because
its living Bread (so as that Manna could not do, because not living) and gives
Eternal life to what eats it too, whereas they who eat that Manna died, John
6.50.58. And he is the true Rock, from whence smitten with the Rod of Moses
(the Curse of the Law) for us gushes out the Water of Life; for the Rock that
followed them was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.3. But a far stronger and more lasting
Rock, then that as being Eternal, and affording better Waters that will spring
up in them that drink them unto Eternal life, John 4.14. They had a Serpent
lifted up to heal them when wounded, and he is that as here is noted. The Cloud
too, to go before and giving us with himself, also a cloud of Witnesses, and a
refreshing Shadow. And a Pillar of fire to give us Light by Night, even in our
darkness, Isa. 4.5. Heb. 12.1.

Secondly, He is also for our well and comfortable being; many things we need
to make our lives more cheerful, and we have all good to that purpose in him
too. As for Instance,

1. It Is a comfort to have good Company and Fellowship. It was not good for the
man to be alone. He that has Christ, never wants good Company, for he will be
with us: He will never leave us nor forsake us, so that we may boldly say: The
Lord is my helper, I will not fear, etc. Heb. 13.5, 6. Isa. 43.2.3. For he is
as good as Ten Thousand, and more. He is enough to set against the greatest
Army, or Multitude. So when Hezekiah would comfort his people against the
numerous Army of the King of Assyria; he tells them, There was more with them
then with their Enemy, and when he comes to account, he mentions none but the
Lord their God, 2 Chronicles. 32.8. for he has all at his Beck. If David was worth
ten Thousand of the people, 2 Samuel 18.3. How much more worth is the Son of
David, who is David's Lord? He that has him, having the Father also; they come
together to abide with them, who receive and keep his words, John 14.23. and so
we may have Fellowship with the Father, and with the Son, 1 John 1.3, 4. And to
be sure the holy Spirit is not wanting where they Two are, for they Three are
one, 1 John 5.7. And the holy Spirit is upon him, Isa. 42.1. Yea, and an
innumerable company of Angels do attend him, and the Church of the Firstborn,
and the Spirits of Just men made perfect, Heb. 12.22, 23.

2. Its comfortable to have Friends and Relations, and they have all that have
him: For he is that Friend that loves at all times, and the Brother born for
adversity, Prove. 17.17. Yea, he stands in all, and affords the comfort of all
Relations: The everlasting Father, and yet the Child born for us, and the Son
given to us, Isa. 9.6. That cares for us as a Father, 2 Cor. 12.14. 1 Pet. 5.7.
And comforts us as a Mother, Isa. 66: 12, A Brother to us, and not ashamed to
be so called, Heb. 2.12. And yet owns us as a Mother, as well as Brethren and
Sisters, if we do Gods will, hearing his Word and keeping it, Mat. 12.49. He
bids us call Wisdom our Sister too, and Understanding our Kinswoman, Prove. 7.4.
And he is Wisdom, and (has) Understanding, and gives it to us, Prove. 8.1.14.
with Luke 11.49. and Mat. 23.34. So then, as we are Children begotten by him,
he is our Father, Isa. 8.18. with Heb. 2.13. As we are the Fruit of the Travail
of his Soul. He is to us (and pities, and loves us as) a Mother, Isa. 49.13,
14. As we are made partakers of his Divine Nature, and he of our humane, he is
our Brother, and as he is the Wisdom of God, our Sister, and Mother, as we
conceive in our hearts in the knowledge and faith of him, and he took his
humanity of us, or of our Nature he is our Child or Son; yea, he makes his
Relations ours, his Father our Father, his Brethren and Sisters ours, and so us
to be Brethren to each other, Mat. 23.8. John 20.17. Yea, as we are his Sheep
he is our Shepherd, to take care of, feed and lead us, and preserve us from
evil, the good Shepherd, John 10.15. As we are his Disciples, he is our Master,
and as we are his Servants, so he is our Lord; not hard and froward, but Good,
Gentle, and Righteous, our Master in heaven, Mat. 23.10 Col. 4.1. John 13.13.
As we are a City, he is our Ruler and Governor, as we are his Subjects, he is
our King, as we are Espoused to him, he is our Husband, etc. Isa. 54.5. And
Good, yea, Excellent in all these, and affords the Comfort of all these
Relations in the most excellent manner.

3. Its comfortable to have good Cheer, rich Provisions and Accomodations,
Mirth and Pleasures, lawful and allowed of God. And Christ is, and affords all
this to us, not only Bread to strengthen our Hearts, but also a Feast of fat
things full of Marrow; not only Water, but Wine and Milk, Wine on the Lees, and
well Refined, Isa. 55.1, 2. and 25.6. Not only necessaries to keep us alive,
but fatness too for our souls, delight, fat things wherewith we may be
satisfied, and Rivers of Pleasures whereof we may Drink abundantly, Psalm. 36.8,
9.

4. Yea, in a word, Riches and Honors are often comfortable, and Riches and
Honors are with him, yea, durable Riches and Righteousness, his fruit is
better then Gold, yea, then fine Gold; and his Revenues then choice Silver,
Prove. 8.18, 19. For he is the Wisdom, that is better then Rubies, and all the
things to be desired, not to be compared with him; in whose Right Hand is
length of days, and in whose Left hand Riches and honors; his Ways are ways of
Pleasantness, and all his Paths peace. He is a Tree of Life to every one that
lays hold on him, and happy is every one that retains him, Prove. 3.13.18. He
and his Presence gives joy and delight, and is a Spring of Content and Comfort
in a First-fruit here, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7, 8. But fully in his everlasting Presence
and Enjoyment of his Glory, Jude 24.

5. Yea, He (like Solomon his Type) has his Royal Palace, Psalm. 45.15. Great
Works, Vineyards, Gardens, and Orchards, planted with all Trees, and all kind
of Fruits, Cant. 4.10, 11. for those that Retain and Appertain to him. Pools of
Waters also, Isa. 35.6, 7. Servants, Psalm. 134.1, 2. and Maidens, Prove. 9.3.
Great possessions of small and great Cattle, above all others, Heb. 2.6, 7, 8.
with Psalm. 8.7, 8. Yea, The Silver and Gold is his, Hag. 2.8. And the peculiar
delights of Kings, Cant. 1.4. and 3.9, 10. Yea, he has Men-singers, and
Women-singers, Psalm. 68.25. And the delights of the Sins of men, Eccles. 2.4,
5, 6, 7, 8. etc. Psalm. 37.4. And all these are comfortable.

6. It makes much also for our comfortable Living, to have all such Gifts and
Offices afforded us, or persons endued with, and set in them Wise and Faithful,
to use and discharge them as we stand in need of in their Exercise. And he is,
and affords all such useful Mercies to us, as flow from such Gifts and Offices
needful for us, ^^ to instance,

First. We are foolish, and need Instruction and Counsel. He is the Counselor
to instruct and counsel us; and Counsel, even the Spirit of Counsel is with and
upon him, that he might direct and advise us, Isa. 9.6. and 11.2. Prove. 8.14.
And he is free to counsel us, yea, calls us to him, to hear him, and receive
his Instruction; and is angry with men for nothing so much, is because they
will not be Counseled and Ruled by him, Prove. 8.22, 23. and 19.20. and 1.22,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, etc.

Secondly, We are full of Diseases in our Souls and Spirits, full of spiritual
Weaknesses and Distempers, possessed with evil Spirits or humors, etc. And he
is the great Physician, and the good One, going about and doing good, and
healing (tendering healing to, and ready to heal) all that are oppressed of the
Devil; not denying or turning away any unhealed, what ever be their spiritual
Distempers, that come unto him, will wait upon him and be his Disciples, and
follow his Counsels, Mat. 9.12. Acts 10.38. Yea, he is both the Physician and
the Physic, Gods salvation, and saving health, Psalm. 67.2. The knowledge of him
heals, he that abides in him sins not, he that sins has not seen him,
nor known him, 1 John 3.6.

Thirdly, We are beset with Enemies, and he is the Man of War, the Lord of
Hosts to vanquish them for us, and deliver us from them, Exodus 15.3, 6. Who
has spoiled Principalities and Powers, and by his own Arm, and his own
Right Hand got himself the Victory, and Triumphed over them through his Cross
gloriously. Col. 2.15. Psalm. 98.1, 2. Exodus 15.2. Has overcome the world, and
gives us the Victory through the Faith of him, John 16.33. 1 John 5.3, 4.

Fourthly, We need Comfort, and such to comfort us, as know our Disturbances
and Troubles, and how to apply comfort to us; and he has the Tongue of the
Learned, and knows how to speak a word in season to the weary soul, Isa. 50.4,
5. Having through Afflictions and Temptations gained all Experience, ^he is fit
to Sympathize with us, comfort and succor us in all our Temptations, Heb.
2.17, 18. and 4.15. Yea, he is the great Master of the Music, that makes and
tunes Instruments to sound forth Melodiously his Praises, and Plays skilfully
upon them, to make cheerful his Friends and Servants; the Prophet Ezekiel was
as a Song of such a one, Ezekiel. 33.32.

Fifthly, We are apt to Inthral our selves, and we need a Redeemer and
Redemption, and he is both, the Redeemer of Israel, Isa. 54.5. And made unto us
of God Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Buying us out from Gods displeasure, and
bringing us out from Bondage, to Sin and Satan, 1 Cor. 6.19. John 8.36.

Sixthly, We are Travelers, and need a Conductor and Leader, and God has
given him for a Leader to us, Isa. 55.4.

Seventhly, We are Soldiers, and need a Captain and Commander, and God has
given us him for a Commander, Isa. 55.4. The Author and Captain of our
salvation, Heb. 2.10. and 5.9.

Eighthly, We are apt to fall out with one another and offend God, and he is the
Peacemaker, the Peace between God and us, and us with one another; listening
to, and minding him, he will Reconcile us and Unite us together, Ephesians. 2.13,
14.16. The Prince of Peace, Isa. 9.6. Yea, the King of Righteousness, and King
of Peace, Heb. 7.1, 2. And our Mediator, and Advocate, and Interceder with
God, when we offend him, 1 Timothy 2.5. Heb. 7.25. Isa. 53.12. 1 John 2.2.

7. There are many Services and Ministries, useful and needful for the Life's
welfare, and the comfortable Accomodations of men therein; and such is his
great Charity and Humility, that Took upon himself the form of a Servant, and
was sound in Fashion as a man; that to help us he refuses not to serve us in
love; setting us an Example of like Love and Humility, that we also might serve
one another in Love. Not out of meanness of Spirit, for he needs us not, nor is
there any more high and lofty then he, Isa. 57.15. But it is his Love and great
Condescension to us, who Came not to be Ministered to, but to Minister, and to
give his Life a Ransom for many, Mat. 20.28. And was as one that served, while
his Disciples were as those that sit at Table, Luke 22.27. And so,

1. We are stripped naked by our sins, and our shame is laid open, and we can of
our selves get nothing, but Fig Leaves to cover us, and keep us warm; now He
not only provides us, and is our clothing (as we have noted) but also makes
them for us, and puts them on us; The Lord God made Coats of the skins of
Beasts for Adam and his Wife, and clothed them, Genesis 3.7, 21. Now, all things
that were made, were made by Christ. Joh. 1.3. and therefore also those Coats
for our first Parents; and He has made, and must make our Garments for us, and
cloth us still, Isa. 61.10. Though he also requite us in his strength to put
them on us, putting off, and laying aside our own rags, as he helps us; Ephesians.
4.21, 22, 23. Romans 13.13, 14.

2. We need meat; and he not only is it, but also prepares it for us; and is
ready to minister it to us: Wisdom has prepared her feast, she has killed her
killing; she has mingled her Wine, and furnished her Table: and as she uses
the Ministry of her Maidservants to call in her Guests, so she also cries
with them, Pro. 9.2, 3, 4. And he tells his Disciples, that if they watch for
him, and his coming, he will make them to sit down to meat, and he will gird
himself and serve them: Luc. 12.37.

3. We need Habitations and Tents to dwell in, and eat and drink in; and he is
the builder of the house for us: Wisdom has built her house, she has hewed
out her Seven Pillars, Prove. 9.1. And he that builds the house is more worthy
honor then the house, Heb. 3.3. And its he that builds the house of God,
laying the foundation, and bringing up the Head-stone, and so finishing it.
Zech. 4.7, 9. and 6.12, 13. So that as he in the flesh was called the
Carpenter; so also now he disdains not in this spiritual sense to be Carpenter
and Mason, and Ingraver too, Zech. 3.9. and his house is for us to dwell in,
and feast in too, Psalm. 84.4, 10. and 91.1. and 65.4. and 36.8, 9. Yea,

4. He is the good Husbandman, that tills the Land, breaking up the fallow
ground; and as he is the grain of Wheat that fell into the ground and dyed, and
brought forth, or brings forth much fruit, so he is the Sower too, The Son of
Man is the Sower, says Christ himself, Joh. 12.24. with Matt. 13.37. Yea, and
the great Reaper too, though he also make use of the Ministry of Angels
therein; Isa. 28.24, 25. Rev. 14.14, Matthew. 13.39. Yea, the Thresher too, else
he would not call his People his threshing Instruments, wherewith he will
thresh the Mountains, and his Enemies; Isa. 21.10. and 41.15. Hab. 3.12. And he
makes his People Plowers, Sowers, Reapers, and Threshers too; Jer. 4.4. Hos.
10.12. Joh. 4.36, 38. 1 Cor. 9.10. 2 Cor. 9 6, 10. Mic. 4.13. He also has his
fan in his hand, and fans out the chaff, casting it into the unquenchable fire,
and gathers the good grain into his granary, etc. Matthew. 3.12. Yea, he is that
good husbandman, that plants a Vineyard, and dresses it, fencing it, gathering
out the stones from it, building a Tower in it, digging a Wine Press in it, and
doing all the works of the Vine-dresser in it: so as to challenge any to say,
what he has therein omitted, Isa. 5.2, 3. Yea, and the great Vine-dresser in
the Parable, that intercedes for the barren Fig Tree, engaging to dig about it,
and to dung it; Luc. 13.7, 8. Yea, and the Keeper of the Vineyard, that
watches it day and night, least any harm it; Isa. 27.2, 3. And he reaps the
Vintage, and treads the Wine Press of the wrath of God, Rev. 14.19. and 19.15.
Isa. 63.1, 6.

5. We are naturally unclean, and He is both the fountain opened for us to wash
in, Zech. 13.1. and the washer of us therein too, sanctifying and washing us
with the washing of Water in the Word, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Yea, he disdains not to
wash his Disciples feet, as really in the spirit, as he did once in the flesh;
having risen from the Table, (with his Father and holy ones above) laid aside
his Robes (of glory) girded himself with a Towel (prepared himself for the
service) poured Water into the Basin (even the water in the Word, into his
Instruments for conveying it, his Ministers) He stands ready, and proffers his
service to wash us, and waits for our acceptance; crying, Will thou not be made
clean? when will it once be? Joh. 13.4, 5, 6, 7. Jer. 13 35.

6. He is also the purifier of the Sons of Levi, that both is as Refiners fire,
and Fullers soap, and that sits as a Refiner and purifier of Silver, to that
purpose: Mal. 3.3, 4.

7. He is the great and good Shepherd of us his Sheep; Joh. 10.11. Heb. 13.20.
The chief Shepherd, 1 Pet 5.4. that leads out the Sheep going before them, and
calling them by their Names; and will give them pasture. He seeks up the lost,
strengthens the weak, fetches back that which is driven away; and does all the
Offices of a good Shepherd, Ezekiel. 34.10, 11, 12. Psalm. 23.1, 2, 3, 4.

8. If we be Dishes of his Sanctuary, He will wash and wipe us too, when
defiled, as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it and turning it upside down; 2 Kings
21.13. And,

9. He will sweep out the wicked of the earth like dross, with the besome of
destruction, that his and his Fathers house may not be defiled; Isa. 14.23. As
once to the same end also, he whipped out the buyers and sellers out of the
Temple at Jerusalem, Joh. 2.14, 15. As also in seeking what is lost, he sweeps
out of his house what may hinder the Souls being found of him, Luc. 15.8. Oh
the humility and condescension of this high and holy One, to condescend to such
ministry and service for us; and (which adds to all the rest) in the exercise
of all these relations, offices and services; He is,

1. Infinitely able, as to strength and power for them all; being the great
God, and our Savior, Tit. 2.13. The man, or Son of man that God has made
strong for himself, Psalm. 80.17.

2. Infinitely furnished with wisdom and understanding, how to do all things in
the most exact way, and as is most befitting; All his ways are judgment: Deuteronomy.
32.4. For the spirit of wisdom and understanding rests upon him, and makes him
quick in understanding in all things, Isa. 11.2, 3. Can we doubt that, seeing
he is that word and wisdom of God, in which the World, and all things therein,
were made, and were so admirably disposed as they be; Psalm. 104.24. with Joh.
1.2, 3. Heb. 1.2.

3. Infinitely faithful, to exercise both power and wisdom, so as may be best
and most pleasing to God his Father, and most conduce to our good and welfare
in our attending to, and being guided by him; faithful in all things, to him
that appointed him; Heb. 3.2. Thus all things pertaining to life, are in and
with him: Yea, pertaining to, and included in.

3. The life to come, even Eternal Life, as we have seen; in which he will be,

1. The everlasting Rest and Sabbath, and give everlasting cessation and rest
from all labor, sorrow, and suffering; and in the fruition of God and himself,
to full satisfaction.

2. The Tree of Life in the midst of the Paradise of God, giving eternal life,
an everlasting well and happy being.

3. The fountain of life, affording a River, or rivers of delights and
pleasures for ever more, Psalm. 36.9. and 16.11. Rev. 22.1.

II. He is, and in him also are, and in the knowledge of him are given all
things pertaining to godliness, or the right worshipping and serving God; which
is the great end of his dying for us, and being a Light and Leader to us, that
being delivered from the hands of our enemies, we might serve him without fear,
in righteousness and holiness before him, all the days of hur life, Luc. 1.75.
All those also he is, and affords to us; As to say,

1. Needful it is, that to our right worshipping of God, we have a right
understanding and knowledge of him, his name, excellency and greatness, love
unto us, and will concerning us; how it is meet for him to be (and how he will
be) served by us; and to this purpose we have him made of God wisdom to us, 1
Cor. 1.30. Our Great Prophet, Act. 3.22. Our Rabbi, Master, or Teacher, Mat.
23.8, 10. The great Apostle of our Profession, Heb. 3.1. Yea, he is both the
great Apostle, Prophet, Evangelist, or Gospel-preacher, and the great Pastor
(or Shepherd, 1 Pet. 5.4) and Teacher, and all these gifts for furniture, and
helpfulness to others, are given forth from and by him; according to the
measure of his gift and pleasure of his will; and by them all, its he that
declares the mind of the Lord, and his name and nature to us, Ephesians. 4.7.8, 11.
Heb. 12.25.

2. Its needful for us, that there be a place for us to worship and meet with
God in; as of old he appointed a Sanctuary for himself to dwell in among his
People, a Tabernacle, and after that a Temple, an holy and honorable Place,
set apart and sanctified for his Name, where they might wait upon him, bring
their Offerings, present their services to him, and worship him, and where He
would meet with them and bless them, Exodus 24.20. and 25.9. and 29.34, 35. An
house of prayer for all People; wherein he would accept their Offerings and
Oblations: 1 King. 8. and 9. 2 Chronicles. 6. and 7.12, 15, 16. Isa. 56.7. Ezekiel.
20.40. And these were tipes of better things; which being now come, God injoyns
not any such observation of such places, but instead thereof Christ himself is
the true Temple, the great and glorious Temple, in whom dwells all the fullness
of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. with Joh. 2.19, 21. where God will be
worshipped, and will accept and bless us; and by faith in him all that are
united to, and with him, in union with him, become his holy Temple also, as is
said, Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22. 2 Cor. 6.16. Yea, in him every of our bodies become a
Temple for the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.18, 19.

3. Needful it is, that there be some time for Worship: And as the body of all
those New Mons, Sabbaths, and holy days appointed under the Law, was of
Christ, Col. 2.16. So He it is that makes a day wherein we may rejoice, before
God, and unto him, and be glad, binding with cords the sacrifices to the horns
of the Altar confessing and praising God in and by him, Psalm. 118.24, 27, 28.
both the day of grace, the accepted time, and time of finding now; and the
everlasting Rest, Sabbath, or holy day hereafter, we have in and by him: Yea,
He is the Sabbath or Rest for the Soul, which gives it rest in its believing on
him, and makes us ceasing from our own works, attend on him, and rest on him,
to be made an holy sanctified People to God in and by him: the rest wherewith
the weary Soul may be made to rest, Isa. 28.12. with 58.13. Heb. 4.2, 3. with
Matthew. 11.28, 29. Exodus: 31:13.

4. It appertained to Godliness, or the right worshipping of God, that Men
entered into Covenant with him, and gave up themselves to be his People,
avouching him for their God, and receiving the Token and Seal thereof, in being
circumcized to him, Genesis 17.7, 10, 11 Deuteronomy. 26. And Christ the Seed of Abraham,
the Son of Man is given for a Covenant to the People; and they that close with
and cleave to him, are therein spiritually circumcised with the circumcision
made without hands, Philip. 3.3. and are taken into nighness with God, to be
his Children, Heirs of the World; being accepted and accounted righteous, and
blessed of him; for, in him we are complete, circumcised, etc. Col. 2.10, 11.
Isa. 42.6. and 49.8. and 55.3. Romans 4.13. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22.

5. There were also Sacrifices and Offerings required to make atonement for the
sins of the Worshippers, and to testify their acknowledgment of his
Sovereignty, and giving admission into his favorable presence; whence that,
Bring an Offering, and come into his Courts, Psalm. 96.8. But alas, we have
nothing clean and fit to offer unto him, that may make us acceptable, we being
unclean our selves, and all our righteousness like a filthy ragg, Isa. 64 6.
and the inferior Creatures are of a small value, and he needs them not, Psalm.
50.9, 12. much less can we by any service of ours, or offering of them, make
atonement for, or any expiation of our sins against him. Christ therefore
answers both to Sacrifices and Offerings, or Gifts; being the great
propitiatory, atoning Sacrifice for us, besides which there is none other, the
perpetual abiding propitiation for our sins, and for the sins of the whole
World, Heb. 1.3. and 9.26. and 10.5, 10. 1 John 2.1.2. And he has offered up
himself a Sacrifice, and an Offering of a sweet smelling savor unto God for
us, Ephesians. 5.2. That by him and the virtues of his blood, and offering for us, we
in our going to God might find acceptance; our sins being there-through
forgiven us, and liberty of approach given us to the Holy of Holies: Heb.
10.10, 14, 19, 20, 22.

6. There needed a Priest to offer the Sacrifices and Oblations of the People,
and make the atonement, and both to obtain and pronounce the blessing of the
Lord, for, and upon them; and to that purpose God chose Aaron, and his Sons,
Numb. 6.6, 23. Deuteronomy. 10.8. 1 Chronicles. 23.13. Levit. 1.3.8. But that Priesthood is
gone, and Christ the Son of man is the Priest in and great High Priest over the
House of God for ever, called of God an High Priest after the order of
Melchisedeck; and consecrated by the Word of Gods oath thereto, as we showed
before, such a Priest as we need, having both perfect power with God, and pity,
and compassion toward us, and faithfulness toward both: yea, and He makes
those that cleave unto him, Priests to God too; a royal and holy Priesthood to
offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by him, Rev. 5.10. 1 Pet. 2.5,
9. But He is over and among them the Great High Priest; his are the holy
Vestments the Breast Plate of judgment is upon his heart, whence all his
actings with God for us, and from God with us, as the great high Priest and
Mediator, are with exact judgment. He gives both to God and us exactly what is
right, and shows to us faithfully the mind and judgment of God; the Vrim and
the Thummim: Light and perfection are in his heart, and in what proceeds
therefrom, there are also engraven the precious Stones, with the Names of the
several Tribes, even all the Saints are in his heart, to judge them and their
causes exactly, presenting them to God, according to their several needs, and
dispensing supplies suitable to them. The Ephod also hangs upon his shoulders
(on which the Government is laid; Isa. 9.6. and covers his Body as a Robe, the
exact righteousness in all his walk^ngs, performing punctually all his
undertakings toward both God and man; as also the inner Robe of the Ephod,
that was down to the feet. He being in his inward Intentions too and Purposes
Righteous, as well as in his Outward and most Appearing performances, and both
pleasant as Pomgranates, and melodious as the Bells; the preciousness whereof
is also signified in that the Bells were of pure Gold. He also is girt about
the Paps with a golden Girdle, of which we spoke before. And the Miter or Crown
is upon his head, the supreme Authority in the Service of God, and in all,
holiness to the Lord. Yea, he is the whole Orderer and Offerer of the Sacrifice
that is acceptable to the Lord: Of which I shall not add to speak.

7. There needed an Altar, to offer the Sacrifice upon. And surely he in his
Divine Nature or Spirit, bare up the Sacrifice of his own Body, and the fire of
his Divine Love kindled it, and made it an whole Burnt-offering unto the Lord;
and on him as our Altar, are all our Sacrifices to be offered too, Heb.
13.10.15. For as the Divine Nature in him sanctified the humane, as the Altar
the Sacrifice, Mat. 23.19. So it is he that is our Sanctifier, 1 Cor. 1.30. And
by the Faith of him, are we sanctified to him, Acts 26.18. Though as there the
Altar could not sanctify any unclean thing forbidden by the Law, nor might it
come thereon: So here we may not think to offer up any sin, or what is in it
self sinful, by retaining the corruption in it, to be sanctified by Christ, but
that that is made clean in him, and through his Word commanding or allowing it,
and his Spirit springing it up, and then the Pollutions thereto cleaving he
takes away; as he himself was the spotless Lamb, and Sacrifice to which was no
Pollution adhering, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.

8. There was a Laver appointed, that the Priests might wash their hands and
feet, and so go to the Altar and offer the Sacrifice, Exodus 30.18. and 40.7.
With respect to which, David said, I will wash my hands in Innocence, and so
will I compass thine Altar, O Lord, Psalm. 26.6. And this we have in Christ, who
washes his Church with the Water in the Word (as the Greek reads (...).
Ephesians. 5.26.) Which Water what is it but that Free Grace, Love and Knowledge of
God therein declared.

9. Yea, all the things in the Tabernacle we have in him; as for brevity to say
in few words. The Table of Show bread, whereon were the Twelve Loaves,
according to the number of the Children of Israel, might signify him the Bread
of God, for all the Israel of God, John 6.35.48. And making us as Bread to God,
such as his Love feeds on to the rejoicing of his heart in our welfare, as
presented in him; for by eating of him who is that Bread, we also become one
Bread, and one Body, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.17. The Candle stick and its
Lamps, giving Light in the Tabernacle or House of God, represented that Light
which we have, and are made to be in him, Ephesians. 5.8. For though the Churches
are compared to, and represented by the Candlesticks, yet they both are so as
they are in him (for in him it is that any are made a People and Church to God)
and he and the knowledge of him, are the great and true Light shining in, and
through them, John 8.12. The Altar of Gold by the Vail, and the Incense burnt
thereon, to perfume the Services of the Tabernacle we have in him, and his
Mediation, and Intercession, in which with the Virtues of his Obedience and
Sacrifice, he perfumes all our Services done in the Spirit. And he himself was
an Offering of a sweet smelling Savor to God for us, Rev. 8.2. Ephesians. 5.2.
Yea, and in him we have

10. What was in the Sanctuary, or Holy of holies (yea and the Vail between
both, which is said to be his flesh, Heb. 10.20.) the Ark of Gods strength;
wherewith he showed forth his presence, and the strength of it (as in drying up
Jordan, throwing down the Walls of Jericho, etc.) and in which was the Covenant
of God, was a Type of him, the Strength and Arm of God, by whom he has showed
forth strength in overthrowing the strength of Satan, and what stood against
our happiness, and in whom are all the Promises and Covenant of God, Yea and
Amen, 1 Cor. 1.22.24. 2 Cor. 1.20. And in a secondary sense through him the
Gospel of Christ, the power of God to Salvation. And the Pot of Manna, and Rod
of Aaron we have in him; for whereof were they Types, but of the hidden
Comforts in him, and of his Rod and Scepter flourishing and bringing forth much
Fruit, even his Power and Prevalency as High Priest, with God in his Mediation
and Blessing men in his Name. He also is the Propitiatory, or covering
Mercy-seat for our sins through Faith in his Blood, (...).
as the Apostle himself tells us, Romans 3.25. And the Cherubims of Glory over
that, was but a shadow, of that shadow of his Protection which he affords them
who dwell in his secret place, who trust in the Ark and Mercy-seat, his Mercy
and Truth, and are directed and guided by that heavenly Voice that proceeds
from him, that sits on those Cherubims of Glory, Rides on the Heavens, and
uses the Ministry of the Angels for the Protection and Safety of his Servants;
as is at large expressed, Psalm. 91.1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 11, etc.

And now we being furnished in him, with all this, for our approaching to God,
having him to teach us the way of his Worship; and him as the Person by whom we
may present our Worship, and that furnishes us with all that may render our
Worship orderly and acceptable. What wants but that we may Worship God
acceptably, and live Godlily, approaching with Boldness and Confidence by him
into his Presence, with true hearts, and full assurance of Faith? Except we
shall say, there are two things wanting yet, viz. a God to Worship, and a
Spirit of Life and Power, to put life and breath into us with an heart to
worship him; but surely in him we have these two also, as follows to be seen.
For,

CHAP. XXIII.
That all the Perfections of God, both the Father and holy Spirit, are in
Christ Jesus.

In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, so that in him we are
complete, who is the Head of all Principality and Power. He is so glorified
with Gods own self, that he is the Mighty God, Isa. 9.6. The great God, and our
Savior, Tit. 2.13. God over all blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. He, even he also,
sits between, or upon the Cherubims of Glory, and gives forth the Answers and
Commands of God, and hears the Prayers, and accepts the Services and Sacrifices
offered up in his House; and with respect to this, doubtless it was that
Ezekiel in his Visions saw, Over the Firmament upon the heads of the living
Creatures, the likeness of a Throne, as the appearance of a Sapphire stone, and
upon the likeness of the Throne as the appearance of a man above it, Ezekiel.
1.22, 26. Plainly importing, that the Nature of man in him is Exalted to the
Throne of God, and that the supreme Power and Authority above all Creatures is
given to him. And indeed, the Cherubims and Mercy-seat, were the Throne of God,
the Throne of Grace* And he tells us himself, That he is set down with the
Father in his Throne, having overcome all his and our Enemies, in, and through
his Sufferings, Rev. 3.21. Being herein infinitely higher then the high
Priests, under the Law of Moses; for they might none of them ascend upon the
Cherubims, and sit down upon the Throne of God; no, it would have been high
Arrogance, and Luciferian pride and presumption, to have assumed that place
which was proper and peculiar to God alone: The Priests, or high Priests under
the Law, might not fit at all in the Temple, but always stood and Ministered,
Heb. 10.11. much less on that Seat of God: Only the Antichrist under the
Gospel Times the man of sin, presumes to se^ himself in the Temple of God, and
likes to be worshipped as if he were God, and exalts h^mself above all that is
called God or that is worshipped. He only of all that we read of, dares to
assume that Power and Place, 2 These. 2.4. A Wickedness the worst of the
Highpriests under the Law, durst not presume to commit, for this Place was
reserved peculiarly to Christ, Gods High Priest; Who having offered one
Sacrifice once for all, is set down on the Right Hand of God, or of Power, even
on the Throne of Majesty in the highest, Heb. 10.12, 13. and 1.3. and 8.1. and
12.2. The Father fully possessing him, and putting on him all his own Power and
Glory, so as he (the Father) Judges no man, but has committed all Judgment to
him (the Son) that all men might honor the Son, even as they honor the Father
that has sent him, John 5.22, 23. So as, That he that believes on the Son,
believes not on him, but on him that sent him; and he that sees him, sees
him that sent him, John 12.44, 45. And so we have an Object to worship, even
the same to whom all the Gods or Angels of God, are commanded to do honor;
Worship him all ye Gods, Psalm. 97.7. Heb. 1.6. Him we may Worship without
Idolatry against God; nay, it is rebellion against God, and a refusing to
Worship God, not to Worship him, for God is in him, and he is God. And therefore

1. We are Baptized into his Name, and therein stand engaged to Believe, Depend
on, and Worship him; yea, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, have but one and the
same Name, Mat. 28.19. And are one, 1 John 5.7.

2. The Apostles therefore join the Lord Jesus Christ with the Father, in
saluting the Churches Grace and Peace (or Grace, Mercy, and Peace) from God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ; and to him also, together with the Father
and the holy Spirit, they commend them, 2 Cor. 1.2. and 13.14. 2 Timothy 1.2. and
4.22. And well they may: For

First, The Father and all his fullness, is in him: Believe thou not that I am
in the Father, and the Father in me, says he to Philip, John 14.9, 10. The
Wisdom, Holiness, Grace and Glory, yea, and all the Power of the Father is in
and on him. And therefore also

Secondly, The Works of God are attributed to him. As the Father raises up the
Dead, and quickneth whom he will, so the Son quickneth whom he will. And as the
Father has Life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have Life in
himself; and he has given him Authority to execute Judgment also, because he
is the Son of man, John 5.21.26, 27. Yea, he is the Creator and Maker of all
things in Heaven and Earth, Visible and Invisible, Col. 1.16. And the Upholder
of all things, by the word of his Power, Heb. 1.3. For he is before all things,
and by him all things consist, Col. 1.17. Is God the Repairer and Redeemer of
his Creature? He is so by Christ, the great Repairer of the Breaches, and
Restorer of the Paths to dwell in; the Ransom and Redeemer from Sin, Death,
Hell, Devil and Destruction, 1 Timothy 2.6. Tit. 2.14. Gal. 1.4. and 3.13. and
4.4, 5. The Father works hitherto in the works of Providence, and he works
also, John 5.17. Yea, what is said of Jehovah, the Lord in that respect, in
Psalm. 146, 6, 10. is applicable to him, as was above noted: For he feeds the
hungry with himself, The Bread that he gives being bis flesh, which he has
given for the Life of the World: As he opened the eyes of the bodily Blind, in
the days of his flesh, so he Preaches the opening of the eyes to them that are
spiritually blind, Luke 4, 18, 19, And the Opening of the Prison to those that
are bound; raises up the bowed in Spirit, loves his Disciples, as the Father
loves him, John 15, 9, Receives and Preserves them that were Strangers to
the Commonwealth of Israel, and makes them fellow Citizens with the Saints:
Yea, What things the Father does, the same does the Son likewise, John 5.19.
Yea,

Thirdly, He is what ever God is, He and the Father is one, one thing, John
10.30. And he has all that the Father has; For the Father loves the Son, and
has given all things into his hands, John 16.15.

Fourthly, The attributes of God are ascribed to him, as Eternity. He is that
Eternal life that was with the Father, and is manifested unto us, 1 John 1.1,
2. And he in the beginning laid the foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens
are the Works of his hands; and when they perish, yet he endures, and his Years
fail not, nor have an end: Immutability, for he is the same and alters not,
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Heb. 1.10, 11, 12. and 13.7.
Omnipotency; for he upholds all things by the word of his Power, Heb 1.3. The
Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last; he that was, and is, and is to
come, the Almighty, Rev. 1.8. Omnisciency; Now know we that thou know all
things, and need not that any man ask thee any thing, etc. John 16.30. He
knew all men, and needed not that any man should testify of what is in man,
for he knew what is in man, John 2.24, 25. All things are naked and opened unto
him, with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.12, 13 Ubiquity, or Omnipresence; Where
two or three are met together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them, Mat.
18.20. Yea, Is God the Lawgiver? So is he, Isa. 42 4. The Isles shall wait for
his Law. Is God the Judge? So is he: Judge of Quick and Dead, Acts 10.42. Is God
the King? So is he: King of all the Earth, Psalm. 47.2, 3. Yea, he is All, and
in all in the New Creature, Col. 3.11.

Again, as for Spirit to Enlighten, Quicken, and Enable us to Worship
acceptably. The holy Spirit in the fullness thereof dwells in, and rests upon
him: The Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and of
Might, the Spirit of Knowledge and of the Fear of the Lord, Isa. 11.2. And with
him, and by him, he Inlightens, Quickens, Teaches, and so fits for Worshipping
God; creates a clean Heart, renews a right Spirit, raises from spiritual death
to spiritual life, and so to Worship and serve God in the Spirit, which Service
he makes acceptable; and he by that Spirit will raise the Body from the Dead;
and fashion it into the likeness of his glorious Body, according to the working
of that glorious Power, by which he is able to subdue all things to himself,
Romans 8.10, 11. Phil. 3.21. Yea, The Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit
of the Lord is, there is Liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17.

Oh how Excellent a Person then is Christ, that is so comprehensive of all Good
and Excellency, even from the highest to the lowest! Who is both Creator and
Creature, and has the Nature and Perfections of both! And has had as well the
Infirmities of the one (sin excepted) out of his great Love and Pity to us, as
the Form and Excellency, Majesty and Glory, of the other. He that is the high
and holy One, the Great and Mighty God, has also cried out and acknowledged: I
am a worm and no man, the very scorn of men, and the outcast of the people.
For he has had the Experiences of Fallen man, the Snares and Bitterness of
Death, and the Pangs of Hell, as well as he has had, and has experience and
full enjoyment of the infinite Joys, and Glorys, and inexpressible
Satisfactions of Heaven and God; no place is there wherein he is not, and has
not been. He was a^ man on the Earth, and sometimes Walking on the Seas. Yea,
as to his Body he was in the Grave, in the heart of the Earth, though not left
there to see Corruption; and as to his Soul he was in (though not left in)
Hell, and yet he was Lord in Heaven, and is so for ever, 1 Cor. 15.45. John
^3.13. Psalm. 16.11. with Acts 2.31. Able to save us to the utmost while we are
on the Earth, and from Grave to Hell, and to bring us to the Possession of
Heaven and happiness: For though he was dead to redeem us from thence, yet he
is now alive for evermore, Amen, and has the Keys of hell and death, to keep
or bring us out from thence, Rev. 1.18. and The Keys of the house of David too,
so to open as no man shall shut, and so to shut as no man can open; and he can
and will admit into his Kingdom, all that are faithful to obey and follow him;
Greatness and Goodness, yea, all Perfections and Excellencies, are completely
and everlastingly in him. Oh therefore how ought we to admire and love him, and
with all acceptance to receive and cleave to him, honor and obey him! Surely
that is the way for us also to be made an excellent and precious People in the
sight of God, and useful to and among men. For this also is of the
Commendations of Christ, that his Excellencies and Preciousness, communicate
and contribute an Excellency to all in whom he is. It Is his Excellency, as we
noted before, that renders the Gospel a more excellent and glorious Doctrine;
and so it is his Excellency and Preciousness derived to them, that makes his
People (those that own and believe on him) to be a more excellent People then
others; as it is said, The Righteous is more excellent then his Neighbor,
Prove. 12.26. it is because Christ is in them; as it is said again, God is in
the Generation of the Just, Psalm. 14.5. And the Riches of the Mystery of the
Gospel Preached among the Gentiles is Christ in (or among) them, the hope of
Glory, Col. 1.27. As Christ also prayed for his Disciples, that they may be one
as the Father and Son are one; he (Christ) in them, and the Father in him, John
17.23. For as the Comeliness of Jerusalem, and her Beauty that was perfect, was
so through his Beauty and Comeliness, put upon her, Ezekiel. 16.14. So the
Excellency of his People, is his Excellency put upon them; who are said to have
put on Christ, and to be, as it were, clothed with him. Now he being so
precious, how must they needs be also precious in and by him? And indeed,
others who have not him, and much more they who reject and refuse him, lifting
up themselves or other things, and glorying in them, are vile persons, Psalm.
15.4. For indeed, every thing or person according to the Spirit, is to be
accounted of as it has reference to, or has more or less of, or conduces
more or less to our enjoyment of him. And so those things or persons, are to be
more esteemed or chosen of us, and loved by us; by whom, or by which we are, or
may be more led to Christ, or built up in him, or more of him, and his
excellencies, are, or may be conveyed to us.

But I may seem to have insisted too largely upon this Subject, and to have
made too long a Digression, (if I may call it a Digression) and yet I may too
truly say, I have spoken nothing in effect to it, but rather have but darkened
wisdom by words without knowledge; his excellencies, being indeed such as
cannot be so spoken, or written of, but that all that is spoken and written of
them is as far below them, as He who would go about to paint the glory and
luster of the Sun, would necessarily fail, and fall short of its proper and
native splen^or and glory, in all his painting. Verily, though there be very
much said of him, and of his excellencies in the Scriptures, yet it may and
will be said, when we come to see him and enjoy him (if we being found in him,
shall be accounted worthy thereof) as the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon, when
she saw him and his excellency and glory. It was a true report indeed (said
she) which I heard of thee in mine own Land, of thy acts, and of thy wisdom,
howbeit I believed not the words till I came, and mine eyes have seen and
behold, the half was not told me, thy wisdom, and thy prosperity exceeds the
fame which I heard So may we say then, the Prophets and Apostles knew in part,
and prophesied in part, not in perfection; and surely that which is but in
part, will be found as short of that, that is perfect, as the capacities of a
little child, fall below the most perfect capacities of a grown and most
accomplished man, as the Apostle signifies, in 1 Cor. 13.10, 12. And surely, if
they knew and prophesied in part only, what then could I do, or have I done,
who have but gleaned some small part of what they have declared? Surely I must
needs have fallen unspeakably short of his infinite perfections, whose Name
alone is excellent, and whose glory is not only above the earth, but above the
Heavens also, Psalm. 148.13. For, who can declare (as I said in the beginning
hereof) all his mighty acts? Who can set forth all his praises? Psalm. 106.2. I
should but still fall below him; yea, and too much darken his glory, should I
assay to add any thing more hereabout: and therefore I shall say no more, but
rather desire and pray, that the spirit of wisdom and revelation may be granted
to me in the knowledge of him, that the eyes of my understanding being
enlightened, I may know (more distinctly for my self, and for the helpfulness of
others) what is the hope of his calling, what the unsearchable riches of his
grace to be believed, and preached by us; Ephesians. 1.18, 19. and 3.8. and to that
purpose say as the Psalmist. Be thou exalted O Lord in thine own strength, so
shall we sing and praise thy power, Psalm. 21.13. Be thou exalted, O Lord, in
thy own glory and excellencies, so shall we see and sing of them.

CHAP. XXIV.
Some Usefulness of this Doctrine, by way of Exhortation; and first, To look to
Christ, as lifted up for Us, in all Cases.



Exhort. 1. To look diligently to him, as so lifted up; that in looking to him
we may be enlightened, and our faces may not be ashamed; as is said, Psalm. 34.5.
He being set or lifted up of God, both in himself first, and then to us, that
we might behold him, and that in seeing or looking to him, we might be
strengthened and framed to believe on him; and seeing and believing on him we
might be saved, and have eternal life, according to the good and holy will of
God, Joh. 6.40. Isa. 45.22. To which,

1. God himself directs and commands us, saying, Behold my servant whom I
uphold, mine Elect in whom my soul delights, I have put my holy spirit upon
him, etc. Isa. 42.1. And,

2. Christ himself also calls us, saying, Behold me, behold me to a Nation that
was not called by his Name, Isa. 65.1. And look to me, and be ye saved all the
ends of the earth; Isa. 45.22. And,

3. The holy Spirit exhorts and commands us, saying, All ye Inhabitants of the
World, and Dwellers on the Earth, when He lifts up an Ensign on the
Mountains, see ye; and when he blows a Trumpet, hear ye, Isa. 18.3. And there
is great Reason for it; For,

Motive 1. If we refuse to look to, and behold him, how then shall we hereafter
look upon him, when He comes in his glory, and calls us to an account, and when
we must make a reckoning to Him of our doings? when He shall set before us,
that God for our good and welfare, out of his abundant grace and mercy to us,
gave him his only begotten Son, and He himself for us, and how He, through his
great and heavy sorrows and sufferings, was exalted and lifted up for us, as an
Object prepared to our hands, and every way sufficient, able and ready to save,
and heal us, and we after all that would not turn away our eyes from beholding
vanity, to look upon and consider Him such a loving and lovely Object; an
Object so fair and beautiful, so comely and glorious, both for escape, and for
delight, for safety and life, ( Isa. 4.2. Psalm. 45.2) as He was and is to us!
How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, as was prepared before
the face (and answerable to the needs and wants) of all People, and published
and lifted up to us. If they that despised Moses law dyed without mercy, (as we
noted before) under two or three witnesses, of how much sorer punishment shall
he be counted worthy, that has trampled under foot the Son of God (such and so
excellent a one, as we have seen before in part) counted the blood of the
Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, a common or unholy thing, and has done
despite to the spirit of grace, etc. Heb. 2.3. and 10.28, 29. This would be
now seriously considered by us: As also that,

Motive 2. If we look to Him, the benefit will be great, for He will help and
heal us at all turns. He is of virtue and force to heal our hearts, minds and
consciences in all cases, as it was with the Brazen Serpent, whatever were the
stings and wounds received by the fiery Serpents in looking to the Serpent of
Brass, they were cured of them: None of them were so slighty, as that they had
any promise of living with them, without looking to that: nor any so deep and
dangerous, but that in looking up to that they lived. So is it here: None so
good, so holy, or so little sinful, as that without looking to Christ, they may
expect to be saved, and to have eternal life; nor are any so bad, or
desperately wicked, but in a hearty, serious and timely looking to Christ, they
may be healed, and live for ever. Let that then move us to look to him, as
delivered up to Death for our offenses, and raised again from the Dead for our
Justification; glorified at the right hand of God, and lifted up in the Gospel
by the Holy Spirit, and in the exercise of the spiritual gifts of God's
Servants, given them to that purpose; yea, in every case let us look to Him to
be healed, and saved by Him; As for instance,

Case 1. Are we sensible of our sins and sinfulness, and ready to despair,
because they are so great and manifold! The way to be healed of such wounds
upon our hearts and consciences; the fears, horrors, and smarts of such
stings, is to turn the eye hither, to the Son of man, the Lord Jesus, not to
pore upon our selves, our own unworthiness, inability to satisfy Gods justice
by any sorrows, bewailings, confessions, or amendments of ours; nor to set our
selves, as conceiting our selves able, to help or heal our selves by any such
courses, or by any devises or contrivances of our own or others; as Plasters
of our own making, or others commending, or giving; but only to mind, and look
unto the perfect Law of Liberty, continuing to look thereinto, that we may see
what He is; and what He has done and suffered for us: what satisfaction He
has given to justice; what Redemption He has obtained; what Peace he has
made; what Pardon is Proclaimed in Him; for whom He has suffered according to
the Spirits testimony in the Scriptures, and to whom He proclaims and preaches
Peace there-through; the greatness of his love, and freeness of his Grace to
Mankind, etc. Thus the Apostle Peter preached Christ to those, who were pricked
at their hearts, at their hearing, that they had been guilty of murdering
Christ; directing them to believe on Him, upon that account, that there was in
Him remission of sins, and the Holy Ghost to be given them by him, and they
looking to him, and yielding up to what He so looked to wrought in them were
comforted and healed, Act. 2.37, 38, 41. So also in Act. 3.13, 14, 19, 26. He
proposed to others guilty of the same fault, the consideration of the blessing
in him the Seed of Abraham, for all the Families of the Earth; and that to
them, (the Jews) first God sent Jesus to bless every one of them, in turning
every one of them from their iniquities: The like in Act. 5.30, 31. And the
Apostle Paul, to the Jaylour, ready to make away himself, and inquiring, in a
great affrightment, what he should do to be saved, directed him to believe on
the Lord Jesus: And to that end preached, and held forth to him the Word of the
Lord: The Doctrine concerning him, which contains (according to his own
expressions to the Corinthians; 1 Cor. 15.3, 4) the Doctrine of his Death,
Burial, and Resurrection; and so of those great Points of the Gospel, wherein
the Grace of God in Christ is set forth to us; in minding and believing of
which, he was healed; Act. 16.27, 29, 30, 31, 32. with 20.24. Gal. 1.6. Yea, in
looking to, and minding this, we shall be armed against all accusations of Sin,
Law, or Satan, as in Romans 8.32, 33, 34.

Case 2. In case of a benummedness of our spirits, through senslesness of our
vileness in our selves, or aptness to be puffed up with conceits of our
wholeness, or betterness then others, and thence a carelessness to seek for
health to our Souls, the way to be convinced of our vileness and emptiness, and
so to be humbled and abased in our selves, is to look to, and upon Christ
crucified, and behold his Cross and Sufferings for us, as set forth in the
Gospel to us; that that is the best way to take down our pride, and bring us to
a sense of our wretchedness, is employed in that, the Apostle tells us, they
judged all dead, from ones having dyed for all: The sight of our deadness and
helplesness in our selves, is best seen in that Glass, that represents that
Christ dyed for all, and so for us; 2 Cor. 5.14. Where also the sight of his
grace in dying for us, will cure our deadness, quicken and put life into us, so
as to make us live; so that that sight both kills and makes alive, wounds and
heals; casts us down in our selves, and raises us up in Christ, Crucifies us
with Christ, and yet makes us live in him, and brings him in to live in us; 1 Samuel 2.6, 7. Gal. 2 20. and so the Exalting, Preaching, and witnessing to
Christ, both throws down the mountains, and fills up the Valleys, Isa. 40.4.
which was the work of the Baptist, bearing witness to the Light, and the effect
wrought in them, who beheld and looked to the Light, witnessed to by him, Luc.
3.4, 5, 6, 16. with Joh. 1.6, 7, 8, 15, 23, etc. Many that cannot by the law be
convinced of their lostness in themselves, and their need of Christ, by reason
that they are strict and zealous Observers and Performers of the Law in their
apprehensions, so as that upon that account they judge themselves righteous, may
and must be seen to be naturally wretched sinners, and to have need of Christ,
in this that He dyed for them; if they look upon, and discern what is set
before them therein; yea, therein they may see the utter undonness of their
state, upon any other account, then only by his Death; where, together with the
convincement of their being dead in themselves, there is hope also presented to
them, that they may be saved by him.

Case 3. In case of temptations from our inabilities, and insufficiencies, to
help our selves by freeing our selves from the defilement of our sins, or
getting victory over them, or saving our selves out of the snares of sin, and
Satan, or working in our selves holiness, and conformity to Christ, so as may
fit us for his Kingdom and glory, our way is to look off, from, (...)
and above our selves unto Jesus, and consider him as the High Priest and
Apostle of our profession, the Author and Finisher of the Faith: what He has
undertaken with the Father for us. How he is appointed, and has engaged to
sanctify, and wash his Church, (that is, such as cleave to, believe on, and
obey him) and to bring forth Judgment into Victory, subduing their Enemies, and
treading Satan under their Feet: And how faithful and powerful He is for
performing his engagements: This is the way, I say, to be helped against such
temptations, Heb. 2.17, 18. and 3.1, 2. And the like we may say for
temptations, from the consideration of his appearing slowness, in performing
his promises, our finding no more deliverance from any sinful distempers, and
temptations to sin, and from the oppressions of other enemies; as Abraham was
helped, and Sarah also against temptations, from Gods not making more have to
perform his promises, by considering God's Power and Faithfulness, Romans 4.17,
18, 19. Heb. 11.11, 12. Yea,

Case 4. Would we be delivered from the power of corruption and sin,
occasioning barrenness and temptation, or otherwise prevailing over, and
polluting us! This is our way to get freedom from, and victory over them; even
the eying of Jesus the Son of Man, for its the knowledge of the truth, as it is
in Jesus, and which He himself is that makes free from the service of Sin, Joh.
8.32, 34, 35, 36. Ephesians. 4 20, 21, 22, 23. and it is the beholding his glory with
open face, as in a Glass, in which we may be transformed into his Image and
likeness, from glory to glory, as by his Spirit: 2 Cor. 3.18. His Word and
Faith it is that sanctifies, Joh. 17.17. Act. 26.18.

Case 5. In case of Persecutions, or Chastisements from God, or any troubles
and afflictions here befalling us; Look to Jesus the Author and Finisher of the
Faith, who for the Joy set before Him, endured the Cross, despised the shame,
and is now set down on the right hand of the Throne of God. And, this will
preserve us from being weary of Gods chastisements, or fainting under the
contradiction of sinners; partly while we there see how Christ suffered the
like or greater for us and has thereby taken away the evil and destructiveness
of them from us; and partly while we see how He is empowered, and is faithful
and compassionate to help us under them, and bring us out of them. He being as
well the Finisher, as the Author of the Faith; and set down on the Throne of
Majesty, as one invested with the fullness of the power of God to help us; and
also appearing there to make Intercession for us; Heb. 12.1, 2, 6. and 7, 24,
25. Romans 8.34.

Case 6. Would we see the odiousness of sin, that we might abhor, and beware of
it? Behold the Son of man suffering for it on our behalf! see the Agonies,
Perplexities, Shame, Reproaches, Death and Curse it brought upon Him. There we
may see Sin condemned in the Flesh; Romans 8.3. and 6.3, 4. Having dyed to it
there, how should we again live in it? should we not cease from that, for which
in Christ we have suffered in the flesh, and must have suffered for it in our
flesh, even in our souls and bodies for our selves, had not he suffered for it?
yea, and must yet suffer for ever, if through the sight of his Grace, we turn
not from it; 1 Pet. 1.24. and 4.1, 2.

Case 7. Would we see the hainousness of neglecting Christ, and the grace of
God in him, or of sinning against him, after the knowledge of him received? The
way for it, is to behold and mind what He has done for us, and to us; that He
is the Son of God, whom we neglect and trample under foot therein; that He is
the Lord that bought us, whom we therein deny; that it is his precious blood,
the blood of the Covenant, by which He procured a gracious Covenant of great
and precious promises to be made for us, and confirmed and ratified it, and the
blood wherewith we are sanctified, and rendered meet to have liberty, and access
to, and acceptance with God, that is therein profaned by us, that its the
spirit that discovers his grace, and is of his great grace sent forth to call
and cleanse us, that is, despited by us; Heb. 10.29. 2 Pet. 2.1. That they are
his Members, who is the Christ, and his Temple; who has bought us with a great
price for himself, that are defiled by us; 1 Cor. 6.18, 19, 20.

Case 8. Would we see the emptiness of all our own righteousness, that we do or
could do for our selves, for making our peace with God, and obtaining his
favor, and acceptance? Behold Christ crucified, as set forth in the Gospel,
and that declares it, and that it will not profit us: Isa. 57.12. for, if
righteousness be, or could have been that way obtained, then Christ died in
vain; but, that may not be supposed, therefore no other righteousness could
avail us, but He to be our righteousness, through his Death and Sacrifice; no
Law could give life to us; none but Christ crucified for us; upon which account
it was, that the Apostle cried out so of the folly and bewitchedness of the
Galathians, who having had Jesus Christ evidently set forth among them, as
crucified for them; yet would turn to beggarly observations, to seek to be
justified by them, Gal. 3.1, 21. with 2.21.

Case 9. Would we see our duties either to God or men, what is meet to be
performed by us, and how short we are in answering his engagements upon us?
Behold the Son of man, and mind the teachings of his grace, bringing salvation
to us, obtaining by his death and sufferings all the freedom from misery and
curse, and all the enjoyment of the good things vouchsafed to us, and what is
also for the future set in hope before us; yea, for ever, and then we shall see
our selves bound to live to him that dyed for us, and rose again, and to offer
up to God our bodies a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable, and that that is a
reasonable service to him, that it behooves us to enquire and take notice of his
will, as our lawful Lord, by virtue of his Death, Resurrection, and Reviving
again for us, and that we ought to glorify him both in body and spirit, as
being his purchase; and so to use all freedoms, mercies and enjoyments with
all sobriety, righteousness and godliness, that we may in nothing dishonor or
disserve him, but glorify him in all things, looking after and waiting for
(giving diligence, that we may be found worthy of) the blessed hope set before
us, and to be revealed at his appearance, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.
Romans 12.1, 2. and 14.9. 1 Cor. 6.18, 19, 20. and the looking upon, and
discerning the Lords body as crucified for us, and given to be the Bread of
Life to us, is the best way to examine our selves, and discern our defects and
evils, and to judge our selves accordingly for them, that we may not be judged
by Him: 1 Cor. 11.28, 29, 30.

Case, 10. Would we be quickened up in our duties, and way of seeking for, and
serving the Lord, and not faint therein, or be slothful, or tired out through
discouragements? The way is, to behold and look upon the Son of man lifted up,
for, and before us; that we may cast away every weight, and the sin that so
easily besets us, and run with patience the race set before us; look to Jesus
the Author and Finisher of the Faith. There we may see his Example and Pattern,
and also both Engagement from his Love to us as the Author, and hope of both
success, and of an infinite recompense of reward, as the Finisher of the Faith
set down on the Right Hand of Majesty, that may make us gird up the loins of
our minds, and run with Patience and Courage, hoping perfectly for the Grace to
be brought in at his appearance, as obedient Children, etc. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14. Heb. 12.1, 2.

Case, 11. Would we be recovered from any Relapses and Decays to our former
Strength, and be helped to go forward in Christ Jesus? Our way is to look upon
the Son of man, and therein to look to him for healing Virtue: Thus the
Apostles sets Christ Crucified, and the Grace in him before the Galatians; when
he was in fear of them to recover them, Gal. 3.13, 14, 16. and 4.4, 5, 6. and
5.1. And so Christ sets himself before the declining Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, wishing him to remember, call to mind, look back upon what he was
fallen from: Remember whence thou art fallen, and repent, Rev. 2.4, 5. And so
to the Angel of the Church of Sardis, Dead, while he had a Name to Live; he
presents himself as he that has the seven Spirits of God, and so Power to
Revive him; and as one that holds the seven Stars in his Right Hand, signifying
his love to, and care of his Servants, and yet power to do his pleasure with
them; and wishes him to remember or look back upon how he had received, and
heard, and to hold fast, Rev. 3.1, 2, 3. And to the Angel of the Church of
Laodicea, grown Lukewarm, and in danger to be spewed out of his mouth; he
presents himself as the Amen, the faithful and true Witness (to quicken up his
zeal in minding the firmness of his Promises, and truth of his Reproofs) and
that he is the beginning of the Creation of God, to mind him of his Power and
Ability to stablish him, or give being as he pleases to him; and after
declaration of his misery, sets before him, and directs his Eye to behold his
Riches, Fullness and Freeness, and to buy of him what he wanted; and his Love
and Patience, in Rebuking, Correcting, and standing with patience at the door
knocking, and waiting for admission; and his readiness to come in, and Feast
with men, upon their hearing and opening to him And to him, as to all the rest,
he presents his Love, Power, and Faithfulness to Reward them that overcome, and
the greatness of the Rewards he will give them, to Cure or Encourage them, Rev.
3.14, 18, 19, 20, 21.

Case, 12. Would we be directed to, and quickened up in the Love of God, and of
one another, or Charity to the World of Mankind, yea, or to our Enemies? Our
way is to behold the Son of man as lifted up for, and to us; for there we may
see his love to God his Father, laying down his Life on the Cross in obedience
to him, as a perfect pattern for our imitation, Phil. 2.8, 9. John 14.31. and
the Love both of God and of Christ to us, 1 John 3.16, 17. and 4.9, 10. able to
move our hearts to love him again, 1 John 4.19. Yea, both his Love to his
Disciples, John 14. and 15.9, 10. as an example and motive to us, to love them
that are his Disciples, and our Brethren, John 13.34, 35. and 15.12. And his
Love to those who were ignorant of him, lost and perishing, as an example to us
to love such, and a motive as we our selves were such, to love such also with a
love of compassion; yea, such as are strangers from us, Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13.19. 2
Cor. 8.9. Romans 5.6. 1 Timothy 1.15. 1 John 3.16, 17. Gal. 6 10. Yea, his Love to
his Enemies is an Example and Motive to us, to love to our capacities our
enemies also, Romans 5.10. Mat. 5.44, 45. Ephesians. 5.2. 1 Pet. 2.21. Yea, in this
lifting up this Son of man by his Spirit, is also the Presence and Efficacy of
his Spirit as a Spirit of love, to infuse love into us, and frame us to love, 2 Timothy 1.7, 8. Yea,

Case, 13. Would we be furnished with any Virtue, and framed to, and directed
in any good way? Look hither and behold Christ Crucified for us, and lifted up
there-through for, and to us; and here we may find Motive, Inducement, and
Spirit, to enable and frame the heart thereto. Yea, in most things, if not in
all Pattern and Example thereof, as to say: In Bowels of Mercy, behold his
mercifulness to us, Luke 6.37. and 10.37. In kindness, Tit. 3.4. In humbleness
of mind, Phil. 2.5, 6, 7. In meekness and lowliness, Mat. 11.29. In gentleness,
2 Cor. 10.1. In long-suffering, 2 Pet. 3.9. and 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. In forbearance
and forgiveness, Col. 3.13.14. In patient putting up of wrongs, 1 Pet. 2, 21,
22, 23. In love and obedience to God, Phil. 2.8. John 14.31. In submission to
Superiors in the World, Mat. 17.25, 27. Isa. 49.7. In giving place to wrath,
Mat. 12.14, 15, 16, 18, 19. Isa. 42.2. For men's loving their Wives, Ephesians.
5.25, 26, etc. And to say no more.

Case, 14. In case of loss of our Friends, Brethren, Relations, Husbands,
Children, etc. as we have him for a Pattern of Submission to his Fathers Will,
in taking out of his hand and drinking the Cup he gave him; to propose to our
selves, and imitate in looking upon him, John 18.11. So also looking upon him
as lifted up for, and before us, we shall see cause to be submissive to God
therein. For was it not more for God to give his Son for us, and expose him to
such Sufferings and Death, then to take away a Son or a Daughter, a Wife or a
Husband, or a Friend from us? Seeing also by his Sons death he has made a way
through Death, to better enjoyments and greater happiness, then they could have
here in this life; and has given to his Son through his death, the Keys of
hell and death, to bring or keep out from Death, as he pleases. Yea, He is the
Resurrection and the Life, so as the Dead in him, shall Live again. Yea, they
do in their spirits live in his Presence, and have a fuller Enjoyment of him,
then we have while here, Phil. 1.21.23. Rev. 1.18, 19. John 11.25, 26. And he
is the Lawful and Sovereign Lord of all; and so of us and ours a Just,
Righteous, Holy, Merciful and Good Lord, whose Work is perfect, and all his
Ways judgment Deuteronomy. 32.4. Psalm. 145.8, 9. and therefore does us no wrong in any
thing; yea, aims at our good and profit in all things. Heb. 10.8, 9, 10. And if
we believe that Jesus Christ Died and Rose again, so we believe that them who
sleep in Jesus, God will bring With him; for the Lord himself shall descend
from Heaven with a shout, with the Voice of the Archangel and the Trump of God,
and the dead in Christ shall rise first; and then we that are alive and remain,
shall be caught up together in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so
we shall be for ever with the Lord: These words minded, and these things looked
to, will be for comfort to us, 1 These. 4.14.17. As also that in the mean time,
the Lord is nigh at hand to us to help us, and this Son of man as a Child born
to and for us, and a Son given us, is also an Everlasting Father, the
Wonderful, the Counselor, the Mighty God, the Prince of Peace. And he will be
a Counselor, a Comforter, a Provider for, and Protector of us, and better to
us then many Fathers or Mothers, Sons or Daughters, Friends or Relations, Isa.
9.6. Yea in a word,

(...) The looking to him is the way to have our understandings enlightened into
all Truth, our minds renewed, our hearts cleansed, comforted, healed, filled
with peace, joy, hope, and every good fruit; our Souls saved from all evil of
sin, both guilt, filth, snare and punishment, and from the pollutions of the
World, and power of Satan, and so from every evil thing; and our whole
Conversation rightly ordered. In a word, its the way to be saved from perishing
out of the way, and much more from perishing in the end, and to have and enjoy
Eternal life. Oh therefore let us in all cases, and at all times, look to him,
and wistly behold and view him; and to that purpose, Oh let us with David, make
it the one thing desired by us, That we may dwell in his house, and be always
beholding the fair Beauty of the Lord, and inquiring in his holy Temple, Psalm.
27.4. Seeing also,

Motive, 3. There is nothing else that we can turn to, or look upon, that can
or will do any of these things for and in us; no Law or Doctrine if this be
rejected and put away, or that is beside, or swarveth from this; no work,
frame, or device of our own or others; no Plaster, Medicine, or Course we can
take, will heal us in any thing so as to better our conditions. For sure if
Moses Law will not do it which was given from God himself (the exactest and
best that ever was given beside) then much less will any humane Laws or
Injunctions, Impositions, Works, Ceremonies, Practices of our own or others;
but if we turn from this Object, we must needs go after vain things, and things
that cannot profit us, because they are vain: And though we may kindle fires to
our selves, and compass our selves with sparks, and walk in the light of our
own fire, yet we must perish and lie down in sorrow, 1 Samuel 12.19, 20, 21. Isa.
50.11. Yea, though we set any Precepts or Ordinances of Christ before us to
observe and practice, yet if we observe and practice them without seeing and
looking to him, and so believing and depending on him for wisdom, Strength, and
Blessing, we shall deceive our selves, and do like them that made the Word of
the Lord to themselves, Precept upon precept, Precept upon precept; Line upon
line, Line upon line; here a little, and there a little, neglecting the vision
of All, the Foundation and Rest, wherewith the weary should be caused to rest,
Isa. 28.12, 13, 16. and 29.11. They that so do are so far from being healed and
saved in, and by such ways, that they fall under reproof, as taking the wrong
course for themselves, because not looking to (yea, are under greater misery
and judgment for neglecting and despising) this healing Object.

These things then being considered, let us be exhorted to look off from other
things as vain and unprofitable; as being neither Crucified for us, nor having
a Name, Power, and Virtue, able to afford Relief to us: Yea, oftentimes
bewitching of and destructive to us (as the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil
was to Evah, and the Wedg of Gold, and Babylonish Garment proved to Achan) and
to look to Jesus the Author and Finisher of the Faith, etc. Yea, let us look to
him in all cases, for all things, in all means, at all times, and with all
diligence and perseverance. I say,

First, Let us look to him in all cases, for all Grace and Blessing needful for
us. As to say,

1. For pardon of our sins; for in him is forgiveness of sin Preached to us,
and to him give all the Prophets witness, etc. as we noted before in speaking
to the believing on him, to be exercised by us. It is not for us to pore upon
our selves, and sins, and think that way to get rid of them without looking to
him, in believing on him: Nor is it for us to run to other Means or Medicines,
or trust to any Popes or Priests to pardon us, but look to him directly as our
only Savior, that having Suffered and Died for our sins, has there-through
both Power and Readiness to forgive them, and so we shall receive it of, and in
him.

2. Let us look to him for cleansing from the filth of our sins; For he is
filled with Spirit and Power to that purpose, the Spirit of the fear of the
Lord is upon him, to enable and furnish him to frame our hearts to fear him;
and in his Mediating and Ministering the New Testament, or Covenant, he puts the
fear of God into the heart which is clean, and leads to cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, and to perfect holiness before
him, Jer. 32.39, 40. with Heb. 8.6.10. Psalm. 19.9. 2 Cor. 7.1. And to that
purpose look we to him.

3. For Light and Direction in the Truth of God as it is in him, and to receive
from him that Unction by which we may know all things, and be lead into all
truth. That Light that will guide our feet into the Paths of Peace at all
times, and in all cases; for He is come a Light into the World, that whosoever
believes on him, might not abide in darkness, John 12.46. And he Will bring
forth Judgment to the Gentiles, and cause his Judgment to rest for a Light to
the people, Isa. 42.1. and 51.4. They looked to him and were enlightened, and
their faces were not ashamed, Psalm. 34.5. All others are vanity, and their
works wind and confusion; none of them (where he is not) can answer any thing,
Isa. 41.28, 29. Let us look to him for direction in our ways, as well as for
instruction to our minds; that we may know and understand his will concerning
us, in what he requires of us, as well as what he is, and has done for us; for
he is the Counselor to Action and Practice, as well as the Teacher of us in
Faith and Doctrine; and he will teach us his ways, that we may walk in his
paths, Isa. 2.3. It Is good to seek to him both in matters of Faith and
Practice, and not to lean to our own understandings, nor take things on trust
from men simply on the account of their Authority or Wisdom.

4. For Spirit and Grace to incline our hearts to believe on him, and walk in
his ways: For the Spirit is put upon him, and he is the Baptizer with the Holy
Ghost, John 1.33. which he gives to them that obey him, Acts 5.32. Thus we find
David looking to him (for by Lord, he oft-times signified the Son, see Psalm.
97.1.5.7. and 68.17, 18, 19. and 102.12.25. with Heb. 1.6.10, 11. Ephesians.
4.8.11.) for the holy Spirit, and for its inclining his heart to his fear and
way: Witness these and the like Expressions, Uphold me with thy free Spirit,
Psalm. 51.11. Thy Spirit is good, lead me into the Land of uprightness, Psalm.
143.10. Make me to go in the path of thy Commandments, incline my heart unto
thy Testimonies, and not to Covetousness; turn away mine eyes from beholding
Vanity; quicken me in thy ways, Psalm. 119.35, 36, 37.

5. Look we also to him; For strength to strengthen us unto every good way and
work, and to uphold us in all difficulties, and against all oppositions; for
the Spirit that is upon him, is as well a Spirit of Might, as of Understanding
and Counsel, Isa. 11.2. And the holy Men of God have looked to him for strength
both unto all good; so David, In the day when I cried unto thee, thou
strengthnedst me with strength in my soul, Psalm. 138.3. Strengthen me according
to thy word, Psalm. 119.28. And against all evil and opposition; as, Uphold me
according to thy word, that I may live, and let me not be ashamed of my hope;
hold thou me up, and I shall be safe, etc. Psalm. 119.116, 117. And so its
promised, that they who wait on the Lord, the Lord will strengthen their
hearts, and they shall renew their strength, they shall mount up as with wings
like Eagles, they shall run and not be a weary, walk and not faint, Psalm.
27.14. and 31.24. Isa. 40.29, 30, 31.

6. For comfort in Distresses, Troubles, and Temptations. For its he that prays
the Father for, and obtains and sends the Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth,
John 14.16, 17. and 15.26. And in his seeing his people, or visiting them with
his Salvation, he makes their hearts rejoice, so as their joy shall no man take
from them, John 16.22. Thus David looked up to the Lord for comfort, When will thou comfort me, Psalm. 119.82. and When will thou come to me, Psalm. 101.2. And
Rejoice the soul of thy Servant, for unto thee do I lift up my soul, O Lord,
Psalm. 86.4. But in looking to him for this and all other things, take we heed
to love him, and keep his Commandments, as our Savior instructs us, John
14.15, 16, 21.

7. For help and succor in dangers, and deliverance from evils, and from all
enemies, whether they be men or Devils: For all Power and Authority in Heaven
and upon Earth is his, and he stands and feeds (or rules) in the strength of
the Lord, and in the Majesty of his Name; and is both mighty to save his
Servants, and to destroy his and their enemies, Mat. 28.18. Mich. 5.4. Isa.
63.1. James 4.12. Thus David, Mine eyes are evermore to the Lord, for he shall
pluck my feet out of the Net, Psalm. 25.15. And when he had in vain looked for
refuge to other things, and they failed him, then he looked to the Lord for
refuge, who never fails them that seeks him, Psalm. 142.4, 5. and 9.10. For
indeed, in vain is Salvation either in Grace unto Glory, or from Enemies, as
Sin, Satan, and their Instruments or Designs looked for from any thing else;
and therefore it is good to look to the Lord, in whom alone is our Salvation,
and to wait for him the God of Salvation, as in Jer. 3.23. Mich. 7.7. Yea, in a
word,

8. Look to him for all Grace and Blessing, the Promises of this Life and of
the Life to come: For in him all the Promises of God are, Yea, and Amen, to the
Glory of God, 2 Cor. 1.20. And he is the God of all Grace, all the fullness of
the Godhead dwelling bodily in him; the Fountain of Living Waters, who gives
freely and liberally, and upbraids no man. Look therefore for the Mercy of this
our Lord Jesus Christ (even for the blessed hope, and his glorious appearance)
unto Eternal life, Jude 21. Tit. 2.13. And look we to him for all this.

Secondly, In all means. As to say,

1. In minding his Word, and looking into that perfect Law of Liberty, as it is
called, James 1.26. There he is exercising his Spiritual power, and affording
his help, that being Spirit and Life, Romans 1.16. John 6.63. A Ministration of
Spirit, that quickens and gives Life, Strength, and Grace, 2 Cor. 3.6.8. Ephesians.
3.16. Heb. 10.29. And gives Wisdom, and makes wise the simple, Psalm. 19.9. and
119 130. Yea, as it is written, The holy Scriptures are able to make a man wise
to Salvation, through Faith in Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 3.15. And he that has the
Doctrine of Christ in his heart, so as to Believe, Mind, Love, and Obey it has
Christ, nay, both Father and Son, 2 John. ^. There he is Discovered, Pourtraied
or set forth, so as there-through we may see what an One he is, and behold his
Grace and Glory with open face as in a Glass, through the help of his Spirit,
as is signified, Isa. 52.15. Gal. 3.1. 2 Cor. 3.18. Look upon him there
therefore, and there wait on, and for him. And with this,

2. In meditating on him as there set forth, musing on, and pondering his
words, and on him, as declared therein. So it is said, Kings shall shut their
mouths at him, for what they had not been told shall they see, and what they
had not heard shall they consider, Isa. 52.15. They shall understand or mind
with themselves; namely, as looking herein and considering them as Preached in
the Gospel; for unto that the Apostle applies it, Romans 15.21. Spiritual
meditation being as it were an inward Contemplation, and wister looking into
the Law of Liberty, and upon him as set forth therein: My meditations of thee
shall be sweet, says David, Psalm. 104.34.

3. In Praying to him, and to God in and through him: Then we lift up our faces
to him, Job 22.26. And therein a man may see his Face oft-times with joy,
lifting up pure hearts and hands to him, Job 33.26. In Prayer, we both look up
to him and upon him, fixing the eyes of our mind upon him; we lift up our eyes
unto, and our eyes are upon the Lord our God, till he have mercy on us, Psalm.
123.1, 2. There we are to take notice of, and know his Name in calling upon it,
Psalm. 91.14, 15. Exercising Faith (which is the exercise of the eyes of the
mind also to behold, as well as of the hand to lay hold of him) in him and his
Name, otherwise it is not a Prayer of Faith as it should be, and as it is called,
Jam. 5.15.

4. In his Sacraments or Ordinances of Communion together with him. In Baptism,
we may behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world, John
1.29. And in the Supper we have to do with his Body and Blood, and his Death
showed forth therein, it being a Communion of his Body and Blood, held forth
there to be taken notice of by us, and received of us, 1 Cor. 10.16. and 11.26.
And for, and in all these, it is good to look to him.

5. In the Unity of the Spirit with his people, and in Fellowship with them, in
his House, his Church, his Temple, those that have his Name upon them, and with
them: Many people shall say, Come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the
House of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of
his Ways, etc. Isa. 2.3. And, Oh how good is it for Brethren to dwell together
in unity, for there the Lord commands the Blessing, even life for evermore,
Psalm. 133.1.4.

Thirdly, Look we to him, and upon him at all times. Hear in season and out of
season, for that is implied in that the Word is to be Preached in season, and
out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2. for there is no Preaching but to some hearers;
meditate on him as set forth in it, night and day, Psalm. 1.2. whether literally
understood, for so David, Seven times a day will I praise thee, Psalm. 119.164.
Consider my meditation, in the morning will I direct it unto thee, and will
look, Psalm. 5.1, 3. And, Mine eyes prevented the night watches, that I might
meditate in thy Word, Psalm. 119.148. Or Metaphorically, for times of Prosperity
and Adversity, when we are merry, beholding his Goodness set forth in his Word,
or proved in his Works. The Word of Christ dwelling in us, will lead us to sing
Psalms; and when sad and heavy, then considering in the day of Adversity him
that is able to help us, Pray, Col, 3.16. with James 5.13. Eccles. 7.14. Yea,
that we may Bless him at all times, and his praise be continually in our mouth;
it is needful that the thought of Him and his Name, and so the Consideration and
Contemplation of him, be always habitually in our hearts, That out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth may speak, and we may out of the good treasure
there bring forth good things, Psalm. 34.1, 2. and 145.1, 2. Mat. 12.34, 35.

4. With all earnestness and serious diligence, even with the whole heart, as
Psalm. 119 10. Jer. 29.13. for this is not a matter of sport and divertisement
only from some weightier matters; but the main and chief thing of all our whole
lives: Matthew. 6.33. The one thing needful or necessary, Luc. 10.42. to be
looking up to, and upon the Lord Jesus; therefore the one thing desired by
David, to dwell in his House, that he might behold the fair beauty of the Lord;
as was noted before, Psalm. 27.4. The things of greatest moment depending
hereupon; as to say,

1. The deliverance of our Souls from the stings and venom of the old Serpent,
even from sin and death, spiritual death, and guilt, and filth now, and
everlasting curse and misery hereafter; And is this a thing to be trifled in,
and dallied with! Is there any thing of so great danger to us, as to dye of
those wounds, and to fall into everlasting misery and perdition? and therefore
is there any thing more seriously to be looked after, then that we may escape
it? Would not men with the whole heart fly from the biting of Serpents, or the
devouring teeth of Lions, or Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, as Lot did; or the
Earths opening its mouth, as the People of Israel did, when it swallowed up
Dathan and Abiram? Oh how should these worse destructions of the Soul be much
more heartily fled from? Would we be in earnest, or dally and trifle, when
laboring of the Gout or Stone, or Strangury, we look out for deliverance from
them? And shall we not much more seriously look for deliverance from Hell and
destruction, eternal wrath, and everlasting burnings, which are infinitely
worse, and not to be avoided, but by looking diligently, that we fail not of
Gods grace? Heb. 12.15.

2. The fitting us for any, or all acceptable service to God, and profit to
men; we cannot serve him acceptably, please him and profit others, till looking
to Jesus, we receive grace and fitness; And is it nothing to please God? Seeing
thence also flows,

3. The attaining to that perfectly, healthy state of Soul, (and Body too in
the Resurrection) in which we shall have the greatest and fullest happiness,
and that for ever; Fullness of joy in Gods presence, and pleasures at his right
hand for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. Will men trifle in seeking health and life,
much more in offers made of Crowns and Kingdoms, with all the confluence of
riches, honors, and delights therein? I trow not; and if they that strive for
Masteries, that they might get corruptible Crowns, wreaths of honor, much more
Crowns of Gold, and Kingdoms would be temperate in all things, and endure all
kind of hardships and labors for them; how much more ought we to be diligent,
and do, and endure all things for an incorruptible Crown of such infinite worth
and value, 1 Cor. 9.25, 26, 27. I read of Socrates, Aul. Gell. Noct. Attic.
lib. 2. cap. 1.
a Heathen Philosopher, that he would endure to stand a whole Day and Night
together, in a fixed posture, looking up to Heaven, without so much as moving
his foot, or winking with his eye, though yet he had no such sight before him,
as the Gospel discovers to us. Oh that we may not be so effeminate, and
impatient of trouble and labor, as to let every, or any thing divert or turn
us away from looking unto, and upon Christ crucified for us; which leads to the
last particular: viz. Let us look to him,

5. With patient continuance and perseverance; for, its He that continues
looking into the perfect Law of Liberty, and is not a forgetful hearer, but a
doer of the work, that is, and shall be, blessed in his doing, Jam. 1.25, 26.
The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways, but the good man
(that continues so) shall be satisfied from himself, with what he drinks in
namely from Christ, Prove. 14.14. Joh. 4.14. They that draw back, Gods Soul
shall have no pleasure in them, and so they draw back to Perdition; but its He
that believes, so as not to draw back, that believes to the saving of the soul,
Heb. 10.38, 39.

Motive 4. I shall add to all this one other Motive to persuade to it, viz. the
reasonableness and smalness of the thing required to so great advantages; its
but look up, and be healed, Numb. 21.8. Look to me and be ye saved, Isa. 45.22.
Hear and your Souls shall live, Isa. 55.3. Open thine eyes, and thou shall be
satisfied with bread, Prove. 20.3. May not that man be justly left to starve, or
pine for want of provisions, that for opening his eyes and looking about him
diligently, might have enough to maintain him, and will not? and that man
justly perish, that in looking to Christ may be saved, and refuses it? We may
apply to such as stick at this, and turn from it, what was said to Naaman by
his Servants; If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not
have done it? how much more, when he says wash and be clean? 2 King. 5.13.
When he says, look up and live, look to Christ and be saved.

CHAP. XXV.
Exhortation to lift up the Son of man, with some Motives to it, and
Demonstration of the usefulness of it, in several Cases; and Directions in it.

Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, that whosoever believes on him
may not perish, but have Eternal Life; and this lifting up is required of men,
as Instruments in Gods and his Spirits hands, as to the lifting him up by way
of commending him, and setting forth his virtues, as has been more largely
opened; let us considering diligently what has been said in Explication
hereof, both in love to, and compliance with God in his blessed appointment
herein; and in love to Jesus Christ, this most precious one, as being most
worthy of all possible love and testimonies of it from us, being in the Name of
God the Author and Procurer of all good for us, and Dispenser of it to us; and
in love to the Souls and Persons of our Neighbors and Brethren, to whom our
love is pleasing in the sight of God and Christ, if duly testified by us. Let
us, I say, eyeing and looking steadfastly upon him, and unto him for help and
guidance, strength and blessing, herein make it our business to lift up and
extol this Son of man with all our skill and power: Knowing that,

Motive 1. Herein we shall do the will of God, and therein also not darken and
obscure, but greatly commend and lift up God himself; for this being his device
and design, the issue, offspring, and product of his infinite Wisdom,
Holiness, Grace, and Goodness, and He his only begotten Son, in whom is all his
delight and well pleasedness, in lifting him up we extol his wisdom and
holiness, grace and goodness, and in neglecting or dishonouring him or calling
him Anathema, we abrogate the grace, and reject the wisdom and counsel of God;
give him the lie, and most horribly dishonor him, as if a God of no judgment
or understanding. He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father that
has sent him, Joh. 5.23. Who judges no man himself [immediately] but has
committed all judgment to the Son, that all should honor him, as they do the
Father that sent him: And surely if we show our selves so unkind to God and
Christ, if we be so opposite to his Grand Design and undertaking, we must needs
fall under the heat and weight of his indignation, and there will be no
escaping it. But in lifting him up and honoring him, if we do it in deed and
in truth, with our hearts, as well us with our lips, we please God, and have
fellowship with him, as co-workers with, and under him; we are subject to his
Spirit: and sowing thereto we shall reap a good reward, even life everlasting,
Gal. 6.8. Romans 6.19. And indeed God will accept of no praises or commendations
of him from us, in which we neglect and lay by his Son, the Son of man,
(according to the measures of the Revelation given us of him) seem our praises
and commendations of him never so glorious. The Pharisees would have had the
blind man give the glory of his seeing to God, so as to detract it from the Son
of man, as a sinner out of envy and opposition to him, Joh. 9.24. But were they
accepted, think you, in such a pretended glorifying of God; Surely no: Nor yet
those zealous Pharisees and Jews, who being zealous of God, but not according
to knowledge, through ignorance of Gods righteousness, went about to establish
their own righteousness, and submitted not to the righteousness of God, which
is Christ Jesus: the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes, Romans 10.1, 2, 3, 4. and no better, but rather worse be those
Antichristian spirits, who taking offense at the Cross of Christ, and lifting
up themselves above it, not holding the head, do talk of God and Spirit, but so
as they confess not Christ come in the Flesh, but through their knowledge of
him after the flesh, and ignorance of him, according to the spirit of God, lay
him by, as an unprofitable thing, or thing out of date, as much as the
Ceremonies of Moses Law, Joh. 4.2, 3.

Motive 2. Herein we shall be profitable to men, to whom we lift him up; that
being the way to do them good, and bring them in to believe, and so to be saved
from destruction, and be made partakers of eternal life; And what can we do
better for them, then to be Instruments of so great good to them? Indeed, this
is the way to be profitable to them in every thing; for, if we be means of
bringing them to Christ, and planting them into him, then are we means of their
being made apt and fit for doing that which is good, and well-pleasing in the
sight of God, in all things. It being the only thing that puts Men into a
sound, and right plight, both toward God and men; and then, we are means too
of their being made able to bear, and endure all kinds of trials and exercises
profitably, which may befall them: Yea, this is the way to make them live both
comfortably and acceptably to God, and to die in the favor of God, and so to be
happy for ever: There is nothing then wherein we can be more friends to men, or
more beneficial to them, then in a due lifting up the Son of man before them in
word and conversation; therefore it is that God calls upon us so frequently, to
praise, bless, exalt and magnify the Lord, even Jehovah; which Title or Name is
attributed to the Lord Jesus also. And he must needs be included in the object
of that act, inasmuch as God accepts not of our praises to him, but in and
through him, as was showed before, especially the Servants of the Lord, who
stand in the House, or Courts of the Lord, they are called upon to exalt, lift
up, or praise the Lord, or the Name of the Lord; Psalm. 134.1, 2. and 135.1, 2,
3. And they are they that are chiefly set in the World to be Instruments of
good to, and in it; and this is the way in which they are directed, to do Men
good; even by praising and commending the Lord to them, as we might consider,
in viewing particulars, how all their service, in the House of the Lord, and in
the World, is to be done with this Engine or Instrument, the praising or
lifting up the Lord, the Son of man; As for instance,

Instance 1. Would we convince the World of Sin, for not believing on Christ?
the way of the Holy Spirit is to do it by witnessing of him; lifting him up,
and setting him forth, as the object to be believed on, the Christ, the
Savior; the Son of God that has dyed for them, and is risen again; this
presently pricks them at the heart, as it did those in Act. 2.36, 37. at the
Apostle Peter's Preaching, and till Men see, and be convinced that He is such a
one, they think not themselves guilty in rejecting him, seeking safety and
happiness in the works of the Law, or some other things; till Paul see that
Jesus of Nazareth was such a Person, He was so far from thinking, that He
sinned in not believing on him, that He thought He ought to do many things
against his name, Act. 26.9. But, when he came to perceive who he was, then he
was convinced of sin in that, and judged himself for it ever after, as unworthy
therefore of such mercy, as was conferred upon him, 1 Timothy 1.12, 13, 14. 1 Cor.
15.9. Ephesians. 3.8. This then is our way to convince men of sin, for their unbelief
on Christ; let them see that He is anointed, and appointed of God to be their
Savior, their only Savior, that He has dyed for them, and is risen again,
and is every way able and ready to save them, and therefore is to be looked to,
and to be believed on, for all grace and blessing, and then they who thought
before, that they might not believe on, and hope in him, they are so bad and
unworthy, will see its their sin not to believe on him; and that that is a
greater evil then all their sins besides; as binding them all upon them, and
hindering them from receiving the pardon of them, they may be convinced of
other sins by the Law, as Murder, Adultery, Theft, etc. But not of this, that
they sin in not coming to Christ, and depending on him for all grace and
blessing, but in his being lifted up, and evidenced to be so excellent and
glorious an one: Joh 16.8, 9. And again,

Instance 2. Would we show men the odiousness of all other sins, how hateful
they are to God, and how needful it is that they turn from them to Christ, to
receive forgiveness of them, and washing and cleansing from them? The way is
not so much to tell them of the Law, and what that says, as to let them know
what Christ suffered for them, and that through his death and sufferings only,
there is forgiveness and cleansing of them, that way will do it, if men in
hearing, hear; and in seeing, see; and perceive what is set before them; as we
showed before. Thus the Apostle saw and judged all to be dead, and in an
utterly lost state in themselves in this, that One died for all* 2 Cor. 5.14,
15.

Instance 3. Would we convince the most seemingly righteous and just man, in
his own righteous walking, and working, that He is a sinner, lost in himself,
and needs to believe on Christ, and seek Justification and Righteousness in
him; the way is to set forth Christ, and lift him up as the Son of man, and
Savior of the World, that has dyed for all men, and through his Death has
the only name, in which there is salvation, and that He is the only Justifier
of men, that will convince them of a need of going out of themselves, and all
their own works and righteousness unto Christ to believe on him, 2 Cor. 5.14.
Gal. 2.15, 16. Those who were not sinners of the Gentiles, but Jews, and had
great fleshly privileges, which they looked upon as advantage to them, yet
hereby were convinced of their righteousness, that it would not profit them,
even by the Spirit witnessing to, and glorifying Jesus in, and by the Ministry
of his Servants, Phil. 3.4, 7, 8. as it is said, He (the Holy Ghost namely)
shall convince the World of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye
see me no more: Joh. 16.10. And, that is our way through the Spirit, to convince
such too: And so,

Instance 4. Would we convince men of righteousness in Christ for them, the
righteousness of God freely prepared for, and given to them of God, that so
they may come to believe on him? This is the way, glorify Christ, and Preach
his acceptable Sacrifice, which He has offered for us, that He the Son of God,
the Word, by whom all things were made, has given himself the ransom for all,
the Propitiation for the sins of the whole World, and that He has offered up
so acceptable a Sacrifice to God, that in the virtues of it, He is ascended up
to God, and is entertained of him, so as He comes down no more to be abased, or
to suffer for us. In the sight of this, that men are not justified by the works
of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus, (which implies the virtues of his Death,
and Sacrifice, and the acceptableness thereof for taking away sin, and
obtaining favor, for the approachers to God thereby) the Apostles and others
were moved to let go their trusting in their own righteousness, according to
Law, and to believe in Christ, that they might be justified; Gal. 2.16. And so
in the lifting up of the Son of man, all that have come in to believe on him,
have been prevailed with thereto; it being as well through his Name, that any
do believe on him, as that they that do believe on him, do, and shall receive
there-through remission of sins, Act. 10.43. 1 Cor. 1.21.

Instance 5. Would we convince the World of Judgment, that their judgment is
naturally false and wrong, and that God will judge the World in righteousness,
and give to every man according to his works? The way is to lift up the Son of
man, and show forth the truth, as it is in him; for, that light makes manifest
whatsoever is reproved, and lays open the foundation of the Eternal Judgment,
and discovers the truth, certainty, and impartiality thereof. Upon this ground,
and in so lifting up the Son of man, Paul preached to the Athenians, the
reproof of their former judgment, and the certainty of the Judgment to come,
Act. 17.30, 31, 32. And to the Corinthians. He says, that their judgment
concerning both Christ, and all men besides, so as no more to know them after
the flesh, sprung from their understanding, and judging that Christ dyed for
all; as also from thence he grounds the judgment, and the appearance of all
before Christ's Tribunal, 2 Cor. 5.10, 14, 15, 16. with Romans 14.9, 10, 11, 12.
Because Christ has dyed for all and released all from under the first
judgment, and is there-through become Lord of all, and all ought to live to
Him, and not to themselves.

Instance, 6 Would we have men to Repent, yea, or exercise Faith? The way to
move them thereto, is to lift up the Son of man. So the Apostle Paul, that
says, He testified both to Jews and Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith
in our Lord Jesus; tells us he did that in testifying the Gospel of the Grace
of God, Acts 20.21, 24. And that he fulfilled his Commission given him of
Christ, To open the eyes of the blind, and turn them from Darkness to Light,
and from the power of Satan unto God; in showing to them at Damascus, and at
Jerusalem, and throughout all the Coasts of Judea, and to the Gentiles, that
they should repent and turn to God, and do good Works meet for Repentance: All
which he did in Witnessing both to small and great, saying no other things but
those which Moses, and the Prophets did say, should come to pass; to wit, that
Christ should suffer, and be the first that should rise from the Dead, and
should show light to the People, and to the Gentiles, Acts 26 18.20.22, 23. Or
with these Arguments, he moved them to that Repentance and Faith which he
Preached and Urged.

Instance, 7. Would we dehort from any sin? This is our way to do it, lift up
the Son of man, show him to be Lord and Christ, that to him we owe subjection
and obedience; and that he has suffered for sins the Just for the unjust, that
he might bring us to God, and therein has given himself for us, that he might
redeem us therefrom to himself. So the Apostle disswades from Fornication, 1
Cor. 6.14.18, 19. and so we may dissuade from Covetousness, Fraud, Envy,
Malice, and every evil thing, as is implied, Romans 6.1, 2, 3.9, 10, 11. Tit.
2.11, 12, 13, 14. and 3.4, 5. Yea, it is the usual way of the Apostles, first
laying down the Doctrine of Christ, and therein lifting him up in the former
part of their Epistles, then in the latter part to dehort and dissuade from all
evil, and provoke and stir up to all Virtue and Goodness. And therefore also,

Instance, 8. Would we persuade to Obedience and Virtue? This is the powerful
Argument to be used, and the way wherein to do it: Lift up the Son of man, and
show how all is due from us to God upon account of the Grace in him, and
brought to us by him; by which he Teaches us, that denying all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present
world, looking for the blessed hope, etc. Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. And so that is here
observable that we noted in the foregoing going particular, concerning the
manner of the Apostles in their Epistles, as may be seen in the Epistles to the
Romans, Galatians, Ephesians, Hebrews, etc.

Instance, 9. Would we convince of Error? The way is to hold forth the Truth
as it is in Jesus, Lifting up and Glorifying the Son of man. So the Apostle
refutes those that denied the Resurrection of the Dead, by minding them of the
Gospel Preached to them, and therein of the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of
Christ, 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3. And so he reproves the Errors of the false Apostles
and the Galatians, by minding them of the Lord Jesus, his giving himself for
our sins, that he might deliver us from the present evil world, and of the
Grace in and of him, Gal. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and 3.1, 2, 13, 14. etc. and 5.1.
etc.

Instance, 10. Would we comfort any in any Temptation or Affliction? The way is
to lift up the Son of man, and show the Grace in him, and how God orders all
things wisely and holily in him, so as to the good and profit of men, to
further their Salvation and Welfare, and that there is help in him in every
condition, Heb. 12. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. etc. 1 These. 4.13.17. Romans 15.4,
5, 6, 13.

Yea, in a word, would we either humble or exalt cast down or raise up,
encourage and strengthen in, and unto what is good, or do any other good thing
in which we may profit men; this is the way to do it, viz. By Lifting up, and
Exalting Christ the Son of man, and setting him, and the Power, and Grace in
him before men; as also his Terrors against those who refuse and turn from
him, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. Heb. 1. and 2.1, 3. and 10.26, 29. and 12.25. So that
this way we may be profitable to men, doing all in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
as we are exhorted, giving thanks to God even the Father, by him, Col. 3.17.
But waving this, we do or can do nothing, as is said, John 15.4, 5, 6. That Is
the second Motive.

Motive, 3. Being acceptable to God, and profitable to men, we cannot but be
useful to our selves also; both in as much as no acceptable service to God, or
profitable work to men, shall be without its reward, 1 Cor. 15.58. Heb. 6.10,
11. And also inasmuch as in Lifting up Christ to others, we may mind him our
selves if we do it as we ought. And indeed we can scarcely Lift him up
profitably to others, without viewing and considering, knowing and taking
notice of him our selves; and that is the order and way approved of God for our
doing it: Let every one that hears say come, Rev. 22.17. And, He that
hears, speaks constantly, Prove. 21.28. While we view and look upon Christ
our selves, that we may commend him to others, we shall not be without Fruit,
Profit and Advantage to our selves also; opening our mouth wide, in this sense
too, God will fill it, Psalm. 81.10. And, The liberal soul shall be made fat,
and he that waters, shall be watered also himself, Prove. 11.25.

Wherefore let us make it our business and design to know, and view, and serve
the Lord Jesus, and to know and view him, that we may serve him; and as we know
him, serve him in Glorifying and Lifting him up, as we are exhorted Psalm. 99.5,
8. Exalt (that is lift up) the Lord our God, and worship him at his holy Hill,
for he (the Lord our God) is holy. And let us do this, as in all cases or to
all purposes, so in all things. As to say,

1. In all the Ordinances of God. In Baptizing, let it be into Him and his
Name, so as holding him forth, and directing therein, to Behold the Lamb of
God, that takes away the sin of the world, manifesting Christ to men as the
Baptist did, John 1.29, 31. In breaking Bread or eating the Lords Supper; lift
up Christ the Son of man, showing forth his Death until he come, 1 Cor. 11.26.
Let it not be Baptism, and the breaking of Bread, much less the Water, the
Bread and the Wine that we lift up, bless and magnify therein but the Son of
man, they are sufficiently lifted up in being made the Mediums of lifting him
up, and conveying Virtue from him to us. In Praying, lift up the Son of man,
and so in Praising, Thanksgiving, and Singing of Psalms; while we Pray, and ask
in his Name; and upon his account, and give thanks to God in all things by him,
and bless in his Name; and in Singing, Make melody with Grace in our hearts, to
him the Lord, John 14.13, 14. and 16.23, 24. Col. 3.15, 17. Ephesians. 5.20. Yea,
What ever we do in word or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving
thanks to God even the Father by him. In our Meditations, let them be much of
him, and of nothing but as represented also in, and through him, Psalm. 104.34.
and 48.9. Isa. 26.7, 8, 9. Mal. 3.16. And so, In our Conferences and
Discourses, Let us with one mind and mouth glorify God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ; so as the Father of him, and so as lifting him up therein,
Romans 15.5. Jude 20.21. And so,

2. In all our whole Life and Conversation, let us lift up the Son of man in
walking, so as becomes the Gospel of Christ; Standing fast in one Spirit, and
in one Mind, striving together for the Faith of the Gospel; which is the Gospel
of Christ, and concerns him, Phil. 1.27. Romans 1.3, 4, 16. Oh let it be our
business in all things, and by all means to lift up the Son of man; to Praise
the Lord; to Sing forth his Praises, and to make his Praise glorious.

CHAP. XXVI.
Reproof to those that are faulty in not lifting up, or in not rightly lifting
up the Son of man: With some discovery of Spirits, which are of God, and which
not.



Reproof, 1. First, He is too little lifted up by men, even by those that
Minister and pretend to be his Servants, and to Preach his Gospel; too many
such are faulty in not lifting him up in their Ministry. Such as

1. They who lift up Themselves, their Parts, Wit, Learning, Places, Offices,
being Proud of them, and Vaunting themselves of, and in them above their
Neighbors; but not lifting up Jesus Christ the Son of man, that men might see
his Glory, Look to, and Believe on him. Too many there are like to Diotrephes,
that love to have the pre-eminence themselves, rather then to endeavor that
Christ may have it in all things, and in all hearts and spirits; seeking their
own things, and not the things that be Jesus Christ's, 3 John 9.10. Col. 1.18.
Phil. 2.21. Most men proclaim every man his own goodness, but a faithful friend
(to Christ) who can find! Prove. 20.6.

2. Such as lift up other men, and have their persons in admiration for
advantage sake; as the Apostle says of the false Teachers, Jude 16. Whether it
be the Beast, either the Papal, or any worldly Power lifting up it self (like
Jereboam, who made Israel to sin) in the Temple and House of God, and
exercising Lordship therein over the Consciences of men and Worship of God: As
it is said Prophetically of many (yea, of the whole World worshipping and
wondering after the Beast) that they will lift or cry him up, saying, Who is
able to make War with him, and to overcome him? Rev. 13.4. And many such
flatterers there be, admirers and applauders of the Antichristian powers, and
Preachers up thereof, in opposition to the Lamb and his Followers: Or whether
it be the False-prophet and his Devices, Image, Mark, and Characters, lifting
up Baal or the man of Sin, in stead of the Lord Jesus; or that lift up the
Whore who sits upon the many Waters Rev. 13.13, 14. and 17.1, 2. etc. or that
cry up and resolve their faith into this or that Writer, Author or Father,
Synod or Council, and their Authority, Piety or Learning, like those who said;
I am of Paul, I am of Apollos and I of Cephas, etc. But mind not to know and
lift up Jesus that men might believe on him, and resolve their Faith into him,
and God in him, and their Authority and Goodness, 1 Cor. 1.12.

3. Such as lift up and exalt other things in opposition to, or so as
withdrawing men from the Son of man, and the simplicity in him. Such as lift up
either Horses or Chariots, Riches, and Greatness in the World, for men to seek
after and lean upon, Psalm. 20.7. Or that cry up and commend some Works and
Observations of the Law of Moses, or much worse, the Traditions, Inventions,
and Will-worships of men, as is intimated in Col. 2.16, 18, 20. Acts 15 2.
Whether only and by themselves as it were; as the Jews and Pharisees did the
Law and its Works, in opposition to Faith, Romans 9.31, 32, 33. and 10.1, 2, 3.
and their Traditions to the making void Gods Commandments, Mat. 15.3 4, 9.
Worshipping God in vain, laying aside Gods Commandments, to hold men's
Traditions, Mark 7.8. Or in part and Co-partnership with Christ and Faith, as
they who would divide the honor between them, and make them Partners in
sharing in men's Justification and Acceptance with God. Such there are among
Christians so called, who Preach up their Works and Doings, yea, rotten
Ceremonies and Doctrines of Devils, to the obscuring and hindering the Knowledge
of Christ, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. either crying them up alone and without Christ, or as
joined in Copartnership with him. Yea, and here we may observe that what the
Prophet Isaiah says, of men's having their fear taught them by the Precepts of
men, is not only applicable to those that cry up and receive the Commandments
and Impositions of the worldly and secular Powers, and great Rulers of the
people, which swarve from Gods Law and Doctrine; as those in the former times
of Israel, that when their Kings set up their Thresholds by Gods Thresholds,
and their Posts by his Posts, Ezekiel. 43.7, 8. walked in the Statutes of the
Heathen, and of the Kings of Israel which they made, 2 Kings 17.8. So as the
Statutes of Omri were kept, and all the Works of the house of Ahab, and their
Counsels, were observed more then the Lords, Mich. 6.16. But our Savior
applied that formentioned saying to the Scribes and Pharasees, who were persons
of the strictest Sect of Religion among the Jews, and a party not only
distinct, but also of a different complexion from the Herodians; taxing them
for making void Gods Commandments, by the Tradition of their Elders: For which
he calls them Hypocrites, and tells them, In vain they worshipped the true God,
while they taught for Doctrines, the Commandments of men, Mat. 15.7, 8, 9. To
instruct us, that even the Sayings, Glosses, and Scriptureless Traditions of
the most zealous and strictest Professors of Religion, when they are attended
and urged upon men as things to be believed, and their fear of God to be framed
by them, rather then Gods Sayings; the Fear and Worship of God is thereby
corrupted, and rendered vain. Let those then look to it and beware, who denying
that Christ has died for all, and is the Propitiation of the sins of the whole
World; do put men upon receiving the Glosses of their zealous Elders, and so
upon Ways and Rules of their imposing, whereby to know that Christ has died
for them, and they may apply themselves to him as their Savior; preferring
(...) and imposing upon men, to believe (...) such like Traditions as those,
before the Sayings of the Holy Ghost, viZ. That God has elected some to
Eternal Life antecedently to his purpose of sending Christ; and for them only
he designed and sent him as a Savior, and for them only he died to save them;
and that all the rest he hated and Reprobated from all possibility of eternal
Salvation; and designed to Destruction either in the pure created Lump, or in
the fallen Mass, and therefore Christ died not for them, nor would God have
them saved. And then for men's coming to know that Christ Died for them; and so
that there is a way made for their Salvation, they put them upon laboring
after, and getting such Faith and Frames, as are properly the effects and
products of that knowledge, first held forth in the Gospel to them, and believed
or received by them: Putting grievous burdens and heavy to be born, as the
Pharisees of old were wont to do, in stead of directing them to Christ, as one
who has certainly come into the World and Died for them, that he might be
their Savior; and they in receiving and believing on him, might be saved by
him. I say, let these and such like Persons, and they that depend upon them,
look to that above noted, concerning our Saviors application of that saying in
the Prophet Isaiah, to the strict and zealous Pharisees; but this will lead us
to another matter of reproof, viz. When men,

2. Lift him not up after the right manner, not as Moses did the Serpent in the
Wilderness, as among other particulars in which men may, and do fail in this
matter; So in these following, viz.

1. When men lift him not up alone, and singly or simply; as Alsufficient, and
the only able Medicine, sufficient of it self if looked to, and believed on, to
heal and save men, and give them Eternal life: But add something else to, and
with him as necessary beside him, as the false Teachers who joined Moses with
him; urging, that unless men were Circumcised, and kept the Law of Moses,
observing days and times, etc. they could not be saved, Acts 15.2. As some such
there are at this day, and that of diverse sorts, and extremely opposite the
one to the other: As the Papists who lift up prayers to Saints, the Virgin
Mary, Pilgrimages, Penances, and many the like humane Inventions and Devices;
yea, the Pope himself, and obedience to him, and some who abhor them, yet lift
up such a form of Baptizing, or of Covenanting, or the observation of the
Seventh-day Sabbath, distinctions of Meats, etc. Or,

2. When they lift him not up high enough so as above all, but lift up other
things above him, and lay more stress upon them then upon Christ, and the
knowledge and mindfulness of him, as some of them before mentioned. As it is to
be feared that some do so lift up their forms of Baptizing, or the being
Baptized again; and others their own Sorrows, Humiliations, Reformations, etc.
not as Fruits or Efficacies springing up from Christ lifted up, and looked to,
but as things through ignorance of Christ, put in place of Christ; which also
usually or often springs from what is a fault in too many, viz.

3. The not lifting him up to all as a remedy prepared for all sinners, while
it is a day of Grace toward them, as one who Died for all, and is risen again,
and is the Propitiation for the sins of the whole World; though it be so
attested of concerning him clearly in the Scriptures, as in 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb.
2.9. 1 John 2.2. And these also (as all the rest be) are very Injurious unto
men; because they rendering doubtful to men, whether there be Virtue in him for
them, and so whether there be hope for them, by taking away or rendering
uncertain the hope of Success, they unhinge them as it were in their
endeavors. Yea, making them believe, that if they be of the number of those he
is set up for, they must needs enjoy the benefit of him inevitably; not only if
they seek, but also if they would strive against it, yet they cannot fail,
because by an irresistible power causing them, they must be brought to it, they
render all eyeing him or striving to behold him needless. Or if they withal
(contrary to their own principles) tell them there is a need of seeking to him,
yet while they tell them it is not for all, but for some discriminated persons
only in Gods secret purpose, who may know that they are of that number by such
marks and frames, signs and differences; they put them upon seeking for such
differencing marks and signs first, and divert them from eyeing the Cross of
Christ (to which they should direct them) and turn them to some other things,
which are nothing of him. Just as if Moses should have persuaded the people (or
rather some other opposing Moses) that God had not ordained the Serpent of
Brass, for a remedy for all the wounded people; but for some such only as might
know themselves to be the persons, by some preparatory operations and partial
healings, effected by some other means first, some Herbs, Plasters, or the
like; and so should thereby have diverted their Eyes from the Serpent of Brass,
to other medicines which also might be so long in getting, or so impossible to
be gotten (as no good sign of discriminative love is to be met with, antecedent
to the looking to Christ discovered in the Gospel) that they might in the
interim, have died of their Wounds: So that these also are exceedingly
injurious to men herein, through want of right understanding, and that also
through not believing, as the Scripture has said, John 7.38.

4. They also exalt or lift him not up rightly, or are too much defective
therein, who do it not at all times, in, and unto every Matter and Service of
their Ministration, for the healing every Sting of the Serpents, every Disease
and Malady of the Soul: Yea, and for preserving it every where in health too,
when restored. David, a right exalter of him, calling upon others to magnify
the Lord with him, and that they would exalt his Name together; says, I will
bless the Lord at all times, his praise shall be continually in my mouth, Psalm.
34.1, 2, 3. And elsewhere, My mouuh shall show forth his Righteousness, and his
Salvation, all the day long, Psalm. 71.15. As signifying that what ever he had
to do, or say, in the Service of God, and of his Generation, he would do it in
the Name and Commendation of the Lord; even of the Lord Jesus, Psalm. 102.12,
25, 26, 27. with Heb. 1.10, 11, 12. What ever he was to declare to any, either
of Sin or Duty, to Reprove, Comfort, Encourage, etc. he would exalt and lift up
the Lord therein, and thereunto as that whereby his sayings might be rendered
the more effectual. And surely, that is the right good and profitable way of
speaking unto men; either for reproof of evil, or instruction to good; for
humbling or lifting up: To fetch the ground of all from Christ, and show how
every one of Gods Words (or his Word indefinitely) is true (from him) as the
beginning, or as having their Foundation in him, Psalm. 119.160. and their end
to lead to him, and glorify him. And it is observable how the Apostle Paul in,
and unto every matter, holds forth and lifts up the Lord, even the Lord Jesus,
the Son of man; making him, and the Grace in him, the bottom Ground and
Foundation, generally of all Doctrine and Duty, Hope and Expectation, rightly
ordered Affection, or Passion, Love, Fear, Sorrow, etc. and so of the whole
Conversation. If he reprove of sin, it is as it is a Deviation from, or
Dishonouring of him, 1 Cor. 6.1.9, 11, 13, 14, 19. And if he endeavor the
amendment of the sinner reproved, he does it in showing the remedy in him, 1
Cor. 5.8, 9, etc. And if he encourage in what is good, he does it proposing
him, and the Grace and Help in him for us, Ephesians. 6.10, 11. Romans 12.1. 2 Timothy
2.1.8. Heb. 3.1, 2, 7. and 12.1, 2, 3, etc. If he Preached Repentance from dead
Works, he Preached it in Christ's Name, as having opened a Door to it, and
Administering Grace for it, and Acceptance in it, Luc. 24.46, 47. Act. 26.20,
23. Heb. 9.14. If faith in the Lord Jesus: He lifted him up, and exalted Him as
the object to be believed on, and affording all encouragements thereunto, Act.
16.31, 32. If the Doctrine of Baptismes, or of the laying on of hands, or of
the Resurrection or Judgment to come, He fetched the ground of all from him, as
exalted of God to give forgiveness, and the Holy Ghost; and as become the
Resurrection and the Life, and the righteous Judge of quick and dead, Heb. 6.1,
2, 3. Now they lift him not up rightly then, or are much defective therein, who
in treating of these things, or any other Doctrines* or in pressing duties, or
reproving any evil ways or practices, speak of those things, as if they were
irrelative to him, and He had nothing to do, in or about them; as if there were
any truth that had no dependence on him, or conducement to his Glory; or any
good or duty that wanted motive, ground and encouragement thereunto, in and
from him, and the grace and glory in him, or any sin or evil that was not
against him, or received not aggravation in its evil, by and from the
consideration of its being done, notwithstanding him, or the cure and healing
of which is not to be sought for, and found in him.

5. They also who lift him not simply and nakedly, but so garnished with the
wisdom of words and eloquence that they lap him up in Lavender, as it were; or
in things of an obscuring substance, to the hindering of the naked appearance,
and the efficacy of his Cross, and the enjoyments of the effects thereof, which
the Apostle supposes may be hindered by such kind of Preaching him; it may make
the Cross of Christ of none effect; 1 Cor. 1.17. and 2.1, 2, 5.

3. Now if they be reproveable, that lift him not up, as they ought, or not at
all, much more then are they so, who instead of lifting Him up, endeavor to
cast him down, as is said of some, Psalm. 62.3, 4. They only consult to cast him
down from his excellency, they delight in lies; they bless (or praise) with the
mouth, but they curse inwardly, or underneath. And this they do,

1. Either by bringing in damnable Heresies, denying the Lord that bought them,
and these bring upon themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2.1. Such as deny, or
confess not Christ come in the Flesh; but throw him by as useless, or as one
gone out of the Flesh, and so Preach up a God or Spirit without Him, taxing,
deriding, or blaspheming those that confess Him come in the Flesh, and the so
confessing or acknowledging of Him, and so all expectation of any thing from,
or by his Person as exalted and glorified, and as having received Gifts in the
man, as of the Seed of David, the Son of man; or any looking for him in Person,
to appear again from Heaven, mocking at the faith of his coming, as is said of
some; 2 Pet. 3.4, 5. 1 John 4.3. 2 John 7.8.

2. Or, by their lives and doings, exposing Him to shame, scorn, and reproach
and so denying and decrying him, while by their fruitless lives, and sinful
demeanours, and abuses of the grace of God, they blemish the profession, which
they make of him, walking in lusts of uncleanness, riotous excesses, rebellious
against, and disobediences toward Magistrates and Princes; covetousness,
pride, fraud, and the like, who are the enemies of the Cross of Christ, while
in deeds they deny him; making their Bellies their Gods, and minding earthly
things, crucifying him to themselves afresh, and putting him to open shame,
Heb. 6.4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Pet. 2.1, 5, 6, 7. Jude 1.2, 7, 8, etc.

And all these, with others are faulty, as guilty of not lifting up Christ the
Son of man; though of these, some make it a piece of Religion to lift up a
wooden cross, and carry it in Procession, and follow after, and look to it, and
some Image or Picture of him, as crucified, set upon, or fastened to it, or so
lift up, and look to the Bread or Host, which they call the very Body it self
that was crucified, or rather the whole Christ; yet of the true Cross of
Christ, and the true and right lifting him up as crucified, they are ignorant,
yea, and enemies thereto, and so are all such as are here mentioned, as
reproved.

Use 5. And here we might also (before we pass to the other Branch of Persons
to be reproved) take notice, that in all aforesaid, we have a Discovery of
Doctrines, Spirits, or Teachers here hinted to us: Our Savior bids us beware
of false Prophets, who come to us in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening
Wolves, Matthew. 7.15. And to take heed least any deceive us: for, says he, many
shall come in my Name, and say I am Christ, and deceive many; yea, and that
there shall come false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs
and wonders, so as to deceive, if possible, the very Elect, Matthew. 24.4, 5, 24.
And the Apostles have told us of a man of sin, whose coming should be after the
working of Satan: Yea, that as we have heard, that Antichrist shall come in
the last times; so there are many Antichrists, and false Prophets come into the
World, 1 John 2.18. and 2 John 7.8. And therefore they also have warned us to
take heed to our selves. Now this is one good Character, by which they may be
known and discerned, their denying, or not lifting up the Son of man; but
exalting themselves, or some other thing, or person in opposition to, or
instead of him; according as the Apostle John, giving that warning to the
Churches, not to believe every spirit, but to try the spirits whether they be
of God, because many false spirits are gone out into the World; adds this as a
Rule for discerning the false spirits, or Prophets from the true. Every spirit
that confesses (that is acknowledges, praises, speaks out) Jesus Christ
come in the flesh, is of God. He suits with and pursues Gods design, who in his
Doctrine, and in the drift and scope of it, makes it his work and business to
commend, and speak forth Jesus Christ come in the flesh; not only God in his
naked consideration, as in himself, and not in Christ Jesus: nor only Christ as
he was before the foundations of the World, or as in the Word or Prophecy only,
but as come in the Flesh, both acknowledging that he is come in the Flesh, and
lifting him up as so come, as the only powerful sufficient Savior, Medicine
and Cure of miserable Man, that men might address themselves to Him, and Him
only; as evidencing himself in his testimony, and attend upon him for his help
and salvation, in all his ways and appointments ordered by him, as come in the
flesh, and having their foundation in him, witnessing of and leading to him, as
in attending to him in his Word, and waiting upon Him in his Ordinances, and
Gifts given and appointed for the perfecting the Saints for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, etc. But on the other hand,
Every spirit that confesses not Jesus Christ come in the flesh, is not of God;
but is that spirit of Antichrist, that should come into the World: that is,
every Doctrine and Spirit breathing therein, and so every Teacher preaching any
doctrine, however otherwise he may appear full of spirit, force, zeal and
efficacy in his teaching, and doctrine for moving and working upon his
Auditory; yea, though he should speak: yea, or walk like an Angel in his
outward conversation and appearance among men, yet if he bring not this
Doctrine of Christ come in the Flesh, if he do not confess, acknowledge, speak
out, so as to set forth, glorify and lift up Jesus Christ, as come in the
Flesh, to be the only Savior, the Great Design and Devise of God, for his
bringing in, or reconciling men to himself, as the power and wisdom of God;
that in which the only wise God has showed forth the riches of his wisdom; and
that in which is the greatness of his power, for destroying and overthrowing
the Kingdom of Sin and Satan, and delivering men from destruction; and for
making them wise and able to every good thing; that man is not sent of God, or
authorized of him in his Ministry and Doctrine, nor is owned of him, as acted
by his Spirit; but, inasmuch as he lays by, hides, and conceals, owns or
acknowledges not that great mystery He is of Antichrist, and the Spirit that
acts and leads him out to, and in all his zeal and fervor for promoting any
other way for bringing men to God, laying by this design of God, this Doctrine
of Christ come in the Flesh is not of God, but is the Spirit that enlivens, and
works in, and for Antichrist, according as the Apostle says, Gal. 1.8, 9. If I
Paul, or an Angel from Heaven, preach another Gospel to you, then that which we
have preached, let him be accursed. Many People judge of Teachers and Ministers
either by their Authority from Men, or their Learning in Worldly or Humane
Sciences, or the Zeal, or seeming Innocence, or Piety in their walkings; but
these the Apostle implies, may possibly be in those that are not of God; they
may be like Angels in their appearance; or, they may also pretend, and seem to
have immediate mission, and furniture from God, without such ordinary ways and
means, as others attain to understanding and fitness by; for, (as the Apostle
elsewhere says) Satan is transformed into an Angel of light, and therefore it
is no great matter, if his Ministers be transformed into the Ministers of
righteousness; 2 Cor. 11.14. And, yet be Messengers of Satan still; those
things which most men look upon of the conversation and walking of men, may be
included in the sheeps clothing; the Sheep is distinguished from the Wolf, by
his bleating, rather then by his clothing, joined with the innocence and
meekness in him; the holy men of God had the end of their conversation, Jesus
Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever: Its good for us to mind
them, and to follow their Faith, and such as so walk, and not to be carried
about with diverse and strange doctrines: Doctrines different from that, whereof
Christ is the great matter and end, Heb. 13.8, 9. The Gospel preached by the
Apostles, was a Doctrine setting forth to Men, and calling them into the grace
of Christ, Gal. 1.6. and that which swarves therefrom, is another Gospel, or a
perverting of the Gospel of Christ: and is not to be heard, who ever he be, and
how-ever he be gifted, or walk, that brings it; no, nor is he to be received to
house, or bid God speed to; He that so does, being therein a partaker of all
his evil deeds, says, 2 John 10, 11. Implying that they be evil doers, (as
indeed they must needs be, and so they are called, Philip. 3.2) who pervert or
change the Gospel of Christ, into another Doctrine, as was before noted, in
chap. 21. The Prophets all witnessed to Christ, as to come in the Flesh,
proclaiming Him the Seed of the Woman, that was to bruise the Serpents head,
Genesis 3.15. The Seed of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, that was to be the
blessing of all the Nations and Families of the Earth, Genesis 22.18. and 26.4.
and 28.14. The Prophet to be taken out of Israel, like to Moses in all things;
The Seed of David, in whose hands the Kingdom and Peace was to be established
for ever, Psalm. 89.3, 4. and 132.11. Isa. 9.7. A Root out of the stem of
Jesse, and a Branch out of his Roots, Isa. 11.1. A Child born to us, and a Son
given to us, and yet the Wonderful, the Counselor, the Mighty God, Isa. 9.6. A
man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs, that was to be wounded for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, upon whom was to be laid the
chastisement of our peace, and who by his knowledge should justify many, as
bearing their sins, etc. Isa. 53.3, 4, 5, 10, 11. And all the Apostles have
preached, confessed, and lifted him up as such a one, saying no other things
then what Moses and the Prophets did say should come to pass: Yea, and the end
of their walking has been to commend, glorify, and win in to him; and
therefore they who so preach, and speak, and walk are the true Ministers of
God, and such as are to be heard, whether they have humane authority, eloquence
of speech, and worldly learning, or not; for, even Christ and the Prophets and
Apostles (at least diverse of them) had not, nor came with those things, Joh.
7.15. Act. 4.13. Amos 7.14. Yea, though they should have like passions, as
other men, and be men of infirmities, as the Prophet Elias, Jam. 5.17. And the
Apostles were, Act. 14.15. Or be Men mean in their Person and Speech, as they
said of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 10.10. as on the other side, the false
Prophets and Teachers may boast of, and have an appearance of all the contrary.
Mind we then what it is that men confess, and whether in their word and
conversation that be their end, to exalt and glorify the Son of man, and win in
to Christ, as come in the Flesh; and close we with, and receive them that so
do, but if Any bring not that Doctrine, reject and refuse him; whether it be,
that He,

1. Deny Jesus to be the Christ, or the Anointed one, that should come into the
World, and whom Moses and the Prophets meant and wrote of, whether he preach,
and expect another Person yet to come, distinct and diverse from him; and to do
either the same works that he has done, or some other acts of saving Men, by
setting up an outward Kingdom for the Jews, after the manner of other great
Princes and Emperors in the World: or whether they look for no other man, but
turn all into an Allegory of some light or power within, whereof that Person
was only an outward Representation, Type, or Figure: Or,

2. Assert a necessity of Moses Law to be observed and kept, that men may be
justified and accepted of God, and saved; as if Christ was not the end of the
Law for righteousness, for that is a denying of him come in the Flesh, as to the
work and business of his coming, Act. 15.2. Gal. 1.7, 8, 9. 2 John 7.8. Or
whether He,

3. Deny the dispensation of the Spirit, and the pouring it out upon all Flesh,
or the openness of the grace of God, in and through him, and liberty of access
to God in the faith of him, and of what he has done and suffered for us, for
that is not a confessing, praising and commending him as so come, as an
All-sufficient, complete Savior, or as the Anointed, the Christ, furnished for
helping and saving Mankind, and as a good ground for all, or any Man to repent
upon, and to turn to, and hope in God: Or, whether He,

4. Look for, and teach to expect another, and further Revelation of the truth
of God, then that given in, and by him; as if he had not completed the Vision
and Prophecy, or was not the Person anointed of God, to give the full
Revelation of the mystery, or had not done it in the Gospel preached by him,
and by his Servants, in his Name, and at his appointment, and in the Spirit
thereunto, and therein given forth: Or,

5. Talk to men of an immediate approach to God, and receipt of Word and Spirit,
grace and blessing from Him, without looking to him, in and by Christ; as if He
was not in the nature of man, or as Man exalted at Gods right hand, and there
abiding, and interceding for us; and obtaining for, and dispensing to us his
grace and blessing; and so remaining as a perpetual High Priest for us, and
Mediator of God and us, through whom we are to have all our access to, and
dependence on God in all things; but, as if Christ was gone out of the Flesh,
or Being of a Man again. Or else, or also,

6. Talk of waiting upon God or the Spirit, without use of, or attending to the
Means and Ordinances appointed by Him, and the gifts given by him for our
helpfulness, dissolving Jesus at it were, and loosing or dividing the Spirit
from the Flesh, or Humanity of Christ, and so from the Means and Mediums
appointed in liew of the Personal Presence of his Flesh in the World; the
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and other Ordinances given and appointed by
him; Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12, 13, 14, etc. Or, whether He,

7. Mock at, or deny the glorious appearance of the Person of Christ, as the
Son of man sitting on the right hand of God, and coming in the power and glory
of God, with all the Angels of his might, to raise the Dead in Body out of
their Graves, and to judge them all according to their works, condemning the
wicked to everlasting misery, for their obstinacy in their wickedness; and
giving an everlasting Kingdom and glory to all that have here believed in, and
obeyed him; for these deny him a great part of the glory given him of his
Father, and so do not lift Him up, but cast him down from his excellency; Act.
10.42. and 17.30, 31. Matthew. 26.64. Luc. 22.69, etc.

Take we heed of all these Principles and Spirits, as erring, and not lifting
up the Son of man, and therefore not of Gods sending and owning.

CHAP. XXVII.
The second Branch of the use of Reproof, viz. Of those who look not to Christ
as lifted up of God, his Spirit and Servants.

how shall they escape the damnation of Hell, who stand so cross and opposite
to God in his grand Design, and to Christ in the Honor due to him and to his
Name, and to the good of all men, if they repent not? Surely wrath is likely to
(and without Repentance will) come upon them to the utmost, 1 These. 2.16. So
also are they enemies to their own good, and go contrary to Gods Ordinance,
Will, and Command, and by their evil examples, are also at least prejudicial
and injurious to others; who when he is rightly lifted up of God, and of his
Spirit, and his holy Apostles and Prophets (as all their liftings of him up are
right) and by his Servants, Ministers, and Disciples; yet refuse to behold and
look to him, and to seek their help and healing in, and by him. But either

First, Neglect him, looking after and upon other things: As the World, and
Flesh, going in their hearts after their Covetousness, their Oxen, Farms,
Wives; that I say not worse things, as Hawks, Hounds, Whores, Wine, and
Belly-chear, Sports, Pastimes, etc. like those in Mat. 22.5, 6. Luke 14.19, 20,
21. and as those that look to their gain from their quarters; neither sensible
of their Wounds, nor seeking to be healed of them; they look rather on the Wine
when its red; or on Women, or the Wedg of Gold, etc. Prove. 6.25. and 23.5.31.
Josh. 7. -- Or,

Secondly, In case they be sensible, that they be as it were bitten and
punished for their sins: If Afflictions, Dangers, Fears, Poverty, Pains, or the
like come upon them, yet they look not to the Son of man for help or healing:
They turn not to him that smites them, neither seek the Lord of Hosts, but look
to other things, as their Policies, and Contrivances for themselves; saying, In
the pride and stoutness of their hearts, the Bricks are fallen down, but we
will build with hewn stones: The Sycamore Trees are cut down, but we will
build with Cedars, Isa. 9.10, 13. Or else looking to those that smite them, as
instruments of their troubles, thinking by complying with them, and getting
their favor and friendship, and making them on their side shall be safe;
saying, A confederacy to them that say a confederacy, and staying upon them,
Isa. 8.12. and 10.20. Or else looking to Humane helps, and Carnal ways of
defense, and safety; as when God brought War upon, and discovered the Covering
of Judah (the weakness and nakedness of their Covering, or else that Covering
of his Spirit wherewith they should have covered themselves, Isa. 30.1. Even
Christ as held forth to them in the Law and Prophets; the true Propitiatory, or
covering Mercy-seat, Romans 3.25.) then they (not looking to that true Covering)
looked to the Armor of the house of the Forest, and and saw the breaches of
the City of David, that they were many; and gathered together the Waters of the
lower Pool, and numbered the houses, and made a Ditch, etc. Such like Humane
courses for safety they took: But they looked not to the Maker thereof, nor had
respect to him that Fashioned it long ago (looked not to the Lord the Maker,
Advancer, and Blesser of their City) nor to him that Fashioned it (or made and
fashioned the Covering wherewith they should have covered) long ago, Isa.
22.8.11. Or they looked to Egypt, and their Horses, and Chariots, Isa. 30.1, 2.
but looked not to the holy One of Israel, Isa. 31.1, 2, 3. As men in a danger
or fright, that look hither and thither for help, but look not to the true
place for help So are men apt to look to Hills and Mountains in times of War,
in times of Sickness to the Physician, as Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16, 12. and the like.
But seeing God has set up, and exalted such a one, as is mighty to save; the
Son of man, one chosen out of the People, one who is one with us, our Brother
and Kinsman; and so one compassionate of us, as acquainted with our Temptations
and Troubles: And one that is able to Succor us, because one with God, the Son
of God, one in whom God and his Fullness, gives forth himself to us: Should we
neglect and flight him, and look to any other thing or person from him? As that
in Psalm. 121.1. may be read, and is read in the Margin. Should I look to the
Hills and Mountains? From whence then comes my help? My help comes from the
Lord, who made the Heaven and the Earth. Not from the Hills and Mountains, but
from the Lord, Jehovah, the Lord who made the Heavens and the Earth. Should not
a man look to his God? Should a man seek for the Living to the Dead? Isa. 8.19.
Is it not better to search and try our ways, and turn to the Lord, lifting up
our heart with our hands (yea, our souls and our eyes) to him in the Heavens,
Lam. 3.40, 41. Psalm. 25.1.15. and 123.1, 2. But Oh! How apt are we to look for
help from trouble, but not to consider that our sins are the causes of our
troubles, and so neglect to seek to be delivered from them? Or if we seek
deliverance from them, then yet how many

Thirdly, Look to false ways for deliverance from sin, and trouble too? Running
(like the Heathens) to false Gods, or (as some Jews) to the true God by false
ways, not by Jesus Christ, the Son of man; and his Death and Sacrifice in, and
through which our way lies to God, and access to, and acceptance with him may
be had of us. But we men are apt; either

1. With Israel of old, to look to the Altars and Groves, the works of their
hands, as in Isa. 17.7, 8. Where he says, in That day a man shall have respect
to his Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the holy One of Israel; and he
shall not look to the Altars, the works of his hands, neither shall he respect
that which his Fingers have made, either the Groves or the Images. Implying
that that was now their way of sinning, that they looked in a Religious way by
Idolatrous and Superstitious sacrifices, and observancies to pacify Gods
anger, appease his wrath, and obtain his favor; as in all Nations generally
the Heathen did by their Idolatrous Sacrifices and Ceremonies, seek to please
their gods, and divert their anger; and by such superstitious and heathenish
ways, too many yet conceit they may do it with the true God, doing that to the
Lord, which the Heathen use to do to their gods, contrary to the express
Command of God, Deuteronomy. 12.30, 31. Or else,

2. With Israel in latter times, after that being punished for their gross
Idolatries, they were reformed from them. For then they looked to the works of
their own hands, in another sense (which they in those former times, under any
Reformation in their better Kings days, were apt also to do) they used to look
to the Temple, and to cry, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord are these. And to their Sacrifices, Oblations,
Burnt-offerings, solemn Meetings, many Prayers, Sabbaths, and the like: And to
hope for Deliverance from Sin and Judgments, upon such accounts as these, as in
Isa. 28.14, 15. and 66.1, 3. Jer. 7.4, 5, 6, etc. Romans 9.31, 32. and 10.1, 2,
3, Luke 18.9, 11, 12. And are there not many now that look either to things, as
bad as the Idolatrous Sacrifices, and superstitious Groves and Altars of the
Gentiles, and Gentilizing Jews; Some that look for help, pardon and deliverance
from wrath, from the Pope and his Ministers, their Masses, Dirges, Pilgrimages,
Invocation of Saints, and such like Fopperies! And by things too much of
Kindred to them, where the Pope is rejected; as by their saying their Prayers,
getting the Priests Absolution, observing Church-orders, etc. And those who are
reformed yet more from those things, do they not come up too much to the
zealous Jews and Pharisees, in looking to their Orders, Covenants, Zeal,
Profession, Ordinances, Duties, and many the like things never Crucified for
them, but to him who died for them; and into whose Name they were Baptized they
look not, or look too little.

3. So also they who look to one another, but not to Jesus, who think this or
that Religious man, or these or those good People shall help and succor them.
Like the foolish Virgins who neglecting Christ, and the getting Oil in their
Vessels from him while they had opportunity, looked that the wise Virgins in
their defects, should supply them, Mat. 25.8. but their hope and expectation
failed them, verse 9. To such it may be said, as old Jacob said to his Sons,
when they were like to famish for want of Bread corn; Why look ye one upon
another? Behold, I have heard that there is Corn in Egypt, get ye up thither
and buy, that ye may live and not die, Genesis 42.1. So may we say, Behold we have
heard that there is Grace in Christ Jesus, there is Salvation in him,
Redemption in him, Forgiveness of sins and Eternal life in him, all things that
we need in him, etc. Let us arise therefore and go up to him, or look up to
him, and Buy of him Gold tried in the fire, that we may be enriched; and White
Raiment, that we may be clothed, and our Nakedness may be covered, and our
Shame may not appear. If we look to other things, they will fail us, and be
like those deceiful Brooks, whereof Job speaks, and like to his Brethren
compared to them, Job 6.15, 16, 19, 20, 21. Streams which pass away, what time
they wax warm they vanish, or are cut off, in the heat they are extinguished
out of their place; the Troops of Teman looked, the Companies of Sheba waited
for them, they were confounded because they had hoped, they came thither they
were ashamed. Whereas Christ is the Fountain of living Waters, and that Spring
of Waters whose Waters fail not, Jer. 2.13. John 4.14. The remedy of Gods
providing for, and commending to us, the sure Foundation of Gods Laying, on
whom whosoever believes, shall not be ashamed, Isa. 28.16.

4. They also who trust in themselves that they are Christ's, who trust in or
look to their making mention of Christ, their Preaching or Prophesying in his
Name, and having success therein, so as to do many wonderful works, and to have
the Spirits subject to them; thinking thence to find safety and deliverance
from their sins and sorrows, from wrath and judgment, but look not to the Son
of man, so as to be healed of their sins by him. It Is not any man's Acts about
Christian Profession or Religion, but Christ himself delivered up of God for
our Sins, raised again for our Justification, and Exalted and Glorified of him,
and so that Grace in him, that is to be Eyed, Looked, and Depended on by us for
all Grace and Blessing, yielding up to be Saved and Healed thereby, as in
believingly minded it works in us; and so, He that looks into the perfect
Law of Liberty and continues therein, being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer
of the work, shall be blessed in his doing, Iam. 1.26. But that continuing
therein, minds me of another sort reproveable. Namely,

Fourthly, Those who having begun to look to him, continue not till in
beholding his Glory with open face as in a Glass, they be changed into the same
Image from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord; but look off from him
again, going away from this glorious Glass of the Gospel, in which the
beautiful Face of Christ, and its Comeliness, and Glory, for Escape and for
Delight is represented; and so forgetting what manner of men they are: And so,
what need they have of being healed and changed, yea, and what manner of one he
is too, and so are not healed and changed as they need. Whether it be that,

1. They turn with Demas, to embrace the present World; and looking upon the
Beauty and Comeliness and pleasing Form of their Enjoyments, Fellowships,
Friendships, Riches, Pleasures, play therein the Adulterers and Adulteresses
from Christ, and provoking his displeasure and judgment against themselves,
they leave off to believe on, and follow him, James 4.4.7. 1 John 2.15, 16, 17.
Or,

2. With the Galatians, and others, they turn to beggarly Rudiments, thinking
to make themselves perfect in the flesh, after they have begun in the Spirit,
looking upon the fair shows which the delude dones make in the the flesh; and
how great in flesh and fleshly Gloryings and Rejoycings of their Zeal,
Devotions, Orders, or Seize others are, with whose false Ways they are
taken, and by which they are corrupted from the simplicity in Christ: Like the
Adulterous Woman Aholah, and Aholibah, complained of in Ezekiel. 23. who were
snared, and committed Adultery with the Egyptians, Assyrians, and Chaldeans,
because of their greatness of Flesh, brave appearance in their Attire, and
lusty Looks; their flesh like the flesh of Asses, and their issue like the
issue of Horses, verse. 14, 15, 20. And like Jerusalem, who committed Whoredom
with the Egyptians, great of flesh, when they saw them, Ezekiel 16.26. Gal. 3.2,
3. and 6.12. Or,

3. As Jerusalem of old, in Ezekiel. 16.16, 17, 18 Looking upon themselves, and
their own Beauty and Comeliness received from Christ, they grow proud and
highminded, and slight Christ, and the lowness of the Doctrine of the Cross,
and so of the Gospel, and say they are Lords themselves, Owners, Possessors,
Self-sufficient, as full as Christ is, as good and able to live as He; or
however, able to live without exercise of Faith in, and dependence on him, from
which therefore they cease, and live upon their own Receipts, Conceits and
imagined Perfection. And truly these are in a sad and dangerous state, puffed
up Lucifer-like in themselves, and may easily fall, or rather are already
fallen into the fault and condemnation of the Devil; and prove the greatest
mischief to others, to seduce and draw them away from the Simplicity in Christ,
to behold and dote on them, and to affect a likeness to them in like conceits
of Self-sufficiency in themselves, and independency on Christ-crucified for
Life and Salvation: Even as the evil Spirits, or the Serpent fallen into, and
by Pride made it his design and business to Tempt and Draw man after him, by
the like aspiring pride to effect equality with God; and so into the same fault
and condemnation with himself. All these are here by this Doctrine of the
Exaltation of Christ crucified, the Son of man Lifted up, Reproved, and we may
be all warned that we be not led away with their error, to fall with them from
our own stedfastness; even from Christ Jesus, and the Grace in him, and
Doctrine of him, wherein our stedfastness lies, 2 Pet. 3 17. But that we
attend to grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of him, even Christ Jesus; to whom
be Glory, both now and for ever, Amen, Verse 18.

And truly, they that rightly view and discern how little Christ is Lifted up
by men, even by those also who pretend to befriend him, and to be his Disciples
and Worshippers or that are called Christians after his Name, yea, his Servants
and Ministers; and how great defects there are in their Lifting him up, who
think to lift up and exalt him; and how few there are that look to him, or
continue so to do, for healing may be filled with grief and sorrow of heart,
both for that God and his Grand Design, and great grace is so much under-valued
and abrogated, Christ to whom we are so much directed of God, and engaged for
the infinite fullness of grace, and of God in him, so slighted, disregarded and
abused; His visage so marred more then any man's, and his form more then the
Sons of men, as is said, Isa. 52.14. And so many men for want of knowledge of,
and looking to him, perishing; the cause, equity, and inevitableness of whose
destruction may be seen also in this Decree and appointment of the Father, that
the Son of man must be lifted up, that whosoever believes on him might not
perish, but have everlasting life; as we shall in the next place take a little
further view of.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Cause and Reason, Equitableness and Inevitableness of Men's destruction,
who shall be thereto adjudged of Christ; and yet the Consolation that this
Doctrine affords to Christ and his Members.



1. As to the reason and cause of it, it appears hence to be, as originally and
firstly their sin against God, provoking his wrath and anger against
themselves, in their personal sinnings against his Law and Doctrine, or
declared will (as the original and first cause of the dying of the People in
the Wilderness, to whom allusion is here made, was their being stung and bitten
by the Serpents) but against those first and original causes of destruction
there is a remedy prepared of God in Christ, and tendered in the Gospel, and the
declarations of God and his goodness, leading to repentance, in, and through
Christ; as there was a Remedy in the brazen Serpent for the People there. But
as there the stung People then perished, because they refused (if any of them
did so) to look to that Serpent. So the cause and reason here of Men's
perishing, is their refusing to look to Christ and to God, in and through
Christ, and so to the grace in him for help and healing, or their refusing to
be healed thereby, through looking off from him to other things: This is now
the great reason of Men's perishing; the condemnation, that Light is come into
the World, and men love darkness rather than light; refusing the remedy,
because they love their diseases, or love not the smart the remedy will put
them to, in order to the curing them of their diseases; because their deeds be
evil, for every one that does evil (that goes on, and designs to do it) hates
the light; neither comes to the light, least his deeds should be reproved,
Joh. 3.19, 20. and so we find the Scriptures every where assert, that the cause
of Men's destruction is their voluntary rejections of the remedy; as in Psalm.
81.10, 11, 12, etc. When God offered himself to Israel to be their God, bidding
them open their mouth wide, and he would fill it, their refusing him, his
advise and counsel, not hearing his voice, nor accepting him to be their
helper, but preferring others before him, procured his leaving them to
themselves and their Idols, and then what but misery and destruction could
befall them? the like we see in Prove. 1.20, 24, 25. Wisdom addresses her self
to all within, and without the City or Church of God, reproving their love of
their simplicity, scornfulness and folly, and tendering her grace and spirit to
them, but they generally will not answer her calls, and hear her counsels, nor
regard the stretching forth of her hands to relieve, help or draw them in to
her self; but put away all her counsels, and will none of her reproofs, and
therefore destruction comes upon them; the like may be seen in Isa. 66.3, 4.
Jer. 7.24, 25, 26. And the like we find our Savior, and his Apostles say of
the cause and reason of men's perishing, not to be any want of goodness or
graciousness in God, or want of provision in Christ, or readiness in him to
help them; but men's own wilfulness in refusing, and putting from them the grace
and truth discovered of God, in and by Christ to them for their salvation; that
they receive not the love of the truth, that they may be saved; believe not the
truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. That they
stop the ear, close or wink with the eye, least they should see with their
eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and be
converted, and he should heal them, Matthew. 13.14, 15. Acts 28.20, 27. Yea, the
very Heathens, who had the least discoveries of God and his goodness and grace,
that through Christ he exercises toward and among men, yet perish upon this
account, that they withold the truth in unrighteousness, that, when they know
God they glorified him not as God, nor were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish hearts were darkened: that, they liked not to
have God in their knowledge, and the like: Romans 1.18, 21, 28.

2. As to the equitableness and justness hereof; what more just and equitable,
then that men who will not be saved, should perish? that they who refuse the
most excellent remedy, and complete Medicine, and way of healing, which the
most wise and gracious God in his most perfect understanding and height of
love, and affection, has devised and prepared for them, dye of their wounds,
which through their own default and wickedness, they have brought upon
themselves; Yea, when God has been at a great cost and charge to provide man a
Savior, and prepare them help, and showed forth his great goodness therein for
their happiness; when He has not spared his own Son, but delivered him (as
made man, the Son of man) for our offenses, and raised him again for our
Justification, and therein, and thereby has saved men from perishing in the
first Death (into which they were fallen in, and through Adam) and therein
cured that deadly wound given them at first by the Serpent, and has glorified
him, and filled him with his own infinite fullness of power, spirit, and all
spiritual grace and blessing; therein both impowering him, and appointing him
to raise all men out of the first death (which he also will not fail to do) and
also providing in him all things, by which he is furnished for calling and
drawing them in to believe, and in believing on him, to preserve them from the
second Death, and to make them to live for ever; being furnished with authority
and fitness to cure all such stings of the old Serpent, as might and would
otherwise sting them to that second Death; and all this without their
knowledge, motion, or desire: Yea, and through him also, and by him making
known to us what he has done, and calling, and counselling us to come to him,
and accept of his grace and salvation, in, and through him (through whom also
we live, and move, and have our beings, and are made capable of hearing and
coming at his call to him, in whom we are so completely provided for that there
is no defect or want of any thing needful for our salvation, and everlasting
well-being) yea, and that we might have both the greatest ground of assurance
of finding help in him, and the greatest engagements upon all accounts to
hearken to, and comply with his counsels, and yield our selves subject to his
will and commandments, he has set before men both his alsufficiency, (as
being the Son of God, and God; and his having in him all the fullness of God)
and also the greatness of the love both of the Father, in not sparing him, but
giving him forth, and preparing him through so great sufferings to be our
Savior; and of the Son in sustaining them for our sakes, that there-through he
might be so perfected for us; how should he not be provoked to great
displeasure, and so to leave us to dye and perish of our wounds, if they, or
any of us, after, and notwithstanding all this, refuse his calls, and will not
submit to him to be saved, and be made happy for ever by him? What man of us,
and especially what Prince or Nobleman, if he be at great cost and labor to
prepare either a feast to entertain, or a Medicine to heal his poor neighbors,
likely otherwise to perish through want, or diseases, could take it well, if
after that they scorn his love, and make light of his provision? and yet such
is the case of Mankind toward God, as the parables in Matthew. 22.1, 14. and
Luc. 14.17, 24. show. And surely the offense is so much the greater, and the
more inexcusable and unpardonable in us men, and lays open to the greater, and
deserves the more severe punishment then any can be deserved from, or inflicted
by the greatest or mightiest man, by how much God is greater than man, and more
uningaged to us than man; and by how much his provision and love therein, and
the tenders and proffers thereof to men, exceed all that can be found in, or
from men. So that God will certainly be just in his proceedings against men in
his condemning them, and will be justified in the eyes and sight of all his
Creatures, both Angels and men (yea the condemned ones themselves) when he is
judged; as is said, Romans 3.4. And there will be nothing found by men to plead
for themselves, or condemn him, when he enters into Judgment with them; not so
much for that his power and greatness will bear them down; as because of the
exceeding great equity and righteousness, that will appear clearly and
evidently in his proceedings. And if it be so equitable, that they who neglect
or refuse to look to Gods salvation perish; how much more will it be so for
those, who beside their neglects, and rejections of this remedy themselves, and
through so doing, either are unfaithful to God in his Design of mercy to men;
while having some knowledge of it, vouchsafed to them, and command to help
their Brethren therein, in setting forth, or lifting up this remedy to them,
they neglect so to do; so as through their unfaithfulness, they occasion them
through ignorance and misprisions, to err and perish there from, (surely its
but just, if those Persons bloods also be required at their hands as is
threatened, Ezekiel. 3 18. and 33.6, 8) or (and much more still, if they also)
oppose and set themselves against Christ, and the grace of God in him; and the
testimony of God in the Gospel concerning him? Inasmuch as they are not only
defective and injurious to their own souls, but also betray, or offer violence
to the souls of others, defrauding them of, or driving them from their
everlasting welfare and salvation; yea, and (as to the latter sort) found
fighters also against God, and his Grand Design.

3. And their destruction must needs be inevitable and unavoidable, when it
befalls them; for, if they only refuse, and neglect to look to Christ, that
they may be saved by him; yet, how can they possibly escape destruction, there
being no other name given under Heaven, whereby they may be saved, but this of
Christ the Son of man lifted up, as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
Wilderness! If there could have been deliverance from Death and wrath any other
way, God would not have put his Son upon such abasement and sufferings, that we
might be saved by him. And now if there be but one Medicine that will Cure a
Disease, and if that be (when with much care and cost it is procured) rejected,
how can that Person who rejects it, possibly escape dying of his Disease? Such
is the case here; Acts 4.11, 12. Heb. 2.3. And they, in refusing the grace of
God and Christ, provoke him to anger; how much more, if they be unfaithful to
others, and hinder them of their good? And, how then can they escape
destruction also from him, seeing He is so infinitely great in power, wisdom
and counsel against them? A child of three years old may as well or better
think to make its party good against the greatest Giant in the World, as the
greatest and most powerful Man, or Company of men in the World may think to
make his, or their party good against God; Who can stand when He is angry,
whose fury is poured forth like fire, and before whom the Rocks are thrown
down; Noh. 1.6. Thence the Prophet proposes to Israel, (what is good to be
always proposed by us to our selves, when we be tempted to sin) Can thine hands
be strong, or can thine heart endure in the day when I deal with thee? Ezekiel.
22.14. And the Apostle proposes the like to the Corinthians, to persuade them
to look singly to God in Christ, and not to provoke him to anger, by looking to
other things, and committing Idolatry (which is a spiritual adultery with them
against him. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger th^n He? 1
Cor. 10.22. Surely that is a great folly to engage so Great, Invincible, and
Almighty a Power against our selves.

But how then can they prosper, and stand against him, and not be overthrown by
him, and perish from his presence, who are Enemies and Adversaries to him, in
his Grand Design! If its his absolute Purpose and Decree, to the accomplishment
whereof, He ingages all his wisdom and counsel, power and greatness that the
Son of man must be lifted up, how then can they but perish, who set themselves
against him to keep or throw him down, either in his Person, or Truth, or
Members? Surely they must needs (and its but just, right and reasonable that
they) perish in all their designs, purposes, and endeavors; there being no
wisdom, understanding, or counsel against the Lord, Prove. 21.30. No fleeing
from his Presence, Psalm. 139.7, 8. Nor standing against his Hand or Power: None
ever resisted or hardened themselves against him and prospered, Job 9.3, 4. All
that rise up against Christ therefore, whether in Himself, his Truth, or People
must inevitably and unavoidably be destroyed; What got Pharaoh by opposing him,
and persecuting his People, but destruction to himself, and all his Armies?
What got Saul, and Haman, and Julian, and all the Persecutors of Christ, and
his People, but their own Ruin? And so shall it be with all others, be they
never so great, or prudent, or numerous, though Jews and Gentiles conspire
against him; yea, and though the Kings of the Earth stand up, and the Rulers
take counsel together, they shall not prosper; but He will laugh them all to
scorn, and have them all in derision; and when he speaks against them in his
wrath, and vexes them in his hot displeasure, (as so he will speak to them, if
they persist against him) they shall perish before Him; Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 12.
and 68.1, 2. No weapon formed against Him, or his Spouse, and People shall
prosper, (because in them also He will be admired and glorified, 2 These. 1.10)
And every tongue that rises up against them shall they also condemn; Isa.
54.17. Whence,

Use 8. This Doctrine also affords matter of comfort and consolation, that
however men neglect and slight Christ; and the Devils, with their Instruments
and Followers oppose Him; and how few soever they be that duly prize him, yet,
He must and shall be lifted up. It Is Gods Decree and Ordination, and it must
take place: This, Christ comforted himself with the consideration of in John
6.37. when he had said that the Jews saw and believed not on him, He adds as a
comfort to himself, his Disciples and Lovers. All that which the Father gives
me shall come to me, and He that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. It
is in the neuter Gender, as to the former Branch; not all they that, but all
that which the Father gives me; we may understand it of all that glory,
honor, fullness of grace, salvation, blessing, power, authority, etc. All this
shall come to him in despite of Men and Devils, that set themselves against
him, or any who carry unworthily toward him, not believing what (or though)
they see what may commend him to them, and draw them and their hearts after
him, as it is said in Isa. 52.13, 14, 15. Behold (all ye that love the Lord
Jesus, know and behold it for your comfort) my Servant shall deal prudently (or
as the Margin has it, shall prosper) He shall be exalted, and extolled, and be
very high: He shall be both exalted of God, with his right hand, and extolled
both by the Spirit of God, and by his Servants, the Holy-men; yea, and in due
time of all Men, and be very high, exceeding high and glorious; As many were
astonished at thee (speaking to him) his visage was so marred, etc. so he shall
sprinkle many Nations. The Kings shall shut their mouths at him, for that which
has not been told them shall they see, and that which they had not heard shall
they consider. Whatsoever the Father gives him shall come to him, nothing
shall keep it back, or any part of it, who, or whatever opposes it. And then He
(that person, Man or Woman) that comes to him, He will in no wise cast them
out, which is a great encouragement also to any man to come to him.

Yea, here is a double encouragement: 1. That He shall have the height and
greatness that God gives him: He shall and must be lifted up, and be made high.
2. That He being so high, and by consequent able to help, succor, satisfy, and
save all that come to Him, He also is so good and merciful, that whosoever
comes to him for help, salvation, or satisfaction, he will in no wise refuse
or cast him out, which may both comfort us in his behalf, and encourage us in
our own to look to him, who-ever they be that look away from, or neglect and
slight him: For, He came not down from Heaven to do his own will, but the will
of him that sent him; and this is the will of him that sent him, that of all
that which the Father has given him, he should loose nothing, (nothing of all
that honor, glory, Kingdom, etc.) but should raise it up again at the last
day. And this is the will of him that sent him, that every one that sees the
Son, and believes on him, should have everlasting life, and he will raise him
up at the last day, Joh. 6.37, 38, 39, 40. And these two Branches of his, will
answer to those two Branches of his assertion, in verse. 37. and [that given
him] is distinct from (him that sees and believes on him) and the raising up
of the one, distinct from the raising up of the other; as those words [And this
is the will of him that sent me] in the beginning of verse. 40. implies; it
being spoken of as a distinct business, and so we may say. As God gave him in
the nature of man, the Throne of Majesty in the Heavens, and a great and
glorious Name here on Earth among men, notwithstanding all the folly and
negligence of the Jews, that see and believed not: yea, and against all the
oppositions, both of Jews and Gentiles, opposing Him, his Doctrine and
Servants, and persecuting Him, and them to Death: so God lifted Him up to
Heaven, both in his Personal Body, and as brought forth by his Church, in the
knowledge and faith of Him, wherein he was taken up to the Throne of God, Rev.
12.5. As also among men he was exalted, extolled, and made very high. But now
by the Antichristian Beast, and false Prophet, arisen and grown great in the
World: He is darkened and diminished again as it were: The Beast has the great
Company of followers and worshippers, and is wondered after, and magnified by
them, saying, Who is able to make War with the Beast? and, Who is like the
Beast? even that which appertains to the Lamb, the Lord Jesus, is attributed to
him, see Psalm. 89.6, 8. And we may take up that complaint, which follows in
that Psalm, verse. 38. Thou have cast off and abhorred thou wast wrath with thy
Anointed or Messiah, not as to his Person, but as to the appearance of his Name
and Glory in the World, and as to his Members here, as his Name and Glory is
upon them; and they by his permission and providence are rendered, as if they
were objects of his wrath and abhorrency: Thou have made void the Covenant of
thy Servants, (the Gospel Covenant at the present takes little place in the
World) thou have profaned by casting down his Crown to the ground, etc. But
now says our Savior, This is the will of Him that sent me, that how-ever low
my Crown, Glory, or Repute seem to lie, I should not loose it, but raise it up
again at the last day; and so He will: When He arises, and lifts up Himself to
judge the World, and to take to Himself his Great Power and Reign; His Enemies
shall be scattered; Antichrist, the Beast and false Prophet shall be
discomfited and taken; The Lamb shall overcome them: and then when they are
overcome by him, He will thereby raise up his Name, Covenant, Throne, and
Kingdom again in the eyes, views and hearts of the World, as it were; or into a
more high and glorious form and appearance, then before they fell down, then
before there was such an Apostasy and departure from him, even as the Persons
and Bodies also of those who see and believe on Him, shall be raised into a
better state and form then they were in, before they fell into the earth by
death, then God will give him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall
raise up the Tabernacle of David, that is fallen down, and he shall build it
up, and shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, then shall that be
fulfilled, which is spoken of by the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 2.11, 22. That the
lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed
down; and the Lord alone (even the Lord Jesus and God in him) shall be exalted
in that day, for the day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that is
proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought
low; and upon all the Cedars of Lebanon that are high and lifted up, (and so
upon all that is high or pleasant to men, that now eclipses or darkens his
glory, and robs him of his honor) and they shall all be cast down, and the
Idols shall be utterly abolished, and the Lord (even Jesus) alone shall be
exalted; and then great shall be his glory in Gods salvation, visibly and
apparently in the World also: For, at that last day, he shall appear in glory,
and all his Saints shall appear in glory with him; and then he shall be
exalted, and extolled, and be very high indeed, not only in himself, but in his
appearance in the World also, and in the eyes and hearts of all men: For, then
all the Kings of the earth shall praise him (even such as now despise and
persecute him) when they shall hear the words of his mouth; yea, they shall
sing in the ways of the Lord, for great shall be his glory, Psalm. 138.4, 5.
Yea, and then all the ends of the World shall remember, and turn to the Lord,
and all the Kindreds of the Nations shall worship before him; for the Kingdom
shall be (and is) the Lords, and He the Governor (then most gloriously) among
the Nations; all they that be fat upon the earth shall eat and worship, and all
they that go down to the dust shall how before him (every one shall confess and
give an account of himself to Him, see Isa. 45.23. with Romans 14.10, 11, 12. and
Philip. 2.10, 11) and none can keep alive his own Soul; Psalm. 22.27, 28, 29.
Yea, all Nations that he has made shall come and worship before him, and shall
glorify his Name, because He is great, and does wondrous things, He (as all the
fullness of the Godhead dwells in Him bodily) is God alone, Psalm. 86.9, 10. Yea,
and all Flesh shall worship him, and bless his holy Name for ever and ever,
Psalm. 145.21. Isa. 66.23. Then shall those Prayers and Prophecies be
accomplished, that we have in Psalm 67.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Let all the People praise
thee, O God; let all the People praise thee: O let the Nations be glad and
rejoice, (or sing for joy) for thou shall judge the People righteously, and
govern the Nations upon Earth; let the People praise thee, O God; yea, let all
the People praise thee, then shall the Earth yield her increase, (for then
shall all things be restored and made new; new Heavens and new Earth, in which
shall dwell righteousness; Isa. 65.17, 25. 2 Pet. 3.13, 14. Rev. 21.1, 5, 6)
and God, even our God shall give us his blessing; God shall bless us, and all
the ends of the Earth shall praise Him. And then what our Lord directs his
Disciples, and Children to pray for daily, shall be fully answered. God's Name
shall be so hallowed, and his Kingdom come, that his will shall be done on
Earth, as it is in Heaven; as universally, perfectly, and perpetually: for, Sin
and Satan, and all that are wicked, and love iniquity, and would not let it go,
shall be thrust down into the Lake, and shall have no place either in Heaven or
Earth: and those that believe on Christ, being saved from perishing therein,
shall enjoy eternal life: The sinners shall be consumed out of the Earth, and
the wicked shall be no more: Bless thou the Lord, O my soul, praise ye the
Lord, Psalm. 104.35.

CHAP. XXIX.
A brief Discovery of the True and False Church, their distinct Manners and
Privileges. And the Conclusion of the whole Treatise, in a Brief Exhortation.

Isa. 48.1, 2. who Swear by the Name of the Lord, and made mention of the God
of Israel, but not in Truth nor in Righteousness, though they called themselves
of the holy City (the holy Catholic Church) and stayed themselves on the God
of Israel, the Lord of Hosts is his Name. This that men usually magnify as the
Holy Church, is but the outward Court that is without the Temple, which the
Beast and False-prophet, the Antichrist or man of Sin sits in, and sets up
their Image in; and which the Angel ordered the holy Man to cast out and not to
measure, as being profane, and no sufficient mark, by which to know who is
Holy and Accepted of God; it being given unto the Gentiles, even to those that
are Uncircumcised in heart and life, boasting in, and knowing themselves by,
and after their flesh and fleshly Privileges: As their Birth, Breeding,
Riches, Learning, Places, Offices, and the like, and walking in, and after the
Flesh, performing and rejoicing in a carnal fleshly Worship, Religion, Zeal,
Devotion; and upon such accounts trampling under foot the holy City, which they
say they are of, but Know, Own, or Love it not; but do hate and Persecute it,
even the true holy Catholic Church indeed, because it has not, nor approves
and applauds, but reproves and faults such carnal rejoycings and confidences,
as Adulteries and Treacheries against her Lord, even the Lord Jesus. That which
they cry up in stead of it, is the Whore that sits upon the many Waters, or
multitudes mounted stately upon the Beasts back, riding him and upheld by him,
even by the Imperial power of the World, Dressing her self partly with Christ's
Jewels, his Scriptures and Ordinances, mingled with, and marred by her
Adulterous additions, her Inventions, Orders, and Impositions in Doctrine and
Worship; even the Church or Court of Rome, and her Daughters that exercise her,
or a like power; which is so far from being the holy Church, that it is indeed
a Nest and Cage of all unclean and impure Birds; as is too evidently seen in
the Lives and Practices of those that are of them, too generally from the Pope
to the Apparitor, every where. But leaving that filthy Whore with all her
Members, drunk with the Blood of the Saints and of the Martyrs of Jesus, the
filthy Sink of sin and wickedness both Mother and Daughters, we may note here:
That the true Church is indeed those, and all those who through the Lifting up
of the Son of man do believe on him, obeying and following him and his holy
Doctrine. All that in their hearts perceiving his Excellency and Goodness, do
love and cleave to him, receive his Commandments, and keep them, being Ruled
and Governed by him, and living in dependence on him: These as united in, and
by one Spirit in and with him, and so among themselves, and one to another in
the Faith and Love of him, and love of one another for his sake, are his holy
Church, his Body, all of them together, and Members of him in particular, 1
Cor. 12.12, 27. Romans 12.5. And these need not to (nor desire to) Lift up,
Preach and commend themselves as the Whore, the false Church, and her Members
do. But they make it their business to lift up their Head and Husband, the Son
of man, in whom they think themselves lifted up sufficiently. This Church
knowing her self to be his Body, his Members, his Beloved, she judges that she
has enough in knowing his Worth, Height, Glory, Excellency, Power and
Authority; and that is the thing that She looks after, yea, looks upon and
admires, and cannot but talk and boast of to others. She desires nothing but
his Love and Fellowship, to be admitted into the Knowledge of, and Acquaintance
with him, and through him to have Access to, and Acceptance with his Father,
who is through him her Father also; and that she may Honor and Serve him, and
bring forth Children to him. Let him have the Glory, the Power, the Riches, the
Wisdom, the Strength, the Honor and Blessing; yea, though she be Despised,
Dishonored, Impoverished, and made conformable to him in her Use and
Intertainment in the World, she is well contented therewith for his sake. She
leans not upon the Power, Riches and Authority of Princes, and of the Nobles of
the Earth; though if God persuades any of their hearts to Favor her, she takes
it out of his Hands with thankfulness. She relies not upon the multitude of her
Members, the great and profound Learning of her Doctors, the high Degrees,
Dignities and Eminencies of her Officers and Ministers in the World, her great
Revenues, Possessions, and Riches among men: These are the things the Whore
loves, looks after, and leans upon, and has her glorying and confidence in.
But the true Spouse of Christ leans upon his Shoulders, Looks to, Magnify and
Loves, Lives to, and Believes on him for all Peace, inward and outward
Protection, Safety, Blessing and Satisfaction, she makes it not her business
then to serve this World, or the great men thereof to humor, observe, comply
with and complement them, and receive their Impositions in Faith and Worship,
though according to her Lords directions, she Submits to every Ordinance of man
for his sake, whether to the King as Supreme, or to the Governors as sent by
him. And meddles not with Seizing on their Crowns and Kingdoms, raises not up
Wars and Commotions against them; contests not, nor strives with them for
worldly Greatness, Honor and Riches; thence Murdering or Trampling upon them,
or stirring up Rebellions against them. It Is the Whore and her Daughters, and
such as drink of her Cup, that practice such things: But she Prays for them,
and gives them all due Reverence, Honor and Subjection, as her Lord commands
her. It Is her great business to please her Lord, receive and keep his Sayings,
conform her self to his Will and Orders, seek his Favor, Protection and
Countenance; for she depends on him for all things, both for this life, and for
that which is to come; and therefore matters not nor fears to displease the
greatest Persons, and expose themselves to their Frowns and Persecutions for
his sake so She and her Members may please him her Head and Husband, and keep
in with him, and keep him with them. Such is the Way, Heart, and Carriage of
them that believe not on men, nor trust to themselves, their own Power, Policy,
Riches or Multitude, but believe on the Son of man, as knowing and believing
that he though the Son of man, is able and faithful to maintain them, and make
them happy.

And then for Her and their Privileges, they are such as they have in, and by
their believing in him, and depending upon him: That is, they are and shall be
saved, and have Eternal life with him in his Kingdom; and these Privileges do
very well content her, and every Part and Member of her, as led by his Spirit
in her. Though he do not keep them from being Tempted of Satan and his
Instruments, or from being Hated, Opposed, Oppressed, and Persecuted of men;
yea, Fought against and Murdered sometimes by the Beast, the Whore or False
prophet, and their Members and Admirers, the Limbs of Antichrist, because he
sees it may be profitable for them, and he knows how to turn it to good to
them, and to his own praise in their Salvation, and increase of Glory; yet she
is therewith well contented, having the assured hope, and certain promise and
engagement of her Husband, to preserve her in his Grace and Favor, and to keep
her from perishing from the way to his Kingdom. She is willing that Satan may
be permitted to tempt her as her Head and Husband sees good, so he do but step
in between him and her, and secure her from being defiled or injured by him.
She is willing to be Mocked, Scoffed, Buffetted, Reproached, put to Death in
her Members with, and for him, so he may be the more Honored there-through,
and she may but Live in, and with him. She is willing to take part with him in
the Tossings, and Troubles in the way for his sake, having confidence that he
will preserve her from fainting and perishing in the end; and that he will see
and set her safe at last in rest with himself, in the Enjoyments and
Embracements of his Love, in his Fathers Kingdom. It is not this Worlds Wealth,
Riches, Honors, Ornaments, Scarlet Gowns, Lawn Sleeves, Mitres, Scepters,
Crowns, Applause, and such like Carnal and Perishing things; not to have
stately Palaces, full and fat Livings and Benifices, the Salutations and
Complements of the Rich and Potent in their Meetings, and uppermost Seats in
Conventions, and the like. In a word, it is not the Ease, Safety, Grandeur,
Favor of this World, or the Wise and Great ones of it that she looks for her
privileges in. No, no, they are the Whore and her Daughters, and Members, that
look for such fine things, and contend for such like Privileges and Respects,
and by that they may in part be known not to be Christ's true Spouse, nor to
have their dependence on him, but other things. His true Church are those that
believe in him, and look after and rejoice in his Salvation, that they may be
upheld and kept in his Service, that they perish not therefrom, and that they
may be saved from every evil thing, and obtain Eternal life; the knowledge of
the true God the Father, and Himself, and the everlasting Enjoyment of their
Fellowship and Favor, in his everlasting Kingdom. And these are privileges
which the Whore, it may be, sometime talks of, but in heart seeks not, nor
rejoices in: But they are such as far exceed all the privileges, and greatest
Advantages that can, any other way then in believing on the Son of man, be
enjoyed by men; or then are enjoyed by any other beside them. Nor do they that
are Members of this holy Church, and this true Spouse, envy the enjoyment of
those privileges by any, nor strive to keep them by themselves or get them,
from one another; as the Whore and her Daughters, and Members do envy their
Honors, Places, Ornaments, Fame for Learning, rich Livings, and the like,
seeking to get or keep them from one another: Nor call others to behold their
Parts, Gifts, Excellencies, as the Whore or whorish Members do: But they desire
all should have, and enjoy the Favor of the Lord in Union with them, and
partake of their Privileges in joining with them, in Honoring and Serving
him; calling all to him, and not to themselves, but as in coming to him, they
become one in heart, way and design of Glorifying him, and enjoying safety and
life Eternal with them. Thence the Spirit and the Bride say come, they gather
to the Lord; and desire the Lords coming to, and company with them; which the
Whore, and her Bawds, and Panders, care not for thinking of, they had rather
have his Room then his Company; to have his Place, Honor, Worship and Respect,
then to have his Spiritual or Glorious presence with them, because they know
themselves guilty of disloyalty toward him, and love their present carnal
Enjoyments, which they know his coming and company would part them from.
Whereas his true Spouse believing on him, know his presence will be the
complete deliverance of them from all danger, and possibility of perishing; and
the perfect possessing them of himself, and of that Eternal life that is in
him. Such the true Church its Manners and Privileges.

Use, 10. Lastly (that at length we may come to a Conclusion) By all that has
been said, we may be, and let us be provoked and stirred up to admire, Love,
Laud and Magnify the Lord, even the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and his great Love and Grace that has devised, found out, made, set forth and
discovered such an Object as this, to be looked to by us; and therein such a
way of Salvation, and Life Eternal for us: That has chosen out of the People
the Son of man, one of us as it were as to his Humanity, and united that to,
and filled it with the Deity, and its infinite Virtues and perfections, that he
has magnified his blessed Son, and that through so great Sufferings and
Abasement, to so high Dignity and Glory, in the Nature of man for us; and so
lifted him up also in the discoveries of him by his Spirit, in the Gospel to
us, even to us such sorry and miserable Creatures (so fallen and rendered so
unprofitable, that we neither could or can be of any advantage or profit to
him) that so in his being lifted up before us, and looked to by us, we might be
healed of all our spiritual Diseases and Maladies; delivered from all the
things of the old fiery Serpent the Devil and Satan, the venom and poison of
it, and the pain and destruction brought into, and upon us by it; the sin and
guilt thence derived, the infirmities, death, grave, hell, that it brought upon
us. Yea, and from all the several stingings of the said Serpent and his Angels
and Instruments, whether by inward Temptations and their Prevalencies, or
outward sufferings and afflictions; keeping us alive, that we may not die of
them: Yea, so expelling the venom and poison of them, and infusing Virtue and
Vigor into us, that we may be safe and found from them, and live in a perfect
life, and walk in a perfect way, and serve and honor him. This Grace may be
somewhat Illustrated by Gods dealings of old with Israel, they were in a sore
and heavy Bondage in Egypt; God beheld it, came down and with various Wonders,
wrought deliverance for them, so as he brought them all out thence, not one of
them being left behind; and then also he became their Perfect, Alsufficient,
Merciful and Faithful Leader and Bringer in, in their following after him, into
the Land of Canaan. Even so God seeing us mankind, all in great misery and
destruction, under the Power and Tyranny of the Devil, and the first Death and
Judgment which we fell into, in and through Adam, came down in the person of
the Son, and by more wonderful ways of bearing the Judgment and Curse of the
Law for us, tasting Death for every man, and giving himself a Ransom for all
men, has bought all men from under that misery; the Free gift being to all men
through his Righteousness, to Justification of Life, Romans 5.18. So as to
justify them from that fault and condemnation, so as they live now under the
patience of God, and merciful Lordship of Christ as Lord of all, through his
said Death and Sufferings; who also offers to all men in the Gospel, a free
Justification of them from all their forepast sins, in yielding themselves up
to his Government, so as they may live in his Sight. Yea, and now the same
Christ that died for all and every one, and has so Ransomed us, is become the
Leader and Captain of our Salvation, calling all men to look to, and follow
him, Isa. 55.4. Heb. 2.10. with Psalm. 50.1. Prove. 1.20, 23. Isa. 45.22. And he
will save them in so doing, and every way secure them from perishing, and bring
them into the possession of an Heavenly Canaan, an everlasting and glorious
Kingdom. For which Guidance and Conduct of us thereto, he is every perfected
and most gloriously Accomplished with Power, Authority, Strength, Wisdom,
Riches for Supply of all Wants, and is infinitely Merciful and Gracious,
Compassionate, and Faithful, and will not fail or be discouraged, but will
bring every faithful Follower of him, or Believer on him to the Enjoyment of
his Kingdom. Indeed, as there God having saved his People out of Egypt,
afterward destroyed those that believed not (which also for our Admonition, the
Apostle Jude would have us to remember, though we have once known it) but that
was not through any defect, or want of Power, Pity, or Faithfulness in God
toward them, but through their unbelief, not depending on him, obeying and
Following him, but stubbornly rebelling against him, and provoking him to anger
with their Disobediences toward, and withdrawings from him. So also here,
though all men be Ransomed by Christ from perishing in the first Death and
Condemnation, that namely which passed upon all men in Adam, before any man was
Born to him; yet there will many perish in the second Judgment, that which
shall be by Christ after all are Dead and Raised again: In the second Death,
but that proceeds not neither from want of Power or Pity, Fullness or
Faithfulness in Christ, but from the want of their Compliance with his Calls
and Counsels to believe on, and Obey him, as the Scripture every where
declares, as was Noted before in Use 7. It Is most sure that every one that will
hearken to his Voice, and Believing on him, Follow him, shall have Eternal
Life. Yea, and though many Sins and Failings may be found with us, in our
Hearing and Following him, as well as many sticks and Hang-backs before our
first yielding to him, to be Followers of him (as were also found in Israel)
Exodus 5. and 14.

Yet, (as there were many Sacrifices; and a Priesthood appointed to make
atonement for their offenses, so as they were kept still in Gods favor, and
under his conduct, to the Land of Promise, not stubbornly and persistingly
rebelling against him; so here also) we have a far better Priest and Sacrifice,
greater, fuller, and faithfuller, and of an eternal virtue and continuance, to
keep the Followers after Him, from perishing from Gods favor, and for bringing
them to the enjoyment of eternal glory: so that we may well say; Herein is
manifested the love of God to us, in that He sent his only begotten Son into
the World, that we might live through him: Herein is love, not that we loved
God, but He loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins; 1 John 4.9, 10. Yea, we may well cry out with admiration and thankfulness; Lord,
what is man, that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man, that thou have
so visited him, etc. Heb. 2.6, 7. Yea, surely in the mindfulness and
consideration of this his so rich and wonderful love and mercy, which led him
to this (as the next verse says, God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him might not perish, but have
everlasting life) we may well give up our selves unto him; and say, Truly we
are thy Servants, we are thy Servants, the Sons of thy Handmaid, thy perpetual
Servants, Thou have loosed our bonds, offering up our Bodies a living
Sacrifice, holy and acceptable to him, which is our reasonable service of him;
Psalm. 116.16. Romans 12.1. Yea, how does it become us to accept this his grace
with all acceptance, and for ever to laud and magnify Him; To enter his Gates
with thanksgiving, his Courts with praises, being thankful to him, and blessing
his Name: Lauding and praising him, that He has passed such a Decree as this;
that, as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the Son of man
be lifted up, that whosoever believes on him might not perish, but have
everlasting life? And as the Son himself, our Lord, the Son of man has
published, and will publish the Decree, saying; I will proclaim the Decree, The
Lord has said unto me, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; ask of
me and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the utmost ends
of the Earth for thy possession; thou shall rule them with an Iron-Rod, etc. So
let us make it our rejoicing, and the business we mind, to proclaim the same to
all, calling upon all to hear it, and be glad of it; to embrace and submit to
it, for ever blessing him, and calling upon all Creatures to bless him with us,
who has so Decreed for us, and is so Decreed of for us. Let us lift up our
voice and sing, for the Majesty of the Lord, and cry aloud from the Sea,
glorifying the Lord, though in the fires of afflictions and sufferings; even
the Name of the Lord God of Israel, (the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all grace, comfort, and
consolation) from the Isls of the Sea; Yea, let us make a joyful noise to the
Lord, all the earth, serving the Lord with gladness, and coming into his
Presence with a Song. Giving thanks unto him, because he is good, his mercy
(prepared for us, and given to us in Christ Jesus) everlasting, and his truth
enduring from generation to generation. Calling upon all to take notice of his
goodness herein unto all, and to praise and laud, and bless him with us: Yea,
and upon all Creatures too, as in Psalm. 148. especially the Saints and holy
ones, who believing on him have title to, and interest in his promises of
salvation and life everlasting. Yea, let us praise him every where, and in all
things, chiefly in his Sanctuary, or Holy Place, and Holy Ordinances; looking
diligently unto Jesus, that we fail not of the grace given us in him, through
any of the politic workings of Si^, the World, and Satan, to that purpose
against us; but that we may be accounted worthy of it to life everlasting. To
whom ^e Glory and Dominion, Honor and Praise, now, and in all Ages, throughout
all Places of his Dominions, even for ever and ever, Amen. And, Oh that my Soul
may bless the Lord at all times, and all that is within me may bless his holy
Name, and let every thing that has life and breath praise Him, till we all
come to sing everlasting Hallelujahs in his glorious Kingdom, Amen, and Amen.

Laus Deo, and Christo su^ in Etern^m, etc. FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. BRief Observations upon Nicodemus, and our Saviors discourse with
him. p. 1. Chap. 2. The words of the Te^t considered, its Parts, four main
Points then observed. The first Point [The Type of the Brazen Serpent lifted
up] spoken to in some brief Notes upon it, p. 22. it should have been p. 14.
Chap. 3. The Second Point in part considered ( viz. That the Son of man must be
lifted up.) Who is the Son of man: And three Reasons propounded why Christ is
so called. p. 23. alias 26. Chap. 4. Two other Reasons (and they the principal
ones) of Christ calling himself the Son of man. p. 48. alias 40. Chap. 5. A
twofold Sense of the Phrase of lifting up (viz. putting to Death, and
Glorifying or Advancing) and what is implied in it in the latter Sense
especially. p. 65. alias 57. Chap. 6. A twofold way of Exalting the Son of man,
viz. either by Real Action upon his Person; or by Demonstration of him, and of
his Worth and Excellency to others. The former of these Enlarged upon. p. 77.
alias 69. Chap. 7. Of the second way of Lifting him up, viz. By Demonstration
of him, and of his Glory unto men by whom that was, and is to be performed, and
wherein. p. 85. Chap. 8. The third point, viz. That the Son of man must be
lifted up as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, and therein several
Analogies and Agreement between them, considered. p. 109. Chap. 9. The fourth
and last Point. The end of the Son of man's being so lifted up, viz. That
whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting Life. Six
Observations drawn from hence, the first of which (concerning men's danger of
perishing) opened. p. 136. Chap. 10. The second Observation spoken to, viz.
That God has no pleasure in men's death or perishing, and some objections
against it answered very briefly. p. 147. Chap. 11. The third Observation
briefly spoken to, showing Christ to be the only Medicine for our misery, and
Way to happiness appointed of God for us, and what an inducement that
consideration is to love God, and accept of Christ. p. 154. Chap. 12. The
fourth Observation considered, and therein the necessity and nature of
believing on the Son of man unto Salvation, with its desirableness and
acceptableness to God. p. 162 Chap. 13. The fifth Observation, [ viz. That
whosoever believes on the Son of man shall not perish, but have Eternal life]
having two Branches, the former of them is here explicated: What the perishing
is from which the believer on the Son of man is preserved, and how he is
preserved from it. p. 182. Chap. 14. Of the second Branch of the fifth
Observation. What Eternal life is, and how the believer on Christ shall have
it. p. 202. Chap. 15. The Application of the two former, viz. the 4th and 5th
Observations in part, in Exhortation to believe, Reproof for not believing,
Encouragements to continue in believing on the Son of man, and some Directions
thereto. p. 212. Chap. 16. Some further usefulness of the said Observations in
Cautions and Instructions. p. 225. Chap. 17. The sixth and last Observation,
viz. about the necessity of the Son of man's being lifted up; spoken to in
certain Conclusions, the first of which in two Branches, shows the necessity of
Gods lifting up Christ in himself, both as to men's believing on him; and as to
their being saved and living for ever by him. p. 239. Chap. 18. Another
Conclusion, proving the necessity of his being lifted up by way of
Demonstration to men, both by God and men; both unto men's believing on him, and
abiding in that believing p. 250. Chap. 19. Two other Conclusions, showing the
Fullness and sufficiency of this means for Begetting and Preserving in the Faith
of Christ; and for bringing to the Salvation and Eternal life to which it is
ordered and appointed. p. 262. Chap. 20. The Application. First by way of
Instruction from the last Conclusions, showing the Excellency and Glory of the
Gospel, with six Inferences therefrom. p. 281. Chap. 21. A second Use. The
Excellencies of Christ himself hence Inferred, and that is Viewed. First, As
the Excellencies of the choice Creatures are ascribed to him, and so he in such
a sense to the Firstborn of every Creature. p. 310. Chap. 22. Secondly, As in
Christ are all things answering the needs of fallen man, all things that
pertain both to Life and to Godliness. p. 335. Chap. 23. Thirdly, As all the
perfections of God, both the Father and the Holy Spirit are in Christ. p. 355.
Chap. 24. A third use of this Doctrine by way of Exhortation, and first, To
look to Christ as Lifted up for us, in all Cases, and for all Grace and
Blessing in all means, at all times, and with all diligence and perseverance.
p. 364. Chap. 25. Secondly, To Lift up the Son of man, with some Motives to it,
and Demonstration of the Usefulness of it in several Cases, with some
Directions in it. p. 388. Chap. 26. A fourth Use by way of Reproof to those
that are faulty in not Lifting up Christ, or not rightly Lifting up the Son of
man; and a fifth Use giving some discovery of Spirits, which are of God, and
which not. p. 399. Chap. 27. A sixth Use, or another Branch of the use of
Reproof, reproving those that look not to the Son of man as Lifted up by God,
and by his servants. p. 416. Chap. 28. A seventh Use showing the Cause or
Reason, Equitableness and Inevitableness of man's Destruction who shall be
thereto adjudged by Christ. And an eighth Use showing the Consolation that this
Doctrine affords to the Members of Christ. p. 425. Chap. 29. A ninth Use
affording a brief Discovery of the true and false Church, their distinct
Manners and Privileges. And a tenth Use concluding the whole Treatise, in a
Brief Exhortation or Provocation to to thankfulness to God for this Decree and
Design of God, concerning the Exaltation of his Blessed Son, the Son of man, to
such a gracious end and purpose. p. 438.
The Errata.
REader, my great distance from the Press, have occasioned too great a B^ood of
Mistakes in the Impression. It Is my grief that it is so, but I can no other
ways help it now (except in those Copies which I send abroad with my own hand)
than to give thee an account of them, and direct thee how to amend them. The
most weighty of them are as here follows

In the Epistle Page 4. Line 17. Read sights, in the Discourse it self, p. 7.
l. 3 r. water, l. 21. r. it goes. p. 20. l. 2. r. credit to, l. 3 put a: at
men, p. 21. l. 17. r. Savior, p. 27. l. 1. r. du^y-waiter, l. 8. dele for, and
r. Gods way p. 34. l. 27. for to r. in, p. 35^ l. 24: r. has not, p. 37. l.
20. r. and 3, 1, and l. 22. r. its, p. 41. l. 27. r. not worthy, and l. 31. r.
13. p. 46. l. 3. r. the, p. 51. l. 4. r. to them, p. 61. l. 18. r. (verily man)
p. 62. l. 18. r. succession, p. 63. l. 15. r. Government l. 26. r. Son of p, 64
l. 8. r, Government, p. 66, l. 7, 8. r, the Evangelist note, p, 68. l. 7 for
10. r, so, l, 15. r. chief, p, 69, l. put a full stop between up and on, p 5,
7, l, 1, r, man. p. 78. l. 2, r. to consume that Sacrifice, p, 84. l. 2, r.
Abraham too, l. 12, r, the flesh, p. 88. l. 23. dele the full step at therein,
p. 89. l. ult. r. their minds, p. 94. l. 21^ r, Act, p, 101. l. 7, r,
righteousness. l, 33. r. experience, p. 99. l, 8, dele of, l. 30. r, God has,
p, 103, l, 1. r. we not, p, 112. l, 21, r. against Christ therein, p. 129. l
21. r. saving them also, p. 133, l. 33. r, to him met with, p, 137. l. 12. dele
of it, l, 33. r. life in, p. 139, l, 14. r. Psalm, 90, 7. p. 140. l, 24, r. all
together, p, 141. l 9. r, and judgment again. p. 143, l. 24, for own, r. one.
p. 157, l. 2. r. Isa. 42. l. 15, r, Jo^ah, p. 162. l. 5^ r. to God, l. 11. r. 1
Cor, 1, 21, p, 165. l. 11, r. thence, p. 178. l, 12, r. 5, 6, p. 195. dele
verse p 200. l. 20, r. instruct, p. 202. l. 19, r. thereof, p. 204. l. 27. dele
the, p. 205, l. 4, r. afflictive, l, 10. r, Sun. p, 115. l. 23, r. puts. p.
219. l. 1. for to, r, too, l. 27, dele the. l. 3^. r. believes, p, 227. l. 34,
r, and signifies, p. 228. l, 30, r. justify. p. 230. l. 22. r. unworthiest. l.
29. r, e^ing. l, 23 (...) 9. r. scarcity. l. 20. r, above, l, 33. r. there. p.
239. l. 27. r, is, p, 241, l. 14. r. confer, l. 17. r. of God. l. 29, r.
whatsoever. p, 243. l. 1. r. believed on, p, 244. l. 22 r. to command, p. 245.
l. 4, r. is able. p. 248, l. 23, r, exercised. l, 26, r. mediation. p. 249, l.
6, and 19. r. mediat p, 251, l. 6. dele and, l. 17. r, accepting, p, 252. l. 1.
r. worse man. p. 25^ l. 24 and 26. r. b^re. p. 254. l, 8, r, sent, p. 262. l.
9. r, which is. p, 263. l. 23, for he r, God, p. 264. l. 33. for 2 r. 1. p,
294. l. 31, r. John 1, 51. p. 297, l. 32. r. their lusts, p, 302, l. 28, r.
withhold. p. 304. l. 22, r, put. p. 338. l, 12. r. all also. p. 340 l. 20, r.
4. yea etc, p, 345, r. Chap, 23. p* 260 l. 22 r. John 2.13, p. 377 l, 7 dele
Case 15. p. 38^. l. 32 r, 2 John 9. p, 402 l. 24 dele upon. and rather. p. 418
l. 2 r. they shall p. 423 ^: 21 r. women l. 325. ^omeliness p. 424 l, 32 r,
worshippers p. 428 l, 6 r, men p. 429 l. 2, r, accounts p. 431 l. 2 r. Nah 1 p,
436 l, 11 r. looks p. 441 l, 7 r, magnifies. p. 472 l, 7 r. privileges p, 443
l. 2 r, fainting p, 445 l. 19 r, stings p. 446 l. 32 r. every way.

In the Epistle p. 4. l. 17. r. light. p. 7. l. 1. r. through, and in the Note
after the Epistle l. 5. r. Evangelies, or Gospels.


