THE EFFICACY Of the true BALM BEING A true Relation of Mrs. Rose Warnes
carriage, Confession of her Sins, and profession of her hope in the mercy of
God, so far as it was known to an Eye and Ear witness of much of it after she
was apprehended, and to the time of her death, to which she was adjudged April
1667. At Lin Regis in the County of Norfolk, upon strong presumption of her
murder of her infant, and suffered April 14. With some means used for her help
in her imprisonment.

As also an inperfect yet pretty full Relation of what she spoke to the People
at her execution.

Published by John Horn of Lin Regis with his Epistle and some verses on her.

Printed for T. Passenger at the three Bibles on London Bridge 166^.

Reader*
HAving lately put to the Press, a discourse upon the Parable of the Prodigal,
chiefly the two last verses of it, and therein treats much of the merciful
compassion of God toward sinners, and readyness to receive the chief of them,
upon their return to him: yea to give by Jesus Christ repentance and remission:
I have thought it very agreeable with that discourse to make public also this
ensuing Relation of God's gracions dealing with a woman in our town of Lin; a
woman of good parentage, and that sometime lived in good fashion but (through
decay and poverty) partly fell into temptation and so into sin, ^ter she had
some understanding of the truth and goodness of God, and had made thereof
sometime some profession, and surely as sins against knowledge, and after mercy
extended, are very provoking of God's displeasure, so it was a token of his
displeasure against her so sinning to permit her (after many convincements,
warnings and reproofs given her, and still sinned against by her) to fall into
so gross sin, as to pull upon her open shame, and punishment in the veiw of
men, falling with child adulterously, and being delivered in secret, she caused
it to be cast forth which God (in severity against her so hainious sinning, yet
in mercy to her soul) would have come to light and there by her brought to
shame and suffering. during the time of whose imprisonment he yet magnifyed his
grace and mercy toward her in giving her repentance and filling her with good
and lively hope, of her salvation, as ensuing this Relation will inform thee,
being the sum of diverse passages and observations noted by a relation to her
by Marriage. viz. Thomas Moor junior, (since that alas deceased and now with
God) and for the use of Friends written by him: who as he was endued with great
understanding and wisdom in the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, and of the
grace of God, and therethrough made a very skilful, able and expert spiritual
Physician, to poor sinful and aflicted souls, so was it her mercy to have much
converse with him, and helpfulnesse from him in the time of her imprisonment,
whose endeavors for her, as his abundant charity through the grace of God led
him to undertake them, so through the blessing of God, were a very good means
of her repentance, and of the comforts and encouragements that her soul met
with, she was it seems much exercised about the Parable of the Prodigal: and I
was much exercised about what I have thereupon published, by occasion of her,
with whom I also conversed in the time of her restraint, though she speaking to
me but once about it, I knew not that she was so much exercised in it, till I
had near finished what I thereon writ, but when I understood it, it made me the
willinger to publish it. And the publishing of that moved me also to publish
this, being an instance of mercy so agreeable to it. I had noted something my
self about her and of her speech at her suffering, but finding those passages
of my Friends and Brothers, more large and full then mine own (mine own also as
to the main of them, being inserted into the Treatise or discourse before
mentioned as to what might be without mention of her name) her speech being
also here remembered, and set down much fuller then my memory retained thereof
or was related by me. I chose rather to publish this of he^ then any thing of
my own: this also being full of very useful observations profitable to be
known, which ^udged great pity should be wrapped up in a napkin and be only in
the hands of some fewer Persons. I have only aded some brief answers to some
things objected by some against her: with a few homely verses, and now it is
public do thou read and make good use of it, and the Lord give his blessing
with it.

Thine to serve thee in the Gospel of Christ. J. H.

Books sold by Tho. Passenger at the three Bibles on London Bridge^
MArkhaw's Master p^ice in 4 to. newly Printed, corrected and amended,
Dod on the commandments.
Doc-litls spiritual Antedote.
Pichard on sanctification.
The wife Virgin.
The penitent prodigal by John Horn sometimes Minister of Lin Alhallowes.
Halls sussurium cum D^o^ or his Divine Soliloquies.
Pilgrims port.
Pathway to health.
Mariners compass rectified,
Academy of complements, the first and best sort, far surpassing any other book
of that nature.
Book of Palmistry.
Book of Knowledge.
Valentine and Orson large.
History of Palmering of England.
Destruction of Troy in three parts*
History of Paladine of England,
History of Amadis d'Gaule 5th, part.
Scarborough spaw,
The jovial Garland.
The loyal Garland.
FINIS.
The Efficacy of the true Balm or Medicine for Restoring and healing the Soul.
A true Relation of Mistress Rose Warnes Carriage Confessian of her sins, and
Profession of hope in the mercy of God; so far as it was known to an eye and
ear witness of much of it after she was apprehended, and to the time of her
death, with sou^e mention by the way of the means used for her help.
AFter the Justices had been with her and taken her examination I went with my
wife to see her and found some women with her, and her self full of sorrow, and
shame. I told her whatever she had done and however grievously she had sinned
against the Lord and against her own soul, and against his name and people of
which (though I knew nothing particularly of what procured this shame and
sorrow to her, nor desired at this time any particular confession from her yet)
I doubted not but there was somewhat of shameful iniquity, and long
stubbornness in hiding it, that procured this shame and sharp correction. And
that which made made me so judge was the infinite mercy of God and his slowness
to anger, who is not easily provoked to such severity and sharpness in rebukes;
yet whatever it was, I desired she should not add this to all, to say there is
no hope; But know there was yet forgiveness, and mercy with him, that he might
be feared, and hoped in by her, for still this saying remains faithful and
true, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, even such lawless
and disobedient sinners. And God has exalted him a Prince and a Savior, for
to give repentance and forgiveness of sins even to rebellious, and backsliding
sinners. And he was now using those means to save and redeem her from her
iniquities, because milder ones would not effect his end. And therefore not to
be angry or frown against him for judging thus, for which we make it our work
to hide our sin he is engaged in love and faithfulness to us to make it his
work to discover and make us take shame, and if we would timely judge our
selves we should not be judged with such sharpness and when we have provoked
him to use sharpness, still he judges us in this world that he may not conde^n
us with the world; Therefore now at last, Humble your self under the mighty
hand of God and to day, if yet you wilt, hear his voice harden not your heart,
for still its to day, which he is sparing you, and has not cut you off in your
iniquity, and is still by any means calling you, that you may escape the
damnation of hell. Therefore now let us take shame and judge our selves. Truly
I must take shame to my self for my unfaithfulness to you, that I have not been
more watchful nor more laid to heart what I have observed and heard.

I have observed that you have been of latter times very seldom in the Company
of your faithful friends and negligent when you have been with them, of minding
and giving earnest heed to that which might and would have kept you from this.

I thought it might be occasioned through the troubles and cares of of this
world coming on you by your necessity and stra^, and having your children like
to be cast on you and desolate, and therefore sought to help it by seeking to
make your life more comfortable, by engaging for you to put you into a way for
your help, and the help and relief of your children with bread. I heard also of
your being often in evil vain and wanton company, and having fellowship with them
in such vanity fi^thyness and foolish talking as is not convenient. But partly
hoped it was not so, because it was hid from me, and though not without some
fears of some truths in such reports, yet was ready to excuse it, as an issue
of the temptation of the fear of want, and hoping of getting some advantage, or
relief by such friendship, which though very evil, yet I was the less severe in
judgeing because of your poor condition, and thought rather first to seek to
take away the occasion by such means as aforesaid.

But did now see cause to blame my self, and therefore could the more pity
her, and earnestly professed that she and we all might now take notice, that
God would by no means allow, or suffer it in those that make mention of his
name; and keep company with those that call upon him in truth, To have
fellowship with others in their unfruitful works of darkness. And in their
merry meetings, and revellings (in which also it is a shame to speak of those
things that are done of them in secret) but would more severely correct it in
them then in others that know not God.

I desired her to acknowledge to Gods glory whether she had not been more a
frequenter of such private meetings that are indeed unlawful, lawful, wicked
and lascivious then a compan^on of those that truly fear him; Amongst wh^m I
told her, I had very ^eldome seen her of late times.

Upon this she freely confessed, that she had been so formerly until iniquity
had got dominion over her. But since that she feared her being with child, and
was also made sensible of the pity and kindness of her friends, who knew not
what she had done; she was filled with shame fear and horror, and had not
frequented such evil company. But earnestly begged of the Lord, to forgive and
hide her sin, and cover her shame, and not make her a reproach to the foolish,
which also she was persuaded, he would have done for her had the at last obeyed
his voice, speaking to her when alone, and by his servants when she was
sometime in their company, Admonishing and moving powerfully no longer to hide
her sin but to declare her ways to some faithful friends that might pity and
pray for her, and seek her help and healing. And she many times was resolved to
do it, and yet could not when she had opportunity they that she thought she
could most freely have opened her self too, not first finding her out, nor
being jealous of any such thing; she knew not how to break the Ice, but still
full of shame and guilt came seldom among them, and when she did, met with such
powerful reproofs as made her afraid and ashamed of them, as if they had known
all that was in her heart, and seen all her ways; which reproofs of instruction
had she submitted too, and been willing to take shame with her faithful friends
she knew she should have met with help and healing, and might have prevented
this that was now come upon her, but she refused to take shame, and now the
Lord had showed himself above her in the thing in which she dealt stubbornly
and proudly, and now he had made her willing to accept of this shame as a just
and gracious punishment of her iniquity, and she now saw that all this was
needful to bring down her heart. And yet could not but hope in his mercy, that
by his thus judging her in this world, he would save and redeem her from her
iniquities, and deliver her soul from going down into the pit of destruction.

Afterward my wife and I being with her alone; she declared something of her
ways of iniquity, and deeds of darkness more particularly, but (as I feared,
and told her) with too much extenuating, hiding, and excusing, and so much she
confessed the next time I was with her. Alas said she, I have yet sought to
hide my sin, and to excuse it and put off as much as I could of the blame and
shame of it from my self even in my confessions of it to you. But God has
found me out, and made you an instrument of showing me the dark corners of my
heart. I think you know me, better then I do my self, I confess you have
discovered the root of all this evil, and of mine iniquities getting such
dominion over me. The Idolatrous esteem I had of having a self sufficiency in
my own hand of those things, God was rending from us, this love of money made
me unwilling to submit to Gods chastisements of that nature, and laid me open
to such temptations, as being yielded too promised help in the things my soul
lusted after; and though still God crossed me in all yet my purpose being not
broken, but my heart inclined to its covetousness. I went on frowardly, and
stubbornly after the way of mine own heart, etc.

I believe and am verily persuaded she then hid nothing, but by degrees as she
could and had opportunity, did declare her ways, and backslid -- ings wherein
she had transgressed against the Lord, and his people even from the first to
the last of these her wanderings that had brought her to this shame; and did
very much take the shame of all to her self, yet still always said that such
iniquities of filthyness and uncleanness of the flesh, as were now become hers,
were not so formerly, nor had she such natural promptness, that way for
temptations to work upon, but did always detest and abhor it all her young time
both single and married, and therefere her iniquity was the greater, in
yiedling, and suffering her self to be over come as she had done; but having
once given way to and dallied with temptations, thinking her self strong enough
to resist them, when she would, sin got dominion over her, and it became more
then her own iniquity, and then still desirous to keep a name Among her
friends, was unwilling to reveal her temptations, snares and weaknesses to
them, and so got no deliverance. Yea though many times filled with horror? yet
was there a secret desire cherished to hide and hold fast deceit, a refusing
to return. Therefore that God was righteous in all, and gracious in thus
judging she often fully abundantly, and freely acknowledged, and did very much
abhor her self, as more vile then we could immagine; and did willingly accept
of the punishment of her iniquity in the shame brought upon her, and that
because she saw by faith, that there was yet help for her in the name of the
Lord, though she had destroyed her self. And indeed she was much helped by it,
and being through a deep fence of her need engaged to a more earnest giving
heed to the things she had heard, and that she might now know them as she ought
to know them, more seriously then ever giving attention to reading, to
exhortation and doctrine she profited much in the time of her imprisonment, and
grew to a more clear and right understanding of the Gospel of Christ: and of
the great things therein belonging to her peace; and God did create the fruit
of his lips in that gracious word peace to her, which led her with great desire
and delight to exercise her self therein day and right, she much longed after
the company of her faithful friends, and bewailed her neglect and slighting
such opportunities, as now her soul thirsted after.

She was much conversant in a little Book lent her (Entitled Instructions to
the Living from the consideration of the future state of the Dead) in which
Gods imputing righteousness with out works; and justifying the ungodly, and
things pertaining thereto is treated of, so that it became her own in reading,
and searching the Scripturns, whether those things were so; and was much
affected with it, and appeared to have met with much help to her understanding,
increase and strengthening to her faith and hope, through so weak a means,
which yet to her was not weak, she could not but commend it to others, and
desire them to read it. After which I gave her my Papers that are now made
public (Entitled Fornication Cendemned) which she often red, and seriously
pondred both in the Manuscript, and after they came out in Print, and desired
many others to read, and consider the same as that in whith she met with great
help, and mercy, and others might in reading be helped with that which would
preserve and deliver them from such sins, and snares as she had fallen into.

She was much exercised in reading the Parable of the Prodigal Son in the
Gospel, and seemed to have much right understanding in it, and help by it, and
met with such refreshing from the consideration of his Fathers receiving him
with so great joy, and in such manner as is there expressed as would not let
go, but pleaded for, and still rejoiced in though she met with some repulses:
something like the woman of Canaan.

There was in her whole carriage a mixture of passionate sorrow, and tears in
the remembrance of her sins, and consideration of the shame brought on
herself and frinds, and occasion given to the adversary, to blaspheme that
worthy name called upon her, yet never without hope in the mercy of God through
Jesus Christ: which indeed truly melted and broke her heart. A mixture of this
I say with cheerfulness of spirit and face, in which though she had more true
rejoyceing in the Lord then it may be many did think, or then some (more pure
then their maker) could brook that such a sinner should so soon have, in the
joy of his salvation restored, yet there was also a mixture no doubt of flesh
(as also to her sorrowings I say a mixture of flesh appearing in too much
lightness of spirit by fits, unbeseeming her condition, but it was her natural
infirmity augmented by evil communications and customs, some remainders of
which were yet to be seen upon her to the last, and often bewailed by her, and
though some were offended, and straightned toward her on sight of it
sometimes, yet without good reason, for was she not even a brand pluck^t out of
the fire, and i^ it strange to see the smell and blemishes of the smoke and
fire still to remain on such a brand? And are not we also our selves compassed
about with infirmity, and liable to remptations; yea have we not sin dwelling
lusting and warring in us.

And can we not then have pi^ bowels and compassion even toward the ignorant,
and them that are out of the way. Yea on our poor broken Brethren, and seek to
restore and heal such with the spirit of meekness, considering our selves,
least we also be tempted; Oh how short are we of like mindedness to that
servant of the Lord, who is Lord of all, that seeing many things that might
provoke and straighten his hand and heart toward us, yet does not so observe
them against us; who blind as the Lords servant, See Isa. 42.19.

She had some injury, by being put in hopes of saveing this life by some that
it may be might have done more then they did (had they had a favor for her) in
order to the saveing it, yet the most that I perceived her cherishing such a
hope, was from a mistake of her own through which she perceived that which was
right; I had it from her self.

I cannot (said she) be without hope of Gods mercy in delivering me from this
further judgment that I have deserved at his hand and sparing this life to me
a little longer, that I may recover more strength before I go hence, to know
him, and glorify him, as I have dishonored him; and to endeavor the bringing
up my children: and the reason of my hope is only in the mercy of God, that is
so exceeding and abundant. And has so abounded toward me a vile wretch, which
encourages me to hope for more.

I answered, that did give her ground of encouragement still to look for his
mercy unto eternal life, and for whatever in his wisdom might most conduce to
that end; but whether the saveing, or destroying this present life might most
conduce to that end, or might most tend to his praise, that was a secret
reserved in his own breast; and not so revealed that we might know, till we fee
it in the issue, and then our faith strenthens to believe that best, and most
tending to that end, which he does. He only knows how, in what manner, and by
what means to deliver the godly in and out of temptation, and to reserve the
unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished. And ^s infinite mer^ that such
sinners, and back sliders may yet in turning to him that smites them, and
appro^ching to him by Jesus Christ through that new and living way opened by
his blood, be reputed as godly, accepted as true worshippers, and be washed in
the blood of the Lamb, and have their names changed in Heaven, and be counted
much to partake of the inheritance with the Saints in light, behold what manner
of love is this, that we such sinners, that have justly deserved to be called
by other names here, should have our sins forgiven in Heaven, and be called by
a new name there; Even sons of God, heirs with Christ, of the inhereritance of
ilfe. let this at all times satisfy; and that he also knows how to deliver,
even to deliver us from all our transgressions, and out of all our temptations,
whether by life or death, leave that to him; and make not have to kindle
sparks, or to appoint him his way, which way he must show us that mercy, he
has given us encouragement by his blood, to hope for unto eternal life.

This or what else was said of this nature, she replied that indeed is enough
to satisfy, and did quiet her heart and this life she valued not in comparison
of it; but she might tell me of something, that gave her some encouragement to
hope for this life also: but she thought I would not approve it, nor was she
without fears of her own mistake in the application of it, and it was this,
that scripture was much brought to her mind, and did follow her, I shall not
dye but ^ive, and declare the works of the Lord. Psalm. 118.17.

I told her, that was primely spoken of Christ, as the whole Psalm, as applied
by our Savior, and the Apostles show, and of him.

1. As personally considered, and yet he dyed once, but could not be holden of
death; nor hindered by it from declaring the works of the Lord, he it is that
lives and was dead and behold he is alive for evermore. Nor did he dye in
death, or fail of his undertaking, and work, but therein and thereby declared
the works of the Lord, the Father glorified his Name in his sufferings, and
glorified it again in raising him, and giving him glory etc.

2. As mystically considered in his body the Church, who though chastened sore
yet are not so given over to death; but that a seed of them is preserved to
call upon him, and declare all his wonderful works, and his word that he has
put in his mouth, and in the mouth of his seed, which shall not depart, and in
a subordinate and secondary fence, it might be spoken of David; yet he did dye
and was buried, and his Sepulchure says the Apostle is with us to this day.
But, he was not cut off untimely, but preserved to the service to which he was
called, and fit in his generation, and to finish his course with joy. He was
yet a little longer spared to declare the works of the Lord. And I would not
question: but this scripture might be brought to her mind by the spirit of the
Lord, to comfort and encourage her soul with this: that he that was chastened
sore and dyed, yet was not given over to death, but was raised and ever lives
to make intercession for her, and to declare the works of the Lord, that she
made her self very much incapable of declaring to Gods praise, and to declare
his works in her, and in delivering from blood guiltiness, that she also might
declare there while that she had breath here: and this gives ground of
encouragement that she should not dye in dying, but in such wise live (because
he lives) as that the works of the Lord might further be declared in and by
her; and he know how to magnify his name in and by her death, as well as by
her life, nor did this give any ground to hope for this life.

When I went another time to see her: she told me she expected I would have
writ something for her to read and consider for her helpfulnesse in the
understanding that Scripture aforesaid, that she might understand where her
mistake was.

I answered I did not think, it had so much impression on her spirit, I mean
her mistaken application of it, and truly I did not the less but the more fear
her death by the hand of Justice, in that she was so ready to catch at any
thing, and to compass herself with sparks, as even to apply that to her self
which was spoken of the Son of God, to gather hopes of this present life from,
and not more bowed to accept of the punishment of her iniquity: in any thing
God should order as to this life for the hopes sake set before her; and spoke
something further to the opening it again, then I must let it go, and I thank
God it does not much trouble me to part with it for nothing of my hope as to
eternal life goes with it, that which has quickened me to that, and nourishes
that, is the resurrection of Christ from the dead, who was delivered for my
offenses, and the Name of the Lord as declared in him, that name of God and
truth in Jesus has made me free, and given me boldness, and confidence by the
faith of him (to such purpose she spoke) but I confess said she: I had a desire
if God see it good, that this life might be spared, partly for my dear
childrens sake, and chiefly I think that I might live to know more of that
worthy name, that I might honor it, as I have given occasion of great blemish
and reproach to it: but, God knows my unfitness, my heart is deceitful, oh let
it suffice me if his name may be magnified, whether by my life, or death.

After the Sessions was appointed, and she had notice of it, I went to see her,
and she told me how on the first news of it, her strength departed from her, a
sudden astonishment and trembling befell her, and she thought of appearing
before so many in such a case was terrible to her, but she soon recovered some
strength to hope in the mercy of God, that had turned her heart and feet to his
te^monies, and to that rock of which she had been unmindful, that he would
stand by her, and perfect what concerned her, so as might be best for her and
tend most to his praise, I endeavored then, and in my several visits before
the Sessions to open and apply that gracious instruction encouragement and
warning in Isa. 50.10.11. Both showing who is the Lords servant there spoken
off, whose voice is to be obeyed in all things; and why called Gods servant,
what his voice is, and why called the voice of the Lords servant, and how to be
obeyed in all things in all it says, or testifies, instructs, reproves,
requires, and how therein God is truly feared and worshipped by us: and
likewise that such true fearers and worshippers of God may sometime walk in
darkness, and have no light; and in what fence that is to be understood, and
lastly that when so yet they are not left wholly comfortless, or as Orphans,
but bave the name of the Lord to trust in: their God to stay upon, to lean and
depend on, and wait for; though they know not what to pray for as they ought in
such cases, not knowing what manner of deliverance may be best for them, and
tend most to his praise, nor see any way of escape, looking on the right hand
or on the left, or which way deliverance should come, yet he that knows how to
deliver does also make intercession with God according to his will, and has
the tongue of the learned, and so knows how to speak a word in due season to
him that is weary, and is made perfect, and infinitely fitted to all his work
and office through sufferings; this the rest, this the refreshing. But when we
will be in such days of darkness, kindling a fire, and compassing our selves
about with sparks, we must expect this at the hands of the Lord, to lie down in
sorrow from them.

She much rejoiced in the word of the Lord, which as she found she did eat, and
it was to her the joy, and rejoicing of her heart; yet was she not without some
unsettlement and confusion, or discomposure upon her spirit between fears and
hopes as to this life, being encouraged by many to hope for the saving of it,
and seek't to pervert the hope and persuasion given her in the mercy of God
through Christ, to an expectation and looking for it in saving her from this
judgment, and on the other hand, by all the instruction and encouragement she
met withal from the Name of the Lord, and his grace in Christ, led to rest, and
rejoice in that which gave her hope in Death, and therein willingly to resign
and give up the hopes and desires of this life, and to leave the matter to him
quietly, as accounting the hope of eternal life which God had given her in
Christ's infinite mercy, and enough to sati-fie. The Sessions being past, and
she condemned to death, being found Guilty by the Jury, upon little or no
certain evidence of her guilt of the fact of which they found her guilty, yet
without any frowardness, or prejudice I could perceive against the instruments
she did acquaint herself with the Lord in it; and accepted it as from his hand
as a righteous and gracious punishment of her iniquity: and was much more
settled, and composed in her spirits than before, and so more fit to hear, and
receive the encouragements and instructions of his name, as I found at my first
visit of her, immediately on her return from the Sessions when she had received
her sentence. When first I applied my self to some reminding and further
opening of the name of the Lord, and particularly of that great instruction and
encouragement in it; that through and by the means of his death, by which peace
and atonement is made for sin, and he empowered to forgive sins on earth, he
has power to save from wrath, to redeem from all iniquity, to restore and
bring back from all their wanderings to God, to receive and make accepted on
their turning to him in his gracious drawings; even such as have sold
themselves for their iniquities, and for their transgressions are put away,
from suc^ nighness, fellowship mercy and good things, as otherwise they might
have enjoyed here, and to this purpose be is Anointed and consecrated for
evermore, having on his Ascension on high, received gifts in the man, not only
for men as they are sinners in themselves and from their first natural root,
but from the rebellions also, though rebellion be as the sin of witchcraft, in
which men make a new and personal compliance and confederacy with Satan, as if
the compliance made with him in their first natural root were not enough: and
sell themselves for their iniquities, as if their being carnal and sold to
their hand under sin, through the disobedience of one were not sufficient, they
sin after the similitude of Adams transgression, yet though they have so done,
to him belongs mercy and forgive ness even for and toward them, see Dar, 9.8.9
with Isa. 50.1.3. There is help in him for such as have destroyed themselves.
Hos. 13.9.

It Is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came
into the world to save sinners* even such sinners as are lawless and
disobedient sinners, that will not be reformed, or reclaimed by the law of
grace, but profanely go on hideing and holding fast, and allowing themselves
in their sins, and are murderers of Fathers, murderers of Mothers,
Man-slayers, Whore-mongers, Adulters, Abusers of themselves with mankind, and
if there be any thing contrary to sound Doctrine, they are lawless and
disobedient in going on in the trade and way of their own iniquities, till the
laws of God and men say hold on them, yet such Christ came into the world to
save, and not for such only, but for blasphemers of the Name of Christ, and
Persecutors of the Church of God which are mentioned by the Apostle there as
his sins, and greater then the former as to matter of fect, and as in the sight
of God, yet such Christ Jesus Came into the world to save, not to save them in
their sins but from them. And God has exalted him a Prince' and a Savior for
to give repentance and forgiveness of sins to such, He is the propitiation now
with God for sins of that nature, that might have been prevented, and might
have been kept from, by the Grace of God, and that not only for those to whom
he has given an understanding to know him that is true, and that are in him,
but also for the world, for them who yet lie under the power of the wicked one,
that judgment may not be speedily executed, but a door of mercy and life may
be held open, while yet he is by any means calling them, that in turning their
sins, which yet are detained in heaven against them, while they continue in
them may be bloted out etc through this man therefore is preached to you the
forgiveness of your sins, for he came because of that truth to forgive such
sins, as men cannot righteouslly forgive, as in that Jer 3.1. etc, And can have
compassion where none can have none. And by him all that believe are justified,
from all things, from which they could not be justified by the law of Moses,
even for such sins as that afforded not a typical justification from; but
condemned the sinner to death under the mouth of two or three witnesses, yet by
him all that believe through this Name in which repentance and remission of
sins is preached to them; are justified from all things, even from all things
from which they could not be justified by that law, yea this perfection of the
righteousness of God, and plentuousness of redemption, even the forgiveness of
sins, in and through it is witnessed in the law and Prophets, for to him give
all the Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever beleiveth in him
whosoever (whatsoever they be or have been yet) now beleiving in him that
justifyeth the ungodly, should namely through the same name of him, through
which they believe receive the forgiveness of their sins, its to him (not to,
or of us) that the Prophets gave this testimony; therefore (...) his work and
office as through his name, his power which the Father by means of his death,
to blot them out in honor: so through the opening of his Name in which they
trust to make them partakers of it in their mind and conscience, by his
knowledge, or still in and unto such things, and so by or through the knowledge
of himself shall my righteous servant justify many.

Here truly me thought she prevented with her understanding, and with great
refreshing and delight, desired further to hear off, express her understanding
of this matter; how through his name he gives the remission of sins, and
quickens to, and nourishes a lively hope by the resurrection of Christ from
the dead, and did her self very aptly oppose that name of the Lord to the fire
of men's own kindling etc. And with gladness still more clearly to see wherein
she had exceeded, did acknowledge her folly, and take shame to her self for her
eadiness to ca^ch at any thing to kindle a fire to her self and compass her
self about with sparks, for a vain hope of this life, when she had such a
worthy name to trust in: and the grace in Christ was sufficient for her, and to
her to encourage defend and strengthen her in her expectation of the mercy of
God unto eternal life, and so in whatever might most conduce to that which now
she was well assured this should, or else should not have come upon her, but
while she was thus with pleasure rejoicing in the name of the Lord, and in the
discovery of the vanity of other confidences, and sparks of her own kindling,
and with gladness relinquishing them, shem et with some trial of her faith, by
means of some coming in (happily some of them not having well learned the truth
as it is in Jesus, and so not enough acquainted with such rejoyceing in the
Lord, and in his name only, or not acquainted with her former exercise in the
time of her afliction) who urged the necessity of seeking some certain evidence
and assurance of the forgiveness of her sins, and thereunto pressed to a
particular confession, etc,

To whom she replied, that grace of God that brings salvation to all men, in
its appearance powerfully moves to repentance, oh says she (they were her
sayings often, and with an appearance of deep sense as having felt and proved the
truth of what she said) that melts and breaks the heart it turns all the
inwards of a man as it were within him, that not only teaches that denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly righteously and godly in
this present world; but when through forgetfulness and departing from it, we
have sinned, and sinned grievously, yet it admonishes and moves to
repentance, and when the heart is turned again to that, oh what sorrow and
melting it works in the sight of such infinite grace to be so abused and shame
with encouragement to hope that yet God should wait to be gracious to such; she
often repeated, and asserted that it did so work even to all such things in truth
as they pressed too, only upon the account of duty, and as a work of the Law;
and for knowledge of the truth of her faith, and repentance, without declaring
any certain ground, that might be as a foundation for it, and move to it, and
work it, and told them it had so taught her, though she had sinned against it,
and though she was a vile wretched sinner, yet this grace of God was exceeding
abundant to her with faith and love which was in Christ Jesus, and she could
not but desire, oh that all other sinners knew this grace of God, and the gift
by grace. For it is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom (said she) I am the chief,
I am the chief, Howbeit he has mercy on me, for a pattern to others, this
grace is sufficient for me, I have found it s^icient, oh it is sufficient for
you all, oh that all knew it: when some told her of what evidences some in her
condition had sought and found of the truth of their repentance and graces, and
thence, and from other like means got assurance of the forgiveness of their
sins, she replied, she knew no other sign or witness; but the sign of the
Prophet Jonah, even him whom God had given for a witness to the people, nor
needed she any other; for to him give all the Prophets witness, that through
his name, whosever believes in him, shall receive the forgiveness of sins, his
name through faith in it had healed and made her strong; when others urged she
must take heed of resting in a false faith, she again replied, it is a faithful
saying, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, no false faith,
it is the true grace of God, that bring^ salvation to all men, and she could not
but wish for them, that they all knew it; when again they replied upon her,
that it was not others concernment but her own that was now to be minded by
her, and that there was something necessary to be found in her faith, and
repentance more then in all cases was necessary, to evidence the truth of it
she pleaded, that there was but one Faith, she knew but one, and that she knew
nothing she had to do, but now to believe on him that justifyeth the ungodly
that imputes righteousness without works; and that it is to him that works
not, but believes on him that justifyeth the ungodly that cease from his own
works to believe etc, when to this reply was made, true this was one thing
needful to be found in her repentance, a ceasing from her own works; (that is
said they) from her evil works, but this not all necessary in her case, she
again replied nay from all my own works, for the best of them are dead and
unprofitable, and righteousness cannot be attained by them, no nor by any of
yours said she; the best of you must acknowledge you have sinned, and are
sinners, and that in your best righteousness, therefore by the deeds of the law
can no flesh be justified in the sight of God, but now the righteousness, of
God is manifested without the law etc. she earnestly pressed that, that though
they had not all sinned as she, whose sins was manifest, yet so unclean was
their best works, that if God should enter into judgment with them they could
not stand, nor escape the wrath of God; it was said that was true according to
the old covenant. But now we are considering our selves under another covenant
(As intimating, that according to the covenant given us in Christ, men might be
accepted, and stand just before God in their own works, not considering that
God has made him that knew no sin, to be sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him.) but still in him she glorified, nor would be
beaten off from it, nor moved to rejoice in any thing else, nor to seek after
any other thing to rejoice in, but stood fixed like him: God forbid that I
should glory in any thing, save in the cross of Christ; by whom the world is
crucyfied unto me and I unto it. This I observed in her reasoning with diverse,
that though sometimes she would to commend that grace in Christ, tell them how
it had taught her, and had and did work upon her, such humiliation, willingness
to take shame etc. And to satisfy them did tell some that she had confessed
her sins, and declared her ways so far a^ she knew them to her faithful
friends, and they had prayed for her, and God heard them: yet when she was
urged to try the truth of her faith and repentance that way, and from the truth
of such things, to gather or make to her self a ground and foundation for her
faith and ^ope she would not plead them at all; but relinquisht them, as empty
weak and unprofitable to that purpose, and would glory in nothing as the ground
of her faith and hope, but the cross of Christ, the grace in him to man ward,
who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification,
that only through faith in it, had healed and put strength in her soul, and did
strengthen her to plead for her hope of eternal life, to good purpose against
all that would have moved her from it.

I perceived also the too usual way that men walk in with sinners to urge
repentance, confession and sorrow for sin, and that it i^ such as does not
bring forth any such fruit in truth it works not the righteousness of God, it
is even such as in which they are teachers of the law, nd know not what they
say, nor whereof they affirm, urging Gospel precepts and duties, on the terms
of the covenant of works, the man that does them shall live in them, and cursed
is every one that comes short, that is, first telling them it is their duty to
repent, to believe etc. without testifying to them any certain ground of
repentance and faith in what Christ has done, and is become for them, as true
for them in Christ, whether they bel^ive of no, yea before they dare assure
them of any truth in the Gospel declarations for and toward them, and then to
provoke to it, tell them if once they can find such a frme, and that their
graces are true according to such signs as they give, they may thence conclude
God loves them, and Christ dyed for them, etc. In this they understand not what
they say, nor where of they affirm, for as without opening a door of
repentance, in the redemption wrought and obtained from the curse of the law,
and preparation of forgiveness of sins in Christ through his blood, and
preaching it in his name, there could have been no repentance toward God, nor
could it have been equally required, and so had been nor man's duty having on^^
sinned, and being sinners they must have been utterly and for ever shut out
from God, and from his mercy: so neither is there any arm or power of God put
forth to work repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ,
but in the testyfying or preaching the cross of Christ, or in that which is
equivalent the discoveries of Gods goodness, and propitiousnesse to sinners,
that is in and through our Savior, so that as the Apostle says Herein is not
love, that we have loved God, but that he has loved us first, and sent his Son
the propri^iation for our sins: so may I say, herein is not repentance unto
life; that men first repent and believe, before they know weather God has had
love of pity and compassion toward them in Christ, wheather Christ have by
the grace of God tasted death for them or no and then ground their knowledge
and assurance of that upon the truth of their repentance and graces.

What I observed b^^ bring to my mind a former passage that I shall now relate,
I went to visit a woman cond^mned to death for killing her husband; and met
with one in the Prison coming from her, that told me she feared i^ was in vain,
for two godly Ministers had been with her and taken great pains, and could not
bring her to any plain confession, nor perceive any such true contrition as
mightgive them any hope concerning her, and they had given over, yet I desired
I might see her, and was permitted, the woman being very (...) on her bed spoke
frowardly to her that led me in, what said she have you brou^ht me in another
torm n^or, to which I replied, that I came not to judge, or torment or trouble
her, nor to ask or require any thing of her, but to tell her good news, the
best for her that ever she heard, and it was certain and true, upon whichshe
lift up her head, and asked what it was, I told her that Jesus Christ came into
the world to save her from her sins, even her by name: for he came into the
world to save lawless and disobedient sinners, ungodly and profane sinners,
even such as were Murderers of Fathers, of Mothers, Man-slayers, Whore
mongers, Adulterers, etc. Yea even Blasphemers of the name of Christ, and
Persecutors of the Church of God; and such as were disobediently and
rebelliously against light coming to them, such, such he came to save from
their sins, she said that was good news indeed, but could I indeed show it her
in the word of the Lord, that expressly for such, Jesus Christ came into the
world to save them, I told her yea, it was plain and fully there testyfied, and
did show it her in that 1 Timothy 1.8.9.15, comparing the verses, and that with
other Scriptures.

I shall not enlarge this discourse, to show how I did evidence and show it by
that and other Scriptures, and apply the instructions thereof to her, but she
called for her Bible, and did consider and ponder on what was said, and then
desired the woman that brought me to leave her chamber, and when she was gone
out, told me I had spoken that which went to her heart, and discovered to her
all that she had done, and yet in showing where her help was, and that now she
would freely and fully tel^ me all that was in her heart, that accidentally she
killed her Husband she believed, but not wittingly, intentionally, and that was
not it that had provoked God to bring her to this judgment, but something else
that she had done, and hidden and allowed her self in, which lay much upon her:
but now something had touched her heart that made her willing to acknowledge
it, as perceiving though it was vile there was for giveness, and washing, and
therefore she was free to confess her sins, and declare her ways to me, and
desired me to pray for her; telling me others had been with her urging and
pressing her to confess her self guilty of what she knew her self clear off;
and because she could not confess what they would have her, judged and
condemned her, and left her as hopeless, but as they set nothing before her of
any ground, or door of repentance opened for such, so it wrought nothing upon
her, but wrath: but after she was instructed, she repented and sorrowed after a
godly sort. even unto life, to the hope of which she was quickened and
strengthened by the resurrection of Christ, who was delivered for our offenses
etc.

And retained that hope in him, even unto death, as was discerned, and believed
by some that continued with her, to this I add no more in this place, nor unto
this relation of Rose VVarnes but that she me^ with more such trials in the two
or three days time she lived, and was in like manner streng^hned to resist the
tempter in them, and not moved from the faith and hope of the gospel, but waxed
more strong therein by occasions of trials.

Some broken remembrances of Mrs Rose VVarnes speech at her execution,
containing the sum of it, with some supplies of words, where her spirits and
strength failed according to what her self had expressed o^t in the Prison, and
before many witnesses.

You are gathered together a great company to look upon me, I hop^ none with
any joy at my shameful death, I am persuaded there is none rejoice at it, but
that you do pity me, sympathize with me, and I pray God make it of good use to
you all.

The Lord is righteous in all that is come upon m^, even unto this shamhful
death. I suffer it justly from his hand, for I have sinned against him
greivously sinned, and sin brings shame, it must have punishment, yea I may say
what profit had I of those things of which I am now ashamed; the end of those
things is death, there fore let all take heed, and be warned in time not to
dally with sin.

God has condemned sin in the flesh, in condemning his own Son in the flesh
for our sins, he was made the banished One for us, his Fathers wrath lay hard
upon him, he was in an Agony, and under the power of darkness, and sweat as it
were greae drops of blood and water trickling down to the ground, and was hung
on a tree, and all this as our surety, he suffered in the flesh for our sin,
sin therefore must still be judged, and condemned in the flesh, and if we sin
against him that was hung on a tree for us all, if we sin against his grace,
that brings salvation to all men in due time: for he by the grace of God tasted
death for every man, he shead his blood for every one of you for every Creature
of mankind on the earth; and gave himself a randsome for all, and is the true
light, that lights every man that comes into the world, a testimony in due
time; therefore if we sin against this grace especially those that name the
name of Christ, and that have tasted that the Lord is gracious? as I have done,
he can by no means in clearing clear the guilty, he will not let sins go unpun
shed, it must be judged in the flesh, and if judgment be not received and
^ubmitted to now, that we judge our selves, it must be judged in the flesh for
ever, for ever in the wrath to come, where their worm dies not, and their fire
is not quenched, oh that is a hundred thousand sold worse then this shameful
death, this will be over presently, and the sting is taken out of it, by him
that was hung on a tree for us, but no end of that, when a thousand times a
thousand years are past, its never a white shortened, its still for ever and
ever, therefore God is gracious as well as rightteous, infinitely gracious in
judgeing me thus here, that he may not condem me in the world to come: I have
all my punishment here, though far less, infinitely less then my iniquity
deserves, yet here I have all, and all this is nothing to the lake of fire the
second death, and whatever I could have suffered less then that, had been
infinite mercy, yet such his mercy I might have escaped this too, had I
received reproof, and judged my self in time, but I heardned my heart against
many reproofs of instruction: the reproofs of this Gospel, they are the way of
life, they powerfully reprove and melt the heart, though I did not turn at
them, I was as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke nothing less then all this
would bring me down; I made mention of the name of the Lord but in late times,
not in truth nor in righteousness; I walked with a blessed precious people, I
tell you they are a blessed people, think not the worst of them, nor of the way
of truth they walk in, or as if the word of the Gospel of the grace of God,
that brings salvation to all men were without efficacy; because I so sinned,
for I walked close with God and with his people, and hid his word in my heart
which I heard among them I had been preserved from so sinning against him; but
it was not heeded by me, I did not hide it in my heart, that I might not sin
against him, I went sometime to hear, and of these late years when my
iniquities had prevailed over me, I went but seldom, and when I heard I heard
overly, overly, overly. I did not in hearing hear. I did not do what it was
working in me to will, and to do; I heardned my heart against the reproofs of
instruction; and would not take shame, I thought to hide my self as Adam. but
with pitiful coverings, when I had greviously sinned against God, in turning
aside to another then my Husband, I thought to have concealed it, that I might
not take shame; and that brought me to this, in which God is righteous, and if
men have done me any wrong, in meddling more then they needed, or in not
affording me what mercy and privilege by the law of the land I might have had
in my sad case, the Lord forgive them, and graciously set home convincement
upon their hearts of their evil and wrong, I forgive them, I bless God I have
not the least prejudice against any; I take it out of his hand that is
righteous, and infinitely merciful in punishing me with less then Hell fire for
ever, and be you all warned in time, to flee from sin, as from the Devil; for
it will lead you captive to the Devil, flee to Christ for help and strength
against it, for sin brings shame: it must be owned and acknowledged, and Gods
Judgment submitted too, the sooner and the more voluntary the better, for
Whore-mongers and Adulterers God will judge; Oh that such as have sinned as I
have done, would make have to confess their sins and take shame, turn at his
reproofs in time, that you may escape the damnation of Hell, that is infinitely
worse then this; Therefore to day, while it is called to day, the Holy Ghost
says harden not your hearts if ye would hear his gracious voice, harden not
your hearts against the reproofs of his instruction: to day even to day off
that this spectacle may be a warning to you all, and that God would set home to
your hearts these broken words of a dying woman; oh that they may be laid to
heart now in time.

Take heed especially all ye that name the name of Christ depart from iniquity;
flee it as from a Serpent, void evil lascivious and wanton company chamring and
wantoness provoke lust, lead into further snares, I had thought I had been
strong enough to withstand, dally not with him, take heed of dallying with the
temptation, it will get dominion, at last it bites like a Serpent, make no
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, for he that sows to his
flesh, shall of it reap corruption, and God will more severely judge them on
whom his name is called, that all may know he cannot endure iniquity, he will
least of all eudure it in them that come nigh him, he will magnify his name;
and will be sanctified of all that come near him.

Take heed all of you that none of you harden your hearts against him: and his
voice by his precious people because of me, but hear and attend to the Gospel,
know them that call on the name of the Lord in truth, God is in and with them
of a truth, though I have sinned against God and them, and therefore am thus
corrected with the rods of men, and they are permitted to use extremity upon
me: I have sinned, the Lord is righteous, let others take heed of despising the
grace of God, or hardening their hearts against it, and against the way of
truth, because of what I have done for even that Grace of God bringing
salvation to all men, is the true grace of God, and does truly teach and
powerfully work. It does in its appearing to us, teach that denying ungodliness
and worldly lusts, we should live soberly righteously and godly in this present
world: it did teach me, but I wanted a Joseph like spirit to have reasoned from
all the Grace appearing in Christ: how then shall I commit so great wickedness
and sin against God, oh that I had harkned, but I rebelled and hardened my
heart; therefore he was fain to bring down my heart withal this labor, and in
all love to my soul; and to warn and admonish others, not to harden their
hearts, be not mockers or despisers least your bands be made strong, do not for
lying vanities for sake your own mercies, for there is eternal mercies life and
redemption in Christ prepared for you whether you believe it or believe it not;
it is prepared in him for every one of you, and given with him, that you might
know and believe, and (...) made pertaker of it in and with him, ^he King, the
God of glory has made a marriage for his Son, the marriage is made, the feast
prepared and ready for you all, the servants are sent to the bidden guests, and
they make excuses, some their Farms, Oxen, Wives, and such things for lying
vanities for sake their own mercies, and some complement themselves out, they
say I have sinned and am so vile a sinner, so unclean and so polluted, I am not
fit, I must first wash my self, or make my self clean, or be washed by my
tears, or works of the law before I may come to him, to eat of his bread and
drink of the wine that he has mingled, take heed of this, let none complement
themselves out here, come as ye are, It Is a faithful saying, worthy of all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners; sinners as
sinners he came to save: but not to save them in their sins, but to save from
them, to redeem us from all iniquity, and unless he save and wash us we cannot
be clean; he knew what we were before he called us, and he called and gave
himself for us, that he might wash us, and unless he wash us, we can have no
part with him, come therefore in his calls and drawings, come as thou art, he
will in no wise cast thee away, how sinful and vile soever, but he will wash
thee with the washing of water by his word, for consider how great things he
has done for thee, while thou wast dead in sins and trespasses, and altogether
filthy and polluted in thy blood, and while such he calls thee, and such were
some of those that are now made accepted in the beloved, even such as I have
been, Whoremongers, Adulterers, etc. But they were washed in their coming to
him, washed in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God, they
did not wash themselves first, or were washed by any other means before they
came, oh come therefore to the waters, he that has no money come ye, and do
not complement your selves out, well, but the bidden guests refused, and the
King was forced to look for guests where he could, he sent out to the high
ways, and hedges, and that once and again to call and draw into the house that
the house might be filled, and when many were come in, the King looking among
those come into the house, finds one without a wedding garment, and said to him
friend, he calls him friend, for Christ had been a real friend, to him But how
came thou in hither not having on a wedding garment, lo he was speechless,
he had not that to say for excuse, that there was none prepared for him, or he
had no way on means offered to come at it he was speechless, nothing to say for
himself. There is certainly a wedding garment provided for you all in and by
Christ: it is made ready, lo all things are ready, and with him tendered a
perfect righteousness to cover you, and make you acceptable in the sight of
God, despise it not, its for every poor sinful wretch in the world, prepared in
Christ, given with him, to be put on in coming into his house, and so unto him,
For he that knew no sin, was made to be sin for us, that we might be made the
vighteousness of God in him, and to him that works not, but believes on him
that justifies the ^ngodly, his faith is counted for righteousness, and to him
God imputes righteousness without works. I hope you will excuse my weakness, I
had almost forgot what I was saying, the man w^ speechless, and so the
judgment following was according to truth (as we are sure it is in all the
revelations of his wrath present and eternal against all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men who hold the truth in unrighteousness.) Go take the
unprofitable servant, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darknes^,
where there shall be weeping wayling, and gnashing of tee^h. Go ye cursed into
ever lasting fi^^, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, depart from me al^ ye
workers of iniquity. O^ most dreadful sentence, most dreadful sentence, and yet
this the certain doom and judgment of all those that are incensed against him,
yea of all that are not found in him whether they have sinned grossly as I have
done or no, or whatever righteousness according to the law, or other garments
they be found in, not being found in this, they cannot be accepted with God,
and so not stand in that day, nor escape that dreadful sentence, it shall come
upon all that ^anctifie themselves, that purify themselves behind one tree
etc. That feed not on the flesh of Christ, that was given for the li^e of the
world, but eat swines flesh etc. Oh this that I now suffer is nothing to that
dreadful sentence, which yet is the portion of all the ungodly that dye in
their sins, and it is his infinite grace not my deserving, that I did not fall
under it for ever, all less that to me is infinite mercy, but that also he
should by these means graciously recall me to that resting place from which I
had wandered, and heal my backslidings, love me freely, own and call me by a
new name in Heaven, sprinkle my heart and conscience with that blood that
speaks better things then that of Abel, (more powerfully for mercy and
forgiveness, and healing, then that for vengeance,) which he has done, and
does abundantly. I may truly say, whence is this to me. Behold what manner of
love is this. And this has made me willing to accept of the punishment of my
iniquity, since my shame was discovered, and heart brought down, she often said,
she never had any temptations since she was apprehended and in Prison, (such
the mercy of God which she acknowledged in it) to escape, or use any means to
get from under it, either by making away her self, or life privately, (as many
had charged her with such enterprises, but there was sufficient evidence to the
contrary) or by getting out; in which she much and often in the Prison
magnifyed the mercy of God to her, yea she admired at his mercy in thus judging
her. And that by this means she that had so procured these things in her self,
and blemished the name of God, should so soon be delivered from all her
trangressions, and from the reproach of the foolish: and from that mercy
encouraged her friends to hope, that though they must remain to bear the
reproach of it longer then she, yet not to be discouraged, he that had found
out a way to deliver her, such as in which Righteousness and Mercy both was
magnifyed, would deliver them, and his name, and magnify it by that which to
outward appearance might seem to blemish i^, he knows how to bring good out of
evil, to make grace abound, where sin has abounded, but shall we therefore
sin, that grace may abound, God forbid, but when he has magnifyed his grace,
in such forgiveness, and heal^ng such sinners, and therein commended his
righteousness, and glorified his name, (oh sure said she) she loved much to
whom much was forgiven, she often protested her great peace and joy of spirit,
in the veiw of what she was hasting too, and that all sorrow and shame would
presently be at an end to her, and God would wipe away all tears for his sons
sake, the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the w^rld, and yet said,
that she was filled with shame, and blushing for her own iniquity there called
to remembrance, but withal with great rejoicing in the Lord, and in him only,
by means of whom her sin should be no more remembered, and therefore did
relinquish all confidence in the flesh in any works of her own according to the
law, or in any arguments, or gracious frames of brokenness, sorrow for sin,
meetings desires after his name, (which though she doubted not of his gracious
acceptance of them, pardoning the iniquities and mixtures in them through the
mediator that lives to present them, and take away those iniquities, and
mixtures, and so make them accepted in himself, yet did she not know or allow
them at all, in the ground of her hope and rejoy^ing in God, nor needed them,
having enough in the flesh of Christ, that was given for the life of the world,
to nourish her to eternal life) nor in particular words of scripture, brought
to her mind and applied by her, to such her needs and conditions as she thought
they answered too and though from such things, she had conceived hopes of
longer life here, partly, by reason of her desire of it for her childrens sake,
and chiefly as she thought that she might live to walk more close with God, and
with his people, and glorify his name, as she had brought dishonor to it. And
those hopes were disappointed, yet that did not move her at all from her hope,
and rejoicing in the hope of eternal life, because that was begotten, ^^d she
strengthened and quickened to it through the resurrection of Christ, that
foundation stands sure, and has this seal for confirming the goodness and
sureness of it. The Lord knows (owneth, approves) them that are his, (namely
that are built and abide on this foundation, yea though they have wandered from
Mount to Hill, and forgot their resting place, yet turn again hither, and have
their hearts and minds stayed here) and though from all her sparks that she had
bin kindling and composing her self withal, she must lie down, yet she had the
name of the Lord to trust in, and her God to stay upon, and he was wonderfully
a present help to her in the time of trouble, and did through his name and the
excellent knowledge of himself, so sprinkle her heart and conscience, and
deliver her from blood guiltiness, that her tongue did sing aloud of his
righteousness, did open her lips shut by her own iniquities, and her mouth did
show forth his praise, she appointed the 25 Psalm, and sung with great joy and
composure: and after earnestly praying to God for the people, and that he would
graciously receive her soul, which she freely and cheerfully committed to him,
she yielded her body to the Executioner, to whom she said, alas poor man, come
do thy office, shall I go higher or lower, which caused some that stood by to
change their minds, for they had said a while before that she lengthned out her
discourse to spin out time, because she was loath to come at it, but now
observing this free proffer of her self to the Executioner without any
hastening her, they on the other hand admired to see her so willing to dye,
when the rope was fitted to her neck, she again protested her great peace and
joy in the view of the blessedness she was going to, and it was thought by
many, the body scarce retained the soul or life after it was turned off, for
she was not seen to struggle, nor scarce if at all move in any part, as they
said that was near, blessed be God for his mercy in giving such a proof of the
truth and faithfulness of that saying, that Jesus Christ came into the world to
save sinners,

Her Speech.
SInners come hither, you to me I call
That you may warned be by this my fall.
Which for your sakes the just Lord ordered,
To appear so publicly, admonished,
That you thereby might be: and so prevent.
Your suffering such like, or worse punishment.
For such like punishments or worse will be
Thi^^ lot that will not henceforth be warn^d by me.
Had I been warned before by others, I
Had not come hither in this wise to dye,
But since his mercies I therein d^d slight
And turned not to him so as I might
In justice he permitted such a fall
Mercy to show to me and to you all.
Take heed of sins deceits, the ways thereto
Take heed how you do venture on to go,
For Sin more sub i will then a Serpent is
Happy the souls that its enchantments m^ss.
I thought my self once strong enough to stand.
Against its charms, and that I had command.
So of my self, that I from it could keep
Me safe, but since alas! for grief to weep
It ^ft has bronght me, so it will do you
If you by me will not he warned now
The vicious courses which I see possessed
The minds of many I did once detest,
I loathed to think to wrong the marriage bed,
Or walk in such bad ways as thereto led,
But oh, alas! while some smooth company
Pretendi^g love and friendship cheerfuly
I entertained and sorted with no harm
Thinking in them, their fair pretense did charm
My foolish heart into so pl^asing sleep
That under shows of love lust began to ^reep.
Slily into my breast, to laugh and play
And jest and sport with them while I gave way.
Such was sins first in windings and the ways
That sinners used heaps of woes to raise.
Upon my person, while some snares did lay
To catch me, and their mates did me betray
Who being naught themselves did seek that I
Might be so too, as if my company,
In badness would their badness mittigate
Or their litentiousness extenuate,
And I, alas! too ready was to close
With sins and their sweet charms, till I did loose*
Of virtue all the savor, then I felt^
The pangs of hell within me, but I dealt,
Deceitfuly and hid my sins, and grew
From worse to worse, which now I sa^ly rue
Woe worth such false acquaintance wh^ pretenses
Of love and friendship gave to my offenses.
The spring and rise, oh then be warned by me
And shun all foolish wanton company
All merry junkettings and gossipings
For much iniquity from such things springs,
Who walks with wise men wisdom shall attain
But a companion unto persons vain,
For such vile sinners, who their faults confess
And heartily therein do seek redress,
Had I not mercy now therein ob^ain'd
Oh how my soul had stained been my heart pained,
With fears of after woe! sinners behold
Take heed of sin, never therewith be bold,
For it will-misery to you procure
Either while here, or that that will endure,
Eternally, be warned then by my fall
Let me Rose Warn a warning be to all,
And yet an instance of such mercy to^
As may persuade you whatsoere you do
Not to despair of mercy, but submit
To bear Gods chastisement, and turning yet
To hope and seek for pardon of him who
His only son sent that he might undo
The devils works, of sin and death for all
Who gave his life, and unto all does call,
To look to him and saved be, since this
A faithful saying worth acceptance is
That he into the world did come that he
Might Savior of the chiefest sinners be
And such has saved, yea since God does swear
That of the truth of what he says no fear,
Might us possess, that he has no de^ light
In death of wicked men, but that the right
They rather turn to and their sins forsake
That of life in his love they may partake.
To sin is bad, but to despair is worse,
For that is the certain way to death and curse
Who sins not shan^ be tempted to despair
Therefore of sin and its deceits beware,
But having sinned repent, for God will give
Mercy to those that turn, and they shall live
Through Jesus Christ our Lord, so farewell all
And see ye warned be by this my fall.
Qui ante non cavet post ^ol^bit.
Who so does not of sin beware before
His doleful state shall afterward deplore
Et qui ante dolet post gaudebit.
Who penitently here their sins bewail
Hereafter shall have joys that nere shall fail.
Upon R. W.
She that was lost we hope is found
She that was dead does live again
She that in lust and sin was drowned
We hope with Christ does now remain
Oh precious blood that washed her so
Free grace that did her so redress
That by the ladder she might go
To endless and eternal bliss.
Lord send us to that fountain too
And thoroughly wash our souls therein
Without which all that we can do
Cannot deliver us from sin.
And keep us from such sins and shame
As blurd and shortn'd here her days
That we may glorify thy name
And go to heaven by better ways.
Rofe Warn.
EPIGRAM.
Rose Warn thy name was, oh that thou had been,
Rose Warned thou such mischeifs had not seen,
But being not Rose Warned by thy fall
Thou art Rose Warn a warning unto all.
SHe left by her speech and demeanor a very great admiration of it, and
affectedness with it in the auditory, which was very great and numerous from
the Town and Country though the fewer from the Country, because it was not the
market day, who generally (so far as they heard her at least) returned with
abundance of compunction and seriousness upon their spirits glorifying God for
and in her, diverse saying they never saw any executed that dyed in that
manner, and with that cheerfulness and hope in God, and with such good
exhortations and instructions given them, which they said they koped they
should never forget, some said they profited by it more then by many Sermons,
and much to that purpose: yet as the elder Brother of the prodigal murmured at
his too good and speedy entertainment by his Father and servants, so their
wanted not some that murmured against her, to the m^st of which their
murmurings sufficient answer may be found in my discourse about the reception
of the Prodigal, yet I shall ad something here with particular reference to her
that was not so proper there to be made.

Object. 1. Some thought her not humbled enough judgeing its likely, by their
not seeing her weep at the bar or as she went to execution, or the like.

Answ. To this let it be received what I say of the humbling God approves of,
in my said discourse, and what is said in the passages in these papers related
of her. Its evident by them, that she did ingeniously acknowledge her guilt and
filth with many expressions of loathing her self with great detestation of her
self and sins, yea and that in the prison with many years, whereof I my self
was a witness: yea she so loathed her self, and saw and confessed her vileness
as to take up no hope or confidence for deliverance no where but in the free
and rich grace of God, and the precious blood of Jesus, which (...) much and
greatly magnifyed, rejecting all other things that could be done by her as much
to weak and vile to give her any release from her so great guilt, or any
boldness or hope toward God and she willingly and cheerfully yielded her self
to accept and bear the chastisement of her iniquity, which is that which God
himself gives as the product of an humbled heart, in Levit. 26.41.42. and if
God accepted of this (or rather of her) in and through his Son, so as to speak
peace to her, who then may fault her for not being more troubled, seeing if he
give peace, who can cause trouble; Job 34, 29. she faid indeed as she went
toward the place of execution that she thought God had wiped away all tears
from her eyes before she dyed, for she could not then weep as formerly she had
done, I might add the observation and saying of Capt. Styles a conscientious
man so far as I ever heard, who was upon some jealousies, only upon National
accounts all that time and more in the Prison, and lodged in the next chamber
to her: who told me and some others that he thought he was the best witness of
her penitency, and that he heard her very frequently praying, weeping and ^ying
to God: and that she was seldom alone, but she was so exercised; or in reading
some good book, and that he thought her (...) very pen^tent woman, and that
there wa^ nothing to be said to her but speak comfortably to her etc.

Object. 2. Put should so great a sinner dye like a Saint.

Answ. That Is spoke to in my discourse and there it shows both that great
sinners may through the grace of God be made real Saints, and b^ing so made
bear their pun^shment like Saints: whether it be death as the malefactor on the
cross Luc 23, 40, 41, 42, or some other heavy judgment: as David his flight
from his son Absalom Psalm. 3. And truly there were many things in her of like
good appearance, to these things found in them in those their sufferings as
what is mentioned before of her due evidence.

1. She rebuked (yet with compassion) and admonished one whom she discerned or
apprehended, deciding what was spoken by her, and admonished and warned all of
sinning, and hardening their hearts against Gods grace.

2. She justified approved and owned Christ in his truth and people.

3. And bear a good testimony to him, and his grace, and the virtue and
preciousness of his death and sufferings.

4. She confessed her own guilt and desert of what was ordered to her,
justifying God therein, and confessing herself ^o have deserved ten thousand
thousand times worse matters.

5. She prayed for Gods blessing upon, and testified love and charity to all
the people, and forgave those that had been more busy then they needed against
her.

6. She submitted to bear Gods chastisement, and the punishment of her iniquity
quietly and patiently, etc.

7. Having sought to God much before, she then expressed great hope and
confidence in Gods mercy, and the blood of Christ shell for her etc. And truly
it is (...) to ^y like a Saint (so as to be one) upon the gallowe^, then to dye
as a wicked man without faith and kope in Christ, the quietest death upon the
bed, as many that dye there do, better are like that Male factour on the
Cross, then as the rich man i^ Luke 12.19. and 16.22. on his bed, though yet in
a sense she dyed not like a Saint, namely as to the rejoceing and glorying in
the cause of her death as they do and may do, when they dye for Christ, his
truth and righteousness.

Object. 3. Some objected that she dyed like the Kings Judges.

Answ. What the Kings judges m^t with from God in their death, God best knows.
But in this she much differed from them, that they many of them justified the
cause of their death, she was much ashamed of the cause of hers and confessed
it, such as deserved that and far worse punishment.

Object. 4. Some said she speak good things, but they were but generals.

Answ. (...). General thing best become a numerous multitude, for they would
reach to them all, so as particulars might not;

2. God and Christ and the holy Ghost, and his Apostles and Prophets speak
general things two, which are not therefore the less but the more useful and
profitable as that all have sinned, and are justified freely by Gods grace
through the redemption that is in Christ Jefus. Romans 3.23. That Christ ayed for
all, and in the propitiation for the sins of the whole world 2 Cor. 5.14.15. 1 Timothy 2.6 John 22. and its well he did so and is so, else (...) might be worse
for the objectors, as well as for others, that all shall dye and rise and be
judged, all that believe are justified.

3. She spoke also many particulars, I wish the objector; may speak as will
when they come to dye, as her particular hope for her self in God, as well as
of her particular guiltiness and submission to him.

Perhaps some would have ^ad her commended her self, and spoken of some
particular good things in her self, as the ground of her hope, and liked not to
hear of so much hope and confidence upon the account of Gods mercifulness to
sinners and the pretiousness of the blood of Jesus, who gave himself a ransom
for all: if so^ she did far better then they would have had her, for Gods
goodness and mercy, and the blood o^ Christ will hold when all particular
frames will or may break or crack that is the Pharisees way indeed, God (...)
thank thee that I am not as other me^ not so or so, but do thus and thus but
their leaven is to be taken hee^ off by us, and yet she also spoke o^ Gods
giving her new life and strengt^ and reviving her spirits when she came from
receiving her sentance, as she also gave particular reproof to one, and pitied
another, etc. But I shall say no more about her, God grant others may be
warned: by her fall, and such as have fallen may be encouraged to look toward
Christ, to raise them up again by his mercy to her, that they continue not in
sin till they perish, and let us bless God for his goodness to her, and give
glory to him, Amen.

THere be some that the truth profess and walk
With those that love it, and of God can talk,
Who are I fear close sinners, some of whom
Who were of my acquaintance wish me dumb
Or dead least I disclose them, and when I
Am gone perhaps will bear them selves more high.
Thinking themselves secure for non^ beside
They fear that know their fau'ts, but thei'l them hide
But let such now repent and trust not to
Such vain delusions as will them undo:
Take heed of hardening still your hearts, had I
Turned at reproofs after I wickedly,
Had once offended surely I had not
Been left of God to incur such a blo^.
As now is upon me, nor have come to this
To which i am justly brought, if you amiss.
Therefore at any time do act b^ sure
You persevere not therein but the cure
Thereof seek speedily, to some confess it
That may be faithful, if you cannot, redress it,
By your endeavors, that is very evil
When sinners keep the counsails of the Devil.
And yet behold Gods mercy unto me
In midst of wrath and judgment you ^ay see.
At once how bad it is to sin, how vile
Man's nature, and how subtle to beguile
Sin and the Serpent are, and yet how good
God is who has a fountain in the blood
Of his dear Son so opened that theirin
Is washing from uncleanness and from sin
For such as David's house which bloody was
And Jerusalem which in sin did pass
All other Cities, in that blood have I
Fleeing to it and hee^ing it, me (...)
Obtained of the Lord, so that I fear
No other punishment but what I here
Do justly suffer. Oh that precious blood
Of my dear Savior, which speaks so much good
Will be destroyed Sinners be warned by me
Learn to be sober and all wildness flee
But chiefly O all ye that Christ door name
^ee from all sin for it will wo^ your shame
That was my great offense that who used
Often times to her what is good, it (...) abused
And other company did so affect
Chiefly if but pretending some respect
To those and that was good, that for their sake
I quenched good motions, and did shipwreck make
Of faith and conscience, and my heart made hard
Against reproofs until I was quite mard
Above all sinners God will least endure
Such as do sin against what sin would cure,
That take his name into their mouths in vain
While from iniquity they wont refrain
By all the motives it presents unto them
But will that practice which will quite undo them.
God will not such hold guiltless if they still
^^rsist in sin and take thereof their fill.
^hey shall not escape his anger, yea ^^ch he
^ill bring to light when others hidden he,
and fill their souls with wounds, their face with shame
because their wickedness bespots his name
^ware, beware by me then all that take
Gods name into your mouths and mention make
Of his love and his laws, think not to hide
^our secret deeds of darkness, they are espied
^y his all seeing eye who does detest
^n most in them, by whom his name's professed
^am a warning made to you, beware
^yet you sin be sure God wont you spare
^our Sins do not your selves, sirs, only wrong
^ut do one God, and all that does belong
Peculiarly to him his people name
Reflect, and fill his precious ones with shame
And grief, and therefore your offenthings he,
Will punish if you wont be worn'd b^ me.
FINIS.

