AN EXPOSITION ON THE Lord's Prayer, WITH A Catechistical Explication Thereof,
by way of QVESTION and ANSWER, For the Instructing of YOUTH: To which is added
some SERMONS On Providence, and the Excellent Advantages of Reading and
Studying the Holy Scriptures.

By EZEKIEL HOPKINS, late Lord Bishop of Londonderry.

LONDON: Printed, for Nathanael Ranew at the Kings-Arms, and Edward Mory at the
Three Bibles in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1692.

EZEKIEL HOPKINS EPISCOPUS DERENSIS.

Printed for Nathanael Ranew



Imprimatur.

Guil. Lancaster R. P. D. Henrico Ep. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.
April. 7. 1692.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THe following Discourses upon that Excellent and Divine Prayer of our Blessed
Savior, contain so much of Practical Divinity necessary to be known by all
Christians, and are so Solidly and Judiciously handled, that they need no
Epistle Recommendatory unto the World, having the Stamp of the Divine Authority
upon the Truths contained in them.

But if any shall curiously enquire, whether this Reverend and Learned Prelate
designed and finished them for the Press: I may truly return the same Answer
that is given in Print by the present Bishop of Cork and Ross to the same
Question, in his Epistle to the Reader before this Author's Exposition on the
Ten Commandments; namely, That they were Transcribed by himself, and by him
deposited in the hands of a Minister whom he could entrust, to be made Public
after his Decease; whose Epistle should have been prefixed hereunto, but that
he is far distant in another Nation, and the Press cannot tarry so long for it,
the Book being just finished.

And as a further Confirmation that his Lordship intended it should be made
Public, appears by his so often quoting this his Discourse on the Lord's
Prayer, in his Treatise on the Commandments, which could not be seen or read by
others but by the Printing of it. Upon which many Persons have been very
desirous and inquisitive after it.

Unto this large and general Exposition on the Lord's Prayer, there is added a
brief and short Catechistical Explication thereof by way of Question and
Answer, made use of by his Lordship for the instructing of the younger and more
ignorant Christians in the Knowledge and Understanding of those Divine and
Heavenly Truths contained in this most Excellent Prayer.

And for a Conclusion of all, there are added several Sermons Preached by this
Learned Prelate, upon the Providence of God, and on the Excellency and
Usefulness of Reading and Studying the Holy Scriptures. All which have been
diligently and carefully perused by several Persons of the Author's
Acquaintance, both of the Clergy and others, with very good Acceptance and
Satisfaction; and the whole is now with Approbation exposed unto public view.

And that the present Publication of them may tend much to the promoting of the
Honor and Glory of God, and the Edification of many Souls in Grace and
Holiness, is the hearty Prayer of the Publisher. Farewell.

The Vanity of the World, with other Sermons, in Octavo.

Discourses and Sermons on several Scriptures, in Octavo.

An Exposition on the Ten Commandments, with other Sermons, in Quarto.

All Written by Ezekiel Hopkins, late Lord Bishop of Londonderry, and Sold by
Nathanael Ranew.

A Practical EXPOSITION ON THE LORD'S PRAYER.
Matthew. VI. 9, 10. etc. After this manner therefore Pray ye, Our Father which
art in Heaven: Hallowed be thy Name: Thy Kingdom come: Thy Will be done, in
Earth as it is in Heaven: Give us this Day our daily Bread: And forgive us our
Debts, as we forgive our Debtors: And lead us not into Temptation: But deliver
us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever.
Amen.


HAving often seriously considered with my self of the great use that is made
of this most excellent Form of Prayer, composed by our Blessed Lord and Savior
himself; as also of the great Benefit and Advantage that might accrue unto all
those, that with understanding make a due use of it in their daily Devotions: I
thought it might be very necessary for your Instruction, and greatly conducible
unto your Salvation, to lay before your consideration, as brief and succinct an
Exposition thereof, as the large extent, and various copiousness of the matter
contained therein, will permit.

The Blessed Apostle, St. Paul, in 1 Cor. 14.15. tells us, That he would pray
with the Spirit, and he would pray with Understanding also. And indeed when we
pray, to pray with Understanding what we pray, is one great requisite to make
our Prayers Spiritual, and through the prevailing Intercession of Jesus Christ
to become acceptable unto God the Father. But to mutter over a road of Words
only, (as the Papists are taught, and as multitudes of many ignorant Persons
among us do also,) without understanding what they signify, or being duly
affected with those Wants and Necessities which we beg of God the Supplies of,
is not to offer up a Prayer unto the Almighty, but only to make a Charm.

Now, because there is no Form of Prayer, that ever we have heard or read of,
that is deservedly so much in use, as this of our Lord's is, I shall endeavor
in some Discourses thereupon, to unfold to you those Voluminous Requests which
we offer up unto God, when we thus pray, as our Savior here teaches us;
wherein, as I doubt not but as I may greatly instruct the Ignorance of many, so
possibly I may bring very much to the remembrance of those who have attained to
great understanding in Religion, those things which may provoke their Zeal, and
excite their Affections; and both these Undertakings, through the Blessing of
God upon it, may be very usefully profitable to enable them to pray with
Understanding, and with the Spirit also, when they approach the Throne of
Grace, to present their Petitions unto the Great God, as by the Intercession,
so in the Words of his dear Son.

In this Chapter, which contains in it a great part of our Savior's Sermon on
the Mount, our Lord lays before his Hearers several Directions concerning two
necessary Duties in a Christian's Practice; and they are Almsgiving and
Prayer; the former a Duty relating more immediately unto Men; the latter a Duty
in a more especial manner respecting God himself; in both which he not only
cautions us against, but strictly forbids all Ostentation and Vainglory.
Therefore, says he, when thou do thine Alms, do not sound a Trumpet before
thee, for this is the Practice of Hypocrites, that they may have Glory of Men,
verse 2. And when thou prayest be not as the Hypocrites, for they love to pray
in the Synagogues, and Corners of the Streets, that they may be seen of Men,
verse 5. Thus must we not do in either of these Cases: For as we must not give
Alms that we may be seen of Men, so neither must we pray that we may be heard
and observed of Men: For what can be more absurd and ridiculous, as well as
wicked and impious, than to be begging Applause from some, when we are giving
Alms to others; or whilst we are praying to the great God of Heaven and Earth,
to make frail mortal Men, like our selves, our Idols; which we do, whenever
we pray, rather that we may be heard and admired by Men, than that God should
hear us and accept us.

In the next words our Savior proceeds in laying down some other Directions
concerning the Duty of Prayer, and therein he forbids his Hearers to use vain
Repetitions in Prayer: verse 7. When you Pray, use not vain Repetitions as the
Heathens do. Not that all Repetitions in Prayer are vain bablings, in the sight
of God; for our Lord himself Prayed thrice using the same words, for so we read
Matthew. 26. and 44. For doubtless as Copiousness and Variety of fluent
Expressions in any, usually flow from raised Affections; so when those
Affections are heightened and raised to an Ecstasy and Agony of Soul in our
wrestlings with God in Prayer, Ingeminations are then the most Proper and most
Elegant way of expressing them, doubling and redoubling the same Petitions
again and again; not allowing God (if I may so speak with Holy Reverence) so
much time, nor our selves so much leisure, as to form in our minds, much more
with our Lips to offer up any new requests, till by a Holy Violence in
wrestling with God, we have extorted out of his hands those Mercies and
Blessings our Hearts are set upon the suing to him for. Vain Repetitions
therefore are such as are made use of by any without new and lively Stirrings
and Motions of the Heart and Affections at the same time. And that which makes
a Prayer vain, makes a Repetition in Prayer to be vain also. Now that is a vain
Prayer, and we shall certainly find it so, when the requests we offer up to God
therein, are heartless and lifeless. For we must know, God has Commanded us to
Pray; not that he might be excited and moved by hearing the Voice of our Cries
in Prayer, to give unto us those Mercies and Blessings, which he himself was
not resolved before hand to bestow upon us; but that we our selves might be
fitted and prepared to receive from him, what he is always ready and willing to
confer upon us. He requires Prayer from us, not that he might be affected
therewith; for as the Apostle St. James tells us, With him there is no
variableness nor shadow of turning, James 1.17. but that we our selves might
have our Hearts raised and affected therewith. And therefore the chiefest
effect of Prayer being to affect our selves, if Prayer it self be not vain,
neither are Repetitions in Prayer vain, if whilst we are spreading the same
requests before God, we do it with new Affections and Desires. No Prayer
therefore ought to be accused of idle Babbling and vain Repetitions; but those
that Pray may (I fear) too often be charged with it. And here by the way, I
desire all those who are offended at, or refuse to join with the Stated Forms
of Prayer that the Church has appointed to be made use of either in public or
private, because the same requests do many times occur therein; to keep a
strict Eye upon their Hearts and Affections, and then the Scruples and
Objections that they make, will presently be removed, for it is much in their
own Power to make them to be, either vain Repetitions, or the most fervent
Ingeminations of their most affectionate Desires unto God, and the most
Spiritual and Forcible part of all their Prayers and Supplications they offer
up unto him.

But then further as our Savior forbids vain Repetitions in Prayer, so he
likewise forbids much speaking: for they think, says our Savior, St. Matthew.
6.7. That they shall be heard for their much speaking. Now as the former
Prohibition does not exclude all Repetitions in Prayer, so neither does this
latter exclude (as some Ignorant Persons perhaps who are soon wearied out with
the Service of God, may be apt to think) long Prayers: for this would be a flat
contradiction to his own practice, for it is said in St. Luke 6.12. That he
went out into a Mountain to Pray, and continued all night in Prayer unto God.

Some indeed take the word (...) Prayer, to signify the House of Prayer, as if
our Savior continued only in such a Dedicated House or Chapel all night,
according as Juvenal uses the word, in qua te quaero prosencha. Yet as it will
be hard to prove that the Jews had any such Houses for Prayer, besides their
Synagogues, which were not seated in Desolate (whither our Savior went then to
Pray) but in Populous Cities and frequented Places: So it will be more hard to
imagine that our Savior would continue all night in the House of Prayer, if he
had not been taken up in the performance of the Duty of Prayer.

There is therefore a great deal of difference between much speaking in Prayer,
and speaking much in Prayer; for certainly a Man may speak much to God in
prayer, when yet he may not be guilty of much speaking: for there is a
compendious way of speaking, to speak much in a little; and there is a babbling
way of speaking, when by many tedious Ambages and long Impertinencies men pour
out a Sea of Words, and scarce one drop of Sense or Matter.

Now it is this last way of speaking unto God which our Savior here condemns;
and condemns it justly, for it shows either Folly or Irreverence: Folly, in
that it is a sign we do not sufficiently consider what we ask: Irreverence, in
that it is a sign we do not consider of whom we ask: and such men are rather to
be esteemed talkative than devout.

But when a man's Soul is full fraught with matter (of which if he duly weighs,
either his Spiritual wants, or his Temporal Sorrows and Afflictions, he can
never be unfurnished) to pour out his Soul, and with a torrent of Holy
Rhetoric, lay open his Case before God, begging seasonable supplies in
suitable expressions, certainly he cannot fall under the reproof of much
speaking, although he may speak much and long: for such an one has much to
say, and whilst Matter and Affections last, let his prayer be an hour long, yea
a day long, yea an eternity long, as our Praises shall be in Heaven, he is not
to be censured for a Babbler, but has still spoken much in a little.

It is true, the Wise Man has Commanded, That our words be few in our
Addresses to God, Eccles. 5.2. and he gives a most forcible Reason; For God is
in Heaven and thou upon Earth. His Infinite Majesty should therefore overawe
thee from using any rash and vain loquacity. But yet this makes not against
long prayers; for many words may be but a few to express the sentiments of our
Souls; and none can be too many, while the Heart keeps Pace with the Tongue,
and every Petition is filled with Matter, and winged with Affections.

And whereas our Savior condemns the Pharisees, who devoured Widows Houses,
and for a pretense made long Prayers, Matthew. 23.14. yet certain it is, that it
was not their long Prayers that he condemns, but their Pretense and Hypocrisy.
Thus much I thought fit to observe from the Context.

Our Savior having thus cautioned his Disciples against the Sins of the
Pharisees and Heathens in their Prayers, comes in the Words I have read, to
instruct them how to pray. After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc.

Some taking advantage from these Words, deny this to be used as a Prayer it
self; but only as a Model and Platform to direct us how to pray.

But if we consult not only the practice of the Church of Christ in all Ages,
but the Scripture it self, we shall find it to be both the one and the other;
for it is our Savior's express Injunction, Luke 11.2. When ye pray, say; and
what should they say, but the Words immediately following, Our Father which art
in Heaven, etc? One Evangelist says, Pray after this manner; the other says,
When ye pray, say; from both which, compared together, it is easy to collect,
that it is both a Pattern for us to form our Prayers by, and that it is a
Prayer it self; which our Savior, in condescension to our Infirmities, has
framed for us; putting Words into our Mouths, to beg of God those Blessings,
which through his most prevalent Intercession shall not be denied us.

And indeed of all Prayers this is the most absolute and comprehensive,
containing in it, not so many Words as Petitions; for there is not any one
thing that we can pray for, according to the Will of God, but it is summarily
couched in this.

And yet this Comprehensiveness, which is the admirable Excellency of this
Prayer, has been the only Reason why some of late have scrupled and refused to
use it; because they cannot pierce through all that is signified by these
substantial Expressions; they think they should take God's Name in vain, in
uttering that before him, which they do not understand the utmost extent of.

But if they did but consider their own Prayers, the same doubts would still
remain. When they pray that God's Name may be glorified; can they comprehend in
that short time, while they are uttering, those Words, the infinite Latitude of
that Request? Is it unlawful, at the close of our Prayers, to desire that God
would give us all good things which we have not mentioned before him? And yet
who of us can conceive how large an extent that Request may have? May we not
say, Amen, and Seal up our Prayers with a So be it; though while we are
speaking it, we cannot presently recollect all that has been mentioned before
God in Prayer? And for any to say, that the Lord's Prayer is a Morsel too big
for their Mouths, (as some have done,) I have always accounted it a most
unworthy and unsavory Speech. Certainly Christ thought it not too big for his
Disciples, whose Capacities at that time were possibly none of the largest; as
appears in many instances, particularly in the Nature of Christ's Kingdom,
which he taught them to pray that it might come, which they thought to be
Temporal and Earthly. And those who refuse the use of the Lord's Prayer, as too
big for them, would yet think themselves much wronged, if we should but suspect
them as ignorant in that, and in many other points of Christian Doctrine, as
the Disciples were when our Savior instructed them thus to pray.

It being therefore, as I hope, clear and evident, that we may often pray in
these Words, and that we must always pray after this manner; let us now proceed
to consider the Prayer it self, in which there are these Four parts.

First, The Preface or Introduction to it.

Secondly, The Petitions or Requests we present to God, in which the greatest
part of it consists.

Thirdly, the Doxology, or Praise-giving; for Praise is a necessary part of
Prayer.

Fourthly, The Conclusion, or Ratification of all, in the Sealing Particle,
Amen.

I shall speak somewhat of these briefly in the general, and then more
particularly of each as my Text directs me.

First, For the Introduction or Preface unto the Prayer, and that is contained
in these Words, Our Father which art in Heaven. This is used as a preparative
to Prayer: And what greater inducement can there be to dispose us into a holy
awe and reverence of God, than to set before us the Greatness and Glory of that
Majesty before whom we prostrate our selves? And therefore we find that the
Saints in Scripture, in all their approaches to the Throne of Grace, were wont
in the beginning of their Prayers, to affect and overawe their Hearts with the
humble mention of God's Glorious Attributes. Thus Solomon, 1 Kings 8.23. O Lord
God of Israel, there is no God like unto thee, in Heaven above, or in the Earth
beneath, who keep Covenant and Mercy with thy Servants. Thus Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.6. O Lord God of our Fathers, art not thou God in Heaven, and rulest
not thou over all the Kingdoms of the Heathens, and in thy Hand is there not
Power and Might? So Hezekiah, 2 King. 19.15. O Lord God of Israel, who dwell
between the Cherubims, thou art God, even thou alone, who have made Heaven and
Earth. And so the Prophet, Jerem. 32.17. Ah Lord God, behold, thou have made
the Heaven and the Earth, by thy great Power and stretched-out Arm, and there
is nothing too hard for thee. The great, the mighty God, the Lord of Hosts is
his Name, great in Counsel, and mighty in Working. And thus our Savior
himself, Matthew. 11.25. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth. And so
the Apostle, Acts 4.24. Lord, thou art God that have made Heaven and Earth, the
Sea and all that in them is. And thus to consider seriously of, and reverently
to express the infinitely Glorious Attributes of God, is an excellent means to
compose us into a holy fear and awe of God, such as becomes vile Dust and Ashes
to be affected with, when it stands in the presence of its great Lord and
Creator: Only here let us remember, that we dwell not so long upon the Titles
and Attributes of God, nor run so much out into Preface, as to forget our
errand unto him.

Secondly, Next after the Preface, we have the Petitions following in their
order. Of these some reckon six, others seven; but which soever we take, the
matter is not great: They may all be reduced under two General Heads.

First, Such as respect God's Glory.

Secondly, Such as respect our selves and others. The Three first respect God's
Glory, and the Three or Four last our own Good; and that either Temporal or
Spiritual. Temporal, in begging at God's Hands our daily Bread. Spiritual, in
desiring both the Pardon of and Deliverance from Sin.

And here again we may observe the admirable Order and Method of this Prayer,
in that our Savior has placed the Petition, which refers to our Temporal
Good, as it were in the very midst and center of it, it being encompassed round
about with Petitions for Heavenly and Spiritual Blessings. And this may
intimate to us, that we are only to bait at the World in our Passage and
Journey to Heaven, that we ought to begin with Spirituals and end with
Spirituals, but only to take up and refresh our selves a little with our daily
Bread in our way.

Thirdly, In the Doxology, or Praise, there are Four things contained.

First, God's Sovereignty, Thine is the Kingdom.

Secondly, God's Omnipotency, And the Power.

Thirdly, God's Excellency, And the Glory.

Fourthly, The Eternity and Unchangableness of them, and of all God's other
Attributes, noted to us in that Expression, For ever.

Fourthly, and Lastly, Here is the ratifying Particle, Amen, added as a Seal to
the whole Prayer, and it imports a desire to have that confirmed or granted
which we have prayed for. And thus Benaiah when he had received Instructions
from David, concerning the establishing of Solomon in the Kingdom, answers
thereto Amen; and explains it, 1 Kings 1.36. The Lord God of my Lord the King
say so too. So that when we add this Word, Amen, at the end and close of our
Prayers, it is as much as if we had said, the Lord God say so too; or the Lord
grant these Requests: For the proper signification of Amen, is, so be it, or so
it is, or so it shall be; the former notes our Desires, the latter our
confidence and assurance of being heard.

Now of all these Four parts, of which this Prayer is composed, I shall speak
in their order.

First therefore, Let us consider the Preface in these Words, Our Father which
art in Heaven. And here God is described by two of his most eminent Attributes,
his Grace and Glory, his Goodness and his Greatness; by the one, in that he is
styled, Our Father; by the other, in that he is said to be in Heaven: And both
these are most sweetly tempered together, to beget in us a Holy Mixture of
Filial Boldness and aweful Reverence, which are so necessary to the sanctifying
of God's Name in all our Addresses to him. We are commanded to come to the
Throne of Grace with boldness, Heb. 4.16. and yet, to serve God acceptably with
reverence and with fear, Heb. 12.28. Yea, and indeed the very calling of it a
Throne of Grace, intimates both these Affections at once. It is a Throne, and
therefore requires Awe and Reverence; but it is a Throne of Grace too, and
therefore permits holy Freedom and Confidence. And so we find all along in the
Prayers of the Saints, how they mix the consideration of God's Mercy, and his
Majesty together, in the very Prefaces and Preparations to their Prayers. So
Neh. 1.5. Lord God of Heaven, the great and terrible God that keeps Covenant
and Mercy for them that love him. So Dan. 9.4. O Lord, the great and dreadful
God, keeping Covenant and Mercy for them that love him. Now this excellent
mixture of aweful and encouraging Attributes, will keep us from both the
Extremes, of Despair on the one Hand, and of Presumption on the other. He is
our Father, and this may correct the despairing Fear which might otherwise
seize us upon the consideration of his Majesty and Glory: And he is likewise
infinitely Glorious, a God whose Throne is in the highest Heavens, and the
Earth his Footstool. And this may correct the presumptuous irreverence, which
else the consideration of God, as our Father, might perhaps embolden us unto.

Now here I shall first speak of the Relation of God unto us as a Father, and
then of the Place of his Glory and Residence, in Heaven, and of both but
briefly; for I must not dwell upon every particular.

First, To begin with the Relation of God to us, as a Father. Now God is a
Father Three ways.

First, God is a Father by Eternal Generation.

Secondly, By Temporal Creation and Providence.

Thirdly, By Spiritual Regeneration and Adoption.

First, God is a Father by Eternal Generation; having by an inconceivable and
ineffable way begotten his Son, God Coequal, Coeternal with himself; and
therefore called, The only begotten Son of God, Joh. 3.16. Thus God is a
Father, only to our Lord Jesus Christ, according to his Divine Nature. And
whenever this Title, Father, is given to God, with relation to the Eternal
Sonship of our Lord Jesus Christ, it denotes only the First Person in the ever
Blessed Trinity; who is therefore chiefly and especially called the Father.

Secondly, God is a Father by Temporal Creation, as he gives a Being and
Existence to his Creatures; creating those whom he made Rational after his own
Image and Similitude. And therefore God is said to be a Father of Spirits, Heb.
12.9. And the Angels are called the Sons of God, Job 1.6. There was a day when
the Sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord. And so Adam upon
the account of his Creation, is called the Son of God, Luke 3.38. where the
Evangelist runs up the Genealogy of Mankind till it terminates in God, Who was
the Son of Adam, who was the Son of God.

Thirdly, God is said to be a Father by Spiritual Regeneration and Adoption,
and so all true Believers are said to be the Sons of God, and to be born of
God, John 1.12, 13. To as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become
the Sons of God, even to as many as believed on his Name, which were born not
of the will of Man, but of God. So Romans 8.17. we are said to receive the Spirit
of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. For the Spirit it self witnesses with
our Spirits that we are the Children of God.

Now in these two last Significations, this Expression, Our Father which art in
Heaven, is to be understood, and so they denote, not any one particular Person
of the Blessed Trinity, but it is a relative Attribute belonging equally to all
the Three Persons. God is the Father of all Men by Creation and Providence; and
he is especially the Father of the Faithful by Regeneration and Adoption. Now
as these Actions of Creation, Regeneration and Adoption, are common to the
whole Trinity, so likewise is the Title of Father. God the first Person in the
Blessed Trinity, is indeed Eminently called the Father, but not in respect of
us, but in respect of Christ, his only begotten Son from all Eternity. In
respect of us the whole Trinity is our Father which is in Heaven, both Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and in praying to our Father, we pray to them all jointly,
for Christ the Second Person in the Trinity is expressly called the Father, Isa.
9.6. Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and his Name shall be
called Wonderful Councellor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father. And we are
said to be born of the Spirit, John 3.5. Except a Man be born of Water and of
the Spirit.

Now that God should be pleased to take this into his Glorious Style, even to
be called Our Father, it may teach us,

First, To admire his Infinite Condescension, and our own unspeakable Privilege
and Dignity. 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed
upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God. Indeed for God to be a
Father by Creation and Providence, though it be a Mercy, yet is no Privilege;
for in that Sense he is, Parens Rerum, the common Parent of all things, yea the
Father of Devils themselves, and of those Wretches who are as wicked and shall
be as miserable as Devils. But that God should be thy Father by Regeneration
and Adoption, that he should make thee his Son through his only begotten Son:
that he should rake up such dirt and filth as thou art, and lay it in his
Bosom; that he should take Aliens and Strangers near unto himself, and Adopt
Enemies and Rebels into his Family, Register their Names in the Book of Life,
make them Heirs of Glory, Coheirs with Jesus Christ his Eternal Son, as the
Apostle admiringly recounts it, Romans 8.17. This is both Mercy and Miracle
together.

Secondly, It should teach us to walk worthy of this High and Honorable
Relation into which we are taken, and to demean our selves as Children ought to
do in all Holy Obedience to his Commands with Fear and Reverence to his
Authority; and an Humble Submission to his Will. This God Challenges at our
hands, as being our Father, Mal. 1.6. If I be a Father, where is mine Honor,
and 1 Pet. 1.17. If we call on the Father, pass the time of your sojourning
here in fear. And likewise by giving thee leave to Style him by this Name of
Father, he puts thee in remembrance that thou should endeavor by a Holy Life
and Conversation to be like thy Father, and so approve it to thine own
Conscience and to all others that thou art indeed a Child, a Son of God.

Thirdly, Is God thy Father? this then may give us abundance of assurance that
we shall receive at his hands what we ask, if it be good for us; and if it be
not, we have no reason to complain that we are not heard, unless he should turn
our Prayers into Curses. And this very Consideration seems to be the reason,
why our Savior chooses this among all God's Titles and Attributes to prefix
before this Prayer: and indeed it is the most proper Name by which we can Style
God in our Prayers unto him; for this Name of Father emboldens Faith, and is as
a Pledge and Pawn before hand that our requests shall be heard and granted; and
therefore our Savior for the Confirmation of our Faith, argues very strongly
from this very Title of Father, Matthew. 7.9, 10, 11. What Man is there of you,
whom if his Son ask him for Bread, will he give him a Stone? or if he ask a
Fish, will he give him a Serpent? If ye then being evil know how to give good
things when your Children ask them, how much more shall my Father give good
things to them that ask him? Indeed it is a most encouraging Argument; for if
the Bowels of an Earthly Parent, who yet many times is humorous, and whose
tenderest Mercies are but Cruelties in respect of God: If his Compassions will
not suffer his Children to be defeated in their reasonable and necessary
requests; how much less will God, who is Love and Goodness it self, and who
has inspired all Parental Affections into other Fathers, suffer his Children
to return ashamed, when they beg of him those things which are most agreeable
to his Will and to their Wants? What do thou then, O Christian, complaining
of thy Wants, and sighing under thy Burdens? Is not God thy Father? Go and
boldly lay open thy Case unto him; his Bowels will certainly roll and yern
toward thee. Is it Spiritual Blessings thou want? spread thy requests
before him; for as he is thy Father, so he is the God of all Grace, and will
give unto thee of his fullness; for God loves that his Children should be like
him. Or is it Temporal Mercies thou want? why, he is thy Father, and he is
the Father of Mercies and the God of all Comfort: And why should thou go so
dejected and disconsolate who have a Father so able and so willing to relieve
and supply thee? only beware that thou ask not Stones for Bread, nor
Scorpions for Fish, and then ask what thou will for thy good and thou shall
receive it.

Fourthly, Is God thy Father? This then may encourage us against Despair under
the sense of our manifold sins against God, and departures from him: For he
will certainly receive us upon our repentance and returning to him. This very
apprehension was that which wrought upon the Prodigal, Luke 15.8. I will arise
and go to my Father. The Consideration of our own guilt and vileness, without
the Consideration of God's infinite Mercy, tends only to widen the breach
between him and us; for those that are altogether hopeless, will sin the more
implacably and bitterly against God; like those the Prophet mentions, Jerem.
2.25. That said there was no hope, and therefore they would persist in their
wickedness. But now to consider that God is our Father, and that though we have
cast off the Duty and Obedience of Children, yet upon our Submission he will
bid us welcome, and instate us again in his Favor, this to the ingenious Spirit
of a Christian, is a sweet and powerful motive, to reduce him from his
wandering and straying, for it will work both upon his shame and upon his hope:
Upon his shame, that ever he should offend so Gracious a Father; and upon his
hope, that those offenses shall be forgiven him through that very Mercy that he
has abused. Thus we read Jerem. 3.4, 5. Will thou not henceforth cry unto me,
My Father, thou art the Guide of my youth? Will he reserve his Anger for ever,
will he keep it unto the end? Noting that when we plead with God under the
winning Name of Father, his Anger cannot long last, but his Bowels of Mercy
will at last overcome the sentiments of his Wrath and Justice. And thus much
concerning the endearing Title of Father, which our Savior directs us to use
in our Prayers unto God.

Secondly, The next thing observable, is the Particle Our, Our Father, which
notes to us, that God is not only the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, but he
is the Father of all Men. He is the Father of all by Creation and Providence.
And therefore we have the Interrogation, Mal. 2.10. Have we not all one Father?
Has not one God Created us? But he is especially the Father of the Faithful,
by Regeneration and Adoption; who are born not of Blood, nor of the Will of the
Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God, John 1.13. This therefore should
teach us,

First, To esteem one another as Brethren. Outward respects, the Grandeur and
Earthly Privileges and Advantages of the World make no disparity in God's Love
to us, or in our Relation to him: And therefore howsoever thou may be
advanced in Wealth or Honor, or parts above others; yet still remember that
they are thy Brethren, as they partake of the same common Nature, and much more
if they partake of the same special Grace. Yea, Christ himself who is the Lord
of all, is not ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. 2.11. And shall thou, who
art but an Adopted Son, no otherwise than the meanest Saint, be ashamed of the
Relation, especially considering there is no Eldership, nor right of Firstborn
in the Family, for they are all Firstborn, all Kings and Heirs with Christ
Jesus himself?

Secondly, If thou art mean and low in the World, this should teach thee to be
well content with thy present State and Condition, for God is thy Father, and a
Father to thee equally with the greatest. There is not the highest person upon
Earth, but if he belong to God, prefers that Relation above all his other
Titles: If he can write Prince, King, or Emperor, and can afterward subjoin a
Child of God, all his other Titles stand but for a Cipher with him. This, O
Christian, how mean, how despised soever thou art, this is thy Privilege, and
a Privilege it is that equals thee with David, with Solomon, and with all the
great ones of the Earth, that ever laid down their Diadems and Scepters at the
feet of God. What says the Apostle? Gal. 3.28. There is neither bond nor free,
but all are one in Christ Jesus.

Thirdly, Since when we Pray we must say, Our Father, this teaches us, to
interest one another in our Prayers. Our Father would not have us selfish so
much as in our Prayers, but in the very entrance into them, we are put in mind
of the Communion of Saints, to beg those Blessings for all that belong to God
which we ask for our selves; for as Christ has made us all Kings, so he has
made all Priests to God and his Father: Now the Office of a Priest is
Intercession: And therefore when we go to God, we should bear upon our Breasts
the Name of our Brethren, and present them before God, through the Intercession
and Mediation of Jesus Christ our Great High Priest, that both we and they may
be accepted of God. And this we ought to do both in public and private. It is
true, in our secret Prayers we may pray particularly for our selves, and we
have frequent instances for it in Scripture; yet ought we in every Prayer that
we make to God, to be mindful of the State and Condition of our Brethren. Yea,
and it is very Lawful and Commendable, even in secret between God and our own
Souls, in those cases that are common to us, with the rest of God's Saints and
People to join them in our Prayers; and although we are all alone, yet to say
Our Father. For we find Daniel praying, Dan. 9.17. O Our God, when yet he was
in secret, O Our God, hear the Prayer of thy Servant. And this is to show, that
near and entire Communion which ought to be between all the Saints, praying
with, and praying for all the Members of the Body of Jesus Christ, and
esteeming their Interest as our own.

Fourthly, This shows us likewise the high Privilege of the Children of God,
that they have a Stock of Prayers going to Heaven for them from all their
fellow Saints throughout the World; yea, from those whom they never knew, whom
they never heard of, yet are they continually appearing before the Throne of
Grace on their behalf. And thou who would think it a great Favor if thou
were interested in the Prayers of some who are mighty in Prayer, and whom thou
have begged to recommend thy Condition to God, may here have abundant
Comfort in that thou art nearly concerned and interested in all the Prayers
that are put up to God throughout the whole World, by all those that are most
prevalent at the Throne of Grace; yea, which is more, thou have an interest in
all the Prayers that have ever been preferred to Heaven by all the Saints from
the beginning of the World unto this very day: for not only this present
Church, but the Church in all Ages is the Body of Christ, and every Member of
it imitates the Pattern of Christ's Intercession, John 17.20. Neither Pray I
for these alone, but for all those that shall believe in me. The difference is,
that Christ's Intercession was Authoritative, theirs only Charitative.

And thus much shall suffice to be spoken concerning God's Goodness and Mercy,
expressed in those Words, Our Father.

The next expression sets forth his Glory and Greatness, Which art in Heaven.
But is not God every where present? Does he not fill Heaven, and Earth, and all
things? Yea, is it not said, that the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him? How
then are our Prayers to be directed to God in Heaven only, since he is as well
on Earth as in Heaven? And were he only in Heaven, and not every where present
on Earth, it would be in vain for us to pray, because our Prayers could never
reach his Ears, nor arrive to his notice.

I Answer, It is true, God is every where present, and all that we think, we
think in him; and all that we speak, we speak unto him; he understands the
silent motion of our Lips, when we whisper a Prayer to him in our Closets; yea,
the secret motions of our Hearts, when we only think a Prayer. Therefore when
our Savior bids us direct our Prayers to our Father in Heaven, this does not
imply that God is no where present, or that he no where hears Prayer, but only
in Heaven: But this expression is used,

First, Because Heaven is the most Glorious Place of God's residence, where he
has more especially established his Throne of Grace, and there sits upon it.
Now because it is a most Glorious and Majestical thing to hear the Suits, and
receive the Petitions that are tendered to him; therefore the Scripture ascribes
it to the most Glorious and Majestical Place, and that is to Heaven. And
therefore we are commanded to pray to our Father which is in Heaven, to keep
alive a due sense of his Majesty upon our Hearts. He would not have us think it
a mean and trivial thing to have our Prayers heard; and therefore he represents
himself to us arrayed in all his Glory, and sitting upon his Throne in the
highest Heavens, willing to be thought a God never more Glorious, than when he
is a God hearing Prayer.

Secondly, Our Prayers are directed to our Father in Heaven; because though he
hears them wheresoever they are uttered, yet he no where hears them with
acceptance but only in Heaven; and the Reason is because our Prayers are
acceptable only as they are presented before God through the Intercession of
Christ: Now Christ performs his Mediatory Office only in Heaven; for he
performs it in both Natures, as he is God and Man, and so he is only in Heaven.
And therefore we are still concerned to pray to our Father in Heaven. God
indeed hears us upon Earth; for there is not a Word in our Tongue, but behold,
O Lord, thou know it altogether; but this will not avail us, unless God
hears our Prayers a second time, as repeated over in the Intercession of Jesus
Christ, and perfumed with the much Incense which he offers up with the Prayers
of all the Saints. Since then we are directed to pray to our Father which is in
Heaven: This,

First, May inform us, that there is no circumstance of time or place that can
hinder us from praying; for Heaven is over thee, and open to thee, wheresoever
thou art; there is no Clime so remote, which is not overspread with that
Pavillion; and thou art in all places equally near to Heaven, and God is in it,
sitting upon his Throne of Grace, to receive and answer thy Requests,
wheresoever thou offerest them up unto him. And therefore we find in the
Scripture some praying in God's House of Prayer, some making their Houses
Houses of Prayer, St. Peter prayed on the Housetop when he fell into his
Trance, Isaac in the open Fields, our Savior on a Mountain, Jonas in a Whale's
Belly, Abraham's Servant in his Journey, and Asa in the midst of a tumultuous
and bloody Battle; yea, whatsoever thou art doing thou may pray, so long as
Heaven is over thee and God in it: Whatsoever Company thou art in, whatsoever
Employment thou art about, thou may still pray; for thy Father that is in
Heaven still hears thee: He hears thy Thoughts and thy Desires, when either
they are too big, or when it is not expedient to articulate them into Words.

Indeed the Voice in Prayer is not always necessary; nay, sometimes it is not
convenient; yea, it is never necessary, but only upon three Accounts.

First, As that which God requires should be employed in his Service; for this
was a great end why it was given us, that therewith we might Bless and Praise
God: With the Tongue, says the Apostle, we bless God, even the Father, Jam.
3.9. Or,

Secondly, When in Secret it may be a means to help to raise up our Affections,
keeping it still within the bounds of Decency and Privacy. Or,

Thirdly, In our joining with others, it helps likewise to raise and quicken
their Affections; otherwise, were it not for these three Reasons, the Voice is
no more necessary to make our Wants and Desires known unto God, than it is to
make them known to our own Hearts: For thy Father which is in Heaven, is not
certainly excluded from any part of the Earth; he is with thee, and lays his
Ear to thy very Heart, and hears the Voice of thy Thoughts when thy Tongue is
silent: And thou may, whatsoever work or business thou art doing, dart up a
Prayer and a winged Desire unto him, which shall be as acceptable and
effectual, as the more solemn performance of this Duty at stated times.

Secondly, Is thy Father in Heaven, thy Prayers then should be made so as to
pierce the Heavens where God is? But how can this be done, since the distance
between Heaven and us is so infinite? This is not to be done by the intension
of raising thy Voice, but by the intension of raising thy Zeal and Spirit; for
Zeal and Affection is a strong Bow that will shoot a Petition through Heaven it
self. Let all thy Petitions therefore be ardent, and carry Fire in them, and
this will cause them to ascend to the Element of pure Celestial Fire, from
whence thy Breast was at first inflamed. It is a most remarkable place, Exodus
14.15. when the Red Sea was before the Israelites, and the Egyptians pursuing
them behind, and unpassable Mountains on each side, the People murmuring, and
Moses their Captain and Guide in an unextricable Straight, we read not of any
Vocal Prayer that Moses then put up; and yet God calls to him, Why cryest thou
unto me; a Prayer it was, not so much as accented not so much as whispered; and
yet so strong and powerful that it pierced Heaven, and was louder in the Ears
of God than the Voice of Thunder.

And thus much shall suffice to be spoken concerning the Preface of this
Prayer, Our Father which art in Heaven.

Let us now proceed unto the Petitions themselves; the first three of which
relate unto God's Glory; the other to our Temporal and Spiritual Good.

Of those which relate to God's Glory; the First desires the advancement of
this Glory it self, Hallowed be thy Name.

The Second, The means of effecting it, Thy Kingdom come.

The Third, The manifestation of it, Thy Will be done, in Earth as it is in
Heaven.

I begin with the First of these, Hallowed be thy Name. In the Explication of
which we shall enquire,

First, What is to be understood by the Name of God.

Secondly, What it is to Hallow this Name of God.

Thirdly, What is contained in this Petition, and what we pray for when we say,
Hallowed be thy Name.

First, What is meant by the Name of God?

To this I Answer, That the Name of God is any perfection ascribed to him
whereby he has been pleased to make himself known to the Sons of Men: For
Names are given to this very intent, that they might declare what the thing is
to which that Name does belong. Thus when God had created Adam, and made him
Lord of this visible World, he caused the Beasts of the Field, and the Fowls of
the Air to pass before him, as it were to do Homage to their new Sovereign, and
to receive Names from him; which according to the plenitude and perfection of
his knowledge, did then aptly serve to express their several Natures, and were
not only Names but Definitions too. So when mention is made in Scripture of the
Name of God, it signifies some expression of his infinite Essence, in which he
is pleased graciously to condescend to the weakness of our capacity, and to
spell out himself to us, sometimes by one perfection, and sometimes by another;
since it is utterly impossible for us finite Creatures, to have a full and
comprehensive knowledge of that Being which is infinite; for so God is only
known to himself; being as infinite to all others, so finite to his own
Knowledge and Understanding: And therefore he has displayed before us his
Name, to give us some help and advantage to conceive somewhat of him, though
his Nature and Essence are in themselves incomprehensible to us, and shall be
so for ever, even in Heaven it self. Now this Name of God may well be
distinguished into two sorts, his Titles, and his Attributes.

First, His Titles are his Name, and so he is in Scripture frequently called
Jehovah, God, Lord, Creator, and the like; and most of these his Titles are
relative, respecting us; so his Name of Creator denotes his infinite Power,
giving Being to all things. Lord and King signify his Dominion and Authority,
in disposing and governing all that he has made. Father, signifies his Care
and Goodness in providing for his Creatures. Redeemer, his Mercy and Grace in
delivering them from Temporal Evils and Calamities, or especially from Eternal
Death and Destruction.

Now these relative Titles, though they properly belong unto God, yet are they
not absolutely essential to him; but connote a respect unto the Creatures. And
therefore, though before the Creation of the World, God was for ever the same
infinitely Blessed Being that he now is, and by the Creation of it no accession
was made to his infinitely perfect Nature, (for in him there is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning; but he is yesterday and to day and the
same for ever;) yet could he not be called by the Name of Creator, or Lord, or
Redeemer, or Father, (unless in respect of his Eternal Son:) But all these
Titles result from the Relations wherein we stand unto God, of Creatures,
Subjects, and Children. These Names therefore had their beginning, some in the
beginning of time, and some since, and yet they do very properly signify unto
us that God who is without beginning or end.

Secondly, As his Titles, so his Attributes are his Name; and these are of two
sorts, either incommunicable or communicable.

First, The incommunicable Attributes of God; and these are those which are so
proper to the Divine Essence, that there is scarce the least footsteps or
resemblance of them to be found in any of the Creatures; and such are his
Eternity, which denotes a duration as well without beginning as without end:
For though there are some Creatures, whose Beings shall never have a period set
to them, as Angels and Men; yet there is no Creature that never had no
beginning of its existence. And so God's Infiniteness and Immensity filling all
places and exceeding all; which was most excellently set forth in that most
significant, yet unintelligible Paradox of the Heathen Philosopher, That God
was a Circle, whose Center was every where, but its Circumference no where: His
simplicity also, excluding all Composition and Mixture, which no Creature does;
for take the most simple of them, as Angels and the separate Souls of Men, yet
they are at least compounded in their Essences, and Powers, and Acts; for the
Power of Understanding is not the Soul, nor the Act of Understanding the Power;
therefore in these there is one thing and another. But it is not so in God, but
whatsoever is in God is God himself, being one most pure and simple Act. Hence
follows his immutability and unchangeableness, there being nothing in God which
was not from all Eternity. And in the same rank are his Omnipotency and
All Sufficiency, his Omniscience and Independency, and the like, which are
incommunicable Attributes, and cannot without Blasphemy be ascribed unto any of
the Creatures.

Secondly, There are other Attributes of God that are communicable, and are so
called because they may in some Analogy and Resemblance be found in the
Creatures also; so to be Holy, Just, Merciful, True, Powerful, and the like,
are the Names of God, and yet may be ascribed to the Creatures. So in that most
Triumphant Declaration of his Name to Moses, Exodus 34.5, 6, 7. we find that the
most of the Letters that compose it may be found, in some degrees, even among
Men, the Lord proclaimed his Name, the Lord God Merciful and Gracious,
Long-suffering, and Abundant in Goodness and Truth, forgiving Iniquity,
Transgression, and Sin. Now this Name of God Merciful and Gracious,
Long-suffering, and Abundant in Goodness, which he seems so much to delight and
glory in, and which he adorns with such fair flourishes, he himself would have
us to own and intimate, Luke 6.36, Be ye merciful as your Father is merciful.
To aspire to a resemblance with God in his incommunicable Attributes and Name,
is a most horrid and blasphemous Presumption; a Pride that cast the Devils from
Heaven to Hell: But to aspire to a resemblance unto God in his communicable
Name, is the tendency of Grace, and the effect of the Spirit of God, conforming
us in some measure to his Purity, and making us partakers in this sense of the
Divine Nature. And therefore it is pressed upon us, Levit. 29.2. You shall be
Holy, for I the Lord your God am Holy. And, Mat. 5.48. Be ye therefore perfect,
as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

Now these communicable Attributes of God, though they may in some respects be
found in the Creatures, yet then are they properly the Names of God, when they
are applied to him free from all those Imperfections with which they are
necessarily attended in the Creatures. Abstract them from all Imperfections,
and we may apply them to God as his Name. Now these Imperfections are of two
sorts, either Privative, or Negative. A Creature is then said to be Privatively
imperfect when he falls short of what he ought to be: And so are the best of
Men imperfect in this Life; Merciful they are, but still retain a mixture of
Cruelty; Patient they are, but still they have Impatience mixed with it; Holy
they are, but yet not Spotless as the Law requires them to be: And therefore in
ascribing Holiness, Mercy, and Patience unto God, we must be sure to separate
from them all such Imperfections as are found in us, through the mixture of the
contrary Corruptions with those Graces; otherwise they will be so far from
being the Name of God, that they will prove Blasphemous Derogatives from him;
neither is this enough, but we must remove all Negative imperfections also. Now
a Creature is said to be Negatively imperfect, when though it has all the
perfections that is due unto it, or required from it: yet it has not all
perfection that is possible or imaginable. Thus the Holy Angels, and the
Spirits of just Men in Heaven, although they are made perfect so as to exclude
all Privative imperfection, their Holiness and their Graces there being as
perfect as they should be, and as God requires from them; yet have they a
Negative imperfection; that is, there is some perfection of those Graces, and
of that Holiness further possible, which they have not, nor is it within the
Sphere of their Natures to attain unto; in which sense it is said, Job 4.8. He
charge his Angels with Folly; that is, not as if they wanted any Wisdom or
Righteousness that was due unto their Natures; but they had not all that Wisdom
that was possible, and so were at least Negatively imperfect.

In all perfections of the Creatures, whether Angels or Men, be they never so
great or excellent, there are Three imperfections that will necessarily attend
them.

First, That they have them not originally from themselves, but derivatively
from another, who is the Author and Embellisher of their Natures.

Secondly, That they have them not unchangeably, but may not only increase but
decrease, yea or utterly lose them.

Thirdly, That they have them not infinitely, but in a stinted and limited
measure.

Now in all the communicable Attributes of the Divine Nature, remove from them
these Three Negative Imperfections, and then apply them to God, and they become
his proper Name. God is Holy, Wise, Powerful, Just, Merciful, True, etc. and so
are likewise some of his most excellent Creatures, whom he has made like unto
himself; but then the difference between God and them consists in this, That
his Wisdom and the rest of his Attributes are originally from him, theirs
derivatively from him; his infinite and boundless, theirs limited and stinted;
his invariable and unchangeable, theirs subject to mutations and decays and
total abolition. So that in these Three respects, even the communicable
Attributes of God, are themselves incommunicable; and so they are his Name,
whereby he is known and differenced from all other Beings whatsoever.

But may it not be here said to me, as it was to Manoah, Judges 13.18. Why
ask thou after my Name, seeing it is secret and wonderful? Indeed we can no
more find out the Name of God to perfection, than we can his Nature and
Essence; for both are infinite and unsearchable. And there are Two expressions
in Scripture, that make this Knowledge impossible, the one of them quite
contrary to the other: One is, that God dwells in that light to which no Man
can approach, 1 Timothy 6.16. Scrutator Majestatis opprimetur a Gloria: He that
will too busily pry into Majesty, shall be oppressed and dazzled with Glory. And
the other is, that he dwells in thick Darkness, 2 Chronicles. 6.1. both implying the
same impossibility of searching out the Almighty to perfection, as Job speaks,
chapter 11. 7.

But though this comprehensive Knowledge be impossible, yet God has given us
hints and traces of himself, by which we may discover enough for our Adoration,
though not perhaps for our satisfaction. And there are Two ways, whereby God
has made known himself and his Name unto us, and they are by his Works, and by
his Word.

First, We may spell out God's Name by his Works; and to this end serve those
two great Capital Letters of Heaven and Earth, the Air and Sea; yea, there is
no one Creature, how vile and contemptible soever it be, but it reads us
Lectures of the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of the great Creator; in which
sense the Apostle tells us, Romans 1.20. The invisible things of him, from the
Creation of the World, are clearly seen, by the things that are made, even his
Eternal Power and Godhead.

Secondly, More expressly and distinctly by his Word, for the Scriptures are
Nomenclatura Dei. By these we come to a more clear and evident Knowledge of
these Attributes of God, which the Works of Nature held forth to us in a more
obscure and confused manner. And by this likewise we attain to the Knowledge of
those perfections of God which the Works of Creation and Providence could never
have instructed us in; as of a Trinity in Unity, of the Eternal Generation, and
Temporal Incarnation of the Son of God, of the whole Mystery of Religion, and
the tenure of the Covenant of Grace, which are things that could never have
been known but by Divine Revelation.

Indeed we may from the Works of God alone gather Knowledge enough of him to
make us inexcusable if we Worship him not as God, for so did the Heathens as
the Apostle speaks, in the forecited place, Romans 1.20. but it is only from the
Word that we know so much of God as to make us Eternally Blessed and Happy.
Here he has displayed his Name, the Lord God, Gracious and Merciful, pardoning
Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin. Here alone has he made known himself to be
our Father in Jesus Christ, and appointed the Spiritual Worship of himself,
that might prepare us for the Eternal Enjoyment of him in Glory.

So that now we see what is meant by the Name of God, his Titles as King, Lord,
Creator, Father, Redeemer, and the like. And his Attributes both Communicable
as Justice, Holiness, Wisdom, Mercy and Truth, etc. and incommunicable as
Infinite, Eternal, Unchangeable, Omnipotent, Independent, and such like; and
that both this Name, both of Titles and Attributes, are made known to us,
either by the Works of God, or by his Word.

Let us in the next place, enquire what it is to Hallow this Name of God. To
Hallow is nothing else but to Sanctify or make Holy, so that Hallowed be thy
Name, is no other than let thy Name be made Holy. But here may be a Question,

How can Creatures be said to make God Holy, whereas it is God that makes them
Holy?

I answer, There is a Threefold way of Hallowing or Sanctifying a thing or
person. One by Dedication. A Second by Infusion. And a Third by Declaration.

First, A thing may be Hallowed or made Holy by Dedication, setting them a part
for Holy Uses and Services; so the Firstborn are said to be Sanctified to the
Lord, Exodus 13.2. And that because among Men the Firstborn were to be Priests
unto the Lord, and among Beasts they were to be Sacrificed. And thus Aaron and
his Sons and the whole Tribe of Levi, whom God took in Exchange for the
Firstborn, are said to be Consecrated and Sanctified, Exodus 28.41. and many
more instances might be given to the same purpose, were it needful. And thus at
least we are said to be Sanctified by Baptism, Ephesians. 5.26. That is, we are by
that Holy Ordinance set apart and Consecrated to the Service of God. Thus one
Creature may Sanctify and make another Holy; namely, by Dedication or
Separatiom to some Sacred Use and Service: And so the Ministers of Christ do
Sanctify and Hallow the Elements in the Holy Communion, setting them apart
from common and ordinary use to that Blessed Mystery.

Secondly, There is a Sanctification or Hallowing by Infusion or Implanting the
real Principles and Habits of Holiness into that which is Hallowed. And thus
God Sanctifies his Elect, by Infusing of his Grace into them, and making them
Holy in some measure and similitude like himself. So our Savior Prays, John
17.17. Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. And the Apostle, 1
These. 5.23. Prays, The very God of Peace Sanctify you wholly. In neither of
these Two Senses is God's Name to be Sanctified or Hallowed by us, for thus to
Pray were to Blaspheme.

Thirdly, There is a Sanctifying by Declaration, when we acknowledge and
reverence that as Holy that is indeed so.

And thus only it is that Creatures may Sanctify the Name of God the Creator.
So we have it used, Isa. 29.23. They shall Sanctify my Name, and Sanctify the
Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel. Now thus to Sanctify the
Name of God, is the very same with that other Expression that commonly occurs
in Scripture, of Glorifying God. We can add nothing to his infinite
Perfections, nor to the Luster and Brightness of his Crown; yet then are we
said to Sanctify and Glorify God when in our most Reverend Thoughts we
observe and admire his Holiness, and the bright Coruscations of his Attributes,
and when we endeavor by all Holy ways to declare them unto others, that they
may observe and admire them with us, and give unto God that Holy Veneration
which is due unto him.

Thus we see what the Name of God is, and what it is to Sanctify or Hallow
this Name. Thirdly,

Let us now consider what is contained in this Petition, Hallowed be thy Name.
And here,

First, In that Christ has taught us to make this the first Petition in our
Prayer to God, we may learn that the Glory of God is to be preferred by us
before all other things whatsoever. And indeed that which God has made the
last and utmost of all his ends, and has appointed to be the highest and
utmost of ours, should be the First of all our Thoughts and Endeavors, and
preferred before whatsoever else is dearest unto us; yea, before our very Lives
themselves. This was our Savior's Practice, John 12.27, 28. Father, save me
from this hour; but for this cause came I unto this hour: Father, Glorify thy
Name. As if he had said, Though Life be naturally dear, and the Cup which I am
to drink very bitter, and the Wrath that I am to undergo, heavy and infinite;
yet all these things are not so considerable to me as thy Glory, and therefore
though it be by Agonies, by Death, by the Cross, yet, Father, Glorify thy
Name. The same mind should dwell in us likewise, and we should hereby be
instructed to desire and pray for other things with limitations and
restrictions, but for the Glory of God absolutely and simply. Father, Glorify
thy Name, and if in the Counsel of thy Will, and the course of thy Providence,
it cannot be otherwise than by my Suffering or Sorrow; yea, or Death it self;
yet, Father, even in this Glorify thy Name; and out of my very Ruins erect
thou a Trophy and Monument to thy Praise: Be thou Hallowed and Sanctified
although at my cost, and with the loss of all.

Secondly, In that this Petition is placed in the beginning of the Lord's
Prayer, it intimates to us that in the very beginning and entrance of our
Prayers, we ought to beg assistance from God, so to perform Holy Duties that
God may be Glorified, and his Name Sanctified by us in it. It is a good and
needful request to beg of God the aid and help of his Spirit to enable us to
Hallow his Name in the succeeding requests we are to make.

Thirdly, Observe that when we present this Petition before God, we beg Three
things of him.

First, Such Grace for our selves as may enable us to Sanctify and Glorify
him.

Secondly, Graces likewise for others to enable them thereunto.

Thirdly, That God would by his Almighty Providence, direct and overruled all
things both good and evil, to the advancement of his own Glory.

First, We beg of God that he would bestow upon us such Graces as are requisite
to Glorify him in the World. We beg Knowledge and Understanding of him, of his
Nature, of his Will, and of his Works; for we cannot Glorify that God whom we
are ignorant of. We beg likewise Patience and Contentment in all Estates,
thankfulness for every Providence, Graces that do highly tend to the Promoting
of God's Honor and Glory. We beg Faith likewise, whereby we give the highest
and greatest Glory to God that Mortal Men are able to ascribe, for to trust
upon his Word, and to build upon his Promises, is to Honor his Truth and
Faithfulness. And therefore we have that Expression, Romans 4.20. That Abraham
was strong in Faith, giving Glory to God. We beg also, that our Speech may be
Savoury, and such as may Minister Grace to the Hearers. And lastly, a humble,
blameless, and exemplary life, for by our good Works we are to Glorify our
Heavenly Father.

I cannot stand to insist upon these things particularly, because my design is
only to give you briefly and summarily an account of what is contained in this
most Excellent Prayer, that you may understand what you Pray for, when you
present these Petitions before God.

Secondly, We herein beg of God, That he would so overruled all things
whatsoever, that his Glory may be secured; nay, promoted by them; and therefore
whatsoever falls out, we ought to say, Hallowed be thy Name by it. Hereby we
Pray that the Gifts and Eminent Graces of God's Children may redound unto his
Glory, that they may not be puffed up with them, nor ascribe the credit of them
to themselves. That the Peace and Prosperity of the Church of Christ may turn
to the Glory of God, that outward Mercies may not make them careless and
forgetful of his Service and Honor. That the sins and failings of God's
People, may eventually turn to the Glory of God, which seem directly to blot
and stain it: And that by their Repentance and Confessions, they may give Glory
to him whom they have offended, and Satisfaction to them whom they have
scandalized, that all the Afflictions and Troubles of his People may in the end
tend unto his Glory as well as their Good, by declaring his Power in supporting
them, and his Goodness and Mercy in delivering them. That all the Devices and
Conspiracies, the Rage and Fury of the Enemies of his Church, may, contrary to
their intentions, be overswayed to advance his Honor, and that the Wrath of
Man may praise him by showing forth his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, either in
restraining or overturning it. And finally, that all Creatures both in Heaven
and in Earth; yea, all the Works of God's Hands should Glorify God in the
several Stations in which he has set them: Some by being the Manifestations of
his Attributes, and some the Manifesters of them. Brutes and Senseless
Creatures passively declaring the Glory of their great Creator; and rational
and intelligent Creatures showing it forth actively, and all concurring in this
great Work, for which all were made, even the Glory and Praise of God.

Thus we see what a large and copious request we present before God, when we
pray that his Name should be Hallowed, which that it may be, let us our selves
endeavor to be Holy, for it is impossible that an unholy Heart or Life should
Sanctify a Holy God. Whilst we persevere in our wicked Conversations, we do
but mock God and our selves, when we desire to Sanctify that Name of his,
which we daily profane and pollute; nay, indeed we do but Pray for our own
Destruction, even that God would Sanctify his Name, part whereof is his just
and dreadful severity upon all those, and consequently upon our selves, who
defile and profane it. And thus I have finished the First Petition, Hallowed
be thy Name.

The Second Petition follows, Thy Kingdom come.

This now very aptly succeeds upon the former, because this is the best way and
means to Hallow God's Name, by enlarging his Kingdom, and bringing in many to
submit to his Scepter and Government. For Praise waits for God in Sion, Psalm.
65.1. And his Name is great in Israel, Psalm. 76.1.

Now here for our clearer proceeding, we must distinguish of God's Kingdom, and
then show you how this Kingdom comes. And lastly, what we pray for in
presenting this Petition to God, Thy Kingdom come.

First, We must distinguish of God's Kingdom. Now the Kingdom of God is
Twofold, either Universal, or more Particular and Peculiar: The one is his
Kingdom of Power, the other is his Kingdom of Grace.

First, His Universal Kingdom, which extends over all things in Heaven and
Earth, yea and Hell it self. And so he is the sole Monarh of the whole World,
and all the Princes and Potentates of the Earth, are but his Viceroys and
Vicegerents, that Govern under and should Govern for him: For he is that
Blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords, as the
Apostle Styles him, 1 Timothy 6.15. and his Kingdom rules over all, Psalm. 103.19.
It is true, in this Universal Kingdom there are many Rebels that would not have
him to Reign over them. Many that daily rise up in Arms, break his Laws, defy
his Justice, and reject his Mercy. Many, that were their Power equal to their
Malice, would Dethrone and Depose him from his Sovereignty. Whole Legions of
Infernal Spirits are continually mustering up all their Forces, and drawing
wretched sinful Men into the Conspiracy, and their quarrel is for no less than
Dominion and Empire; who shall be King, God or Satan; yet all their attempts
are but vain and frustrate, and in spite of all their impotent rage, God's
Kingdom shall stand, and as it was from Everlasting, so shall it be to
Everlasting, for thine is the Kingdom and Power, for ever and ever. And
therefore the most wicked of all God's Creatures are still his Subjects; not
subject indeed to his Laws, for so they break his Bonds asunder, and cast away
his Cords from them; but they are subject to his Power and Providence, and that
in Three respects. As it grants Permission. As it imposes Restraints. And as
it inflicts Punishments.

First, All are God's Subjects in that they can do nothing without his
Permission. Neither the Devil that Arch-Creature, nor the worst of his
Instruments, can so much as touch an hair of our Head, unless leave be granted
them. Yea, we find that a whole Legion of Devils after they were dispossessed
of their usurped abode, durst not so much as house themselves in a Herd of
Swine, without first craving leave of our Savior, Mark 5.12. And all the
Villainies and Outrages that have ever been committed in the World, have had
their pass from God's Permission, without which the Lusts of Men as furious and
eager as they are, must needs have miscarrying Wombs and dry Breasts. Nor is it
any taint at all to the pure Holiness of God, that he does thus permit the
wickedness of Men, which if he pleased, he might prevent. For though we are
obliged to keep others from sin when it lies in our power to do it, yet no such
Obligation lies upon God, though he can keep the wickedst Wretch on Earth from
ever sinning any more; yet he permits Wisely for the greater advancement of his
own Glory, and the Exercise of his Peoples Graces, and at the last he punishes
Justly.

Secondly, His Kingdom is over all, in that he can bend in and restrain his
Rebellious Subjects as he pleases. Sometimes he does it by cutting short their
Power of doing mischief. He chains up those Mad Men, and takes from them those
Swords, Arrows, and Firebrarnds, which otherwise they might hurl abroad, both
to their own and others hurt. Sometimes he raises up an opposite Power against
them that they cannot break through to the Commission of their sins: so the
Jews would often have taken Christ and put him to Death, but they feared the
People, whom his Miracles and Cures had obliged unto him. Sometimes Providence
casts in some seasonable diversion, and thus he overruled Joseph's Brethren,
restraining them from killing him by the Providential passing by of Merchants
that way. And sometimes by removing the Objects against which they intended to
sin. So Herod intended to put Peter to death, but that very night, God sent his
Angel to work his escape, and prevented that wickedness. Many other ways there
may be of his Exercising his Sovereignty and Dominion over his most Rebellious
Creatures, who though they are Slaves to their Lusts, yet God holds their Chain
in his own hand, slacking it by his permission, and sometimes straitning it by
his Powerful restraints. And therefore we find in Scripture, that God has a
certain measure for Men's sins, beyond which they shall not exceed. Zach. 5.
There is mention made of an Ephah of Wickedness. And this signifies to us, that
though wicked Men break the bounds of his Laws, yet they cannot break the
bounds of his Providence. God has set them their measure which they can
neither fill without his Permission, nor exceed, because of his restraint.

Thirdly, God declares his Kingdom to be over all, by inflicting deserved
punishments on the most stubborn and rebellious Sinners: though they transgress
his Laws, and provoke his Holiness, yet they shall never out-brave his Justice;
but he will certainly humble them, if not to Repentance, yet to Hell and
Perdition, Luke 19.17. Those mine Enemies that would not that I should Reign
over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me. And therefore we see how
God has erected Trophies and Monuments to the Praise of his dread Power and
Servere Justice, out of the Ruins of the most Proud and Insolent Sinners.
Pharaoh who was both the great Type and Instrument of the Devil, how did God
break that stubborn Wretch with Plague upon Plague, and one Misery after
another? For to this very purpose God set him up, that he might show his Signs
and Wonders upon him. And thus God deals with many others in this Life by some
Signal and Remarkable Punishments, making them Examples to deter others from
the like Crimes.

But thus he deals with all his Rebels in Hell, for even that is one, and a
large part of his Kingdom: It is his Prison wherein he has shut up all his
Malefactors whom his grim Sergeant, Death, has Arrested. It is the great
Slaughterhouse of Souls, and the Shop of Justice; Devils are there his
Executioners, and Fire, and Rack and Torments the due Guerdon of those
impenitent Rebels, who shaking off his Yoke, and casting of his Cords from
them, are crushed for ever under the insupportable load of his Wrath, and bound
in Chains of massy Darkness, reserved for the Judgment of the Great Day.

Thus we see God's Universal Kingdom consists of Three great Provinces, Heaven,
Earth, and Hell: In Heaven, only Grace and Mercy Reigns; on Earth, both Mercy
and Justice, in the various dispensations of them toward the Sons of Men; in
Hell, pure and unmixed Justice triumphs, in the Eternal Damnation of his
Apostate Creatures: This is God's Universal Kingdom. But,

Secondly, Besides this, God has a peculiar Kingdom, and that is his Kingdom
of Grace, which though it be not so large and extensive as the former, yet is
it far more excellent, and the Royalty of it is God's singular Delight. Now
this Kingdom of Grace is his Church, and may be considered Two ways.

First, In its Growth and Progress.

Secondly, In its Perfection and Consummation.

In the former respect, it is the Church Militant here upon Earth; and in the
latter, it is the Church Triumphant in Heaven, for both make up but one Kingdom
under diverse respects.

First, Let us a little consider God's Kingdom here upon Earth, or the Church
Militant; and that is Twofold, Visible and Invisible.

The Visible Kingdom of God upon Earth, are a company of People openly
professing the Fundamentals of Religion, and those Truths necessary to
Salvation, which God has made known unto the World, and joining together in
the External Communion of Ordinances.

The Invisible Kingdom, are a company of true Believers, who have Internal and
Invisible Communion with God by his Spirit and their Faith. The Visible Church
is of a much larger extent than the Invisible; for it comprehends Hypocrites
and Formalists, and all those who have given up their Names to Christ, and
listed themselves under his Banner, and make an outward profession of the
Truth, although by their Lives and Practices they contradict and deny what they
own and profess with their Lips: These belong to the Kingdom of God's Grace, as
to the External Dispensation and Regiment of it, because they profess obedience
to his Laws, and live under the means of Grace, by which many of them through
the efficacious concurrence of the Spirit of God, are translated into the
Invisible Kingdom of his dear Son.

Now this Visible Kingdom of God upon Earth, is but an imperfect State and
Condition; for though all that are Members of it are selected and taken out of
the World, yet there is a great deal of Mixture and Dross, and many things that
do offend. For,

First, There is in it a mixture of Wicked Persons with those that are really
Holy. Many are of this Kingdom only, because their Consciences are convinced of
the Truth of the Christian Religion, although their Lives are not subject to
the Power of it; and these are taken out of the World only as they are brought
into the Pale of the Church, and profess the Name of Christ and his Religion,
as distinct from all other Religions in the World. And therefore we find the
Church, or the Kingdom of Heaven, in Scripture, frequently compared to a Net
cast into the Sea, gathering every kind of Fish, both good and bad, Matthew.
13.47. both sorts are embraced in the Bosom of this Net, and no perfect
Separation can be made, until it be drawn to shore, at the Day of Judgment; and
then the Good will be gathered into Vessels, and the Bad cast away, as it is
there expressed. Again, it is compared to a Floor, wherein is both Chaff and
Wheat, Luke 3.17. and these will be mixed together until the last
discriminating Day, and then shall the Wheat be gathered into the Garner, and
the Chaff burnt up with unquenchable Fire. Again, it is compared to a Field,
wherein there grows Tares as well as Corn, Matthew. 13.24. which must grow
together until the Harvest, and then shall the Tares be bound in Bundles to be
burnt, and the profitable Grain be gathered into the Barn. This has still been
and will be the mixed condition of God's Church on Earth, wherein, through
Hypocrisy and gross Dissimilation, many that are Enemies to the Cross of
Christ, will yet go under that Cognizance, and keep up a Form of Godliness,
though they deny and hate the Power of it.

Secondly, There is even in the Invisible Church here on Earth a great mixture
too; those who have a real and vital Union to Christ, and maintain a Spiritual
Communion with him; yet even they have a sad mixture of Evil with all their
Good, of Sin with all their Grace and Holiness; so that the Church is still
imperfect, not only from a mixture of Persons, but from a mixture in Persons:
As we know but in part, so we love but in part; we fear, we obey God but in
part. And with our Profession of Faith we had need also to prefer that humble
Petition, Mark 9.24. Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief.

Secondly, The Kingdom of God may be considered in its Perfection and
Consummation, and so it is Triumphant in Heaven. And this consists of such
Glorious Angels as never Fell, and of such Glorified Saints who are raised from
their Fall, and restored to a far better Condition than what they lost. This is
the most Glorious part of God's Kingdom; here is his Throne especially
established, and here it is that he displays himself in the splendour of his
Majesty; being surrounded by innumerable Hosts of Holy Angels, and the Spirits
of Just Men made perfect, who continually Worship before him, with a most
prostrate Veneration, and give Honor, and Glory, and Praise to him that sits
upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

Now this Kingdom is altogether free from those former Imperfections and
Mixtures. There is no mixture of good and bad together, neither is there any
mixture of bad in the good; but all are Holy, and all as completely Holy as
Creatures can be; for into the New Jerusalem shall no unclean thing ever enter.
There are neither Temptations to try us, nor Sins to defile us, nor Sorrows to
afflict us; but perfect Joy and perfect Purity: Where all Tears shall be wiped
from our Eyes, and all Sin, the Cause of those Tears, rooted out of our Hearts.
And yet if Heaven it self may be liable to any Defects, or capable of any
Additions, there seems at present to be wanting in it these Two things.

First, The Kingdom of Glory is not yet Full, nor shall it be till the whole
Number of the Elect shall be called, and the whole Number of the Called,
Glorified. Many as yet are conflicting here below, and fitting themselves for
their Eternal Reward; many yet lie sleeping in their Causes unborn, whom God
has Foreknown and Predestined unto Eternal Life, all of whom he will in his
due time bring unto the Possession of his Heavenly Kingdom, to complete the
Number of his Glorious Subjects. And therefore it is said, concerning the
Saints that are already in Heaven, that white Robes were given to every one of
them, and it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season,
until their Fellow Servants also and their Brethren, that should be killed as
they were, should be fulfilled, Rev. 6.11.

Secondly, Those Glorified Saints that are now in Heaven, though their Joys be
perfect, yet their Persons are not; but one part of them, their Bodies,
continue still under the arrest of Death and the Power of the Grave; but yet
they sleep in Hope, and through that Mystical Union, that there is between
Jesus Christ and every scattered Dust of a Believer, they shall obtain a
Glorious and Joyful Resurrection; and then shall this Heavenly Kingdom be every
way perfect; perfect in the full Number of its Subjects, and every Subject
perfect in his entire and complete Reward; his Soul made for ever Blessed in
the Beatifical Vision of God, and his Body made unconceivably Glorious by the
redundancy of that Glory that fills his Soul, and both shall remain for ever
with the Lord.

And thus you see what the Kingdom of God is, both universal and peculiar, the
Kingdom of his Power, and the Kingdom of his Grace, and that as it is Militant
here on Earth, both Visible and Invisible, and as it is Triumphant in Heaven.

The next thing in order is, to show how this Kingdom of God is said to come.
This Word, come, implies that we pray for a Kingdom that is yet in its
Progress, and has not yet attained the highest pitch of that perfection which
is expected and desired; for that which is yet to come, is not as yet arrived
to that State in which it is to be: And therefore we do not so properly pray
that the Universal Kingdom of God should come; for his Dominion over the
Creatures is actually the same, and shall be so for ever: But more especially
we pray that the peculiar Kingdom of God should come, and that as to both parts
of it, Militant and Triumphant. Now this peculiar Kingdom is said to come in
Three respects.

First, In respect of the means of Grace and Salvation; for where these are
rightly dispensed, (I mean the Holy Word and Sacraments,) there is the Kingdom
of God begun and erected; and therefore we find it called the Word of the
Kingdom, Matthew. 13.19.

Secondly, In respect of the Efficacy of those means, when all ready and
cordial Obedience is yielded to the Laws of God, then does this Kingdom come,
and the Glory of it is advanced and increased.

Thirdly, In respect of Perfection, and so it comes when the Graces of the
Saints are strengthened and increased; when the Souls of the Godly departing
this Life are received into Heaven; and when the whole Number of them shall
have their perfect Consummation and Bliss in the Glorification both of Soul and
Body, after the General Re-surrection. And thus we have seen how the Kingdom of
God may come.

In the next place we must enquire, what it is we pray for when we say Thy
Kingdom come.

I Answer, There are various Things lie couched under this Petition; as,

First, We pray that God would be pleased to Plant his Church, where it is not,
according to his Promise, giving all the Nations of the World to his Son for
his Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for his Possession. That the
dark Places and Corners of the Earth, that are yet the Habitations of Cruelty,
may be illustrated with the Glorious Light of the Gospel shining into them.
That God would reveal his Son to those poor wretched People, that sit in
Darkness and in the Region of the Shadow of Death, and would rescue them from
their Blind Superstitions and Idolatries, and from the Power of the Devil, who
strongly works in the Children of Disobedience, and would translate them into
the Kingdom of his dear Son; especially, that he would remove the Veil from the
Heart of the Jew, upon whom a sad Judicial Hardness has long lain, that they
at length may be brought into the Unity and Fullness of Christ's Body: We pray
that all the World, both Jews and Gentiles, may be gathered into one
Sheepfold, under Christ Jesus the great Pastor and Shepherd of Souls; so that
as God is one, so his Name and Service may be one throughout all the Earth. And
thus we pray that Christ's Kingdom may come, in respect of the means of Grace
and Salvation.

Secondly, This Petition, Thy Kingdom come, intimates our earnest desire that
the Church of Christ, where they are planted, may be increased in the Members
of the Faithful. That those, who are as yet Enemies to the Name and Profession
of Christ, may be brought into the Visible Church; and that those in it, who
are yet Strangers to a powerful Work of Grace, may by the effectual Operation
of the Holy Ghost be brought in to be Members of the Invisible Church. And thus
we pray that God's Kingdom may come, in respect of the Efficacy of the means of
Grace.

Thirdly, We pray that all the Church of Christ throughout the World may be
kept from ruin, that they may not be overrun with Superstition or Idolatry:
That God would not in his Wrath remove his Candlestick from them, as he has in
his Righteous Judgment done from other Churches, which were once Glorious and
Splendid: We pray likewise, that God would make up all Breaches, and compose
all Differences, and silence all Controversies, and cut off all those who
trouble the Peace, and rend the Unity of the Church, breaking it into Factions
and Schisms, which are the most fatal Symptoms and Portenders of God's
withdrawing himself, and carrying away his Gospel, and giving of it to another
People, who will better bring forth the Fruits of it, which are Peace,
Meekness, and Love. And if in any thing Christians be diversely minded, that God
would be pleased to reveal it unto them; and that whereunto they have attained,
they may walk by the same Rule, and mind the same Things. And thus we pray that
Christ's Kingdom may come in respect of its perfection and entireness.

Fourthly, It intimates our humble Requests to God, that his Ordinances may be
purely and powerfully dispensed. Hence, as I noted before, the Word is called
the Word of the Kingdom, Matthew. 13.19. that is the Word whereby we are brought
into the Kingdom of Christ here on Earth, and fitted for his Triumphant Kingdom
in Heaven. It is the means of our New Birth, the Seed of our Spiritual Life.
And as a Kingdom cannot be well established or governed without good Laws; so
for the Government of his Kingdom, Christ has established Laws, which are
contained in the Records of the Holy Scriptures. And as his Word is the Law, so
his Sacraments are the Seals of his Kingdom; for so every believing Partaker
God does under his Seal confirm the grant of Heaven and Eternal Salvation.

And therefore in this Petition we pray also, that God would give his Church
able Ministers of the New Testament, that may know how rightly to divide the
Word of Truth, and to give every one his Portion in due season.

And that he would be pleased to accompany the outward Administration of his
Ordinances with the inward Operations of his Spirit, which alone can make them
effectual to turn Men from Darkness to Light, and to bring them from the Power
of Satan unto God. That the whole Number of God's Elect may in his due time be
brought in by the means which he has appointed and sanctified for their
Conversion and Salvation.

These are the chief and principal things that we beg of God for the Church
Militant, when we say, Thy Kingdom come, viz. that it may attain a perfection
of Extent, and be planted where it is not to a perfection of Number; and may
gain more Proselytes and Converts, where it is planted to a perfection of
Establishment, that they may not be rooted out by the Violence of Men, nor
abandoned through the Judgment of God. And to a perfection of Purity and
Holiness by the powerful Dispensation of Gospel Ordinances attended by the
Efficacious Concurrence of the Holy Spirit. But,

Secondly, This Petition likewise respects the Church Triumphant in Heaven: Nor
is this praying for the Dead a thing justly condemned of Superstition and
Folly; for we pray not for them to alter their State, which is impious and
ridiculous, and a Foppish Consequent upon the Figment of Purgatory: But we pray
for the Church Triumphant only in general, that those things which are as yet
defective in it may be supplied; for certainly wheresoever there is any kind of
imperfection we have ground to pray for the removal of it; especially when God
has encouraged us to it by promise that he will remove it: And therefore,

First, We may well pray that the whole Body Mystical of Jesus Christ, and
every Member of it, may be brought to the full Fruition of Heaven and
Happiness, that daily more may be admitted into the Heavenly Fellowship, till
their Numbers as well as their Joys be Consummate. And,

Secondly, We may pray that the Bodies of all the Saints that have slept in
their Beds of Earth from the beginning of the World, may be raised again out of
the Dust, and united to their Souls, and for ever made Glorious in the Kingdom
of Heaven; for both these things are absolutely promised, the one Romans 8.29,
30. that those whom God has Called and Justified he will likewise Glorify.
And the other is, 1 Thessal. 4.16. The Dead in Christ shall arise. And
certainly whatsoever may be the Object of our Faith, Hope may be the Subject of
our Prayers. And this every true Christian longs and breaths after, that these
Days of Sin and Misery may be shortened, that Christ would come in his Glory,
that his Mediatory Kingdom being fulfilled, it might be delivered up unto the
Father, and that we all might be one as the Father is in him, and he in the
Father. Even so come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. And thus I have finished the
Second Petition, The Kingdom come.

The Third follows, Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. This now
follows upon the former in a most rational and admirable method; for as before
we pray that the Kingdom of God might come, as the best adapted means to Hallow
his Name; so now we pray that his Will may be done by us, as the clearest
Declaration that we are the Subjects of his Kingdom. Now here are considerable,

First, The Petition it self, Thy Will be done in Earth:

Secondly, The Measure and Proportion of it, as it is in Heaven.

I shall begin with the Petition, in which every Word carries great Weight and
Moment; and therefore in the explication of it I shall show you,

First, What this Will of God is.

Secondly, How his Will may be said to be done.

Thirdly, What force this Particle thy, thy Will, carries in it, and what it
denotes.

Fourthly, What is meant by God's Will being done in Earth. And all these with
all perspicuity and brevity.

First, What this Will of God is. Now the Will of God is commonly and very well
distinguished, into the Will of his Purpose, and into the Will of his Precept;
his Decrees or his Commands. The former respects what shall be done by him; the
latter what ought to be done by us: Both these, in Scripture, are frequently
called the Will of God.

First, God's Purpose is his Will; yea, it is more properly his Will than his
Precepts are; for by this God does absolutely determine, what shall be, and
what shall not be; and all things in the World take their Place and are ranged
in their several Stations; and the whole series of Causes and Effects are
governed by the Ordination and Appointment of this his Sovereign Will. And
therefore it is said, Ephesians. 1.11. that God works all things according to the
Counsel of his own Will. And Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased that did
he in Heaven, in Earth, in the Sea, and in all deep Places. This is God's Will
of Purpose, whereby he guides and governs all Events whatsoever; so that there
is not the most inconsiderable Occurrence that happens, not the least flight of
a Sparrow, nor the falling off of an Hair, nor the motion of an Atome in the
Air, or a dust, or a sand on the Earth, but as it is effected by his Power and
Providence, so it was determined by his Will and Counsel.

Secondly, The Precepts and Commands are likewise the Will of God; but they are
improperly so called; because these concern not, neither do they determine the
Event of things, but only our Duty; not what shall be, but what ought to be;
and it is called, Romans 12.2. The good and acceptable and perfect Will of God.
This is all contained in the Holy Scriptures, which are a perfect Systeme of
Precepts given us for the Government of our Lives here, and for the attaining
of Eternal Life hereafter; and therefore it is likewise called his Revealed
Will; whereas the other, namely the Will of Purpose, is God's Secret Will,
until it be manifested unto us by the Events and Effects of it.

Now concerning this distinction of God's Will of Purpose and Precept, we may
note that though there be a great deal of difference, yet there is no
contrariety or opposition between them.

First, They differ the one from the other, not in respect of God, (for his
Will is one infinitely pure and uncompounded Act,) but only in respect of the
Object; for there are many things which God wills by his Will of Purpose, which
he has not willed by his Will of Precept. His Precepts are all holy, and
command nothing but what is holy and acceptable: This is the Will of God, says
the Apostle, even your Sanctification, 1 Thessal. 4.3. It is the highest degree
of Blasphemy to impute unto God, that he has commanded us any thing but what
is Holy, Just, and Good: This were to make him the Author of Sin, who has
declared himself the Punisher of it. But his Will of Purpose is not restrained
within bounds and Limits; but extends it self to all Events whatsoever,
whether Good or Evil.

And as Evils are of two sorts, either the Evil of Punishment, or the Evil of
Sin; so is God's Will of Purpose twofold, effective of the one, and permissive
of the other; but in both most certain and infallible.

1. God's Will of Purpose does effect and bring to pass the Evil of Punishment:
Amos 3.6. Shall there be any Evil in the City and the Lord has not done it?
For he does both in Heaven and in Earth whatsoever pleases him. Were it not
the Will of God, the World had never groaned under so many Miseries and
Calamities as have in all Ages befallen it. Now God never enjoins us this as
our Duty, although he lays them upon us as our Burden.

2. God's Will of Purpose permits the Evil of Sin for Wise and Gracious Ends,
that he may bring good out of Evil; even those very Sins and Wickedness which
his Will of Precept forbids, his Will of Purpose permits; for if God did not
will to permit them, there would be no such thing as Sin in the World.

Secondly, Hence arises another very remarkable difference, that we may
effectually resist God's Will of Precept, so as to hinder the accomplishment of
it; but whatsoever we do so it is our Sin, and will without repentance be our
condemnation. So Stephen accuses the Jews, Act. 7.51. You do always resist the
Holy Ghost: that is, by your Practices you do always go contrary to the
Commands of God, revealed by his Spirit in his Word. And were it not for this
resisting of the Will of God, we should be perfectly holy and blameless.

But we cannot resist the Will of God's Purpose, so as to hinder the Execution
of it; although sometimes to endeavor it, may be so far from Sin, as to be our
necessary and indispensible Duty: For though it may be the Will of God to bring
us into Poverty or into Prison, or to lay sore Diseases upon us; yet it is not
only lawful for us, but we are obliged as far as lies in us, to hinder these
Evils of Punishment from befalling us, and to preserve our Estates, our
Liberty, our Health, and all our outward Comforts, by all lawful and allowed
ways and means: Much more, if God should will to permit a Sin in others, or in
our selves, are we bound to hinder the Commission of it; for, for us to be
willing to permit, because God is, though it be a conformity of our Wills to
God's Will of Purpose, yet this is not our Rule to walk by: And it is a
wretched Rebellion against his Will of Precept, which alone we are to respect
in all our Actions, and endeavor to conform our selves unto. Doubtless it was
God's Will of Purpose, that Christ the Lord of Life and Glory should be
Crucified; but yet the Jews conforming themselves according to this Will, were
guilty of the most horrid Wickedness that ever was committed in the World; for
both these we have confirmed to us, Acts 2.23. Him being delivered by the
determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by Wicked
Hands have crucified and slain. Although it was by the determinate Counsel and
Will of God, that Christ should be taken and slain; yet nevertheless they were
wicked Hands that were imbrued in that precious and inestimable Blood. And thus
I have shown how the Will of God's Purpose and Precept do differ. But yet,

Secondly, Although there be this great difference, yet is there no contrariety
or repugnancy, but a perfect Harmony and Uniformity between them. Some have
thought that if God wills such a thing should be done; as for instance, the
Crucifying of our Lord and Savior by his Will of Purpose, and yet Wills that
it should not be done by his Will of Precept, that these two Wills must needs
contradict one another; and this Argument some do make no small use of to
explode the distinction of the Will of God.

But the Solution is most easy; for when Wills are contrary to each other,
there must be a Willing and a Nilling of the same thing; but it is not so here;
for the Object of God's Will of Purpose is Event; but of his Will of Precept,
Duty. Now it is far enough from having any shadow of a contradiction for God to
will or permit that to be which he has willed or commanded us not to do.
Indeed to will such an Event to be and not to be, that such a thing shall be my
Duty and shall not be my Duty, are contradictions, and not to be imputed unto
God. But to will that such a thing shall eventually be, and yet to will that it
shall be my Duty to endeavor to hinder it, is so far from being a
contradiction, that it is most apparent and evident, and falls out most
frequently in our ordinary converse in the World. So in the forementioned
famous instance of the Death of Christ. God willed by his Will of Purpose that
it should so come to pass in all the circumstances of it as it was perpetrated:
but then he willed by his Will of Precept, that it should be their Duty not to
do it. Now certainly there is no contradiction or absurdity that Duty and Event
may be quite contrary one to the other: unless we could take away all Sin, and
Authorize all the greatest Villainies that ever were committed under the Sun.
And thus much for the first Head.

And having thus seen what the Will of God is. The next General is to enquire,
what Will it is we pray may be done, when we say, Thy Will be done. And here,

First, It is clear that we especially and absolutely pray that the Will of
God's Precept may be done, and that not only by us, but by all Men: For this
Will of God is the Rule of our Obedience, and according to it we ought to
conform all our Actions. And because we are not sufficient of our selves so
much as to think any thing of our selves, much less to perform all those
various and weighty Duties of Holiness, which God has enjoined us in his Word,
therefore our Savior has taught us to beg of God Grace and Assistanee to
enable us to fulfill his Will, giving us not only Commands of Obedience, but
Promises for our Relief and Encouragment instructing us in the Word, to crave
supplies of Grace from him who has required Duty from us. And indeed there is
a great deal of Reason we should pray that his Will of Precept should be done
on Earth, if we consider,

First, The great Reluctance and Opposition of Corrupt Nature against it. The
Law is Spiritual, but we are Carnal and sold under sin, Romans 7.4. and in the
best of Men there is a Law in their Members, warring against the Law of their
Minds, that when they would do good, evil is present with them; and therefore
we have need to pray, That God would incline our hearts to his Commandments,
and then strengthen us to obey them: That as our Will to good is the effect of
his Grace, so the effect of our Wills may be the performance of his Will.

Secondly, God's Glory is deeply concerned in the doing of his Will. For it is
the Glory of a King to have his Laws obeyed. And so is it God's. When we
profess our selves to be his Subjects, and pray that his Kingdom may come, it
is but fit and rational, that we should pray likewise, Thy Will be done,
without which this his Kingdom of Grace would be but merely Titular: For his
Word is the Scepter and Law of his Kingdom, and if we yield not Obedience to
it, we do tacitly condemn it and the Lawmakers also of Injustice, and thereby
reflect a most intolerable disparagement upon God preferring the will of Satan,
and of our own Lusts, before his most Holy and Righteous Will. But when we
endeavor to yield Obedience to his Commands, and pray that we may be able to
do it with more diligence and constancy: this as it pleases, so it glorifieth
God, for by so doing, we acknowledge both his Sovereignty and his Equity; his
Sovereignty, in that he may require of us what he pleases; and his Equity, in
that he requires of us nothing but what is most just and fit: And therefore
our Savior tells us, John 15.8. Herein is my Father Glorified, that you bring
forth much Fruit.

Thirdly, Our own Interest is deeply concerned in it: For through Obedience and
doing the Will of God, it is, that we come to Inherit the Promises, Revel.
22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments that they may have a Right to
the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City. And
therefore to pray, that God's Will may be done by us, is but to pray, that we
our selves may be fitted and prepared for Eternal Life and Glory, unto which we
can no otherwise attain, but by Holiness and Obedience. O think but to what an
Excellency does Grace advance the Soul even in this Life; and makes Christians
as much above other Men, as other Men are above Beasts. That when they are
employed about the foul and nasty Offices of sin; hurried by their vile
Passions unto vile and base Actions, raking in the Mire and Filth of all manner
of uncleanness, and defiling their Soul with those Sins which will hereafter
Damn them: Thy work should be all Spiritual, consisting of the same pure
Employments that the Holy Angels and Glorified Saints in Heaven spend their
Eternity in. Consider what an high Honor and Privilege it is that you should
be admitted to attend immediately upon the Service of the King of kings. You
are called to wait about his Throne, his Throne of Grace, to which you have
always free access to converse and commune with God, by maintaining Fellowship
with him in the performance of Holy Duties; which is a Dignity so high, that
Humane Nature is capable but of one preferment more, and that is of being
removed from one Throne to the other; from attending on the Throne of Grace to
attend on the Throne of Glory. And then think, O Soul, if it be possible to
think, what neither Eye has seen, nor Ear has heard, neither has it, nor can
it enter into the heart of Man to conceive. Think how transcendently Blessed
thy Estate shall be, when the Will of thy God which was here thy Duty, shall
there be thy Nature: When thy Obligation to do it shall be turned into a happy
necessity of doing it. When all thy Thoughts and Affections shall be centered
in God for ever, and not the least motion of thy Soul shall so much as twinkle
or waver from the Eternal Contemplation and Fruition of the Infinite Deity. And
therefore this our Eternal Happiness being wrapped up in doing the Will of God,
it highly concerns us to pray, That it may be done, and to endeavor to do it
on Earth, so as that at length we may attain to the perfection of doing it in
Heaven. And this is the First thing that in this Petition we especially and
absolutely pray for, viz. That God's Will of Precept may be done by us on Earth.

Secondly, It is more doubtful, whether we are simply to pray that God's Will
of Purpose should be done. And that,

First, Because the Will of God's Purpose is secret and unknown, and therefore
cannot so immediately concern us in point of Duty, For secret things belong to
God, but revealed things belong to us and to our Children, Deuteronomy. 29.29.

Secondly, Because this Will of God shall within the periods set by his Eternal
Decrees, have its most perfect and full accomplishment. For though his Revealed
Will may be resisted and hindered, yet neither Men nor Devils can hinder his
secret Will and the Purposes of his Counsels, these shall take place mauger all
their spite and oppositions; and therefore it seems not altogether so proper
matter for our Prayers.

Again, Thirdly, Many things come to pass by the Will of God's Purpose, which
we ought not to pray for; yea, which we ought to pray against: As not to
instance in God's Will of permitting the sins and wickednesses of Men, which
beyond all exceptions, we ought to deprecate. Let us but consider, common
Charity obliges us not to pray for any evil of Suffering to befall either our
selves or others: and yet we know that it is oftentimes the Will of God's
Purpose to bring great and sore Judgments upon Kingdoms, and upon Families and
Persons: And if we may indefinitely pray that this Will should be done, this
would be nothing else but to pray for the Death and Ruin of many thousands,
whom yet the Revealed Will of God commands us to pray for, and to desire all
Good and Prosperity to them. But yet notwithstanding all this, we may doubtless
pray, that the Will of God's Purpose may be done so far as it brings to pass
those things, which we are obliged to pray for by the Will of his Precept. We
may pray that God's Will may be fullfilled in giving Peace and Prosperity and
good things both Temporal and Spiritual unto others and to our selves, but
simply and absolutely to pray, That this Will should be done in whatsoever it
respects, would be as often a Curse as a Prayer: Since (as I told you before)
there is no evil comes to pass, whether of sin or punishment, but it is by
God's Will permitting the one, and effecting the other.

But you will say, do we not find frequent Examples in Scripture, of Holy Men
who have Prayed that God's Will might be done even in the bringing to pass that
which was evil. Thus Ely when Samuel had denounced fearful Judgments both
against himself and against his House, It is the Lord, says he, let him do what
seems good unto him. 1 Samuel 3.18. And so David, when Persecuted by the unnatural
Rebellion of his Son Absalom. If he say thus, Behold I have no delight in him,
let him do as seems good unto him, 2 Samuel 15.26. And thus the Disciples, when
upon Agabus's Prophecy what Afflictions should happen unto St. Paul at
Jerusalem, they would have persuaded him from going thither, but could not
prevail, conclude all with this, The Will of the Lord be done, Acts 21.14. And
thus likewise our great Example, the Lord Jesus Christ himself, when he had
prayed that the bitter Cup of his Passion might pass away from him, he seems to
correct himself and make another Prayer, Not my Will, but thine be done, Luke
22.42. Although he knew this Will of God could not be done without his own most
extreme Sufferings, nor without the horrid sin and wickedness of his Murderers.

But to all these instances I Answer, That they are not so much Prayers as
Declarations of a ready Submission and Obedience to the Will of God. For by
this expression, The Will of the Lord be done, we do not desire that those
things should come to pass which will be grievous and afflicting to us; but
only testify our ready subjection to the Sovereign Will of God, and a patient
resignation of our selves and of all our concerns unto his disposal. When we
pray, we ought to beg of God that he would be pleased to avert from us those
Plagues and Judgments which our sins justly expose us unto. But if it shall
seem good to him to inflict any of them upon us, The Will of the Lord be done:
That is, we desire with Patience to submit unto his Providence and contentedly
to bear those burdens which he shall impose upon us.

The sum therefore of all is this, When we pray Thy Will be done; if it be the
Will of God's Precept, we pray absolutely that it may be done by us, as being
obliged thereunto by his express Word and Command. And if it be the Will of
God's Purpose, intending any Temporal or Spiritual good unto us, we pray, that
his Will may be done upon us. But if it be the Will of his Purpose to inflict
any evil, then our saying, Thy Will be done, is not so much a Prayer as a
Testimony of our submission to his Will without murmuring or repining at his
Providence. Thus have we seen what this Will of God is that we pray may be done
in this Petition, Thy Will be done.

Thirdly, The next thing to be taken notice of, is the Particle, Thy, Thy Will
be done, and this carries in it both an Emphasis and an Exclusion.

First, Thy Will, emphatically to signify unto us, That God's Will ought to be
preferred above and before all others. Not to regard the fancies and humors of
Men when the Will of God is clear before us: nor to be careful to please them,
but our Lord Christ; and if they will quarrel with us upon any such account, we
know whither to Appeal for our Justification, and for our Safety: For our
Justification to their Consciences: Whether we ought to obey Men rather than
God, Judge ye, Acts 4.19. And for our Protection and Safety to God's Power and
Providence, with those three Heroic Persons, Dan. 3.16, 17. We are not
careful, O King to answer thee in this matter. If it be so, our God whom we
serve, is able to deliver us from the burning Fiery Furnace, and he will
deliver us out of thine hand. And there is great Reason for this preference of
God's Will before all others.

First, Because God's Will is most Sovereign. He is the Supreme Lord of the
whole World: the greatest of Men are but his Subjects and Vassals. Now it is
infinitely more Reason that we should conform our selves to the Will of him who
is both our Lord and theirs, than to the Will of our fellow servants: And that
we should seek to please him who is able to destroy both our Souls and theirs,
than that we should please them, who when their rage reaches highest, can
destroy only this Body and vile Carcass.

Secondly, Because God's Will is the most Holy and Perfect, and there is
nothing that he has Commanded us to do, but it has a native Goodness and
Excellency in it, and therefore it is called, The Good, the Acceptable, and
Perfect Will of God, Romans 12.2. To be governed by our own or other Men's Wills,
is usually to be led by Passion, and blind, headlong affections, but to give
up our selves wholly to the Will of God, is to be governed by the highest
Reason in the World: For his Will cannot but be good, since it is the measure
and rule of goodness it self; for therefore things are said to be good because
God wills them. And whatsoever he requires of us, is pure and equitable, and
most agreeable to the dictates of right and illuminated Reason: So that we act
most like Men when we act most like Christians, and show our selves most
Rational, when we show our selves most Religious. And therefore we have a great
deal of Reason to say, Thy Will be done.

Secondly, As this Particle, Thy, may be taken emphatically, Thy Will before
all others; so likewise it may be taken exclusively, Thy Will and not our own
be done. To teach us that hard Lesson of Self-denial. Indeed, when we consider
the Rebellions of our corrupt Appetites and Desires, and all those tumults and
uproars they raise in our Souls against the Holy and Perfect Will of God; the
perverse Disputings of our Reason against his Authority, and those strong
propensions that are in us toward that which is displeasing to him, and
destructive to our selves, we shall find abundant need with our greatest
fervency to pray, Thy Will and not our own be done. And thus I have finished
the three First Enquiries, what this Will of God is, how it may be said to be
done, and what is imported in this Particle, Thy. The

Fourth and last thing to be enquired into, is, What is meant by God's Will
being done on Earth.

And here briefly, to resolve this, That the Will of God should be done on
Earth, signifies, That it be done by Men living on the Earth, the place here
being put for the persons in it. And although there be several other Creatures
besides Man, who do all of them serve him and fulfill his Will according to
the Rank and Station which they all hold. And therefore we have it expressed,
Psalm. 148.8. Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor, stormy Wind fullfilling his Word.
Yet this his Will and Word is only the Ordinance of their Creation. And the
Will of his Purpose to the effecting of which they are often employed as
Instruments. It is not the Will of God's Precept obliging them to Duty; for
this can be fullfilled by none but by rational and intelligent Creatures. This
Petition therefore, especially, if not only, respects us Men whom God has made
Lords of this Earth, putting all other Creatures in subjection under us. Now
here we pray,

First, That all Men in the World renouncing the will of Satan and their own
corrupt wills, may readily subject themselves unto the Will of God. For this
Expression, on Earth suffers us not to limit our prayers to this or that
particular Place or Region, but wheresoever God has spread abroad all Nations
upon the face of the Earth, we are to desire of God for them Grace to enable
them to do his Will, Psalm. 67.2. Let thy ways be known upon Earth, and thy
saving Health unto all Nations.

Secondly, We pray that we may employ and improve the few and short days of
this Mortal Life to the best advantage. For this is that day wherein we may
work the Works of God, and if we neglect to do the Will of God while we are
here on Earth, it will be too late for ever, for there is no Work, nor
Operation, nor Device in the Grave whither we are going.

And certainly if ever we would do the Will of God in Heaven, we must accustom
our selves to do it here on Earth. Here we are as Apprentices that must learn
the Trade of Holiness, that when our time is out, we may be fit to be made free
Denizons of the New Jerusalem. Here we are to tune our Voices to the Praises of
God, before we come to join with the Heavenly Choire. Here we are to learn what
we must there for ever practice. And thus I have done with the Petition it
self. Thy Will be done in Earth.

The next thing observable, is the proportion of it, As it is in Heaven.

But you will say, Is it not utterly impossible while we are here on Earth, and
clogged with Earthly Bodies, and encompassed about with manifold Infirmities?
Is it not impossible ever to attain unto a Celestial and Heavenly Perfection in
our Obedience?

I Answer, True it is so, but yet this Prayer is not in vain, for it teaches
and engages us to aim at and endeavor after the perfect Holiness of Angels
and the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect. We are commanded to be Holy as God is
Holy, and to be Perfect as our Heavenly Father is Perfect, whose Perfection is
impossible for us to equalize: Yet these excessive commands have their use, to
raise up our endeavors to a higher strain and pitch, than if we were commanded
somewhat within our own power. As he that aims at a Star is likely to shoot
much higher than he that aims at a Turf.

Thus though it be a thing altogether impossible for us in this Life to attain
to an Angelical perfection in our Obedience; yet the command that obliges us
to it, and our Prayers for it are not in vain; because by our utmost endeavors
after further measures and degrees of Holiness, we may very much assimilate our
Obedience to that Obedience that is yielded to God's Will in Heaven it self,
and therefore this Particle, As, is rather a note of similitude than of
equality. But though our Obedience on Earth cannot be equal to the Obedience
that is yielded to God in Heaven, yet we pray that it may bear as much
similitude, proportion and conformity unto it as is possible for us to attain
unto while we are here in the Body.

And therefore that we may the more fully understand what it is we pray for
when we present this Petition to God. Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in
Heaven, we shall briefly enquire, how the Holy Angels and Blessed Spirits do
the Will of God in Heaven. And,

First, Their Obedience is absolutely perfect, and that both with a perfection
of Parts and Degrees. They do all that God enjoins them, not failing in the
least Tittle of Observance; and therefore they are said, To follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes, Revel. 14.14. Hence it is ascribed to them as their proper
and peculiar Character, Psalm. 103.20. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels that excel
in strength, that do his Commandments, harkening to the voice of his Word. And
again, they do the whole Will of God with all their Might, with all their Mind,
with the greatest Intention that is possible, even to an Angelical Nature:
never are they remiss in their Service, or slack in their Attendance, but are
continually Blessing and Praising of God, standing ready to receive and execute
his Commands and Commissions.

Now when we pray that we may do the Will of God on Earth, as it is done in
Heaven; we pray for this Heavenly temper, that we may bear an Universal respect
unto all God's Commandments: no more sticking or pausing at any thing that God
requires of us, than an Angel or a Glorified Saint would do: But enfolding all
our Interest and Concerns in God's Glory, might respect nor value nothing but
what tends to the promotion of that. This is to do God's Will as the Angels do
it in Heaven.

Secondly, Their Obedience is cheerful, not extorted from them by violent
constraints of Fear, or of Suffering; but it is their Eternal Delight, and
their Service is their Felicity. And thus should we pray, and endeavor to do
the Will of God with Alacrity and Cheerfulness; not being haled to it as our
Task, but esteeming the Commands of God to be as the Angels do, our Glory and
our great Reward. But alas, how infinitely short do we fall of our Pattern? we
think the Sabbath long, and Ordinances long and tedious, and are secretly glad
when they are over: And what should such as we are do in Heaven, where there is
a Sabbath as long as Eternity, and nothing but Holiness there? And therefore we
had need pray earnestly, that God would now sit and prepare us for the Work of
Heaven, while we are here on Earth; for else Heaven will not be Heaven, or a
place of Happiness unto us.

Thirdly, The Will of God is done in Heaven with zeal and ardency; and
therefore it is said, Psalm. 104.4. That God makes his Angels and Messengers a
Flame of Fire. And have not we abundance of need to pray for Conformity with
them in this respect also? We do the Will of God so coldly and indifferently,
that we our selves scarce take notice of what we are doing. We often bring
Sacrifices to God, and either bring no Fire with us, but are frozen and dull;
or else offer them up with strange Wildfire, and usually are heated more with
Passion and irregular Affections, than with Holy and pious Zeal. And,

Fourthly, The Will of God is done in Heaven with celerity and ready dispatch;
they are quick in executing the Commands of the great God and their Lord; and
therefore are said to have Wings and to fly, Esai. 6.2. And this expression of
Wings, and the flying of Cherubims and Angels is frequently mentioned in
Scripture, only to intimate to us, the expedition they use in the Service of
God. But alas, how dull and slow are we? how long do we consult with Flesh and
Blood, and are disputing the Will of our Sovereign Lord, when we should be
obeying it? When we are clearly convinced that such a Duty is necessary to be
done, how many delays, and excuses, and procrastinations do we make, being
willing to stay the leisure of every vile Lust, and vain Impertinency, thinking
it then time enough to serve God when we have nothing else to do. Certainly,
this is not to do the Will of God on Earth, as it is done in Heaven, where,
upon the first intimations of God's Will, they take Wings and execute it
speedily.

Fifthly, The Will of God is done in Heaven with all possible Prostration,
Reverence, and Humility: And therefore it is said, Rev. 4.10. that the four and
twenty Elders fell down before him that sat upon the Throne, and Worship him
that lives for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns before the Throne. Crowns
are themselves Ensigns of Majesty; but here they cast their very Crowns, all
their Dignity and Glory at the Feet of God; and make their chiefest excellency
it self do Homage to him that is King of kings, and Lord of lords. And so
should we in all our serving of God, do it with reverence and godly fear,
preserving upon our Hearts an awful sense and regard of the dreadful Majesty
before whom we appear.

Sixthly, The Will of God is done in Heaven with constancy and perseverance.
They serve God Day and Night, Rev. 7.15. and are never weary of his work, no
more than they are of their own Happiness; for his Service is their Happiness,
and their Obedience their Glory. And thus should we pray and endeavor that we
might do the Will of God constantly and perseveringly; for it is perseverance
that crowns all other Graces; and God has promised to Crown our perseverance
with Glory and Eternal Life. And thus we see briefly in these Six Particulars,
how the Will of God is done in Heaven.

To conclude this: Is there no other nor lower Pattern set us, than the perfect
Obedience of Angels and Glorified Spirits? Let us not then content our selves
with a comparative Obedience, and by measuring our selves with those that are
worse, think highly of our own Perfections: Let us not applaud our selves with
the boasting Pharisee, with a Lord, I thank thee, I am not as other Men are,
Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers. What is this to the Pattern that God has set
us for our imitation? Perhaps thou do but all this while compare thy self
with those that are in Hell, and do God's Will not much better than such have
done, if this be all that thou can plead for thy self: Whereas God has set
thee Examples for thy imitation in Heaven. Do thou endeavor to do his Will
as Seraphims and Cherubims, and the whole Host of Blessed Spirits? Thou live
it may be not so like a Devil as others do; but do thou live like an Angel?
Do thou serve God with the same proportionable Zeal, Ardency, Delight, and
Constancy, as those Holy Spirits do, who always stand in the presence of God,
ready pressed to do his Will; if not, neither endeavourest after so high a
degree of Obedience and Purity, know that thy imitation of any lower Example
than that of Heaven, can never suffice to bring thee to Heaven. And thus I have
finished the Three first Petitions of this excellent Prayer; namely, those that
relate unto God; for the Petitions contained herein, as I said in the
beginning, were such as immediately concerned God's Glory, or such as
immediately concerned our good. The First I have already considered.

I now come to treat of those Petitions which immediately concern our own Good;
and that is either our Temporal or our Spiritual Good: Our Temporal Good, in
praying for our daily Bread: Our Spiritual Good in the two last Petitions,
wherein we pray for the Forgiveness of our Sins past, and for Deliverance from
Sin for time to come.

I begin with the First of these our Requests, or Petitions, for Temporal
Blessings, contained in the Fourth Petition, Give us this Day our daily Bread;
and here I shall consider,

First, The Order, and then the Petition it self.

First, The Order; and that is remarkable upon two Accounts.

First, Whereas this Petition is placed in the midst, and encompassed about
with others that relate unto Spiritual Blessings; so that after we have prayed
for the Glory of God, our Savior teaches us to make mention of our Temporal
Wants, and so to pass on again to beg Spiritual Mercies for our Souls. This may
instruct us in the Government of our Lives, to use worldy Comforts as here we
pray for them. Spiritual and Heavenly things are our greatest Concernments, and
should be our greatest care; with these we should begin, and with these we
should end; only God allows us the World as an Inn; we may call in at it, and
refresh our selves with the Comforts and Accommodations that we find, but we
must not dwell nor set up our rest there. We are all Strangers and Pilgrims
upon Earth; Heaven is our Country, and thither we are traveling, only in our
Journey we may call and bait at the World, and take what we find provided for
us with Sobriety and Thankfulness: And therefore this Bread that we here pray
for, is elsewhere called the Staff of Bread, Psalm. 105.16. He brake the Staff
of Bread. Ezekiel. 5.6. I will break your Staff of Bread. And all this is to put
us in Mind that we are to ask for, and to use these Earthly Enjoyments only as
Travelers, that make use of a Staff for their help and support, whilst they
are in their passage home. And we are hereby also taught to crave no more than
will suffice for our convenient Supplies, otherwise we make our Staff our
Burden, and our Support it self a Load and Pressure.

Secondly, It is observable, that though we are commanded, to seek first the
Kingdom of God and its Righteousness; with a Promise that all other Earthly
things shall be added to us; yet here our Savior places the Petition for
Temporal Blessings, before the Two Petitions we present to God for Spiritual
Blessings; and this Order has seemed so strange and incongruous to some, that
hereupon alone they have been moved to affirm that this Bread which we here ask
is not any Temporal good thing, but the Bread of Life, even Jesus Christ
himself, as shall be shown more by and by.

Now this Order does not intimate to us, that Earthly Blessings are better and
more considerable than Heavenly, or that they should have the preference in our
esteem or desires, (I hope there are none of us so brutish, nor so far
degenerated into Beasts, as to account the poor Enjoyments of this Life, more
valuable than the Pardon of Sin, and those Spiritual Mercies that are in a
tendency to Eternal Life and Happiness.) But,

First, Our Savior uses this method in his Prayer, in conformity to the
method of Divine Providence toward us, which first gives us Life, and the
necessities of it, and then Orders us Spiritual and Heavenly Blessings, as an
accession, and happy addition to those Natural good things he bestows upon us.

Secondly, Because we are usually more sensible of our Temporal than of our
Spiritual wants; our Savior therefore does by degrees raise up our Desires by
the one to the other; for seeing we are commanded to pray for the supply even
of our Temporal necessities, which are but trivial in regard of the necessities
of our Souls; we cannot but be convinced that we ought to be much more earnest
and importunate with God for Spiritual Mercies than for Temporal; by how much
our Spiritual wants are more important and of vaster consequence than our
Temporal. When therefore thou come to this Petition, think with thy self, O
Christian, if I must pray fervently and affectionately for my daily Bread,
which can only nourish my vile Carcass for a few short years; a Carcass that
must notwithstanding all these recruits shortly moulder into Dust, and it self
become meat for Worms: How much more importunate ought I to be, for the Pardon
of my Sins, and those Spiritual Mercies and Blessings, without which my
precious and immortal Soul must eternally perish? Since Christ has commanded
us not to labor, and by consequence not to pray for that Meat which perishes,
with any comparative industry and earnestness, to our laboring and praying for
that which endures to Eternal Life. And thus much concerning the Order of this
Petition.

In the Petition it self we have,

First, The matter of it, or that which we pray for, Give us Bread.

Secondly, The Kind, or Quality of it, called here, daily Bread.

Thirdly, Our Right and Property in it, Our Daily Bread.

Fourthly, The limitation of it in respect of time, Give it us this Day. Of all
these briefly.

First, The matter of this Petition, or that which we pray for, and that is
Bread. Give us our Bread. By Bread here is meant all Temporal and Earthly
Blessings, that contribute either to our being or to our well-being in this
Life. And because we have need of very many things for our present subsistence,
as Food, Raiment, Habitation, and each of these comprehend many other
necessaries in them; all which would have been too long particularly to
enumerate in this compendious Prayer; therefore our Savior has summed them up
in the word Bread; figuratively denoting all kinds of Provisions necessary for
this Natural Life, whereof Bread is the most usual and the most useful. And
therefore as when God speaks of a Famine, he calls it a Famine of Bread, Amos
8.11. Not as if a scarcity of Bread were the only Dearth intended by it, but
that there should be likewise a want of all things requisite to the
sustentation of Life. So here when Christ teaches us to pray, for our Daily
Bread, this Phrase extends to all things conducible to maintain Health, or to
recover it; to preserve Life, or to prolong it.

Some indeed think this too mean and sordid a request to be preferred to God,
and would not have any of the low Conveniences of this present Life to have any
place in a Prayer, all whose other parts are so Spiritual and Heavenly, and the
whole so short and compendious; where the Petitions are so few, they will not
believe any of them should be spent so trivially, as to beg that which, though
they might not attain, yet they might be eternally Blessed and Happy; and
therefore they interpret this Word, Bread, in a Spiritual sense, and take it
for the Food of the Soul, whereby it is nourished unto Eternal Life; and
especially for our Lord Jesus Christ, who is called the Bread of Life, John
6.35. and Living Bread which came down from Heaven, verse 51. But here seems
no place for any such Mystical Interpretation, the Word Bread being put without
any addition or like circumstance that might refer it to Christ, or to
Spiritual things; and therefore ought to be understood according to the Words
literally and in their ordinary signification; although indeed it be here used
by way of Synechdoche, one part of Temporal good things being put for the whole
accession of them. Now from this we are taught these three things.

First, That Temporal Mercies and Blessings may lawfully be prayed for. And
although we ought not to be most earnest and importunate, nor to enlarge and
expatiate most upon these requests, but more earnestly to covet the best Gifts;
yet neither is unworthy of a Christian whose Affections and Conversation is in
Heaven, to beg at God's Hands those Mercies that he knows needful for the
support and comfort of this present Life; yea, we read of nothing more frequent
than the Saints praying either for the removal of some Temporal Evil or
Punishment, or the receiving of some Temporal Blessing or Favor. If I should
quote the Scriptures, I might transcribe a great part of the Bible; nay, so far
were they from looking upon it as below them, that we find Jacob putting it
into his Indentures when he bound himself to God, and made it as it were the
Condition of his Obligation to God's Service, Genes. 28.20. Then Jacob vowed a
Vow, saying, if God will be with me and keep me in this way that I go, and will
give me Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on, so that I come again to my
Father's House in Peace; then shall the Lord be my God. And indeed there is a
great deal of Reason and Ground to pray for these things; for they are both
needful for us, and God has promised to give them to us.

First, They are needful for us, as the means that God has appointed for the
preservation of our Temporal Life and Being, in which we have so many
opportunities to serve and glorify him, and so many advantages to secure
Heaven and Glory to our Souls: And therefore as we tender either the obtaining
of Heaven, or the additional degrees of Glory and Happiness there; so we stand
obliged to pray that God would afford us those necessaries that may conduce to
the prolonging of our Natural Life; till having finished our work we are made
fit to receive our Wages and Reward. Your Heavenly Father knows that you have
need of all these things, says our Savior, Matthew. 6.32. And therefore, though
Miracles be a kind of a Non-obstante to the Law of Nature, and a suspension of
the ordinary course of Providence; yet we often find God working a Miracle to
supply these wants of his People; whereas it had been alike easy by another
Miracle, to have caused them not to want; for it had been no more difficult for
God to have kept Elijah from hungring, than it was to make the Ravens his
Purveyors, or to make a Barrel of Meal become a whole Harvest, or to open a
Spring and Fountain in the Cruise of Oil; but he chooses rather to supply
these Wants than to cease them, to keep us in a continual dependence upon him,
that the sense of our necessities might engage us to have continual recourse
unto God for relief.

Secondly, As Temporal good things are needful for us, so God has promised to
give them to us: Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the Day of Trouble, and I will
deliver thee. And, My God, says the Apostle, shall supply all your wants, Phil.
4.19. The Lord will give Grace and Glory, and no good thing will he withold
from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.13. Thus we see Temporal good things
may be prayed for, both because they are needful for us, and because God has
promised them to us: Yet,

Secondly, They must be prayed for only conditionally; for they are only
conditionally promised. And these conditions are twofold. If they be
consistent with God's pleasure, and if they be conducible to our good; for
without the observing the one we should not so much seem to Petition as to
invade, and without observing the other we should but beg a Curse instead of a
Blessing.

Thirdly, We may learn likewise that God is the Giver of every Temporal Mercy
and Good thing. Whatever thou enjoyest, it is from his mere free Bounty. He
spreads thy Table, fills thy Cup, makes thy Bed, puts on thy Garments; is the
God of thy Health and Strength, and loadeth thee daily with his Benefits. If
thou have riches, it is the Blessing of God that makes rich, Prove. 10.22. It
is God that gives thee Power to get Wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.18. Have thou Credit and
Reputation? It is God that hides thee from the Scourge of Tongues, Job 5.21.
Have thou Friends? It is God that gives thee Favor in their sight. Have thou
Gifts and Parts? It is the Almighty that gives thee Understanding, Job 32.8.
And have thou Joy and Comfort in all these? It is God, who not only fills thy
Mouth with Food, but thy Heart with Gladness. Now God is said to Give us our
daily Bread, and all the necessaries of Life, especially Two ways.

First, By producing them and bringing them to us. He is the great Lord and
Proprietor both of Heaven and Earth. The Earth is the Lord's and the fullness
thereof; and he gives it to whom he will. He makes it bring forth abundantly
all its Stores for the use and service of Man: For be the Chain of Second
Causes never so long, yet the first link of them is held in his Hand: And
therefore we have it expressed, Hosea 2.21, 22. I will hear says the Lord, I
will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear
the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and they shall hear Jezreel.

Secondly, God gives them, by Blessing them to us; without which Blessing our
daily Bread would no more nourish us than so much Chaff: For had we all the
abundance that the Earth could yield, and the Blessing of God withheld from
it, the very Air would stiff us, and our very Food would famish us: For it is
not so much by these things that we live; not so much by our daily Bread, as by
every Word; that is, by every Word of Blessing upon them, which proceeds out
of the Mouth of God, Deuteronomy. 8.3. And concerning those to whom he denies this his
Blessing, he tells us, Job 20.22. In the fullness of their sufficiency they
shall be in streights. And therefore when we pray that God would give us our
daily Bread, we pray not only that God would give us the Possession and
Enjoyment of Earthly Comforts; but that he would put Virtue and Efficacy into
them, by his Blessing upon them, to be subservient to our relief and support,
without which the Staff of Bread would break under us, and the stay of Water
roll away from us. And thus much for the first thing, Give us Bread.

Secondly, Let us consider, the Specification of this Blessing, or the Kind and
Quality of it, our daily Bread. This Word (...), is variously rendered, I shall
not trouble you with the particular Notions of it; let it suffice, that here by
the Word, Bread, is meant our ordinary and usual Bread, or whatsoever is
necessary for our subsistence in the World from Day to Day. And it is the same
with what is expressed in that excellent Prayer of Agur. Prove. 30.8. Give me
neither Poverty nor Riches, feed me with Food convenient for me. So do we pray
here, that he would bestow upon us daily, that which is sufficient for the day.
And by this we are taught to moderate our Desires, and to beg of God no more
than is needful for us. We beg not delicacies; we beg daily Bread, not
superfluites, nor Goods laid up for many years.

But now because the measures of necessities are diverse, and that may be but
daily bread to one, which to another is superfluity, it will be requisite to
show you by what necessities our Prayers are to be bounded.

I Answer, First, We may pray for the supply of all our Natural necessities:
And to this the Sovereign Principle of self-preservation strongly obliges us.
And he that prays not nor endeavors for this, is a self-murderer in
withholding from himself what is simply, and absolutely necessary for the
maintenance of his Life.

Secondly, Besides things that are naturally necessary, there are things that
are civilly necessary, which are not so absolutely Imperious as the other; yet
these also oblige us to pray for supplies and relief. I account those things
civilly necessary, which though they are not simply necessary to the
preservation of our Life, yet are necessary to the State and Condition in which
Divine Providence has set us. As for Men of High Birth, of Public Note, or
Public Employment, more is necessary for them, than for others, whom God has
placed to take up a narrower room in the World. For Cedars require more Sap
than Shrubs: And for such as these to pray against poverty, is possibly to pray
for much more than would make private persons rich. We are allowed to pray for
such a competent measure of Earthly Blessings as is suitable to our Station,
and commensurate to our charge and burdens; and according to the Judgment of
Christian prudence, apparently needful, for those whom we are bound to provide
for, that they may live honestly and decently. All these are necessaries that
we are to pray for in this Petition, give us our daily Bread.

But we must take heed that neither Covetousness nor Ambition impose upon us,
and make us measure necessaries by our inordinate Desires, rather than by our
real Wants. For whatsoever is more than enough for our present State and
Comfortable Subsistence, is not our daily Bread, but the Bread of the Poor, out
of whose mouths we snatch it. And whatsoever we lay up with great designs of
enlarging our selves or our Posterity beyond our Lawful measure, are but
Treasures of wickedness, whose rust will Witness against us at the last day.
And thus much for the Second Observable.

Thirdly, in the Words of this Petition, are designed our Right and Propriety
to this daily Bread: Give us our daily Bread.

Now right to a Temporal Enjoyment is Threefold, either Natural, or Spiritual,
or Civil. Natural by Creation. Spiritual by Regeneration. And Civil by Humane
and Legal Constitution.

First, As for the Natural Right by Creation, that was once found in Adam, who
was made the visible Lord of the Universe, and all things put under his feet.
We may read his Patent and Charter, Genesis 1.28. And God said unto him, be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the Earth and subdue it, and have
Dominion over the Fowl of the Air, and over every living thing that moves upon
the Earth. But this Right we have lost, and can call nothing ours upon this
account. Only as Princes allow Traitors and Malefactors Provision in their
Prison till they come to Execution. So God allows many Wicked Men many Earthly
Enjoyments out of the mere bounty of Prison-Provision, to keep them alive till
they are brought forth to their Execution. This Natural Right therefore being
lost, there succeeds in the room of it,

Secondly, A Spiritual Right to Earthly Comforts. And this belongs unto all
those who themselves do belong to Christ: for he is made the Heir of all
things. And all things both in Heaven and Earth are consigned over unto him by
a Deed of Gift from God his Father, and they being united unto Christ, and his
Spiritual Offspring, are Heirs with Christ, and Coheirs of all that ample
Dominion which Christ himself possesses. And upon this ground the Apostle
tells the Corinthians, in 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. All things are yours, the World,
things present and things to come, all are yours; and he subjoyns this reason
for it, for ye are Christ's. But yet this Spiritual Right is not to be extended
to an Usurpation upon the Temporal Enjoyments of others. For Grace and Holiness
being a thing wholly inward and invisible, cannot conferr any outward Title.
For this,

Thirdly, Is given by another Right, which is Civil, according to the
constitution of Humane Laws, and the Process in Courts of Humane Judicature.
For Law is the only distributer of meum and tuum. And we can call nothing ours
which is not so, or ought not to be so by the Sentence of the Law under which
we live; and he that detaineth any thing which the Sentence of the Law
adjudgeth to another, is guilty of Theft and Robbery.

Now when we pray for our daily bread, we pray,

First, That God would give us the good things of this Life to be obtained by
us in a Lawful Regular manner.

Secondly, That he would bless and increase those good things that are
rightfully our own.

Thirdly, That he would bestow upon us a Spiritual right in whatsoever we enjoy
through Jesus Christ, who is the Heir and Possessor of all things. And,

Fourthly, We pray that we may not desire nor covet that which is another: for
we are taught to pray only for that which we may justly call ours, to which we
have as well a Civil as a Spiritual Right and Title. And thus much for the
third particular.

Fourthly, We have in the words the limitation of the Petition in respect of
time. Give us this day our daily bread. And indeed there is great reason why we
should pray for it this day, for we every day stand in need of relief and
supplies from God. Our wants and our Troubles grow up thick about us, and
unless God make daily provisions for us, we shall be overrun by them. Food
nourishes but a day, and that which we receive this day, will not suffice us to
morrow. There is a continual Spring and Fountain of necessities within us, and
therefore we must have continual recourse unto God by prayer, that he would
daily satisfy and supply our Wants, as they daily rise up about us.

Again, by teaching us to pray for our Temporal Comforts this day, our Savior
tacitly intimates to us, that we should be content with our daily allowance. It
is enough, if we have our Dimensum, our appointed Food for the day. To morrow
is in God's hand, and the care of it is his and not ours, and therefore he bids
us, take no thought for to morrow; that is with no tormenting, carking and
desponding thoughts, Matthew. 6.34. And indeed if we are provided for this day,
we may well rest content and satisfied in the Providence of God, since he has
engaged his Word of Promise, That he will never leave us nor forsake us.

Now in this part of the Petition, there are sundry things we pray for. As,

First, We pray for Life it self, that it may be prolonged, whilst God has any
Service for us to do in the World.

To this very end we pray for daily Bread, that Life may be maintained and
preserved by it.

Secondly, Health and Strength of Body, which is indeed the greatest of
Temporal Blessings, and the salt to all the rest, without which they are
unsavory and tasteless.

Thirdly, All the means that God's Providence has appointed to preserve Life
and Health, and to recover Health when it is decayed and impaired.

Fourthly, Success in our Lawful Calling and Endeavors for the procuring any
Conveniences and Comforts of Life. For in this Prayer we beg a Blessing upon
our Callings and Industry, that God would prosper us in them, and by them
increase our Temporal Enjoyments, so far forth as is needful to his own Glory
and our Good.

Fifthly, we beg a Blessing from Heaven upon whatsoever we enjoy that it may
indeed prove good and comfortable to us; without which all that we possess may
prove a great heap of things, but none of them will be Comforts or Enjoyments.

And thus I have finished the First of those Petitions that immediately concern
our selves, wherein we beg of God the supply of all our Temporal Wants. The Two
which remain respect Spiritual Blessings, of which the former (which is the
Fifth Petition in Order of this most Excellent Prayer) is for the Pardon of
Sin, Forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors. Of which I now come to
treat.

And here before we come to the Petition it self, let us briefly take notice of
the connection and dependence that it has upon what went before.

Having prayed for our daily Bread, we are next taught to pray for Pardon. And
this method is indeed most Wise, and most Rational. For,

First, The guilt of Sin many times withholds from us those Earthly Comforts
we stand in need of. We have forfeited all into the hands of God's Justice, and
he is pleased to make us know our obnoxiousness to his Power and Wrath, by
denying or taking from us those Temporal good things as a due, though the least
punishment of our deserts, Esai. 59.2. Your Iniquities have separated between
you and your God, and your Sins have hid his Face from you, that he will not
hear you. And therefore when we have prayed for our daily Bread, we are to pray
likewise for the Pardon of our Sins. That the Partition between God and us may
be removed, and his Blessing being no longer obstructed by our guilt, may
descend down freely and plentifully upon us.

Secondly, Without Pardon of Sin, all our Temporal Enjoyments are but Snares
and Curses unto us. Though God does sometimes bestow abundance of this World's
good things upon impenitent and unpardoned Sinners, yet they have not so many
Enjoyments as Curses: Their Bread is kneaded up with a Curse, and their Wine
tempered and mingled with a Curse; there is Poison in their Meat, and Death in
their Physic, their Table is their Snare, their Estate their Fetters; and
whatsoever should have been for their welfare, proves only a Gin and a Trap
unto them; for the Wrath of God is one direful Ingredient among all that they
possess. And therefore, if we would have our daily Bread given us, or Comfort
and Blessing with it, we ought earnestly to beg the Pardon of our Sins, which
are like the Worm in Jonah's Goard, which will wither and devour all our
Enjoyments. And thus much for the Method and Order.

In the Words themselves we have,

First, The Petition, Forgive us our Debts.

Secondly, The Condition or Proportion, or Plea and Argument, (call it which
you will) for the obtaining of this forgiveness, as we forgive our Debtors.

In the Petition we may observe, that the same which our Evangelist calls
Debts, is by St. Luke 11.4. called Sins, Forgive us our Sins. We stand indebted
to God both as we are his Creatures, and as we are Offenders: By the one we owe
him the Debt of Obedience; and by the other, the Debt of Punishment.

First, As we are Creatures, we owe the Debt of Obedience: And to the payment
of this Debt we stand bound both to the absolute Sovereignty of God, who is the
Supreme Lord of all his Creatures, and therefore may oblige them to what he
pleases; and likewise by his manifold Favors and Mercies conferred upon us.
From him we have received our Beings and all our Comforts; he maintains us at
his own Cost and Charge, he enlarges us when we are in Streights, relieves us
when we are in Wants, Counsels us when we are in Doubts, Comforts us when we
are in Sorrows, Delivers us in our Dangers; and besides the manifold Temporal
Mercies we daily receive from him, gives us the Means, the Hopes and Promises
of obtaining far better things at his Hands, even Eternal Life and Glory: And
therefore certainly upon these Accounts we owe him all possible Service and
Obedience. And indeed it is but Reason we should employ all for him; from whom
we receive all; and give up our selves to his Service, who are what we are by
his Bounty, and hope to be infinitely better, than now we are, through his
Mercy.

Now this Debt of Obedience is irremissible, and we are eternally and
indispensably bound unto it: For it is altogether inconsistent with the Notion
and Being of a Creature, to be discharged from its Obligation to the Laws and
Commands of its Creator; for this would exempt it from the Dominion of God, and
make it Absolute and Independent; that is, it would make the Creature to be no
longer a Creature but a Deity. We do not therefore pray, that God would forgive
us this Debt; no, he cannot so far deny himself, and it is our Happiness and
Glory to pay it: To this his Sovereignty obliges our Subject Condition, and
his Mercy and Goodness our Ingenuity.

Secondly, As we are Transgressors, so we owe God a Debt of Punishment, to be
suffered by us to make God some reparation to his Honor, and satisfaction to
his Justice, for our transgressing his Law, which sentenceth all Offenders to
Eternal Death and Damnation.

This Debt now is that which we pray God would forgive us; a Debt, which if we
pay, we are eternally ruined and undone; and there is no way possible to escape
the payment of it, but by the free Grace and Mercy of God remitting of it unto
us: And thus Sin is called a Debt, not indeed properly, as if we owed it, but
by a Metonymy, as it is the meritorious Cause of this punishment, the suffering
of which we owe to Divine Justice.

Hence, by the way, we may observe that every Sin makes us liable to Eternal
Death; for Death and Damnation is the Debt which we must pay to the Justice of
God, and Sin is that which exposes us unto it, by the Sentence of the Law
which we have transgressed. For as against other Debtors is brought forth some
Bond or Obligation to exact payment from them: So against us is produced the
Handwriting of the Law, and we not having performed the Condition of the Bond,
stand liable to the Forfeiture and Penalty, which is no less than Curses, and
Woes, and Torments, and Everlasting Death. Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10. And,
the Wages of Sin is Death, Romans 6.23. And, the Soul that sins it shall Die,
Ezekiel. 18.4. Now here to excite thee to a fervency in praying for the
forgiveness of thy Debts, consider,

First, The infinite multitudes of thy Debts. God's Book is full of them, and
there they stand on account against us under every one of our Names. We were
born Debtors to God; our Original Sin and Guilt obliges us to punishment; and
although we did not personally contract the Debt, yet as being the wretched
Heirs and Executors of fallen Adam, the Debt is legally devolved upon us and
become ours. And ever since we came into the World we have run upon the score
with God, our Debts are more than our Moments have been; for whatsoever we have
thought or done has been Sin, either in the matter, or at least in the
circumstances of it. God sets all our Sins down in order in his Debt-book; some
as Talents, and some as Pence. Our flagitious Crimes and heinous Impieties, our
presumptuous Sins, committed against Light, Knowledge, Conscience, Convictions,
Mercies, and Judgments; each of these God sets down as a Talent: And how many
thousands of these may we have been guilty of? Our Sins of Ignorance,
Surreption, and daily Infirmity are much more innumerable, and though they may
be but as Pence in comparison with the other, yet the unaccountable numbers of
them will make the Debt desperate, and the payment impossible. And yet
notwithstanding our Debts are so many, and very many of them such great Sums
too; yet we daily run ourselves farther in Arrears, not considering that a Day
of Accounts will come, when both our Talents and our Pence shall be punctually
reckoned up against us, not omitting the least Item; when every vain Thought,
and foolish Passion, that has flushed up in us, with every idle and
superfluous Word that we have unadvisedly spoken, as well as the more gross and
scandalous Passages of our sinful Lives, shall be then audited; all which will
make the Total Sum infinite, and us desperate.

Secondly, That God, who is thy Creditor, is strict and impartial; his Patience
has trusted and forborne thee long; but his Justice will at last demand the
Debt severely, and every particular shall be charged upon thee even to the
utmost Farthing; for he has booked down all in his remembrance, and will bring
all to thine: And therefore we have it expressed concerning the last Judgment,
that the Books were opened, and the Dead were Judged, out of those things which
were written in the Books, according to their Works, Rev. 20.12. What now are
these Books, but the two great Volumes of God's remembrance, and our own
Consciences? These are two Tallies evenly struck, that shall justly represent
the same Sum and Debt, and God's strict Justice will not then abate thee any
thing of its utmost due; for he will by no means acquit the Guilty. Indeed we
are apt to think that because God so long forbears us, he will never calls us
to make up and adjust Accounts with him. Our present impunity tempts us to
question his Omniscience, and to suspect his Threatenings; and because he winks
at us, we are ready to conclude that he is Blind; we are of that wretched
temper described, Psalm. 50.21. Because God keeps silence, we think he is
altogether such a one as our selves: As careless in requiring his Debts, as we
are in contracting them; but he will reprove us, and set them in order before
our Faces, to our everlasting shame and confusion.

Thirdly, That the least of all these thy Debts make thee liable to be cast
into the Prison of Hell, and to be adjudged to Eternal Death and Punishments.
Not only thy impudent and scandalous Sins which make thee detested of Men as
well as hated of God; but the least shadow of a thought that gives but an
umbrage of vanity to thy Mind, the least motion and heaving of thy Heart
toward a sinful Object, the exhaling but of one sinful Desire, the wavering of
thy Fancy, a glance of thine Eye, is a Debt contracted with the infinite
Justice of God; and a Debt that without forgiveness must be paid in the
Infernal Prison of Hell: So says our Savior, Matthew. 5.26. Verily thou shall
not come out thence till thou have paid the utmost Farthing.

Beware therefore then that you do not entertain any slight thoughts of Sin;
nor think, with the Papists, that there are some sorts of Sins that do not
deserve Death, which they call Venial Sins, in opposition to other more gross
and heinous Sins, which they allow to be Mortal. Believe it, the least prick at
the Heart is deadly; and so is the least Sin to the Soul. And indeed it is a
Contradiction to call any Sin Venial, in their sense, who hold it is not worthy
of Damnation; for if it be a Sin, it is worthy of Damnation, for the Wages of
Sin is Death; if it be not, How is it Venial? There is but one Mortal Sin,
simply and absolutely such, as God has revealed in his Word, that it shall
never be pardoned, neither in this World, nor in that which is to come; and
that is the Sin against the Holy Ghost, which St. John therefore calls a Sin
unto Death, 1 John: 5.16. And so far are they who are guilty of it excluded from
God's Mercy, that they are excluded from the Charity of our Prayers; for we are
not so much as to pray for such, as it is there expressed.

Again, all the Sins of finally impenitent and unbelieving Wretches are
eventually Mortal, and shall certainly be punished at last with Eternal Death
and Damnation; For the Wrath of God abides on him that believes not, Joh.
3.16. And God will render Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, upon
every Soul of Man that does evil, Romans 2.9. All Sins whatsoever are Mortal
meritoriously, both in the Penitent and in the Impenitent; the Law has
condemned all alike, though all Sins are not alike heinous, nor shall be
equally punished; but with some it shall be far more intolerable than with
others; yet all are alike Mortal and deserve Death and the same Hell, though
not the same Place, nor the same Degree of Torments in Hell; for those Sins
which are accounted most Trivial and Venial, are in themselves Violations of
the Holy Law of God, and the Penalty that his Laws threaten is no less than
Death. The Law is accurate and reaches to the least things; yea, to the least
circumstances of those things; and every Transgression against it shall receive
its due recompense of reward: Nay, had we no other guilt left upon our Souls,
from the first moment of our lives to this present day, but only the guilt of
the least Sin that the Holy Law condemns; be it only the wrenching aside of a
Thought or Desire, only a bye and sinister end in the performance of Holy
Duties; nay, let it be but the first rudiment and imperfect draught of a
Thought not yet finished, without a full satisfaction and expiation, this small
Debt would cast us into Prison, this little Sin would sink us irrecoverably
into Hell, and lay us under the Revenges of the Almighty God for ever.

Oh then with what horror and amazement may Sinners reflect upon their past
Sins! With what dread and trembling may they expect their future State, since
as many thousand Sins as they have committed of all sizes and aggravations, so
many Deaths and Hells heaped up one upon another have they deserved, and
without intervention of a full payment and satisfaction must they be adjudged
to undergo? For though the least degree of Divine Wrath be a tormenting Hell;
yet God will inflame his Wrath to as many degrees of acrimony and sharpness as
they have committed Sins, till their Punishment be equal to their Offenses, and
become infinitely intolerable.

Fourthly, Consider, thou can never pay God, nor discharge the least of thy
Debts for ever. For,

First, Thou can not possibly do it by any Duties or Services in this Life:
For whatsoever thou do is either required, or not required; if it be not
required, it will be so far from being a satisfaction for thy Sins, that it
will be an addition to them, and a piece of Will Worship, which will meet with
that sad Greeting at the last Day, who has required these things at your
Hands? If it be required, it is no more than thou owe to God before, and if
thou had never sinned were obliged to pay it. To think to satisfy for thy
Sins by thy Duties, is but to rob one Attribute of God to pay another; for
whatsoever Obedience thou can perform, thou owe it to the Sovereignty and
Holiness of God, and his Justice will never accept of that which belongs to his
Authority. Besides it is absurd to think to pay one Duty by another, to
discharge the Debt of Sin by paying the Debt of Duty.

Secondly, Thou can not pay off thy Debts by any Sufferings hereafter. It is
true Sinners shall lie eternally in Prison, and be eternally satisfying the
offended Justice of God; but in all that Eternity there shall never be that
moment wherein they may say, as Christ did in his making satisfaction, it is
finished, the Debt is paid, and Justice has received as much as was due from
me. No that satisfaction must be eternally making; and therefore the punishment
must be eternally lasting: For every Sin, even the least Sin, is committed
against an infinite God; and therefore the punishment of it must be infinite:
For Offenses take their measures, as well from the Dignity of the Person
against whom they are committed, as from the hainousness of the Fact in it self
considered. As a reviling Word against the King is Treasonable, against our
Equals but actionable; and therefore by the same proportion, the same Offense
against the infinite Majesty of the great God, must needs carry infinite guilt
in it; that is, exposes to infinite punishment.

Now then, O Sinner, think with thy self, what satisfaction thou can make to
God that can bear a proportion to thy infinite Offenses. Thou can not at once
undergo an infinite measure of punishment, for thy Nature is but finite.
Could thou do this, then indeed there were hope; yea, certainty of relief for
thee; for Divine Justice will not exact more than its due. But because this is
impossible, thy Woes and Torments in Hell must be Eternal, that they may be
some way infinite as the Justice is which thou have offended; infinite, if not
in Degrees, yet in duration and continuance.

And O what dreadful despair will this cause in thee when thou shall have been
in Hell under most acute and insufferable Torments Millions of years, and yet
the payment of all that sum of Plagues and Woes, shall not be of value enough
to satisfy for the least of thy Sins, nor to cross out of God's Book the least
and smallest of thy Debts: but thy account shall still be as great, and as full
as it was at thy first plunging into Hell, and still an Eternity of Torments
remains to be paid by thee!

And now wretched Creatures that we are, whither shall we turn our selves? what
hope, what relief can we find? shall we flatter our selves that God will not
require our sins at our hands? no: they are Debts and therefore he may, and he
is a Just God, Just to himself, and to the Interest of his own Glory, and
therefore he will: God has beforehand told us, at what rate we must expect to
take up our sins, and what we must pay for them at the last. He has told us as
plainly as the mouth of Truth can utter it, that the Wages of sin is Death, and
the ways Sinners choose, lead down to the Chambers of Hell and Destruction. Our
own Misery is our own choice. He has in his Word set Life and Death before us,
and declared to us the means how we might escape the one and obtain the other.
He has represented to us the unconceiveableness of both: And if we will be so
obstinate as after these manifest representations, to choose Hell and Death, it
is but Reason and Justice that we should have our own Choice; for it is our
Choice interpretatively, when we choose those ways and actions that expose to
them.

And thus much concerning the acknowledgement we make in this Petition, our
Debts. Debts, vast and infinite, which the Justice of God will strictly require
of Sinners in their Eternal Condemnation. Debts, the least of which makes us
liable to be cast into Prison, into Hell, and for the least of which we can
never satisfy.

But what is there no hope? Is there no possibility to cross the Book, to
cancel the Obligation whereby we stand bound to the revenging Justice of God,
and everlasting Sufferings?

Truly none by our own personal satisfaction; but yet there is abundant hope,
yea full assurance of it, through the free Mercy of our God. And therefore as
our Savior has taught us to acknowledge our Debts, so he has likewise taught
us to pray, Father, forgive us our Debts.

And now that I have showed you our Misery by reason of our Debts, and you have
seen the black side of the Cloud, which interposeth between God and us. So give
me leave to represent to you our Hopes and Consolation in God's free Grace, and
the Divine Mercy in dissolving this black Cloud, that it may never more appear.
And here let us,

First, Consider what the Pardon of sin is. And this we cannot better discover,
than by looking into the Nature of sin. Sin therefore, as St. John describes
it, 1 John 3.4. is a transgression of the Law of God. And to the validity of
all Laws, it is necessary that there be a penalty annexed, either literally
expressed, or tacitly implied. The guilt that we contract by transgressing the
Law, is nothing else but our liableness to undergo this penalty. And this guilt
is Twofold; the intrinsecal and formal, and that is the desert of punishment,
which sin always necessarily carries in it as it is a violation of a Holy and
Righteous Commandment.

The other is extrinsecal and adventitious, and consists in the appointment and
designation of the sinner unto punishment. This now does not formally flow from
sin, but from the Will of God constituting and willing to punish sin with Death.

Now Pardon is nothing else but the removal of the guilt of sin. But now the
question is, which guilt it removes. I Answer,

First, It does not remove the intrinsecal guilt of sin, or the desert of
punishment. For the sins of those who are Justified and Pardoned, do yet in
their own Nature, deserve Death and Eternal Damnation. As a Pardon vouchsafed
to a Traitor, does not cause his Actions not to have been Treasonable and
worthy of Death: for this does necessarily follow immediately upon the
Transgressing of the Law, to which the Penalty is annexed. So neither is it in
the Power of Pardoning Grace to make that our sins should not deserve Death,
according to their own demerit; for that were a contradiction, since this
demerit, is necessary and essential unto sin as such.

Secondly, Therefore Pardon of sin removes that guilt which consists in the
adventitious Appointment or Ordination of the sinner unto Punishment, flowing
from the Will of God, who has in his Law threatened to inflict Eternal Death as
the Reward and Wages of sin. Now this designation of the sinner unto punishment
is Twofold; either Personal or Mystical. One of these two ways God will
certainly punish every Soul that sins: either by appointing the sinner
Personally to undergo the punishment of his iniquities; and thus he deals with
unbelievers whom he will punish in their own Persons for their transgressions.
Or else he appoints them to undergo the punishment of their sins Mystically, as
being by Faith made one with the Lord Jesus Christ, who himself has born our
sins in his own Body on the Tree. Now Pardon of sin does not remove the
Mystical appointment of a Believer unto Punishment, for he has suffered it,
for Christ has suffered it, and Christ and he are one Mystical Person by
Faith. God never Pardons but he likewise punishes the very sin that he Pardons;
he punishes it in our surety and undertaker when he forgives it to a Believer.
Pardon of sin therefore removes only that guilt which consists in our own
Personal appointment and designation to punishment: though the sin does always
in it self necessarily deserve Death, though that Death has been inflicted
upon Christ, and therefore upon Believers in him, as Members of him.

But yet notwithstanding that God thus takes Vengeance on our sins, he does
Graciously Pardon them when he releaseth our Personal Obligation unto
punishment, and reckons that we have suffered the penalty, in Christ suffering
it, and therefore ought to be discharged from any further liableness unto it.

This now is that Pardon of sin which we pray for when we say, Forgive us our
Debts. And for the more full Explication of it, I shall lay down these
following positions.

First, The Pardoning Grace of God in respect of us, is altogether free and
undeserved. We can of our selves scarce so much as ask forgiveness, but even
this comes from the Grace of God, therefore much less can we do any thing to
merit it. Far be it from us to affirm as the Papists do, that Good Works
proceeding from Grace are Meritorious of Pardon and Salvation: Alas, what are
our Prayers, our Sighs, our Tears, yea our very Blood, should we spend it for
Christ? They are but poor imperfect things, and are so far from having in them
any infinite worth and value to counterbalance our sins, that the defects of
them add to the number of our other Transgressions. They cannot all of them
make one blot in the Book of God's Remembrance, but may well make more Items
there against us. Had it been possible for Men to have quitted scores with
Divine Justice by what they could do or suffer: Heaven would not have been so
needlessly lavish, as to send Christ into the World, to lead an afflicted Life,
and to die an accursed Death, only for our Redemption and Salvation.

Secondly, The Pardoning Grace of God is not free in respect of Christ, but it
cost him the price of Blood. It is the Blood of the Lamb Slain from the
Foundation of the World, that crosses the Debt-Book. Without shedding of Blood
there is no remission, says the Apostle, Heb. 9.22. And this is my Blood which
was shed for the Remission of sins, Matthew. 26.28. And although possibly God
might according to his absolute Sovereignty have freely remitted all the sins
of all the World, without any kind of Satisfaction, only by a Free and Gracious
Act of Mercy: Yet considering that he had otherwise declared in his unalterable
Word of Truth, that there must be a recompense made him for all our offenses,
it had been a wrong to his Veracity, if not to his Justice, to have granted the
Pardon of any one sin without the intervention of a full price and
satisfaction. No satisfaction could be made correspondent to the wrong done to
an infinite God, but by an infinite Person who was God himself; for had the
Person been finite, the Sufferings must have been Eternal, otherwise they could
not have been proportionable to the offense, which requires an infinite
Satisfaction: But if the Sufferings had been Eternal, Satisfaction could never
have been made, but would for ever have been making unto the Justice of God,
and consequently our sins could never have been Pardoned. And therefore God
appointed to this Work of reconciling himself to fallen Man, his only begotten
Son, God Coequal, and Coeternal with himself, and every way infinite, as
himself, that he might be able to bear the whole Wrath of God at once, and at
one bitter draught, drink off the whole Cup of Fury which we should have been
draining by little drops to all Eternity. So that Justice being satisfied in
the Sufferings of Christ, for the sins of those whose Persons, and whose guilt
he sustained upon the Cross; Mercy has now a way opened to Glorify its Riches
in their Pardon and Salvation.

Thus in these two Positions, it appears that though the remitting of our sins
be an Act of God's Free Grace and Mercy in respect of us, yet it is the effect
of Purchase in respect of Christ. God Pardons sins to them who committed them,
upon their Faith (and Repentance; but he Pardons not those very sins to Christ,
to whom they were imputed, but exacted Satisfaction from him to the very utmost
rigor of Justice. Hence it follows,

Thirdly, That the Pardon of sin is not only an Act of mere free Grace and
Mercy, but according to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, it is also an Act
of Justice in God. Indeed both Mercy and Justice are concurrent in it, for
since by the Union of Faith we are made one Mystical Body with Christ, it could
not consist with the Equity of God to punish the sins of Believers in their own
Persons; for this would be no other than to punish them twice for the same
Offense, once in their surety, and again in themselves.

Now what abundant cause of Comfort may this be to all true Believers, that
God's Justice as well as his Mercy shall acquit them: That that Attribute of
God at the Apprehension of which they were wont to tremble, should interpose on
their behalf, and plead for them. Yet through the All-sufficient Expiation and
Atonement that Christ has made for our sins, this Mystery is effected, and
Justice it self brought over from being a formidable Adversary to be of our
Party and to Plead for us. Therefore the Apostle tells us, 1 John 1.9. That God
is Faithful and Just to forgive us our sins. And St. Paul, 2 Thessal. 1.6, 7.
It is a Righteous thing with God to recompense Tribulation to them that trouble
you. And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus Christ
shall be revealed from Heaven with his Mighty Angels.

Fourthly, When God pardons, he does no longer account of us as sinners. Indeed
after Pardon, we still retain sinful and corrupt Natures, and there is that
Original Pollution in us that can never be totally dislodged in this Life. But
yet when God pardons, he looks not upon us as Sinners, but as Just. The
Malefactor that is legally discharged, either by satisfying the Law, or by his
Princes Grace and Favor toward him, is no more reputed a Malefactor, but as
Just and Righteous as if he had never offended. So is it with us, we are both
ways discharged of our guilt; both by satisfying the penalty of the Law in
Christ our Surety; and by the Free Grace and Mercy of God, who has Sealed to
us a Gracious Act of Pardon, and therefore we are Just in the sight of God as
if we had never sinned.

Fifthly, Pardon of sin is one great part of our Justification. Justification
consists of these two parts, Remission, and Acceptance: We have them both
joined together, Ephesians. 1.6, 7. He has made us accepted in the Beloved, in
whom we have Redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of sins.
Remission of sins takes away our liableness to Death, Acceptance of our
persons gives us a Title unto Life. Now to be free from our obnoxiousness to
Death, and instated in a Right to Eternal Life; these two Constitute a perfect
Justification. For to be accepted of God in Christ, is no other than for God
through the Righteousness and Obedience of Christ imputed to us, to own and
acknowledge us to have a Right to Heaven. And therefore we have mention of
Pardon and an Inheritance together, in St. Paul's Commission to his Ministry,
Acts 26.18. That they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an Inheritance among
them that are Sanctified.

It is not therefore, O Soul, a bare negative Righteousness that God intends
thee in the Pardon of thy sins; it is not merely to remove the Curse and Wrath
thy sins have deserved (though that alone can never sufficiently be admired)
but the same hand that plucks thee out of Hell by Pardon, lifts thee up to
Heaven by what he gives thee together with thy Pardon, even a Right and Title
to a Blessed and Glorious Inheritance. Thy Pardon thou have from the Passive
Obedience of Christ in his Sufferings. A Right to Heaven thou have through the
Active Obedience of Christ in fullfilling all Righteousness. And through both
have thou obtained a complete Justification: God looking upon thee as Innocent
through the Satisfaction of his Son, and as Worthy through his Obedience, both
which are made thine by Faith.

Now this Pardon of sin is in Scripture set forth by very sweet and full
Expressions. It is called, a blotting out of Transgression. A Metaphor taken
from a Creditors crossing the Debt-Book, signifying thereby a discharge of the
Debt. And lest, we might possibly fear God will implead us for them without
Book, the Prophet adds forgetting, unto blotting out, Esai. 43.25. I even I am
he that blotteth out thy Transgressions for my Names sake, and I will not
remember thy sins. It is called, a covering of our sins. Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is
the Man whose Transgressions are forgiven, and whose sin is covered. Yea, we
have a further ground of Comfort, for it is not only a covering of our sins,
but it is a covering of God's Face from them. Psalm. 51.9. Hide thy Face from my
sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. It is a casting of them behind God's
back as a thing that he will never more regard. Is. 38.17. Thou have cast all
my sins behind thy back. And lest we should suspect he should turn again to
behold them, it is called, a casting of them into the bottom of Sea, Mic. 7.19.
as we do with things we would have irrecoverably lost and gone. It is a
scattering them as a thick Cloud, Esai. 44.22. When the Vapors of it are so
dissipated, that there shall not remain the least spot, to obstruct the shining
of God's Face and Favor upon our Souls. Yea, and so perfect an Abolition shall
be made of all our Iniquities, that though Divine Justice should enter into a
strict search and scrutiny after them, they shall not be found against us. So
the Prophet Jeremiah tells us, Jerem. 50.20. In that day shall the iniquity of
Israel be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they
shall not be found. How has God heaped up Expressions of his Grace and Mercy
one upon another? and studied words as it were to assure us of the Validity of
our Pardon, giving to us abounding Consolations as our sins have been
abounding. And thus much shall suffice to show the Nature of Pardoning Grace
and Mercy, as expressed in these words, Forgive us our Debts.

Secondly, Let us consider unto whom this Petition for Pardon is directed, and
that is as all the rest are, to our Father; whose Laws we have violated, whose
Justice we have offended, whose displeasure we have incurred, and to whose
vengeance we have made our selves liable and obnoxious, to him we sue for
Pardon and Remission.

Hence we may collect this note: That it is the High Prerogative of God alone
to forgive Sins.

God assumes this particularly to himself, and seems to triumph in the Glory of
this Attribute, I even I am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions. And
therefore when Christ cured the Paralytick, the Scribes and Pharisees stormed
at him for a Blasphemer, for saying, Be of good cheer, thy Sins are forgiven
thee: Thou Blasphemest, say they, for who can forgive Sins but God alone? Mark
2.7. And this Charge of Blasphemy which they laid against Christ, had he not
been the true God, had been unanswerable: And therefore our Savior denies not
their Principle, which is most certain and infallible; but to convince them
that they themselves were Blasphemers, in applying it to him, proves his Deity
by a Miracle, and demonstrates his Authority to forgive Sins, by his Power in
healing Diseases.

But you will say, if it be the incommunicable Prerogative of God only to
forgive Sins, How is it that we find this Privilege and Power, ascribed unto
Men also, John 20.23. Whosoever Sins ye remit, they are remitted. It seems
therefore that the Apostles and Ministers of Jesus Christ, their Successors,
stand invested by Christ with a Power to forgive Sins.

I Answer, Remission of Sins is twofold, either Authoritatively and
Judicially; or, Secondly, Ministerial and Declarative: The former belongs only
to God, who by the mere Authority of his Grace and Mercy does freely and fully
acquit us of our Guilt, without requiring any thing at our Hands, by way of
recompense or punishment. Now for any Creature, either in Heaven or Earth, to
assume this to himself, is a most insolent and Blasphemous Pride; which while
the Pope of Rome does, he has given us the strongest Argument that can be, to
assert and prove him to be the Antichrist, and that Son of Perdition; for among
the many Characters that are given of Antichrist, all of which do more than
sufficiently belong unto him, this is one, that he exalts himself above all
that is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.

Not only above Titular Gods, as Kings and Magistrates are, (for it is
notoriously known what Power he arrogates unto himself in disposing Crowns, and
transferring States, making Princes themselves far more inferior to him, than
their Subjects are to them;) but also above the only Living and True God, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, in pretending to a Judicial Authority to forgive Sins
and Offenses committed against God: For it is clear and evident, whosoever can
Pardon the Offenses of one Person against another must himself be Superior to
both, and have Authority and Jurisdiction over both; but chiefly over the
Person offended to make him cease the Prosecution of his Right, and sit down by
the Wrong received: For if a Prince should Pardon the Injury that one Subject
does the other, he must command the Person grieved not to molest or prosecute
him that has done the Wrong, and so disable him from taking revenge. Now what
a wretched and damnable Insolence is it for any vile sinful Man to pretend to
such a Power of forgiving Sins committed against God, as if by his Authority he
could command God to surcease his Suit, and to require no farther recompense,
but to rest himself contented that it is the Pope's Will and Pleasure to have
it so? What is this but to exalt himself above all that is called God, not only
on Earth, but in Heavean it self? A most horrid Blasphemy, and so proper a
Character of Antichrist, that there needs no other to describe him by.

Secondly, There is a Ministerial declarative Remission of Sins; and this is
either Internal in the Court of Conscience, or External in the Court of the
Church of Christ here upon Earth. The former Remission is the Office or
Ministry of the Holy Ghost sealing of us up unto the Day of Redemption, by his
silent and most comfortable Testimony, witnessing unto us that our Sins are
pardoned, and our Persons accepted. The External Declaration of Remission of
Sins, is an open publication to all humble Penitent Sinners the Absolution and
Pardon of their Offenses, according to the tenor of God's Faithful Promises.
And in this sense alone, the Ministers of Jesus Christ have power to pardon and
remit Sins, Whose Sins ye remit they are remitted; that is, whose Sins you
declare that God has remitted, they are remitted, not absolutely but
conditionally, in case Men come up to the performance of those conditions, upon
which God has promised Pardon and Forgiveness, which are Faith and Repentance.
And therefore in our Public Prayers, where the whole Congregation has made an
humble Confession of their Sins, the Minister according to his Office and Power
given him by Christ, declares to them, That God Pardons and Absolves all them
that truly Repent, and unfeignedly believe his Holy Gospel: Or, if on any other
Occasion the Minister say, I Absolve thee from thy Sins; yet the meaning is the
same, he absolves him Officially not Judicially; he Absolves by declaring him
Absolved and Pardoned upon his sincere Faith and Repentance; which if People
did but better understand, they would not be so forward to carp at, least they
carp at the very Gospel it self.

Nor does this at all entrench upon God's Prerogative; for the Minister, only
as the Officer and Messenger of God, declares that it is he alone who Pardons
and Absolves Penitent Sinners. A Practice as far from bordering upon the
intolerable Arrogance of Antichrist; as it is on the other side from yielding
enough to the express Authority of Christ to adjudge it vain and fruitless. As
it is the Prince that Pardons, the Herald only proclaims it: So here, it is God
only who Pardons Sinners, the Minister's part is in a solemn and official
manner to Pronounce and Proclaim this Pardon, to all that shall accept it upon
the Terms on which it is offered by God. And this may suffice in Answer to that
Objection.

But then again it may be Objected, How is it God alone who forgives Sins,
whereas we likewise are bound to forgive those that Trespass against us.

To this I Answer, Every Trespass against Man is also an Offense against God;
for so merciful is our God unto us, that he has taken his Creatures under the
Protection of his Law, and fenced us round with the Authority of his Commands,
so that no injury can reach us, but it must commit a Trespass upon the Divine
Law, and break through those bounds that God has set about every Man's
Propriety and Right to defend it against unjust Invaders: But yet if any shall
dare to violate this, we must forgive them so far forth as it is a wrong to us,
(as I shall show more largely hereafter;) but we cannot pretend to forgive the
wrong that they have done to God in wronging us; but this must be left between
him and their own Souls; to his Mercy and their Repentance.

If then it be the Prerogative of God alone to pardon Sin, hence we may for our
abundant Comfort be informed,

First, That our Pardon is free and gratuitous; for whatsoever God does he does
it freely, for his own sake, without respect to any former deserts, or
expectations of any future recompense. It is infinitely below the Sovereignty
of his Grace to admit of any other motive for his Mercy, but his Mercy. And
therefore he has told us, I will be Gracious to whom I will be Gracious, and I
will show Mercy to whom I will show Mercy, Exodus 33.19. Since it is a God that
Pardons, it is infinitely unworthy of his Glory and Majesty to sell his Pardons
and Indulgencies, and to make his Mercy Merchandise.

But yet this pardoning Grace of God, though it be free in respect of Purchase,
yet is it limited to Conditions in respect of Application; which Conditions are
Faith and Repentance. Whosoever believes in him shall obtain remission of Sins,
Acts 10.43. Repent, says the Apostle, that your Sins may be blotted out, when
the times of refreshing shall come, Acts 3.19. Think not therefore, O Soul,
when thy Conscience is oppressed with the Guilt of Sin, think not what
Expiation thou must make, what Ransom thou must pay to God; say not, Wherewith
shall I come before the Lord, or bow my self before the High God? Shall I come
before him with Burnt-Offerings, with Calves of a year old? Will the Lord be
pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousand Rivers of Oil? Shall I
give my Firstborn for my Transgression, the Fruit of my Body for the Sin of my
Soul? as the Prophet speaks, Micah 6.6, 7. What shall I do, or what shall I
offer to make amends and recompense for my Offenses? This is to be injurious to
the free Grace of God, which requires no satisfaction from thee; only thy
present Acceptance and future Reformation. This is that indeed which God
requires from thee; but to think to purchase his Favor, and to buy his Mercy,
is infinitely to disparage it. And they only judge rightly of it, who judge it
invaluable.

Secondly, It is God that Pardons; therefore our Pardon is full and complete.
Indeed those Acts that God works within us are in this Life imperfect. The
Illumination of our Minds, the Sanctification of our Hearts, are God's Works
within us; and these are defective, not as they come from God, but as they are
received in us: As we know but in part so we are sanctified but in part. But
those Acts of God, that he does not work in us, but only terminate upon us, of
which we are the Objects, but not the Subjects, they are all as perfect here as
they shall be to all Eternity: Thus God Justifies, Adopts, and Pardons fully
and completely; for these are Acts of God residing in his own Breast, where
they meet with no opposition or allay; nor do they increase by any small
Degrees as our Sanctification does; but are at once as perfect as ever they
shall be. I do not mean, (though some have so thought and taught,) that God
does at once Pardon all the Sins of a true Believer, as well those which for
the future he shall commit, as those which he has already committed, which is
an absurd and dangerous Tenet; as if Sin could be pardoned before it were, or
guilt removed before it be contracted. But only whatsoever Sins God pardons, he
does it not gradually. Nothing of guilt is left upon the Soul when God Pardons
it, though still there be something of filth left in it when God Sanctifies it.
And therefore, as it is the great grief of God's Children, that their inherent
Holiness is so imperfect, affronted by Temptations, foiled by Corruptions,
oppressed and almost stifled to Death by a Body of Sin that lies heavy upon it;
yet this on the other Hand may be their exceeding great comfort and rejoicing,
that God's pardoning Grace is not as his sanctifying Grace is, nor granted to
them by the same stint and measure. A Sin truly repented of, is not pardoned to
us by halfs, half the guilt remitted and half retained, (as the Papists fancy
to establish their Purgatory:) No, O Sinner, there is not any guilt left for
thee to satisfy for, not any reserve of punishment for thee to undergo; but
all thy Sins are so pardoned, that they are in God's Account as if they had
never been committed against him. And therefore be thy Comforts never so strong
and flowing, and thy sense of God's pardoning Grace never so clear; yet know
that thy Pardon is still infinitely more perfect than thy Joy in it can be
satisfactory: For Assurance, and the sense of Pardon, is a Work of God's Spirit
wrought in us, and is commonly mixed with some hesitation and misgiving doubts;
but our Pardon is an Act of God in himself, where it meets with nothing
contrary; and therefore with no abatement; but is as perfect and absolute as
ever it shall be in Heaven it self.

Thirdly, Is it God that Pardons? Then for thy comfort know, that he can as
easily forgive great and many Sins, as few and small: For the greatness and
multitudes of thy Sins can make no odds in infinite Grace and Mercy, only
repent and believe. God proclaims his Name, Exodus 34 7. The Lord God Merciful
and Gracious, Long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth, forgiving
Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin: That is, all sorts and sizes of Sins. The
greatest Sins repented of, are no more, without the extent of his Mercy, than
the least unrepented of are without the cognizance of his Justice. And that
there is any one, (though but one) Sin unpardonable, arises not so much from
the atrociousness of the Fact, as if it exceeded Mercy; but only from the
malignity of its Nature, hardening the Heart against God, and making it
incapable of Repentance; otherwise could they who commit this Sin repent, even
they also should obtain Pardon. Say not therefore, Mine Iniquity is greater
than can be forgiven: I have out-sinn'd Mercy, and there is no Portion for me
in God, his fiery Indignation will eternally devour me. This is to be injurious
unto God, and to stint that Grace and Mercy which he has made infinite: And
thou may with as much Truth and Reason say, that thou art greater than God,
as that thy Sins are greater than his Mercy.

Yet here, before I leave this, let me caution you that you do not abuse this
comfortable Doctrine of God's pardoning Sin, and turn that into Presumption
that was intended only to arm you against Despair. Indeed both Presumption and
Despair tend, in a diverse manner, to encourage and harden Men in Sin: The
Despairing Sinner argues, If I must not be saved, if my Sins be so many and
great that there is no Pardon for them, to what purpose then should I live
strictly? To what purpose should I cross and vex my self by an unprofitable
severity? It is too great niceness to scruple farther sinning, when I am
already sure of Damnation; and therefore if I must go to Hell, I will make my
way thither as pleasant as I can. This is a kind of Despair that produces, not
horror, as it does in some, but a most wretched carelessness what becomes of
them.

On the other hand Presumptuous Men argue, God is able to pardon the greatest
and vilest Sinners; they cannot sin beyond the reach and extent of his Grace
and Mercy; and therefore what need they yet trouble themselves to repent and
reform, they will yet indulge themselves a little longer in their Sins; for it
is as easy for God to pardon them at the last moment of their lives; as upon
many years preparation.

We see Iniquity every where most fearfully to abound in the World, and
doubtless both Despair and Presumption have too great an influence both upon
the Minds and Lives of Men, to make them careless in their Eternal Concernments.

Enough has been spoken to the Despairing, which are but few; but to the
Presumptuous let me add a Word. It is the most unworthy and dis-ingenuous use
they can make of the Mercy of God to press it to serve against its Authority:
Shall we continue in Sin that Grace may abound, God forbid? Shall we Sin
licentiously, because God pardons freely? no, the Grace of God obliges
otherwise, the Love of Christ constrains otherwise; the filial disposition of
the New Creature enclineth otherwise;. Gratitude and Retribution engage
otherwise. But if these motives be too refined and ingenious for thy sordid and
slavish Spirit; and if thou will still go on in the Presumption of thy Heart,
crying Peace, Peace to thy self; although thou continuest, adding one Iniquity
to another, know, O vile wretch, that the Lord will not spare thee, but the
Anger of the Lord and his Jealousy shall smoke against thee; and all the
Curses that are written in his Book shall come upon thee, and the Lord will
blot out thy Name from under Heaven, Deutr. 29.19.

And thus I have done with the general consideration of God's pardoning Sin,
held forth to us in this Petition: Forgive us our Debts or Trespasses.

Now in this Petition we pray not only for the Pardon of Sin; but likewise for
all things that are antecedently necessary to obtain it: As,

First, We pray that God would discover to us the horrid odious Nature of Sin;
that he would convince us of the woeful miserable Estate that we are in by
Nature; and how much more wretched and miserable we have made our selves by our
sinful lives; that he would set home the terrors of Sin upon our Consciences
to our humiliation, and make us Despair in our selves, that we might fly unto
Christ, and lay hold on that help and refuge he has set before us.

Secondly, We pray that God would humble us under the sight and sense of our
manifold Transgressions, that as our Sins have made us vile in God's Eyes, so
they may make us vile in our own, to loath our selves in dust and ashes for
them.

Thirdly, We pray that God would give us his Spirit to enable us to confess our
Sins cordially, and sincerely to pour forth our Hearts before him, and to
acknowledge our manifold Provocations with shame and godly sorrow, upon which
God promised to grant us pardon and forgiveness, Prove. 28.13. He that covers
his Sin shall not prosper; but he that confesses and forsakes them shall find
Mercy. And the Apostle tells us, If we confess our Sins, God is Faithful and
Just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness, 1 John
1.9.

Fourthly, We beg a more clear understanding of the Sacrifice and Atonement
made by Jesus Christ, through which alone all Pardon is purchased and procured:
To know both what it is and why ordained; and likewise the knowledge of God's
rich and free Mercy, and the Conjunction of this Sacrifice and Mercy together,
in the great Mystery of the freeness of Divine Grace, and the Satisfaction of
Jesus concurring to the Remission of our sins, and the Salvation of our Souls.

Fifthly, We pray that we may have a high esteem of Christ, and may hunger and
thirst more after him and his Righteousness, through whom alone Pardon of our
sins is to be obtained.

Sixthly and lastly, We pray that we may be brought over to close with the Lord
Jesus Christ by a lively Faith; that his Righteousness thereby may be made
ours, and we by that Righteousness may obtain Pardon of our sins, and an
Inheritance among them that are Sanctified. For though Pardon be procured by
the Death of Christ, yet the Application of it to the Soul, is only by Faith,
uniting us unto him, and making us one with him. For all that Christ has
either done or suffered for the Redemption of the World, would be altogether in
vain as to our particular benefit and advantage, were it not that Faith
entitles us unto it, and makes that satisfaction which he has given to Divine
Justice to be Mystically our Act, as it was Personally his.

And thus I have considered the Petition it self, Forgive us our Debts.

I now proceed to the Condition or Plea annexed. As we forgive our Debtors. And
here we have,

First, the Act, Forgive.

Secondly, The Object, Debtors.

Thirdly, The limitation of this Object, our Debtors.

Fourthly, The proportion or resemblance, in the Particle as: As we forgive our
Debtors.

I shall begin with the Object, Debtors. As all Men stand indebted to God in a
Twofold Debt; a Debt of Obedience, and a Debt of Punishment: So one Man may be
a Debtor to another two ways; either by owing to him a Debt of Duty, or else a
Debt of Satisfaction.

First, Some Men stand indebted to others in a Debt of Duty. And indeed I might
well have said, this Debt is reciprocal between Man and Man. Thus Children, owe
Parents Reverence and Obedience, and Parents their Children Provision and
Education. Subjects owe their Magistrates Honor and Tribute, and Magistrates
owe their Subjects Justice and Protection. Servants owe their Masters Fear,
Diligence and Faithfulness; and Masters owe their Servants Maintenance and
Encouragement. And generally all Men owe one another, Love, Respect and
Kindness.

Now these Debts cannot balance one another, that as much as is left unpaid me
by any person; so much again I may refuse to pay him. If a Father pay not his
Debt to his Child, or a Magistrate to his Subject, or a Master to his Servants,
they are not hereby acquitted of their Obligations, but still Duty, Obedience
and Faithfulness is required from Inferiors to their Superiors: And so on the
contrary, Love, Protection and Maintenance is required from Superiors to their
Inferiors, although peccant, as long as the Relation shall continue between
them: And the reason is, because we are bound to these Duties, not only by the
Obligations that mutual Offices lay upon us, but by God's express Will and
Command, and the performance of the Relations that is betwixt us. And
therefore, though it be Lawful for two Persons that owe one another an equal
Debt of Money, or other such like things, to cross out one Debt by the other,
and so discount it betweem them: Yet it is not so where the Duties that God
requires are the Debts they owe to each other: for although others may fail in
the performance of what belongs to their part, yet thou ought not to fail in
thine; for thus to be even with Men, is to run in Debt with God, and to make
him thy Creditor, who will certainly be thy Revenger.

And from hence it appears that this is not the Debt that we are to forgive our
Debtors, for we have no power to release them from their Obligation to Duty,
whilst the Relation between us continues, no more than we have to rescind the
Laws of God and of Nature.

Secondly, Some Men may stand indebted to others in a Debt of Satisfaction, as
they owe them reparation on good grounds for wrongs and injuries done against
them, and this is the Debt which we are to forgive others.

Now as wrongs and injuries are of diverse sorts, so many diverse ways may others
become Debtors to us.

And they are chiefly these Six that follow:

First, By wronging us in our persons, either by unjust Violence, or by unjust
Restraints. Thus the Persecuting Jews were Debtors to the Apostles and
Disciples of Christ, for often Scourging and Imprisonieg them.

Secondly, By wronging us in our Place and Dignity, and in the Office, to which
by God's Providence we are called. And so also those that vilify the persons,
and detract from the Authority of those that are set over them, become their
Debtors. Thus Aaron and Miriam were Debtors unto Moses, for traducing the
Authority that God had committed unto him, Numb. 12.2.

Thirdly, By wronging us in our Friends and Relations, either by corrupting
them. Thus Sechem became a Debtor to Jacob and his Sons, for violating his
Daughter and their Sister. Or else by destroying them: So Herod to the
Bethlemitish Mothers by murdering their Children.

Fourthly, By wronging us in our Right and Title, withholding from us what is
our due.

Fifthly, In our Possessions, when either by Force or Fraud they take from us
what of Right belongs to us.

Sixthly, And lastly, in our Reputation and good Name, unjustly defaming us for
those Crimes which only their Malice has invented and published against us.

To all these wrongs we are subject, God permitting the wickedness of Men, a
large scope to vent it self, and affording us a large field to Exercise our
meekness and forgiving temper in each of these.

But withal, if those who in any of these, or any other particulars do wrong
their Brethren, are by the Sentence of our Savior here pronounced Debtors,
this should teach them to look upon themselves as obliged to make satisfaction
according to the utmost of their Power and Ability.

Thou therefore who art Conscious to thy self of wronging any either in their
Persons, or Dignities, or Relations, or Rights, or Possessions, or Reputations:
Though it be thy Duty to confess it before God, and humble thy self to him for
it, begging Mercy and Pardon at his hands: Yet this is not enough; for by one
single offense thou have contracted a double Debt; thou stand indebted to
the Justice of God for the Violation of his Law. But this is not all, but thou
stand in Debt unto Man likewise, by injuries done against him, and both thy
Creditors must be satisfied: God by the Righteousness of Christ through thy
Faith and Repentance; and Man by an Acknowledgment, Reparation and Restitution.
The Apostle has commanded us, Romans 13.8. To owe no Man any thing, but to love
one another. And indeed Satisfaction for Wrongs is a necessary part of
Repentance; for he that truly Repents, does really and from his heart wish that
the Wrong had never been done, and therefore willbe sure to do his utmost to
annihilate the fault, by giving the abused Party a compensation fully
answerable to the injury, and to the utmost of his Ability, restore him into
the same or a better Condition than that in which he was before he received the
Wrong. Therefore,

First, Art thou Conscious to thy self that thou have wronged any Man in his
Credit and Reputation, either by raising or divulging false and slanderous
Reports: know that thou art his Debtor, and Justice obliges thee to make him
satisfaction for that injury, by wiping away those aspersions, and licking away
the dirt with the same Tongue with which thou did bespatter him: for if thou
suffer the same Reports to run on which thou have set on foot, all that
shall relate them after thee, multiply thy guilt; and all the numerous
Offspring of Lies, which (through a certain itch that Men have of speaking
ill) will be soon propagated, shall all be charged upon thee; for of them all,
thou and the Devil art the Father.

2ly, Art thou Conscious thou have wronged thy Superiors, as Magistrates,
Ministers, Parents, or Masters, in that Authority and Power that God has given
them over thee, by any disobedient demeanor toward them: know that thou art
their Debtor, and it lies upon thy Conscience to give them due satisfaction;
which because it cannot be done by recalling the Offenses past, it must be done
by an humble acknowledgment to them, desiring their Pardon, and promising and
endeavoring more ready submission for the future. So was the Case of Aaron and
Miriam when they had affronted Moses, and were convinced of the wrong they had
done him: Aaron makes his humble acknowledgment and begs forgiveness, Numb.
12.11. Alas my Lord, I beseech thee lay not this sin upon us, wherein we have
done foolishly, and wherein we have sinned. And so the Prodigal when he
returned to his Father, confessed his disobedience, Luke 15.21. Father, I have
sinned against Heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son. Which though it be a Parable, yet teaches us real and literal Duties in
parallel cases.

Thirdly, Art thou Conscious to thy self, that thou have wronged any one in
their Right, either in withholding or taking from them what in Law and Equity
belonged to them? thou art their Debtor, and as such art bound to make them
satisfaction by making them a full and plenary Restitution; and that though the
thing wherein thou have wronged them be great or small, more or less; yea
though it should seemingly tend to the loss of thy Credit to acknowledge such a
wrong, or visibly tend to thy impoverishing and undoing to restore it. Nor is
it enough when thy Conscience checks thee for it, that thou confess the sin to
God, and prayest for Pardon at his hands; but it behooveth thee to render unto
Man what is his, and what thou unjustly keep from him, whether it be his by
thy Promise and Engagement, or by his former Title and Possession. As thou
love thy Soul, and hopest for Pardon and Salvation, thou must make
Restitution; and the reason is, because as long as thou detainest it, so long
thou continuest in the Commission of the same sin, for an unjust detainure and
possession is a continued and prolonged Theft: And certainly our Repentance be
it what it will, can never be true and sincere while we continue in the sin we
seem to repent of, and this Repentance not being true, Pardon shall never be
granted thee, but as thou remainest a Debtor to Man, so thy Debt to God remains
uncancell'd; and though Men may not sue thee to recover their Right, because
this sin sometimes is so secretly carried on, that it may not come to their
knowledge, yet Divine Justice will sue thee for it, and pursue thee to Eternal
Condemnation.

But you may say, What if those whom we have wronged, be since dead? how can
any Restitution be made to them, or any Recompense reach them.

I Answer; In this case, thou art bound to find out their Children or Relations
in whom they still live, and to whom it is to be supposed, that which thou have
detained, should have descended, and to restore it unto them, with ample
satisfaction likewise for all the prejudice they have sustained in the mean
time for want of it.

But in case none can be found to whom of Right it may belong, then God's Right
takes place, as he is the Universal Proprietor of all things, and thou ought
besides what thou art obliged to give of thine own, to bestow it in Works of
Charity and Piety, which may promote his Glory, still bewailing that thou have
so long deferred the Restitution of it to the immediate Owners, till thou have
made thy self now incapable of doing it.

This perhaps will seem a very hard Lesson to many; and doubtless it is so to a
World so full of Rapine and Injustice: But I cannot, I dare not make God's
Commands lighter nor easier than he has made them: And let this seem as hard
as it will, yet this is the Rule of Christianity, this is the inflexible Law of
Justice, and without observing it, you keep your selves from all hopes of
obtaining Pardon by continuing in your sin, which is utterly inconsistent with
Repentance, and without Repentance there can be no Remission nor Salvation.

And thus much for the word Debtors, and what it intimates to us; namely, that
we are bound to make satisfaction for all the wrongs and injuries we have done
to any others.

But then as there lies this Debt on the part of the Debtor, so does there
likewise one great and important Duty on the part of the Creditor, and that is
forgiveness: As we forgive our Debtors. Now all pardon and forgiveness is a
removing of the liableness unto punishment under which we formerly lay: And
therefore as when God pardons, he frees us from the punishment due to our
offenses; so when we pardon and forgive others, it must be by a meek forbearing
to punish others who have offended us. And this consists in two things.

First, In abstaining from the outward Acts of private and personal Revenge,
whether by word, or by deed; for both are expressly forbidden us. If others have
bent their Tongues against us, and shot forth their Arrows even cruel words;
Christianity obliges us not to return them back again, much less, (as is the
common but wicked practice of the most) with double measure and advantage: for
if they have wronged us by their actions, as well as by their speeches, we may
not assume to our selves a liberty of Retribution, nor think that the iniquity
of their proceeding, will justify the Equity of ours: for both of these, see
what the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 3.9. Be pitiful, be courteous, not rendering evil
for evil, for railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing, knowing that you
are thereunto called that you should inherit a blessing. And indeed there is
nothing that the Gospel and Laws of Christ do more instantly press upon us,
than that we would not requite injuries with injuries: This prohibition is the
proper Character of his Doctrine, and this the practice of his Disciples.
Revenge is a wild untamed passion that knows no bounds nor measures. And if we
were permitted to carve it out for our selves, we should certainly exceed all
limits and moderation: for self-love which is an immoderate affection, would be
made the whole Rule of our vengeance: And because we love our selves abundantly
too well, we should revenge every imaginary wrong done us with too much
bitterness and severity: And therefore God would not trust the righting of our
selves in our own hands, knowing we would be too partial to our own interest
and concerns; but has assumed it to himself as the Prerogative of his own
Crown. Romans 12.19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give
place unto Wrath, for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay says the
Lord.

But you will say, How then, must we sit down under every petulant wrong that
is done us, and by a stupid Patience invite injuries, and tempt others to the
sport and recreation of abusing us; for every one will be ready to shoot his
Arrows against a soft Butt, where they will stick; but who will care to shoot
them against a Stone-wall, that will rebound them back in their Faces again?

I Answer, It is indeed well worth the most serious and critical consideration,
rightly to state how far we are bound to forgive Injuries and Wrongs, without
requiring any satisfaction for them. And because the resolution of this seems
to be of great difficulty, as also of great importance for the regulating of
our Consciences, I shall first lay down some Distinctions, and then some
Conclusions drawn from them for our more full satisfaction in this case.

First, Those Wrongs that are done thee, may either be forgiven by thee or
without doing any wrong to others, or not.

Secondly, Those Wrongs which thou may forgive without doing any wrong to
any other, are either light and tolerable Offenses, or of great concern and
consequence. Now these Distinctions being premised, I say,

First, In no Case whatsoever, be the injury greater or less, is private
revenge to be allowed; but so far forth art thou bound to forgive it, as not to
be both Judge and Executioner thy self. This, I suppose, is clear and
indubitable, that all revenge is to be committed to the Magistrate's Sword,
whom God has armed with Authority and Commission, to be the Avenger to execute
Wrath upon them that do evil.

Secondly, Therefore if the wrong thou have received be insupportable, and
tends either to the ruin of thy Estate and necessary subsistence, or to the
irreparable loss of thy good Name, or it may be of thy Life: I know no precept
of forgiveness, that does in this case forbid thee to seek satisfaction; but it
must be only in a public and legal way, otherwise in forgiving others we
should vastly injure our selves, and so pervert the rule which commands us to
love our Neighbors as our selves, and therefore our selves primarily as the
standard and measure of our love to them. Now if any one should attempt to take
away that which is necessary to my livelihood; or by false accusations should
go about to take away my Credit or my Life; certainly I owe so much Charity to
my self, as to resist him in it, and to require satisfaction and recompense for
it; but still this must be observed, that we ought not to right our selves
according to our own private discretion, but by the Sentence of the Law and by
the Authority of the Magistrate; for the Law is good, says the Apostle, if it
be used lawfully. And therefore briefly in our seeking for our Right at Law
there are these three things requisite to make it a lawful and allowable Action.

First, When that we sue for, is a matter of moment.

Secondly, When we have to do with obstinate and stubborn Persons, who will
yield to nothing but what they are forced and compelled to, and will not stand
to the Award and Arbitration of private Christians.

Thirdly, When we have beforehand used all likely and probable means to
prevail with those who have done us wrong, to make us necessary and fitting
satisfaction. These Three things must always concur to make our suing even for
public revenge a thing lawful. And then in all such Processes we must be sure
to observe these Two things.

First, That we have Right on our side, or at least be verily persuaded that we
have it, and that the Person whom we prosecute does us wrong. To seek for
reasonable satisfaction in this case, is so far from being charged with Rancour
and Malice, that it is rather an effect of Love to bring them to do us right,
whereby indeed they do greater right to themselves.

Secondly, We must be sure to maintain Love to them, being willing and ready to
do them any kind Offices, whatsoever lies in our power. We must therefore seek
our Right with much meekness and compassion. And when a Controversy depends
between us and any other, we should not make it a matter of strife and
variance, but only put it to the decision of the Law, to whom the right
belongs; and if it be found to belong to the other, and not to thy self, thou
ought to be glad that Right is done, and to prefer the interest of Justice
before thine own; otherwise thou seek Victory and not Equity. And this is
the Second Conclusion, that for a great important Wrong, thou may lawfully
seek for satisfaction.

Thirdly, If the Wrong done thee cannot be passed by without the wronging of
others, thou may and ought in this case to require satisfaction. As for
instance, the Laws of the Land have ordained Death as the punishment of
Robberies and Theft upon the Highway in the Day, and breaking open of Houses
in the Night; not so much for revenge upon the Guilty, as for example to
others, and for security to the Innocent. In this case, we ought not to pass by
any who have been deprehended thus unjustly invading our Possessions;
especially if we have just cause to suspect, (as commonly it so happens,) that
our suffering them to escape, will but embolden them to farther outrages; for
this were a wrong done to the Nation and Community in which we live, and by
such an indiscreet pity and compassion we bring upon our selves the Guilt of
all the Crimes that they afterward commit.

Fourthly, If the Wrongs that are done thee be tolerable, and thou may
forgive them without wronging of others; the Laws of Christianity oblige thee
so to do, without standing upon any satisfaction and reparation for them. Our
Savior has given us our Rule in this Case, Matthew. 5.40. If any Man will sue
thee at Law and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also: Which teaches
us that about small matters, things which we may easily be without, or easily
procure, such as a Cloak or Coat, we should not be contentious, but rather
recede from our Right, than vigorously pursue it with strifes and quarrels. And
we ought to be so far from seeking revenge for such petty Injuries, as are not
destructive nor greatly prejudicial to us, as to be willing rather to suffer a
Second, than to revenge the First.

For if all that can be called our due and our right must be exacted to the
very utmost, what Debt is there that we are bound to forgive? Those therefore
are justly to be condemned that take every advantage against their Neighbors,
and although the Offense be but trivial, a passionate Word, or a sudden and
light Blow, that proceeded not from any propense and intended Malice, or the
like, presently pursue such Advantages with rigor and extremity; and because
they may do it according to the Law of Man, regard not the Law of God which
commands us to forgive such Debtors.

And this is the first thing wherein forgiveness does consist, in abstaining
from the outward Acts of Revenge, and exacting satisfaction from those who have
wronged us, where we have seen how it is limited, and how to be observed.

Secondly, Forgiving our Debtors consists in the inward frame and temper of our
Hearts toward them, that we bear them no Malice, no Ill Will; but be as much
in Charity with them, as though they never had offended us. And this
forgiveness we are bound always to exercise, even in those cases in which we
may seek for satisfaction; yea, although we could never prosecute them for
satisfaction; yet if we retain secret grudgings and animosities in our Hearts
against them, this is not an entire forgiveness, and such as will be acceptable
to God; for he estimates the Heart, and not only the outward Actions-which may
have many bye ends to sway and direct them.

And thus I have, as briefly as I could, shown you what forgiving of our
Debtors is, and how far we are bound to do it.

And now, Christians, I know you cannot, but reflect seriously upon it, how
hard and difficult a Duty this of forgiveness is. It is that which the whole
interest of Flesh and Blood, and all the Party that Passions and Affections can
muster up within us will certainly rebel against this Doctrine. And alas, how
seldom is it that Men can conquer themselves so as to yield obedience unto it
really and cordially! Whence is it that all places are so full of Railing and
Reviling, Quarrels and Challenges, vexatious Contentions, and endless Suits,
Warrants, Arrests, Actions, and Imprisonments, and that upon slight Injuries
and Provocations; but only that they have not learned this necessary Duty, of
forgiving one another? Nay, many think it the part of a high Spirit and
generous Nature to make themselves terrible to those whom they suppose have in
the least wronged and affronted them; and upon the least disgust fly out into
all extremities of Threatenings and Revenge; whereas in Truth this is but the
Effect of a mean and sordid Spirit. It is a Disposition breathed into Men's
Souls by the Devil, and demonstrates, as a great deal of Pride, so a great deal
of Vileness and Baseness: The truest Gallantry and Generousness is to imitate
the great God, in being patient and long-suffering, and ready to pardon and
forgive. This is that height of Spirit, the true Magnanimity and Greatness;
and if we would be perfect we must stoop; stoop did I say? rather we must
aspire to this Heavenly Temper. And to excite unto this, consider,

First, That it is infinitely more honorable to forgive a Wrong than to
revenge it: For,

First, The one makes thee like to God, the other makes thee like the Devil:
Yea, it is the chiefest excellency by which God delights to be set forth. I,
even I, am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions, Isai. 43.25. And who is a
God like unto thee that Pardons Iniquity? Micah 7.18. Now how Glorious is it to
imitate God in that which he himself counts his chiefest Glory? The Great Ones
of the Earth imitate him in Power and Authority, and are some kind of
glimmering Types of his Majesty, who daunts and dazles all approachers. But a
poor contemptible Christian, whose meanness lays him open and exposed to all
the Wrongs and Injuries of abusive and insulting Wretches, may represent a far
greater Glory of God, than that wherein Princes and Monarchs shine; even his
Forbearance, Pity, Long-suffering, and Pardon: He may represent God sitting
upon his Throne of Grace; whereas the other represents him only sitting upon
his Throne of Power. Now God never Triumphs more in any Attribute, than that of
his Mercy: See with what fair Flourishes he writes his Name, Exodus 34.6. The
Lord, the Lord God; infinite in Power, that spreads forth the Heavens and
rangeth all the Host of them, that hangs up the Earth in the midst of the Air,
and the whole World in the midst of a vast and boundless nothing, that pours
out the great Deep and measures it in the hollow of his Hand, that rides upon
the Wings of the Wind, and makes the Clouds the dust of his Feet? No, but when
he would display himself in his greatest Glory, he does it in a still Voice,
The Lord God, Merciful and Gracious, Long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness
and Truth, keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression, and
Sin. Now, O Christian, by forgiving those who have wronged thee, thou make
thy self as a God unto them, and imitatest him in that wherein he does chiefly
Glory.

Secondly, It is more honorable, because to Pardon is always the Act of a
Superior; it is a Prerogative of Royalty, and highly becomes the Majesty of
those whom Christ has made Kings as well as Priests; and certainly they cannot
better declare themselves such, than by issuing out Pardons. Think therefore
with thy self, O Christian, when thou art wronged and affronted, think what an
advantage the petulancies of froward Men do give thee to make thy self their
Superior; it is but pardoning them and thou ascendest the Throne. And
certainly they can never so much Triumph over thee by their Injuries as thou
may over them by Forgiveness. And so much for the First motive.

Secondly, Consider how many Offenses God has forgiven thee, and this will be
an effectual motive to engage thee to forgive others. And here consider who it
is that has forgiven thee, and what it is he has, forgiven thee.

First, Consider who it is that has forgiven thee. And here consider the
infinite distance that is between thee and him; he is the Sovereign Lord and
Creator of all, in comparison with whom thou art nothing, yea less than
nothing. He stands in no need of thee, but whether thou live or die, perish or
art saved, he is the same God, for ever Blessed in himself. He is able to
destroy thee every moment, able to breath thee back into thy Dust, to look thee
into Hell and Destruction. They perish at the rebuke of thy Countenance, Psalm.
80.16. And yet this high and absolute Lord, at thy entreaty, freely forgives
thee all thy Debts, although he might have gotten himself a great renown in thy
everlasting Perdition, and might have set thee up as a flaming Monument of his
Wrath, and inscribed on thee Victory and Truimph to the Glory of his
everlasting Vengeance. And should not thou then, O Man, O Worm, forgive thy
Fellow Servants, one of the same Mold and Materials with thy self, one to whom
perhaps thou art no way Superior, unless that he has now given thee an
opportunity of pardoning him; one who possibly may hereafter be helpful unto
thee, and in Agreement and Peace with whom thou may find much Comfort and
Good to thy self; should thou not much more forgive him? Certainly God may
very well think thee unworthy of his Pardon, who art infinitely his Inferior,
if thou can not think those worthy of thy Pardon, who in Nature are thy
Equals.

Secondly, Consider the Wrongs and Debts that God has forgiven thee, are
infinitely greater than those thou art to forgive unto Men: Their Offenses
against thee are but Pence; but thine against God are Talents. And as there is
a vast disproportion in the Nature of the Offenses, so is there likewise in the
Number of them. The Servant in the Parable, whom his Lord forgave, owed him ten
thousand Talents; but his Fellow Servants, whom this Wretch would not forgive,
owed him but an hundred Pence, Matthew. 18. So is it with us, our Sins against
God, for the greatness of them are Talents, for the number of them are ten
thousand; in every thing we do we wrong the Glory of God, and are continualling
offending him: But Men do not always wrong us; or if they did, yet the least of
our Offenses against God is far more heinous, than the greatest of Men's can be
against us; we cannot speak of him, nor to him, but that by our unworthy and
low Conceptions we revile him far more, than any Man can do us by the most
studied and bitter invectives. The least irreverend thought of God is a greater
injury against him, than it would be against us if Men should wound or stab us.
And yet although thy Deeds be as great as Talents, and so numerous as many
thousand Talents, yet thy Lord and Master frankly forgave thee all: And this
should, by all the obligations of ingenuity, constrain thee to forgive thy
Fellow Servants so small Debts as a hundred Pence, when he has not wherewithal
to make thee satisfaction. See how our Savior presses this in the forecited
place, Matthew. 18.32. I forgave thee all that Debt thou owedst me, because thou
desiredst me; and should not thou have had compassion on thy Fellow Servants,
as I had pity on thee? Certainly if ever thou accountedst the pardoning Grace
and Mercy of God sweet and precious, I will not say thou should be glad of
Wrongs that than might have occasion to pardon them; but yet certainly thou
should most cordially embrace all such occasions, if it were but only to
recommend the excellency of thy Charity unto others; as Divine Love has
recommend its Fullness and Riches to thy dearest esteem. And that is the Second.
But,

Thirdly, Consider the binding Particle in the Text, Forgive us our Debts, as
we forgive our Debtors. And now think with thy self, that thou do but bind
and seal the guilt of thy Sins upon thy own Soul, unless thou art willing and
ready to forgive others. Thou who art revengeful and implacable, instead of
praying, pronouncest the most direful and dreadful Curse that can be against
thy self, and beggest of God, no more to forgive thee, than thou do forgive
those that have offended thee; and so thy Prayer is not only turned into Sin,
but into a Snare and Curse, and thou passest upon thy self the tremendous
Sentence of thine own Eternal Damnation; for if thou prayest that God would
forgive thee as thou forgivest others, thou either cursest thy self, or else
thou must forgive them.

Now this forgiving of others must have these Qualifications.

First, It must be unfeigned and cordial from thy very Heart and Soul, for so
thou would have God forgive thee. It is not enough to forbear outward
Revenge; but thou must not harbor in thy Breast the least grudge or prejudice
against them. God forgives so as to forget; but if thou keep Malice raked up
in thy Heart till thou can find a fit opportunity to vent it in Revenges; how
can thou but expect that God likewise should take his advantage against thee,
and when it would make most for the Glory of his Justice, break forth upon thee
and exercise his vengeance in thy everlasting Destruction.

Secondly, Thou art obliged likewise to forgive freely without any Recompense
or Satisfaction from others. If the injury be supportable, we ought not so much
as expect or desire Satisfaction; if it be otherwise, and yet the persons
offending unable to make Satisfaction, we ought to forgive them without taking
any unmerciful Revenge upon them; which is the wicked custom of many, who will
cast their insufficient Debtors into Prison, and there let them starve and rot;
though by this cruelty they cannot satisfy their Debt, but their Malice and
Revenge.

Thirdly, We must forgive others fully and completely, for God does so. He
pardons our sins so fully, that they are in his account as if they had never
been committed; and so must we pardon injuries wholly and fully as if there had
never been any done us. This the Apostle observes toward the Galatians, who
were a People as injurious to his Ministry and Authority as any could be, and
yet he forgives it so fully that he tells them, Gal. 4.12. Brethren, I beseech
you be as I am, for I am as you are, you have not injured me at all. And to
express all this, we must blot out the remembrance of all wrongs, and be ready
cheerfully to take all occasions to do good unto them; yea, not only to take
them, but to seek them: This will be a plain Evidence that on Leaven of Malice
or Revenge has soured our Spirits.

Well then to sum and close up all: What is it thou can plead for Revenge,
which the consideration of God's pardoning thee will not abundantly answer. Is
it that the wrongs that others have done thee are great and insupportable?
What, are they more intolerable than thy sins against God? Is it that he is a
vile and inferior person unto thee? How much more art thou so unto God? Is it
that he has often wronged thee? Are they not ten thousand Talents that God
has forgiven thee? Is it that he will be emboldened to wrong and injure thee
again? Possibly so, but thou art not certain of it: However, consider how often
thou have abused the Mercy of God to encourage thee, in sinning against him: Is
it that Men will think thee base and cowardly if thou put up such wrongs
and injuries? Seek thou the Honor that comes from God, and not the vain
foolish Repute of Men. But is God indeed accounted Faithful in pardoning thee?
or does he spare thee because he dare not strike thee? Certainly there is no
offense, nor an aggravavation of any offense, that can be pleaded as a Reason
for Revenge, but the same may in a greater measure, and in a higher proportion
be pleaded why God should Revenge himself upon thee; and yet if notwithstanding
this, thou hopest for pardon and forgiveness from him: go then to thy Brother
and do likewise.

And thus I have finished the Fifth Petition, the matter of which being of such
vast and important consequence, I have expatiated beyond what my First intended
Method would allow. I shall contract my self in what remains, and keep my self
within the limits of an Exposition.

We are now come unto the Sixth and Last Petition of this most Excellent and
Divine Prayer, which some divide into two, making the one Negative, Lead us not
into Temptation; and the other positive, But deliver us from evil. But the
matter being not great, whether they be one or two, I shall not contend about
it.

And here before I come to speak of the Petition it self, I shall (as I have
done in the former) speak something concerning the Reason and Wisdom of its
Order and Method.

And the only thing that I shall remark, is that whereas it immediately follows
upon that Petition wherein we beg the Pardon of our Sins, that we may not be
lead into Temptation: This ought to teach us that it should be our care not
only to seek for the pardon of our past sins, but to endeavor the prevention
of sin for the future. And therefore as when our Savior cured the impotent Man
that had lain a long time at the Pool of Bethesday without relief, he gives him
this caution, John 5.14. Behold thou art made whole, sin no more lest a worse
thing come unto thee. So when God has healed those Mortal Wounds that sin has
made in our Souls, by his pardoning Grace; it highly concerns us, without most
exact circumspection to beware that we be not again entangled in guilt, and
with our most fervent Affections to pray that we may not be exposed to the
fiery Darts of the Devil to wound us anew: for Relapses and Recidivations are
always most dangerous and fatal; and new Wounds received upon old Scars, most
difficult to be healed. And indeed without this preventing Grace of God, all
his pardoning Grace would be but in vain. It would be fruitless to forgive
sins, if God did not withal secure us for the future from running upon the
score with his Justice: for such is the Force and Fraud of the Tempter, and the
corruption of our own Natures so prone to comply with whatsoever he offers and
suggests to us, that did not God as well give us a stock to live upon, as
forgive us our former Debts, we should soon run our selves as deep in Arrears
as ever, and make our selves liable to be seized on by Justice and condemned to
the Infernal Prison. And therefore that God's Grace in forgiving our
Trespasses, may not be in vain, our Savior has taught us to subjoyn this
Request, Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil. And thus much
for the Connection of this Petition with the foregoing.

The Petition it self contains in it two branches, the one against Temptations,
the other against the prevalency of them: Lead us not into Temptation, suffer
us not to be assaulted and buffeted by the wicked one: or if, O Lord, thou
shall in thy all-wise Counsel and Purpose permit us to be Tempted, yet deliver
us from the evil to which we are Tempted. Let us endure Temptations as our
Affliction, but let us not consent to them and make them our sins.

It is the former of these that I shall first speak to, and therein I shall
endeavor to show:

First, What Temptations are. And,

Secondly, How God may be said to lead us into Temptation, for that is supposed
when we pray he would not do so.

First, What Temptations are. Temptation, according to the proper signification
of the word, is no other but a Trial or Probation. And this may be of two
kinds. Exploratory, or Suasory.

First, There is an Exploratory Temptation, to search out and to discover what
is in Man, what his Graces and Corruptions are.

Secondly, There is a Suasory or enticing Temptation, that inclines the Will
and Affections to close with what is presented to them.

Now in general, we may observe five several sorts of Temptations, whereof some
are of the former, others of the latter kind.

First, Some whereby one Man Tempts another. Secondly, Some whereby we Tempt
our selves. Thirdly, Some whereby we Tempt God. Fourthly, Some whereby God
Tempts us. And, Fifthly, Some whereby the Devil Tempts us.
First, There are some Temptations whereby one Man tempts another: And such
Temptations may be faultless, when they come only by Exploration, either to
find out Men's great Excellencies: Thus the Queen of Sheba came to tempt or to
prove Solomon with hard Questions, 2 Cron. 9.1. to know whether his Wisdom was
answerable to the Fame that went of it. Or else to find out and discover their
Rottenness and Hypocrisy; and thus the Church of Ephesus is commended for
tempting or trying those who said they were Apostles and were not, finding them
to be Liars. But it is Devilish, when it is either by Suasion unto that which
is Evil: Thus the Whorish Woman Tempted the young Fool, Prove. 7.18. Or with a
design to entrap or draw any into danger. Thus the Old Prophet Tempted the
young Prophet, being vexed that God should Honor him with so important a
Message, whilst he was passed by, and knowing that God would not suffer his
disobedience to go unpunished, in 1 Kings 13.18. And such was the wicked Plot
laid by the Pharisees, Luke 20.23. when they came and asked our Savior,
whether it was Lawful to pay Tribute to Caesar or not? which if he had
affirmed, would have lessened his Repute among the People, and made them to
fall off from him, because they looked upon Caesar but as an Usurper, and
groaned for deliverance from the Roman Yoke of Bondage; yea, and many of them
hoped and expected that this would have been effected by our Savior. Or if he
had denied, it would have brought him into danger of his life as an Enemy unto
Caesar, as afterward he was accused to be.

Secondly, There is a way of Temptation whereby a Man Tempts himself, and that
is Praiseworthy when it is only by Exploration and Trial of his own heart, to
find out what Graces and what Corruptions lodge there. Thus we find the Saints
in Scripture often examining and proving themselves. And every Christian is
commanded expressly so to do. 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether you be in
the Faith, prove your own selves. But it is wicked and sinful in two cases.

First, Then a Man wickedly and sinfully Tempts himself, when by presuming upon
his own strength, he unnessarily runs into danger, and ventures upon the next
occasions of sinning, for this is to come within the Devils Purliews, and if
any such be made his prey, they must thank their own venturousness and folly.

Thus we Tempt our selves to the Commission of those sins, which we beforehand
know such company, or such Employments, or other like Circumstances will prompt
us to commit.

Secondly, A Man is said to Tempt himself, when he is drawn aside by his own
Lusts and enticed. James 1.14. For whenever any particular sinful Object is
propounded, it is this Lust that excites the heart to close with it and embrace
it. This is indeed the great Tempter, without which other Temptations to evil
would be but weak and ineffectual. And though possibly they might prevail
through the innate liberty of our wills, yet were it not for our corruptions
that cleave unto us, Temptations would have no more advantage upon us than our
own free choice, and we might as easily reject as consent unto them.

Thirdly, There is a Temptation by which we are said to Tempt God: For the
Scripture frequently witnesses that God is Tempted by us, Exodus 12.2. Moses
chiding the People of Israel, expostulates with them: Wherefore do you Tempt
the Lord? And God himself complains of it, Numb. 10.22. That they had Tempted
him ten times. Mal. 3.15. Acts 15.10. and diverse other places. God is therefore
Tempted by us, not as we are unto evil. For this the Apostle expressly denies,
James 1.13. God cannot be Tempted to evil. But,

First, Tempting of God, is sometimes taken for a presumptuous trying of the
Providence of God. When we have no warrant nor necessity to cast our selves
upon the extraordinary effects of it. Thus Christ Answers the Devil Tempting
him to precipitate himself from the Pinnacle of the Temple, upon confidence of
an Extraordinary and Miraculous support from God, It is written, says he, Thou
shall not Tempt the Lord thy God, Matthew. 4.7. That is, we must not put God upon
working of Miracles for our deliverance, when we may keep our selves from the
danger in an ordinary providential way.

Secondly, Tempting of God is often times the same with provoking him. And
therefore we find them put together Psalm. 95.8. As in the provocation and in
the day of Temptation in the Wilderness. And therefore, look how God may be
said to be provoked, so he may be said to be Tempted. That is, both in
condescension to our Capacities, and in reference to the effects of it: for as
a Man that is provoked, is Tempted to take Revenge upon him that has done him
the injury; So God expresses himself as provoked by our sins, and Tempted
thereby to inflict Wrath and Vengeance upon us for them. But this is only
Figuratively. As for any proper Temptation by any new motion or inclination
wrought in the Divine Will by the presence of any new Object, so God cannot
without Blasphemy be said to be Tempted.

Fourthly, There is a Temptation whereby God is said to Tempt us: Now this is
always Holy and Just; and it is only a Temptation of Trial and Probation.
Sometimes it is to discover his Peoples Graces: And so he Tempted Abraham, that
his Obedience might be conspicuous, Genesis 22.1. And sometimes to discover their
corruptions. So he Tempted Hezekiah, 2 Cron. 32.31. It is said, That God left
him to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart: Not but that God
knew it before, for he is the Searcher of the Heart, and the Trier of the
Reins. But that hereby it might be discovered and made apparent, and that
Hezekiah by the discovery of his Pride and Corruption, might take occasion to
humble himself the more deeply before God.

Fifthly, There is a Temptation whereby Satan Tempts us: yea, it is his proper
Work, and that from which he has his Name (...), the Tempter, 1 Thessal. 3.5.
Lest by some means the Tempter might have Tempted you. Now as God Tempts only
by Exploration and Trial: So the Devil always Tempts by Suasion, inducing us by
all possible Arguments and Motives to the Commission of sin, that he may have
advantage to accuse us of it, and hereafter to torment us for it.

Now among these many various kinds of Temptations which have been reckoned up,
those Temptations which we are to pray against, are of three sorts.

Such as proceed from our own Lusts and Corruptions; such as proceed from other
Men's persuading us, either by Motives or Examples unto that which is evil; or
lastly, such as proceed from the Devil; or else they may be reduced to these
two Heads. The Temptations which proceed from our own inbred Lusts and
Corruptions, and those which proceed from the Devil: for indeed wicked Men are
but his Agents and Instruments, when they Tempt us to that which is evil.

Now that our Savior Christ should make it the great matter and object of our
Prayers, to beg of God that we may not be led into Temptation, we may observe
that it is a Christian's Duty, not only to keep himself from sin, but also to
endeavor to keep himself from Temptation to sin. For,

First, It is a very ill sign of a rotten and carnal heart, to be content to
lie under a Temptation, although it does not consent to the commission of sin.
It speaks some kind of contentment and complacency that we take in the sin,
when though we do not commit it, yet we are very well pleased to hear of it,
and to entertain Motions and Solicitations to it: This argues the Soul is not
chaste toward God, that though we cannot enjoy it in commission, yet we will
make some recompense to our selves for the scrupulousness of our Consciences,
by enjoying it in the Temptation.

Secondly, If you suffer a Temptation to lodge in your Hearts, you are in
imminent danger of being prevailed upon by it: The Temptation will be
continually gathering strength, and your opposition against it may in some time
flag and grow remiss, and objects and opportunities and such like advantages,
may add such a force to the Temptation, as may hurry you away into the
commission of the sin contrary to your former resolutions: You can promise your
self no safety, no not from the commission of the vilest Sins, as long as you
suffer the Temptation to abide upon you. Puddles that stand long unmoved will
at last breed filthy and venomous Creatures: So a Temptation that lies long
unmoved and undisturbed upon you, will form some filthy and loathsome Sin or
other. The only secure way is to strike at the Temptation it self, to cut that
off, and then there is no danger to be feared from the Sin. This is the course
St. Paul took, 2 Cor. 12.8. when he was buffeted by a Messenger from Satan,
that is assaulted by a Temptation, he not only takes care that he might not
yield to it, that was not altogether enough for a truly Gracious Soul to do;
but he labors to be rid of the Temptation it self; for this thing I besought
the Lord thrice, that is often, that it might depart from me. He prays not only
that he may be kept from the Sin to which he was Tempted, but that he might be
freed also from the Temptation it self.

Thirdly, Consider that as all Temptations are dangerous, and that we have
great reason to fear least in the end they should prevail upon us to commit the
Sin to which we are Tempted; so most of them are not only Temptations, but Sins
also. Indeed there is a Temptation to Sin, which is a Temptation only and no
Sin; for so Christ himself was Tempted, Matthew. 4.1. He was led into the
Wilderness to be Tempted of the Devil. And we read there with what horrid
Temptations he was assaulted, even to Worship the Devil, to distrust God, and
to destroy himself. And yet as black as these Temptations were, they were only
Temptations and no Sins; for so the Apostle tells us, Heb. 4.15. He was Tempted
in all things like unto us, Sin only excepted. And such sometimes are the
Temptations wherewith the Devil assaults the Children of God, horrid and
hellish Temptations, even to deny the very Being of God, the Truth of the
Scriptures, the Immortality of the Soul, Heaven and Hell, and such bublings of
Blasphemies against the very Fundamentals and Ground-works of Religion; and yet
if we be watchful presently to abhor and reject these injections of Satan, and
to cast back into his Face these his fiery Darts which he shoots into our
Souls; they are not our Sins, though they are our Troubles; but they shall be
charged upon Satan, to whom of right they do belong, we being but only Passive
and Sufferers in them. But truly the most of our Temptations are Sins
themselves; and therefore we have great Reason and need to pray against them;
for they are Sins unto Sins; Sins as they are irregular and inordinate Motions
of our Passions and Affections, and unto Sin as they tend to the bringing forth
of farther Evil. And such are all the Temptations of our inbred Lusts and
Corruptions, when our Desires and Affections strongly incline us to those
Objects which God by his express Law has forbidden us. Were it not for these
sinful Temptations, the others which are immediately injected by the Devil,
would not have any great advantage to prevail over us; for by reason of our
Lusts and Corruptions, our Hearts always stand open to let in the Devil, and
were it not that these have seized on the Soul, the Devil must have stood
without, and though he had knocked, yet would he have knocked in vain: And
therefore we see in his first Temptation, he deals all without doors, there was
no Natural Lust in our First Parents to befriend him, or to betray the Soul
unto him: He shuts up himself therefore in the Body of a Serpent, questioning
with Eve about God's Commands, persuades her of the desirableness of the
forbidden Fruit; tells her that God's Threatening was rather to fright them than
to hurt them. But in all these Methods of Tempting, Satan had no admission into
the Soul, because Lust as yet had taken no possession of it; but ever since,
the Corruption of our Natures, contracted by the commission of the first
Offense, the Devil does not stand to Tempt us without doors, but he enters
boldly as into the House of his old Friend Concupiscence; nay, as into his own
House; for the Souls of wicked Men are so called, Matthew. 12.29. He is by Lust
let into the very inmost recesses and retirements of the Heart, and can now
propound Objects immediately to our Fancies, and by our Fancies darken our
Understandings and Affections, and incline our Wills.

Again, our Natural Corruption as it admits, so it entertains and cherishes
the Temptations of the Devil. A spark of Fire, if there were no fuel prepared
for it to seize on, would presently die and vanish. And so truly would Satan's
Temptations, that are like so many sparks of Hell Fire struck by the Devil into
our Souls; were it not for the prepared fuel, the catching Tinder of our Lusts
and Corruptions, these Temptations would soon go out and expire; and be like a
flash of Lightning, that might possibly startle us, but could not burn us. And
thus though our Savior Christ was grievously tempted; yet it is said, Joh.
14.30. The Prince of this World comes and has nothing in me; that is, the
Devil could find no Sin or Corruption in him, and therefore could fasten none
of his Temptations upon him.

Thus we see what abundant reason there is for us to pray earnestly against
Temptations, whether they proceed from Satan, or from our own Corruptions; the
one sort being always Sins of themselves, and both sorts inclining and enducing
us unto Sin.

But since Satan, and our own Hearts prove Tempters unto us, some may possibly
ask, how shall we know when it is Satan that Tempts us, and when the Temptation
arises from our own Corruptions?

The Question is nice and difficult; yet because it may tend to the
satisfaction of some who are curious in observing the Workings of their own
Souls. I Answer,

First, There is but one kind of Temptations to Sin, which have not their rise
and original usually from Lust, and those are Temptations to sin against the
Light and Law of Nature, as to the denying those Truths that are clear and
evident by Natural Reason and strong Impressions on the Minds of Men; as the
being of a God, the Immortality of the Soul, future Rewards and Punishments,
and the like; or else the doing of those things which are repugnant to the
Dictates of the Law of Nature, as for a Man to be Tempted to offer Violence to
himself, and to destroy himself. It is very probable that such Temptations have
not their first rise and original from our Natural Corruptions; but are
immediately darted into the Soul by the Devil; though indeed our Corruptions
too often catch at them and brood upon them, till they have from such horrid
Temptations as these conceived some horrid and monstrous Sin in the Soul. Such
injections as these, are Balls of Wildfire kindled in Hell and cast into the
Soul by the Devil; and are not our Sins any farther than they are entertained
by us and consented unto.

Secondly, As for those Temptations which have a greater compliance to the
corrupt tendency and inclinations of our sinful Natures, which are not to such
unnatural Sins as the other, it is very hard if not impossible to Judge,
whether they originally proceed from Satan, or from our own inbred Corruptions;
usually they both join together; if Satan first inject them, usually our Lusts
nurse and foster them; or if our wicked Hearts be the first Parents of them,
usually Satan inforceth them, and by additional recruits of Temptations, makes
them more prevalent and permanent, and by fair and specious colors makes them
more plausible and taking: And certainly there being such an innumerable
Company of Evil Spirits that notwithstanding the great Work and Employment they
have to do in the World; yet Hell could spare a whole Legion of them to
Garrison in one possessed Man, we may not doubt but that they are continually
busy, prying into every one of our Tempers. And as long experience has made
them very sagacious in guessing at the first motions of our Hearts, by the
alterations they find in our Fancies, or the Humors of our Bodies, of which
they have an exact intuitive knowledge: So when by such visible Symptoms they
perceive Corruption stirring in us, they presently join issue with it, and by
all their art and policy inflame our Lusts by adding new fuel to them,
improving the first Motions and imperfect Embryo's of Wickedness, till they
arrive to their full strength and stature.

Thus, if by any Symptoms the Devil can perceive Wrath and Malice boiling
within our Breast, he will presently move the Tongue to give it vent in
opprobrious and reviling Speeches; and these he will second with injurious and
violent Actions. So St. James tells us, James 3.6. The Tongue sets on Fire
the course of Nature, and is it self set on Fire of Hell. But as a Holy Man, I
think St. Austin, being demanded by a curious Questionist concerning the Origin
of Evil, how Sin first got into the World? replied, It was not so necessary to
discourse how it came into the World, as to consider how we might get it out
again. So truly it is not so necessary critically to enquire, whence
Temptations come into the Heart, as how they may be got out of it. And to this
I may give the same Answer, that Christ did to his Disciples, Matthew. 17.21.
This kind goes not out but by Fasting and Prayer. We ought fervently to pray
that God would rebuke the Wicked One, and cause him to depart from us; that he
would by his Grace suppress all the Tumultuous Rebellions of our own Lusts and
Passions, and neither lead us into Temptation, nor leave us under Temptation.

And thus I have done with the First General in this Petition, showing you what
Temptations are.

The Second is, To show you how God may be said to lead Men into Temptation;
for it may seem very strange, that the Holy and Righteous God should have a
Hand in Tempting of Men; which is so proper a Work of the Devil, and of our own
Corruptions.

But the different manner of God's leading us into Temptations, and Satan's
Tempting us, will sufficiently justify him from the least aspersion or
suspicion of being the Author of Sin. And therefore,

First, God is said to lead us into Temptation, when he providentially presents
outward Objects and Occasions, which do solicit and draw forth our inward
Corruptions. When the Temptations of our inward Lusts meet with external
enducements that are cast in a Man's way by God's Providence; then as we may be
said to Tempt him, so God may be said to lead us into Temptation. Thus Achan
and Judas were no doubt of it covetous Wretches, before the one stole the Wedge
of Gold, and the other betrayed his Master: But the Temptations of those Lusts,
were not as yet come to their strength, till the glittering of the Wedge of
Gold, and the proffered Reward of the High Priest, raised their Covetousness to
its full height. Indeed we find the propensions of our wicked Hearts strongly
bent toward Sin at all times, even then when we have no external Objects
propounded to excite them; but when these inward inclinations do meet with
outward enforcements, as alluring Objects, fit Opportunities, strong
Persuasions from others, inducing Examples, or the like; the Temptation then
grows headstrong and wild to purpose; and if Grace does not rein it in with a
hard hand, it will certainly hurry us into the commission of that Sin which
has so many advantages to commend it to the Soul. Now all these Objective
Temptations, God may most righteously administer to our Lusts in the common
course of his Providence, and we often see he does so: For there is no outward
act of Sin committed in the World, but the Sinner took occasion from some
Providence of God to perpetrate it. A Thief steals not any thing, but what
God's Providence brings in his way. The Murderer slays not any Man but whom
Providence offers to his Sword and Violence. And all the Villainy that ever was
acted in the World was by a Providence, tendering the Lusts of Men Objects and
Opportunities, without which Sin conceived in us could not be brought to light.

And therefore when we pray that God would not lead us into Temptation, we pray
that God by his Providence would so order and dispose all the occurrences of
our lives, so as not to lay before us those Objects; nor proffer us those
occasions which might either excite or draw forth our inbred Corruptions. And
indeed this is a most necessary Petition to be preferred to the Throne of
Grace; for we cannot but be conscious to our selves, how hard a thing it is to
keep our Hearts from sinful Desires, when we encounter Objects to excite them:
And how hard a thing it is to keep our selves from sinful Actions when once
sinful Desires are excited in us.

Secondly, God is said to lead us into Temptation, when he withdraws the
influences of his Grace and Spirit from us, and leaves us under the Power of a
Temptation. Those very Temptations which when assisted by Divine Grace, we
could easily resist and subdue; will when God withdraws himself from us, sadly
prevail over us, and shamefully foil us. Thus it is said that God left Hezekiah
to try, or to tempt him, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. And indeed since our corrupt Natures
are of themselves prone only unto evil, if God withdraw the Auxiliaries of his
Grace, (as for many righteous causes he often does,) every Temptation that
assaults us will ravish our Consciences, and captivate our Souls: For all the
security that we have from the committing of the most flagitious Crimes, is
wholly from God's Grace, either restraining or renewing us; the former holding
us back from the outward act of Sin; the latter weakening and destroying the
inward habit and principle of Sin. And therefore when we pray that God would
not lead us into Temptation, we beg that he would still continue the influences
of his Grace unto us, and by them excite and quicken our Graces; that his Grace
may not forsake us, nor our Grace fail us. That we may not be exposed to the
Assaults of Spiritual Enemies naked and defenseless, to become a sure and easy
Prey unto them.

Thirdly, God is said to lead Men into Temptation when he permits Satan and
Wicked Men his Instruments to tempt us; yea, sometimes he gives them
commission, as well as permission; and appoints and sends them to do it. Thus
we find in the case of Ahab, 1 Kings 22.24. Who shall persuade Ahab that he may
go up and fall at Ramoth-Gilead; and an Evil Spirit steps forth, and very
officiously accepts of the Employment, as most congruous to so malicious a
Nature; and God sends him with his commission in the 22 verse, Thou shall
persuade him and prevail, go forth and do so; and so he did. And as God does
sometimes thus send the Tempter, and give him commission to assault and prevail
over wicked and ungodly Persons, their former Sins provoking him to punish them
with farther Impieties. So whenever any of us are Tempted, God does at least
permit Satan to sift and winnow us, sometimes to his own defeat, but too often
to ours. And in this fence there is no Temptation that befalls us, but God
leads us into it. And therefore it is very observable, that whereas in 1 Chronicles.
21.1. It is said, that Satan provoked David to Number Israel; yet in 2 Samuel
24.1. it is said, the Lord moved David against Israel, to say, Go number Israel
and Judah; here one and the same Temptation is attributed both to God and to
the Devil; but it must be understood under a diverse habitude and respect;
Satan Tempted him effectively, God only permissively. And thus God may be said
to lead every Man into Temptation whom he suffers to be Tempted. When therefore
we pray that God would not lead us into Temptation, we pray that he would not
permit the Devil to approach near unto us, nor to cast his Fiery Darts at us;
but that he would put a hook into the nose of that great Leviathan, and so
bridle and restrain his Fury, that he may not be able to assault us. These now
are all the ways that I know of, how God may be said to lead Men into
Temptation. Either by offering them objects and opportunities by his
Providence, which may correspond with their inward Lusts and Corruptions, and
as it were entice and call them forth. Or else by permitting Satan and wicked
Men to Tempt us. Or lastly, by withdrawing from us the influences of his Grace
and Holy Spirit, and leaving us under the power of Temptations when they do
assault us. But for any proper, effective, or persuasive Tempting of Men to
sin; this is infinitely abhorrent to his Pure and Holy Nature, in which sense
St. James tells us, James 1.13. Let no Man say when he is tempted, that he is
tempted of God, for God cannot he tempted to evil, neither tempts he any Man.
But though God cannot thus Tempt any Man without a stain to his Infinite Purity
and Holiness: yet he may lead Men into Temptation: either Providentially, or
Permissively, or by substracting his Grace, whereby they should stand: And yet
at last, justly punishes them for sinning. And this is no unrighteous thing
with God, for he lays no constraint upon the freedom of our Wills, but we sin
freely and of our own accord.

Now although God can easily keep us from all assaults and attempts of our
Spiritual Enemies, yet he permits us to be Tempted by them for most Wise and
Holy ends. As,

First, He leaves these Canaanites to molest us, to teach us the Wars of the
Lord, to make us continually Watchful, to breath and exercise our Graces, to
administer matter for our Conquest, and occasion for our Crown and Triumph.

Secondly, To convince us of our own utter inability to stand of our selves
without his help and assistance: thereby engaging us to depend upon his Arm,
and to call for Divine Supplies and Succors.

Thirdly, To Glorify both his Justice and Mercy. His Justice in giving up
wicked Men to the rage of Temptaons, to be hurried by them from sin to sin,
till at last they put an end to the Succession of their sins in Eternal
Damnation. And his Mercy in succouring of, and supporting and delivering his
Children out of all their Temptations. And therefore when St. Paul prayed to be
freed from the buffettings of the Messenger of Satan; God answers him, My Grace
is sufficient for thee; my strength is made perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9.
When the Devil presumes he has so well laid his Temptations that it is
impossible for the People of God to escape his Snares, yet God finds a way for
their deliverance out of them all. For God holds the great Tempter under a
powerful restraint, so that he cannot touch us beyond permission and
commission. And therefore that place in Revelat. 2.10. is very remarkable to
this purpose, Fear none of those things that thou shall suffer, behold the
Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, that you may be tried, and you shall
have Tribulation ten days. How many restraints are here mentioned to be put
upon that malicious Spirit? He shall cast into Prison, whereas he would
willingly cast into Hell, or at least into the Grave: It shall be but some of
you, whereas his spite and rage is against all the Children of God: And it
shall be but for ten days, but for a short time neither: the Place, the Number,
the Time, all limited, and that with such a restraint, that all the Pride and
Rage of the Devil shall not be able to exceed it.

Fourthly, God permits his own Children to be Tempted, that by their Victory
over Temptations he may confound the Malice of Satan, and commend the
Excellency of his own Ways and Service. This highly honors God, and shames the
Malice of the Devil, when we are neither terrified by Sufferings, nor induced
by the Pleasures of sin from the course of our Obedience; for this evidently
declares, That we are True and Loyal to our Great Sovereign. That we more fear
his Eternal Wrath and Displeasure, than those light Afflictions that are but
for a moment; and that we find more true Joy and solid Delight in his Service,
than in the ways of Sin and Vanity. And therefore God calls us forth as his
Champions, puts his Cause in our hands, and bids us resist manfully for the
Credit and Honor of Piety, and then lets loose Satan upon us, whom if we can
but Conquer, (which certainly we shall do if we but seriously resolve it) God
and Angels, who from the Theater of Heaven are Spectators of the Combat, give
us their Applause, and will hereafter give us our Crown. See how God Glories
over this baffled Devil, and upbraids him with the Victorious Constancy of his
Servant Job: God had before commended the Integrity of Job, Chap. 1.8. Have
thou considered my Servant Job, that there is none like him upon the Earth, a
perfect and upright Man, one that fears God and escheweth Evil. To this that
Malicious Spirit fullenly replies, Does Job fear God for naught? thou need
not Glory in his ready Service and Obedience when he is so well paid for it; no
wonder he is so Pious and Devout when he gets so well by it; but leave him a
while to me, to take from him those enducements that make him so Pious and
Holy, and I will undertake that even this perfect and upright Man shall curse
thee even to thy Face: God accepts the Challenge on his Servants behalf, Satan
and Job enter the List, the Devil buffets him sore, destroys all his Cattle,
ruins his House, kills his Children; yet Job shrinks not for all this, but
wrestles naked with his Adversary and foils him: See now how God rejoices at
his Champion's Victory, and upbraids the Devil with his shameful overthrow,
Chap. 2. 3. Have thou considered my Servant Job, that there is none like him in
the Earth, a perfect and an upright Man, one that fears God and escheweth
Evil. God repeats the same Character and Commendation which he had before given
him, Glorying as it were over Satan, that Job had made his Words good; yea, and
still he holds fast his Integrity, although thou movest me against him to
destroy him without cause. So truly, whenever God suffers us to be Tempted,
it is that by our Conquest he might bring Honor to himself, and Credit to
Piety and Religion. For this makes it appear, That we see so much of Excellency
in the ways of God, that nothing in the World, whether Crosses or Crowns,
Thorns or Thrones, Pains or Pleasures, Loss or Profit, can in the least
persuade us to baulk or forsake them. And in such an Heroic Champion as this,
God himself Glories and Triumphs.

And thus I have finished the former part of this Petition, Lead us not into
Temptation; the next follows, But deliver us from evil.

Now here before I come to speak of the Words themselves, let us observe their
connection with, and dependence upon the foregoing Words; for whereas our
Savior has taught us to pray with this Adversative Particle, But lead us not
into Temptation, but deliver us from evil; this may instruct us. That the best
security against sin, is to be secured against Temptations unto sin: For though
it be no excuse that we are violently tempted to sin when we yield to the
commission of it; yet withal, it too often happens, that those whom God leads
into Temptation, and engages amidst the press of their Enemies, it too often
happens, that they come off bleeding and wounded. Yet,

First, It is no excuse for sinning, because no Temptation is a Compulsion. The
Devil can only persuade, he cannot constrain us to sin: God may let him into
the fancy, and suffer him to Paint upon that the most alluring Images that Vice
can be represented in, but when he has done all this, it is still our own
choice that makes us like what his Pencil has drawn there. And in this lies a
great difference between God's Operations upon us by his Grace, and Satan's
upon his Suggestions; in that God has an immediate access to the very elicite
Acts of our Wills and Understandings; and can and does by his Spirit, actuate
them by an immediate energy, and call forth not only by, but to their Objects:
But now these are such Sacred Partments of the Soul, that the Devil has no Key
to them. And therefore his Method is to bribe the attendants on these chief
Powers of the Soul, the Fancy and the Passions, to which he has admission
through the near dependence they have upon material Organs, and by these to
send in Messages, and offer Proposals to it; which yet if it be not basely
false and treacherous to its God, it may reject and disdain. If the Devil could
force Men, he would likewise justify them, for that can be no sin, where there
is no liberty: The same Temptation which compels to any Action, would likewise
make that Action to be no Transgression; because Laws are not given but upon
supposition of freedom. And therefore whosoever sins upon a Temptation, sins
not merely because he was Tempted, but because he would sin: And though the sin
had not been committed without the Temptation, yet the Devil can be no farther
chargable with it, than only because his Malice prompts him to persuade us. Our
own Wills are the most dangerous Devils, freely embracing the proffers of
Satan, and consently to our own destruction, and whilst we consent to that upon
which God has threatened and entailed it. And therefore when thou sinnest,
think not to lay the fault upon Satan, or his evil Instruments whom he makes
use of in Tempting, for though it be their fault and guilt to Tempt, yet it is
only thine to yield, and God will not condemn thee for being Tempted, which
thou could not help; but for yielding and consenting, which is thine own free
Act and thine own Sin also. Thou who art drawn away by thy lewd Companions, to
abuse thy self and dishonor thy body by Riot and Luxury, or to break God's
Laws and Man's by Theft, or any other condemned Crimes, though thou have a
great deal of reason to hate them, yet have thou infinitely more reason to hate
and abhor thy self. They can but persuade, they cannot compel thee,; yea, if
they should threathen thee with Death it self, unless thou consentest: yet,
thou lie under no force, but sinnest freely, and upon very weak motives do
destroy and damn thy own Soul: since all motives inducing to sin must be
accounted weak when God has over-balanced them with the promise of everlasting
Life, and the threatening of everlasting Death. And therefore we find God as
justly, as frequently in Scripture, charging Men's perdition upon themselves,
and laying the blood of their Souls upon the stubborn resolvedness of their own
Wills. Hosea 13.9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self. John 5.40. Ye will
not come unto me that you may have Life. Matthew. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
how often would I have gathered you, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her
wings, and you would not? And therefore let your Temptations be what they will,
yet the sin and guilt is still your own; if as you are led into Temptations, so
Temptations lead you into Sin.

Secondly, Though it be no excuse for sinning, yet it is too seldom seen, that
those who are brought into Temptation, are brought off again without
contracting some guilt on their Consciences by it. For since there is so great
a Correspondence between Temptations and our Corruptions, it would be as
strange for a Man that has been hotly assaulted by them, to have no impression
made upon him, as to carry Fire in his Bosom and his Clothes not be burnt: yea,
almost as Miraculous as to walk secure in the midst of a Fiery Furnace
untouched by the Flames. There is a strong simpathy between our corrupt hearts
and Satan's Temptations; and as it is with strings tuned to Unisons, upon the
motion of the one, the other also will move and vibrate: So is it here, the
heart vibrates and is secretly affected upon the first motion of a Temptation
with some passion of Delight and Complacency toward that sinful Object. And
there is a kind of liking and approbation of it in the very first conception of
our Thoughts, before they are yet deliberated and digested; so that it is
almost as impossible for Temptations to assault us without leaving some guilt
and pollution behind them, as it is for Objects rightly presented to a Mirror,
to make no impression of their Image upon it. For though the Temptation should
produce nothing but hovering and fleeting Idea's, and some imperfect shadows of
Desires and Affections in us, which yet are checked and scattered, as soon as
ever they begin to form themselves, yet there is not the thinnest film of a
sinful thought, nor the least breathing of a sinful desire; but the Holy Law of
God and his Word, which reaches to the dividing asunder of the Soul and
Spirit, and is a Judge and a Discerner of the Thoughts and intents of the
Heart, does strictly prohibit and condemn these callow, unfledged motions of
our Hearts, to be Concupiscence, the sad effects of Original sin, and the
fruitful cause of all actual.

And therefore if we would be delivered from evil, we have very great cause
first to pray that we be not led into Temptation: For some Temptations do
almost so inseparably follow one upon another, that this will be our best
security against those secret desires and wouldings, and first smatterings and
rudiments of wickedness, which else the compliance of our corrupt hearts with
Satan's Temptations will certainly betray us unto. Hence it is, that when God
in Scripture frequently dehorts us from sin, he extends the prohibition to all
Temptations and Occasions of sinning. Yea those things which in themselves
considered, may be lawfully and innocently done by us, yet because they may
prove Snares and Temptations to us, we must as carefully refrain from them, as
we earnestly desire to keep our selves far from sin. And therefore it suffices
not the Wise Man to command, If sinners entice, consent thou not, Prove. 1.10.
but that thou may be sure not to consent, thou must order thy Actions and
Converse so, as that thou may not be enticed by them: in the 15. verse says
he, Walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy feet from their path. And
so we have the same Counsel given us by him in another Chapter, that we may not
be inveagled by the allurements of a strange Woman, be sure to avoid all
occasions thereof, Prove. 5.8. Remove thy way far from her, come not near the
door of her House. And again, Prove. 4.14, 15. Enter not into the path of the
wicked, and go not in the way of evil Men, avoid it, pass not by it, turn from
it, pass away. Here is earnestness even to a tautology, as some may profanely
think; but Sacred Writ can admit of no such thing. But there are so many
expressions heaped up, signifying the same thing only, to denote how great the
necessity of avoiding Temptations and Occasions to evil, is to those who desire
to avoid the sin. We have treacherous and deceitful hearts within us, that have
often betrayed us when we have trusted them. And I beseech you, call to mind
when you have emboldned your selves to venture upon Temptations and sinful
Occasions, being confident and fully resolved not to yield to them: Have you
not often been surprised and led away Captive, contrary to your Hopes, contrary
to your Intentions, contrary to your Resolutions, contrary to the vain
Confidences with which you were before possessed? Methinks former experience
should make you cautious, never again to trust those hearts with such
opportunities and advantages for wickedness, since they have been so often
already treacherous and deceitful to us. Venture them not therefore upon
Temptations, for what security have you that a sinful heart will not sin; yea,
and betray you to commit those great abominations which possibly you cannot now
think of, without horror and shivering.

And thus much I thought fit to note to you from the connection of this part of
the Petition with the former, Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from
Evil.

In the words themselves we have two things chiefly considerable: The thing
that we pray against, and the Person to whom we pray. That which we pray
against is Evil, that we may be delivered from it. The Person to whom we pray,
is God our Heavenly Father.

That which we pray against, is Evil. Some limit this word Evil only unto
Satan, making the sense to be, deliver us from the Evil one: founding this
Interpretation upon that Article that is joined with the Original Word (...);
but this is not always descretive, but sometimes indefinite, as for instance,
Matthew. 12.35. and many other places. And therefore considering the
Comprehensiveness of this Prayer, we ought to allow the Word a large extent,
and to comprehend under it,

First, Satan whose proper Style and Epithete it is to be called, the Evil one:
and so we find this black Title given him in Scripture, Matthew. 13.19. The
wicked one comes and snatcheth away that which was sown. And 1 John 2.13, 19.
You have overcome the wicked one. He is the wicked one eminently and
singularly. He is the chief Author of Evil, his Temptations are all unto Evil,
his delight is only in Evil, he is the Father of all those that do Evil. And
therefore this is the most proper and significant Character of the Devil. But
yet it is also ascribed unto Men according to their resemblance of him.

Secondly, All other Evils are here meant, whether they be of sin, or sorrow;
whether they be Transgressions, or Punishments; and that either Temporal
punishments in those Judgments which God inflicts upon sinners here: or Eternal
Judgments, such as he has threatened to inflict upon them hereafter. From all
these we pray to be delivered; but the greatest of all these, is Sin. For,

First, It is greatest in the Nature of it, as being the only thing that is
contrary to the greatest Good, even God; for in all other things else in the
World there is something of Good, even as much as derived and participated of
God: And so the very Devils themselves have a Metaphysical Goodness in them, as
they are Creatures and have received their Beings and Powers from God, who is
the Author of nothing that is Evil. But Sin has not the least ray or footsteps
of Goodness in it, but is only defect and irregularity: And that alone which as
his Soul always hates, so his Hands never made.

Secondly, It is the greatest Evil in the Effects and Consequences of it. It
once turned Glorious Angels into hideous Devils, and tumbled them down from
Heaven to Hell, filled the World with Woes and Plagues, brought Death and
Diseases, and a vast and endless sum of Miseries into it; it torments and
terrifies the Conscience, kindles Hell-flames, exposes the Soul to the eternal
and direful revenges of the great God; and is so perfectly and only Evil, that
the worst of things here were they free from the Contagion of Sin would be
excellent and amiable.

To pray therefore against the Evil of Sin, is to pray against all other Evils
whatsoever; for the Devil, the Evil One, cannot hurt us but by Sin: And no
other Evil can befall us but for Sin, God inflicting them as the due Guerdon
and Reward of our Transgressions. Sin therefore being the chief and Principal
Evil, and all others but retainers to it; I shall at present speak only of
God's delivering us from Sin.

Now as there are Two things in Sin which make it so exceeding Evil, the Guilt
of it whereby it Damns, and the Filth of it whereby it Pollutes the Soul; so
God has Two ways to deliver us from it.

First, By removing the Guilt already contracted, which he does in justifying
and pardoning the Sinner.

Secondly, By preventing us from falling into the filth and pollution of it for
the future.

Of the Pardon of Sin I have already largely treated in the foregoing Petition.
The Deliverance from Evil, which we here pray for, is by preventing it for the
future. And whereas we are taught by our Savior to beg this of God our
Heavenly Father, we may observe, that it is only the Almighty Power of God that
can keep us from Sin; and that will appear if we consider, either our Enemies,
or our selves.

First, Consider the mighty Advantages that our great Enemy the Devil has
against us: As he is a Spirit he is both powerful and subtle; and both these
are whetted by his great Malice against us; long experience also for above five
thousand years has made him very politic in dealing with Souls, and carrying
on his own designs and interest: He knows our temper, our passions, and our
inclinations, and can choose and cull out those Objects which shall infallibly
strike and affect us; he waits those Mollia tempora fandi, those easy hours of
whispering his suggestions to us when we are most facile and compliant, when we
are most easily wrought upon, and made soft to his hands by some foregoing
circumstances: And if after all this he despairs to prevail upon us as a Devil,
he can quickly shift his shape and transform himself into an Angel of Light,
and engage our very Consciences unto evil; he can disguise his Temptations into
impulses of the Holy Spirit, persuade us that what he prompts us to is our
Duty, head his fiery Darts with Scripture Sentences, wrap up his Poison in the
leaves of the Bible, and wound our Souls by our Consciences; and certainly this
Devil of Light is now gone abroad into the World with all that Power of
Deceivableness he can, and we cannot but with sad and bleeding Hearts observe
his too general prevalency and success: And besides all this he is continually
present with us, follows us up and down where ever we go, and is always at our
Elbow to prompt us to Evil, and at our Right Hand to oppose us in that which is
Good. Hell has Emissaries enough to afford every Man a Friend for his
Attendant; and these critically observe every glance of thine Eyes, every flash
of thy Passions, and are presently ready to apply suitable Temptations unto
thee, and to strike thee in that part of thy Soul which is softest and most
yielding. And as the Syrians that were sent by Benhadad to the King of Israel,
to intercede for him, watched every Word that should fall from his Mouth, that
they might lay hold of it to obtain farther Favor from him: So these Spies of
Hell do watch every kind Word, and every kind look of thine toward Sin, and
want no skill to improve them to obtain yet greater matters from thee. Now if
God did not appear to deliver us from these subtle Wiles and Methods of the
Devil, how soon would he make Fools of the wisest and most experienced
Christians?

Secondly; Consider the mighty Dis-advantages that we lie under to oppose the
Temptations of the Devil, which though they be many and great, yet I shall name
but two, which may be found even in the best of Men.

First, Our inadvertency and heedlessness, through which we are often surprised
into Sin, and captivated by the cunning craftiness of our Enemies which lie in
wait to deceive. How seldom is it that we stand upon our Guard, or if we do
that we are completely armed? Sometimes our Shield, sometimes our Helmets,
sometimes our Sword of the Spirit is wanting: How seldom is it that we attend
all the Motions of the Enemy? Indeed a Christian should look round about him;
for he is every where beset and encompassed about with Enemies; and whilst he
is vigilant to ward one part, the Devil falsifies his thrust, and wounds him in
another; but if he cannot wound on the Right Hand by Presumption, he will try
what he can do on the Left by Despair; if he cannot prevail by his Temptations
to cause us to neglect and cast off Holy Duties, he will Tempt us to Pride our
selves in the well performing of them; if he cannot make us fall, he will Tempt
us to be high-minded because we stand; and so make our very standing the
occasion of our woeful downfall; and because we are apt to think our selves
better than others, he will Tempt us to be supercilious Despisers and
Contemners of others.

Now, O Christian, it is a very hard matter, and thou will find it so, thus to
turn thee about to every Assault: and that Man had need to have his Spiritual
Senses well exercised, that shall be able dexterously to do it. Now when so
great circumspection is scarce sufficient for our security, how can they
possibly escape without fearful Wounds and Gashes in their Consciences, who are
supinely negligent of their Souls, and mind not which way their Thoughts, their
Passions, their Affections incline, and so give the Devil a Handle to turn
their Souls by which way he will? Certainly if we do not buckle our Spiritual
Armor close to us, but suffer the joints of it by our heedlessness to lie
open, the Devil may easily wound us wheresoever and in whatsoever part he
pleases. And truly, if through this inadvertency and want of circumspection,
Adam in the State of Innocence, and the State of Uprightness fell, when the
Devil had no immediate access or admission into the inward Faculties and Powers
of his Soul: yet if Satan, who was but a young, unpractised, and unexperienced
Devil, could prevail with him by his Wiles, to ruin himself, and to betray the
great Trust which God had deposited in his Hands for all his Posterity: How
much greater may we think is his Advantage over us, into whom he may insinuate
himself and his Temptations; and when we are busy about other things, strike
and wound us at unawares.

Secondly, Besides this inadvertency, the Devil has another grand Advantage to
lead us into Evil, and that is because we are naturally prone and inclined of
our selves to those very Sins to which he Tempts us. It is very hard for that
place to escape, that has Enemies without and Traitors within. So stands the
case with us, we are not only beleaguered, but betrayed; there are in our
Hearts multitudes of Lusts that hold intelligence with the Devil, and espouse
his Cause; yea, there is no one Sin, how vile and profligate soever, but it may
find Partisans in our base and wicked Hearts, wherein are the Seeds and
Principles of all Impieties; and therefore as things of a like Nature presently
concorporate, (as we see one drop of Water diffuseth it self and runs into
another,) so Temptations to Sin meeting with a sinful Nature are presently
entertained, and as it were embodyed together; for whilst we pursue what Satan
Tempts us unto, we do but pursue what our own Natural Lusts and Corruptions
inclined unto before, waiting only for an opportunity of being called forth
into Act.

And therefore considering both the Advantages the Devil has against us, and
the great Dis-advantages under which we lie; he a Spirit, we but Flesh; he wise
and subtle, we foolish and ignorant; he experienced, we raw and unpractised; he
diligent and watchful, we careless and negligent; he laying a close siege to us
without, and we betraying our selves within: It must needs be ascribed only to
the Goodness and Grace of God, to deliver us from the commission of that Evil,
to which we are so fiercely and cunningly Tempted.

And thus I have demonstrated the Proposition, That it is only the Almighty
Power of God that can preserve us from Sin. It now remains to show you, the
Ways and Methods that God takes to do it, and those are in the General Three:
By restraining Providence; by common and restraining Grace; and by sanctifying
and renewing Grace.

First, God delivers us from Evil, by his restraining Providence, putting an
Hook into Men's Nostrils, and a Bridle into their Jaws, and by a powerful Hand
reining them in when they are most fiery and furious. And thus he often does
with the worst and vilest of Men, whose Lusts though they estuate and boil
within, and are like the raging Sea, raging and rolling in their Hearts; yet
God sets bounds to their proud Waves, and says to them as he does to the great
Sea, hitherto shall you proceed and no farther. It is to this we owe it, that
the Wickedness of Men has not yet made the World an uninhabitable Desert, that
Solitudes and Wildernesses are not as secure Retreats as frequented Cities; and
savage Beasts as safe Company as Men. To this we owe it that almost every one
is not a Cain to his Brother, an Amnon to his Sister, a Judas to his Master,
and a Devil to all the World; for where Grace does not change, Divine
Providence does many times so Chain the Sinner, that he cannot bring forth that
Wickedness he has conceived; that although he be permitted Sin enough to
destroy himself, which his very Will and Affection to Evil is sufficient to do;
yet through God's withholding Opportunity or Abilities from him; his Sins are
not permitted to break out to the ruin and destruction of others. Though God
does as it were permit them to give up their Hearts to the Devil, yet he ties
up their Hands, let them imagine and intend as much mischief as Hell can
inspire them with, yet none of all this shall they execute, any otherwise than
as his Holy and Wise Providence permits: Yea, Divine Providence is effectual
not only in keeping wicked Men from the outward Acts of Sin; but even God's
dearest Children and Servants they also have a great deal of Corruption
stirring in their Hearts, and even in them Lust is too fruitful, conceiving
those Wickednesses which God often by his Providence so stifles and strangles
in the very Birth. May not the best of us with thankful acknowledgements of the
Divine Goodness toward us, reflect back upon many dis-appointments that we
have met with, to which we had given our consent and entertained purposes of
sinning? May we not all say, Had not God denied Opportunities, or cast in
Diversions, or cut off the Provisions which we had made for our Lusts, we
should at such or such a time have dishonored the Gospel, scandalized our
Profession, opened the Mouths of wicked and ungodly. Men to blaspheme the Holy
and Reverend Name of God, and contracted to our own Consciences black and
horrid Guilt, by the commission of some infamous Crimes, of which we were
guilty by consenting to them? God has hedged up the Broad-way with Thorns,
that so he might turn us into the Narrow-way that leads to Eternal Bliss and
Happiness.

Now the particular Methods that Divine Providence makes use of to prevent the
Sins of Men, are many and various, and all of them wise and just.

First, Sometimes God by his Providence cuts short their Power, whereby they
should be enabled to Sin. All that Power that Wicked Men have, is either from
themselves, or their Associates whom they make use of to accomplish their
Wickedness; and sometimes Divine Providence strikes them in both; it cuts off
their Instruments for Counsel. And thus Providence overruling, Absalom to
reject the politic Counsel of Achitophel, prevents all that mischief that so
Wise and so Wicked a Statesman might afterward have contrived, upon which he
goes home and hangs himself; and as if his Sagacity forsook him not in his
Death, by that last Action gave a Prophetic Omen of his Masters attending
Destiny.

Sometimes God cuts off their Instruments for execution: So God miraculously
defeated the huge and vast Host of the blaspheming Rabshekah, and by unseen
strokes slew almost two hundred thousand of them dead upon the place. Sometimes
God immediately strikes their Persons, and disables their Natural Faculties; so
he smote the Men of Sodom with Blindness, and put out those very Eyes that had
kindled in them the Flames of unnatural Lusts: Thus likewise when Jeroboam had
stretched forth his Hand to lay hold on the Prophet, God suddenly withers it
up. Sometimes he hides their Wits from them and besots them: So the Jews, in
Job. 7.30. sought to have apprehended Jesus, and though he was in the very
midst of them, and there was enough of them to do it, yet God so astonishes
them, that they only stand gazing on him, whilst he passes through the Crowd of
them and escapes away. And indeed it is a great Mercy of God to take away that
Power from Men that he sees they will only use to their own destruction. And
though Wicked Men would think that if God should now strike them Dumb, or
Blind, or Lame, or Impotent, that it would be a heavy Plague or Curse inflicted
upon them; yet believe it, it is far better that God should strike thee Dumb,
than that ever thou should open thy Mouth, to rail at him and his People:
Better thou were stricken Blind, than that ever the Devil and filthy Lusts
should enter into thy Soul, by the Windows of thine Eyes: Better that thou were
maimed, than that ever thou should have power to commit those Sins which will
damn, if but intended, but if executed will sink the Soul seven fold deeper
into damnation.

Secondly, Sometimes Providence prevents Sin, by raising up other opposite
Powers against a Sinner. Thus God defeated the designs of the Scribes and
Rulers who hated Christ, and oftentimes they would have put him to Death; but
it is said they feared the People, whom his Doctrine, his Miracles, and his
course of Life had obliged to himself. Instances of this nature are many, and
occurr familiarly.

Thirdly, Sometimes Providence casts in some seasonable diversion, which turns
Men off from the Commission of those sins which they had intended. Thus the
Providential passing by of Merchants, induced the Patriarchs to sell their
Brother Joseph, whom before they had determined to famish. As skilful
Physicians, when one part of the Body is oppressed with ill and peccant
humors, draw them to another part less dangerous. So God by his Providence
many times turns Men from the Commission of greater sins to a lesser sin. And I
believe there are but few Men, who if they will but seriously examine their
lives, may produce may instances both of the Devil's policy in fitting them
with occasions and opportunities of sinning, and of God's Providence in causing
some urgent Affairs, or some sudden and unexpected Accidents to intervene,
whereby they are turned off from what they purposed.

Fourthly, Sometimes by his Providence he takes off the Objects against which
they intended to sin. Thus God preserved St. Peter from Herod's Ambitious Rage.
He intended the next morning to put him to Death, but that very night, God
sends his Angel to work his escape, and thereby hinders the execution of that
wicked purpose. And thus in all Ages, God many times hides his Children from
the fury of wicked Men, that their Wrath against them, like Readiness Javelin
misseth David, and strikes only the Wall, from whence it often rebounds back
into their own Faces.

These now are some of the most remarkable Methods of Divine Providence in
preventing the sins of Men. And I am very prone to think that there are very
few who if they will be at the pains to reflect back upon and strictly examine
that part of their lives that is past and gone, they may easily produce many
remarkable instances, both of the Devil's Policy in fitting them with
opportunities and occasions of sinning, and of God's Providence in causing
some immergent affairs, or some other strange and unexpected accidents to
interpose, so that he has either Graciously taken away our power, or taken
away the Objects of our Lusts, or diverted us when we were in the pursuits of
them. To this we owe much of the innocence, and in some respects blamelessness
of our lives; that we have not been a scandal to the Gospel, a shame to the
Good, and a scorn to the Bad: and this is the first way how God preserves from
sin by his Providence.

Secondly, God preserves from sin by his restraining Grace. Now this
restraining Grace is that which is common and vouchsafed to wicked Men as well
as good. Indeed God by it deals in a secret way with the very heart of a
sinner, and though he does not change the habitual, yet he changes the present
actual disposition of it; so as not only by external checks laid upon Men's
Lusts, but by internal persuasions, motives, and arguments, they are taken off
the prosecution of those very sins which yet remain in them unmortified and
reigning. Thus Esau comes out against his Brother Jacob with a Troop of two
hundred Ruffians, intending doubtless to take revenge upon him for his
Birthright and Blessing; but at their first meeting, God by a secret work so
mollifies his heart, that instead of falling upon him to kill him, he falls
upon his neek and kisses him. Here God restrained Esau from that bloody sin of
Murder, not in a way of External Providence only, but with his own hand he
immediately turns about his heart, and by seeing such a company of Cattle
bleating and bellowing, timorous Women, and helpless Children bowing and
supplicating to him; he turns his Revenge into Compassion, and with much
urging, receives a Present from him whom he thought to have made a Prey. The
same powerful restraint God laid upon the heart of Abimelech a Heathen King,
Genesis 20.6. where God tells him, I withheld thee from sinning against me, and
therefore suffered I thee not to touch her. Here was nothing visible that might
hinder Abimelech, but God invisibly wrought upon his heart, and unhinged his
sinful desires. And from these two instances of Esau and Abimelech, we may
clearly collect, how restraining Grace differs both from restraining
Providence, and from Sanctifying Grace: from Providence it differs, because
usually when God Providentially restrains from sin, he does it by some visible
apparent means, which do not reach to work any change or alteration upon the
heart, but only lays an external check upon Men's sinful Actions. But by
restraining Grace, God deals in a secret way with the very heart of a sinner,
and although he does not change the nature of it, yet he alters the present
inclination of it, and takes away the desire of committing those sins which yet
he does not mortify. And from Sanctifying Grace it differs also, in that God
vouchsafes it to wicked Men and Reprobates, to the end that their Lives may be
more plausible, their Gifts more serviceable, and their Condemnation more
intolerable. And indeed the efficacy of this restraining Grace may be so great
that there may appear but very little difference between the Conversation of a
true Christian whom Special Grace Sanctifies, and the Conversation of one in a
State of Nature whom common Grace only restains: they may both live outwardly
without blame or offense, avoiding the gross pollutions of the World, and shine
in a Sphere above the ordinary sort of Men, and yet the one be a Star, and the
other but a Meteor. The highway may be as dry, and as fair, in a Frosty
Winter, as in a warm Summer, bur there is a great deal of difference in the
cause of it: In Summer the Sun dries up the moisture, in Winter the Frost binds
it in. So the ways of those who have only a restraint laid upon them, may be as
fair and clear as the ways of those who are truly Sanctified, but the cause is
vastly different; Grace has dried up the filth of the one, but ownly bound in
the filth of the other.

Now God does thus by his restraining Grace preserve Men from sin, by
propounding to them such Considerations and Arguments as may be sufficient to
engage Conscience against it, when yet the Will and Affections are still bent
toward it. Restraining Grace thunders the Curse of the Law, and brandisheth
the Sword of Justice in the Face of a sinner, reports nothing but Hell and
Everlasting Torments, and such terrible things which may scare Men from their
sins, though still they love them. It is indeed a great Mercy of God to keep us
from sin, even by legal terrors, and usually these are a good preparation and
introduction for saving Grace. Doubtless, the thoughts and fears of Hell, have
with very good success been made use of to keep Men from those sins that lead
unto Hell. But yet if in our conflicts against Temptations, we can draw
Arguments from no other Topics but Hell and Eternal Death and Destruction: If
we cannot as well quench the Fiery Darts of the Devil in the Blood of Jesus
Christ, as in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone; it is much to be doubted, whether
our abstaining from sin be from any higher principle than what is common: only
for fear of punishment, and not for love of God or Goodness.

Thirdly, God has another method of keeping Men from sin, and that is by his
Special and Sanctifying Grace. And this is proper only to the Children of God
who are really Sanctified and made Gracious. Now whatever sin God does thus
preserve any from, he does it by exciting the inward principle and habit of
Grace to the actual use and exercise of it. There is a Twofold Grace always
necessary to keep the best Christians from sin, Habitual and Exciting, and God
by the one quickens and stirs up the other, which else would lie fluggish and
dormant.

Habitual Grace denominates the Soul a live unto God, but it is no otherwise
alive, than a Man in a swoon is; it is only exciting and influential Grace that
can enable it to perform the Functions and Offices of Life. In the drearyest
Winter there is life in a Seed that lies buried under ground, but it acts not
till the Sun's influence draws it forth; but then it heaves and shoves away the
Earth that covered it, and spreads it self into the Beauty of a Flower and
Fruit. So is it here: Inherent Habitual Grace, is indeed an immortal Seed, and
it is but a Seed till the influences of an approaching God awaken it, and chafe
its benumbed Virtue, and then it stirs and thrusts away all that dung and filth
of corruption under which it lay buried, and flowers into Actual Grace.
Habitual and Influential Grace, must both concur to produce Actual Grace: as
necessarily, as there must be both the concurrence of the heat of the Sun, and
the Life of the Root to the production of a Flower. Now God by exciting the
Inherent and Habitual Grace, which was before in the Soul, keeps Men from
sinning two ways.

First, Hereby he prevents and excludes those sins which were we not employed
in the exercise of Grace, we should certainly commit. When the Soul is
constantly employed in Holy and Spiritual Affairs, sin then neither has room
nor opportunity to exert it self. It is kept out of the thoughts when they are
employed about Holy Meditations. It is kept out from the Affections, when they
are set upon Heavenly Objects. It is kept out from the Conversation, when both
the Duties of our general and particular Callings are duly performed in their
respective Seasons. The Apostle exhorts us, Ephesians. 4.27. Not to give place unto
the Devil. Truly, when God's exciting Grace quickens our inherent Grace to a
continual Exercise: When every faculty is filled with Holy Actions, and every
Season with Holy Duties, the Devil then can have no place to tempt, nor
corruption to stir. It is the best security God can give us from the Commission
of Evil, to quicken us to the performance of what is good. When we Hear, Pray,
or Meditate, or attend upon the public Ordinances, we ought to bless God for
this his exciting Grace, whereby we have not only performed a Duty, but also
possibly escaped some foul and notorious sin, which else we might have
committed. We who are here this day before the Lord, had we neglected, (as so
many others do) this present opportunity: who of us know what horrid
Temptations and fearful Sins, we might in our own Houses have been exposed
unto, which in God's House we have avoided. David when he walked idly upon the
Roof of his House, lies open to the snares of the Devil, and falls into those
foul sins of Adultery and Murder: Had he then been at his Harp and his Psalms,
he might thereby have driven the Evil Spirit from him, as formerly he was wont
to do for his Master Saul. Running Streams preserve themselves clear and pure,
whereas standding Puddles soon grow corrupt, and breed noisome and venomous
Creatures. So is it with the Heart, whilst God's exciting and quickening Grace
puts it upon continual Exercise, it is preserved from corruption: but when it
once grows fluggish, and does not freely flow forth into the actings of Grace
and the performance of Duties, the Spawn of all manner of sins will breed
there, and filthy Lusts crawl to and fro without disturbance. And therefore in
praying that God would deliver us from evil, we pray that he would continually
vouchsafe unto us the quickening influences of his Holy Spirit, that he would
always fill our Sails with that Wind that blows where it lists: Awake, O
North wind, and come thou South wind, and blow upon our Garden, that the Spices
thereof may flow forth: for indeed if the Spices do not, the Stench will.

Secondly, As God by his exciting Grace hinders those sins which might arise in
the heart, so he suppresseth those that do arise. There is the greatest
contrariety imaginable between Inherent Grace and indwelling sin imaginable:
When the one is vigorous, the other languisheth; and both of these opposite
principles have their seat in the same heart, and both of them are in a
continual expectation of an exciting influence to call them out into Act.
Indwelling corruption is usually roused up by Temptations, and when it stirs in
the Heart, and is ready to break forth into the Life; Habitual Grace is of it
self so feeble, that it cannot make any opposition, until a kindly influence
from the Spirit of God, calls forth some particular Grace, that is most of all
contrary unto it, to resist and subdue it. This Method God used to keep St.
Paul from sinning: he was under a sharp and pungent Temptation, which he calls
a Thorn in the Flesh, 2 Cor. 12.7. Satan buffets, and he prays, and God
Answers, My Grace is sufficient for thee; my Grace is sufficient not thine: The
Grace that is in thee, is weak and helpless, it is a very nothing if I withdraw
my influence from it, but the quickening Grace that flows from me, this alone is
sufficient to remove the Temptation, and to prevent the sin. Now whilst God's
exciting Grace works thus upon St. Paul's inherent Grace; this Temptation, this
Thorn at his Breast (as they report of the Nightingale) only makes him the more
wakeful and vigilant. But if God should have suspended his Gracious influence,
this Thorn would sadly have wounded his Conscience, by the commission of some
foul and gross sin.

Now as all manner of sin lies couched and comprehended in that body of sin
which we carry about with us. So all manner of Graces are couched also in that
principle of Grace which God has implanted in his own Children: And when the
Devil by a Temptation calls forth a particular sin, God also by his exciting
influence, calls forth a particular contrary Grace to hinder the commission of
it. Thus when they are tempted to Pride, God calls forth Humility to prick that
swelling and puffy bladder. So when they are tempted to Wrath and Passion, he
stirs up Meekness to oppose it. When a Murmuring and Repining at God's
Dispensations, he puts Patience upon its perfect work. And in brief, there is
no one sin whatsoever, that the Devil can by his Temptations stir up in the
Heart; but God also can and often does, stir up a contrary Grace to quell and
master it. But now there are two Graces which are more especially employed in
this Service; and they are an awful fear, and filial Love of God: And therefore
when we pray that God would deliver us from evil, we pray.

First, That he would so affect our Hearts with that dread and reverence of his
Holy Majesty, that we may not dare to commit the least sin, knowingly and
willingly against him. For the fear of God is a powerful preservative, to
withold the Soul from consenting to Temptation, and when we are fully
possessed with it, we shall be able to return that Answer to every
solicitation of the Devil, that Joseph did to the filthy enticements of his
lewd Mistress, how shall we do this thing and sin against God? Yea, it will
preserve us not only from the more gross and scandalous acts of sin, but from
the secret lurking wickednesses that lie deep in the Heart. 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness and pollution both of Flesh and Spirit,
perfecting Holiness in the fear of God. Indeed, where this Fear of God is
deeply implanted, it will keep us from offending him in our Thoughts, as well
as in our Actions. We shall be afraid to sin against him by Hypocrisy or
Unbelief, or Impenitency; as well as by Murder, or Blasphemy, or any of those
flagitious Crimes, which not only the Law of God, but the Law of Nature and
right Reason condemn.

Secondly, We pray that God would so affect our Hearts with a Holy and filial
Love of himself, that may sweetly and yet powerfully keep us from whatsoever
may be an offense unto his Divine Majesty. For Love would not willingly do any
thing that may offend or grieve the Object loved. There is a Holy ingenuity in
this Grace, that strongly engages the Heart to love what God loves, and to
hate what he hates. Now the only Object of God's hatred is sin; and therefore
where the Love of God is implanted, it will cause such a Divine Simpathy of
Affection, that those who love the Lord, will hate sin and iniquity, as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm 97.10. And certainly hatred of sin is a most effectual
means to keep us from committing of it. And thus I have shown you the methods
that God uses in delivering us from Evil. By his restraining Providence. By
his restraining Grace. And by his Sanctifying and renewing Grace.

Hence then see to whom you are to ascribe your preservation from Evil, and
from those horrid sins that others fall into. Sacrifice not to your own Net,
not to the freedom of your own Wills, not to any excellency in your own
disposition and temper, not to your Natural Aversation to what is Wicked and
Impious: But give the Praise and Glory both of what thou art, and of what thou
art not, wholly unto God. Thy Nature is as sinful as the worst of Men's; and
that thy Life is not as sinful and wicked as the worst, proceeds only from the
Goodness and Grace of God which has made the difference: yea, a difference
little less than Miraculous; for is it not a Miracle, that when the Fountain is
as bitter in our Hearts, as in the Hearts of others, yet that the Streams
should not be so? Whence is it that since we have the same corrupt Hearts with
Cain and Judas, or any of the most branded Wretches in the World for Sin and
Wickedness; that yet we have not committed the like Impieties with them; but
that God has either restrained or Sanctified us? But Sanctifying Grace of it
self is not enough; for whence is it then that we have not committed the same
sins that those have done, who yet have been Sanctified; whose foul sins and
sad miscarriages, are Recorded for our warning: Are we more Holy than they?
Have we obtained a greater measure of Sanctification than they? No, only our
Gracious God by vouchsafing us a constant influence of his exciting Grace, has
been pleased to keep us from those sins, into which he suffers wicked Men to
fall, and not only them, but sometimes his own dear Children also. Well then
let not the strong Man Glory in his strength, but let him that Glories, Glory
in the Lord; for he is our Strength and our Deliverer: What have we that we
have not received, and if we have received it, why should we boast as if we had
not received it? It is not what we have already received, but what we are
continually receiving from God that makes us to differ from the vilest and most
profligate sinners in the World.

And thus much shall suffice for the way and method how God does deliver us
from evil. Now that which we pray for in this Petition, is,

First, That if it shall please God to lead us into Temptation, yet that he
would not leave us under the power of Temptation, but with every Temptation he
would make a way for us to escape, that we may be able to bear it.

Secondly, That if at any time Temptation should get the upper hand, and
prevail over us to the commission of sin, yet that God would not leave us under
the power of that sin but raise us up again by true repentance and Godly
sorrow, that so at last we may be delivered from the great and soul-damning
evil of obduration and impenitency.

Thirdly, That God would not only deliver us from gross and self-condemning
impieties, but from every evil way and work, and preserve us blameless to the
Heavenly Kingdom of his Son.

Fourthly, That he would be pleased not only to deliver us from that which is
in it self evil, but from all the occasions and all the appearances of evil,
for these also are evil, if not in effect, yet in tendency.

And thus now I have finished the sixth and last Petition of this most
Excellent and Divine Prayer of our Savior: And I nothing doubt, but in the
Discourses I have made of it, you have seen it verified what at first I
affirmed of it; that it is a comprehensive summary of all that we can ask of
God, whether it be for supplies of our Temporal or Spiritual wants, and that
all other Prayers which we make are but a commentary upon this, drawing that
out at length, which here is closely wound up in one bottom.

This Prayer of our Savior now expounded unto you, consists, as I told you in
the beginning, of four parts.

First, The Preface or Introduction, Our Father.

Secondly, The Requests or Petitions, which are six.

Thirdly, The Doxology or Praise. And then,

Fourthly, The Conclusion or Ratification of all in the Word, Amen. The two
first I have dispatched: I now come to the

Third, and that is the Doxology or Praise; for Praise is a necessary part of
Prayer: This Praise now is here ascribed unto God, by ascribing unto him his
Attributes, Thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory for ever. In
which words four of God's Attributes are mentioned and ascribed unto him.

First, His Sovereignty, Thine is the Kingdom.

Secondly, His Omnipotency, thine is the Power.

Thirdly, His Excellency, thine is the Glory.

Fourthly, His Eternity, all these are thine for ever.

The Kingdom is thine for ever. The Power is thine for ever. The Glory is thine
for ever. For so this Particle for ever, is to be distributed unto each of the
foregoing Attributes. Now in ascribing unto God these Attributes, we may
consider, the Eminency, and the Propriety of them.

The Eminency of them in the Particle The, The Kingdom, The Power, The Glory,
denoting to us the highest and the chiefest of all these: For his Kingdom is
that which rules over all. His Power, that which no Created Power can
control. His Glory, such as stains all other Excellencies, and makes all their
Light and Luster to be only the Shadow of God.

The propriety of this Attribute in this Particle, Thine: though others may
have Kingdoms, and Power, and Glory; yet these in their Eminency belong only
unto God; they are thine, and thine only, Originally, Infinitely, and
Unchangeably.

Now all these Attributes of God are annexed to the Petitions of this Prayer by
the illative Particle For: For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory.
And this carries in it the strength and force of a Reason, both why we pray
unto God, and likewise why God should grant us those things that we pray for.

First, We pray unto God: for his is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory
for ever, and therefore he alone is able to relieve and supply us.

Secondly, We plead for the obtaining of those good things which we ask of him;
therefore grant them unto us, For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the
Glory for ever. This adds strong Consolation and Assurance to our Faith, that
we shall be heard in these requests that we present to God. For,

First, His is the Kingdom, and we are his Subjects, and therefore we may
depend upon him as our King for help and protection.

Secondly, His is the Power, and therefore he is able to supply and help us,
and to do abundantly for us above what we can ask or think.

Thirdly, His is the Glory, and therefore since what we ask is for his Honor
and Praise, we may firmly believe our requests shall be granted unto us. And,

Fourthly, All these are his for ever, and therefore we may rest assured that
at no time our Prayers shall be in vain: But as it is the same unchangable God
who in former Ages has done great things for, and given great things unto his
Servants who have called upon him; so he still retains the same Power and the
same Compassion, his Ear is not heavy, nor his Arm shortened, nor his Bowels
withered: and therefore we may with assurance expect that he will supply our
wants, and grant our desires, since the Treasures of his Mercy are for ever
unexhausted. Thus every word is a forcible Reason, both to oblige us to Address
our selves unto God, and likewise to move him to bestow upon us those good
things which we thus ask at his hands. And from hence by the way, we may
observe two things.

First, That in our Prayers we ought to plead with God by weighty and enforcing
Reasons.

Secondly, That the most forcible Reasons in Prayer are to be taken from the
Attributes of God.

First, That in our Prayers we ought to plead with God by weighty and enforcing
Reasons. Thus God bids us to, Take unto our selves words, and to turn unto him,
Hosea 14.2. And thus if we look into Scripture, those Prayers of the Saints
which are there Recorded, we shall find them Disputes (if I may so call them)
as well as Requests, and so many Reasons urged in them, as if by dint of
Arguments, they would constrain God to yield to their desires. So in Moses's
Prayer, Exodus 32.11. Wherefore does thy Wrath wax hot against thy People, which
thou have brought forth out of the Land of Egypt with great Power? wherefore
should the Egyptians say, for mischief did he bring them out to slay them in
the Mountains, and to consume them from the Face of the Earth? Turn thee from
thy fierce Wrath and repent of this Evil against thy People. Remember Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob thy Servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self, and
said unto them, I will multiply your Seed as the Stars of Heaven, and all
this Land that I have spoken of will I give unto your Seed, and they shall
inherit it for ever. And so Joshua pleads with God, Josh. 7.8. O Lord, what
shall I say when Israel turns their backs before their Enemies! for the
Canaanites and all the Inhabitants of the Land shall hear of it, and shall
environ us round and cut off our Name from the Earth, and what will thou do
unto thy great Name? And so Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.6. O Lord God of our
Fathers, art not thou God in Heaven, and rulest thou not over all the Kingdoms
of the Heathens, and in thy Hand is there not Power and Might, so that none is
able to withstand thee? And so in the following verses, he pleads with God by
such powerful Arguments, as if he would extort Mercy and Deliverance from him.
Now although it be true that all the Arguments we can urge, and all the Reasons
that we can allege, cannot alter the purposes and determinations of God, as to
any Event that he has ordained; yet there is this twofold use and necessity
of pleading them.

First, Because by considering the Reasons we have to pray for such Mercies,
our desires will be the more earnest and fervent for the obtaining of them: It
will put Spirits and Life into our Petitions, when we can represent to God the
necessity of our asking, which to his Mercy will prove a strong motive for his
granting.

Secondly, Because Reasons in Prayer do mightily conduce to the strengthening of
our Faith, and gives us great encouragement to believe that we shall certainly
obtain what we have so much reason to ask. Now Faith and Assurance of obtaining
our Request is a great Condition to the Acceptance of our Prayers: And
therefore the Apostle commands us, to lift up Holy Hands, as without Wrath, so
also without doubting, 1 Timothy 2.8. and again Jam. 1.7. Let him ask in Faith,
nothing wavering; for let not that Man think that he shall receive any thing of
the Lord. Now when we can humbly represent unto God, both the great necessity
that we stand in of those Mercies that we beg, and likewise the equity which
arises, either from his Promises past, or his Name and Attributes proclaimed,
that we should receive them: What abundant Strength and Confidence may this add
to our Faith, and make us come to God with an humble expectation, that he would
either Answer our Prayers or our Reasons? And therefore if thou would be sure
to have thy Prayers answered, pray chiefly for such things for which thou can
produce such Reasons as cannot be answered. And therefore,

Secondly, The most forcible Reasons and Arguments in Prayer are to be taken
from the Attributes of God. These must needs be powerful when they are himself:
And if thou can but get an Attribute to take thy part when thou come to the
Throne of Grace, and if thou can but rightly use and fit it to thy requests,
thou may be sure of speeding; for God will not, nay he cannot deny himself.
In us there can be nothing found to move him, nor any where out of himself; and
where we find (as very often we do in Scripture) that the Miseries and
Afflictions of God's People are made use of as a Plea for Mercy, yet this Plea
it self which is usually most winning and most affecting, can no otherwise
prevail with God than as his Pity and Compassions engage him to relieve those
that are in Misery. And to speak properly, they are not our Afflictions, but
the Glory of his Power and Mercy in delivering us from them, that is a motive
unto God: Only it is the art of a Praying Christian aptly to represent himself
as an Object, for God's Attributes to be exercised about. And if he can but
interest any Name or Attribute of God in his behalf, he may be confident of the
success of his Prayer, and that he shall not return ashamed. These two
Observations I gather from the illative Particle, for: For thine is the
Kingdom, etc.

Concerning the Kingdom of God I shall speak but very little now, having
already treated of it in explaining the Second Petition of this most excellent
Prayer, Thy Kingdom come. Certain it is, that God's Universal Kingdom is here
understood, as he is the High Creator, and Supreme Lord of all things both in
Heaven and in Earth; yet not so as to exclude his peculiar Kingdom of the
Church. And this is an excellent Argument to confirm our Faith for the
obtaining of those things which we pray for; because the Kingdom is Gods, and
he is the absolute Sovereign over all; and therefore all things are at his
dispose. As for Spiritual Blessings which we seek, he has the Power of
bestowing of them; for he is King of his Church, and bestows the Gifts and
Graces of his Spirit upon the Faithful Subjects of that his Kingdom. And as for
Temporal Blessings that we beg, he likewise can readily bestow them upon us;
for he is the Universal Monarch of all the World, a King to whom all other
Kings are subject, and all other Thrones are but the Footstool of his.

And therefore, in the general, whatsoever we want, be it Protection or
Provision, our Faith in the Sovereignty of God may encourage us to ask it with
an humble boldness and confidence; for it is the Office of a King to give both
unto his Subjects.

But let us more particularly consider how God's Kingdom may be accommodated to
all the Petitions of this Prayer of our Lord, as a strong Argument and Reason
to prevail with God for the obtaining what we request in each of them.

First, The Kingdom is God's, therefore he will see that his Name be hallowed
and glorified in it. Kings are jealous of their Honor, and it is a great
Offense either to speak or do any thing that may redound to their discredit. It
is fit and decent for a King to have the highest Name, and the greatest repute
among his Subjects. And therefore we may be sure God will maintain this in the
World; yea so jealous is God of having dishonor reflected upon him, that he
has forbidden not only the profanation and trivial mention of his own Name,
but the profanation of that which does but belong unto him. Matthew. 5.34, 35.
Swear not by Heaven, for it is God's Throne; neither by the Earth, for it is
his Footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the Great King.
Heaven is the Throne of his Majesty, the Theater of his Power: Jerusalem and
the Temple the Seat of his Worship. And therefore as Kings and Princes, have
respect shown to their presence Chamber: So God, because he is the Great King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, requires to be reverenced in all that does
appertain unto him, and he will be sanctified in all that draw near unto him.
Those who will not actually hallow him by their Obedience, on them God will be
hallowed passively by their Punishment. And because he is a King he will
maintain the Honor of his Majesty and Royalty: And therefore we may with Faith
pray, Hallowed be thy Name: For thine is the Kingdom, etc.

Secondly, The Kingdom is God's, and therefore this Kingdom shall come, it
shall be maintained, it shall be established, it shall be enlarged and
increased. Is it not the highest concern of a King to look that his Kingdom be
not overthrown, and himself deposed and outed of it? So is it God's interest
and concernment to preserve his Kingdom from the incursion of Enemies, and the
sad consequences of the Rents and Divisions of his Subjects. He has promised
that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against it, that he will enlarge the
Borders of it, and give all Nations unto Jesus Christ for his Inheritance and
Possession. And therefore when we pray, Thy Kingdom come, we may very well
expect that our Requests should be granted; for the Kingdom is God's, and we do
but pray that he would regard his own Interest and Concerns, that he would look
down from Heaven and visit this Vine which his own Right Hand has planted,
that neither the Wild Boar out of the Forest may root it up, nor the cunning
Foxes pluck off its tender Grapes.

Thirdly, The Kingdom is God's, and therefore we may well pray, That his Will
may be done on Earth as it is in Heaven: For what is Sovereignty without
Obedience to it but a mere Pageantry, a mock-shew of idle Royalty? It is but
fit and rational to pray that his Will should be done whose the Kingdom is. And
whilst we thus pray we may be confident of being heard and accepted, since the
Reason we urge is so natural and pressing.

Fourthly, The Kingdom is God's, and therefore we may with great encouragement
to our Faith, pray for Our daily Bread, and all those Temporal Accommodations
that are needful and expedient for us: For it is a Kingly Office to provide
things necessary for their Subjects; to protect and defend them, to supply and
relieve them; and therefore, Psalm. 72. where we have a perfect Character of a
good King, it is said, verse 6. He shall come down like rain upon the mown
grass, and as showers that Water the Earth. That is, he shall be to his People
as soft Showers to the sprouting Grass, kindly nourishing it, and making it
grow and flourish. And certainly God who is the greatest and best of Kings,
will be so much more to his People and Subjects; and since he has assumed to
himself the Style and Name of King he will provide abundantly for their Peace
and Prosperity.

Fifthly, The Kingdom is God's, and therefore we may well make our applications
to him for Pardon, and beg of him the Forgiveness of our Offenses, since it is
the Prerogative Royal of Kings to forgive Offenders. Hence our Savior
describing the Process of the General Judgment, when he comes to speak of
pronouncing the Sentence of Absolution upon Believers, styles himself King, so
we read Matthew. 25.34. Then shall the King say to them on his Right Hand, Come
ye Blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom. So that here our Faith has a very
strong Plea to urge with God for the Pardon of our Sins, Forgive us our
Trespasses: For thine is the Kingdom; and it belongs to the Royalty of thy
Kingdom to forgive humble and penitent Suppliants.

Sixthly, The Kingdom is God's, therefore we may well pray in Faith, that he
would Deliver us from Evil: For this is one great end of Government, to protect
their Subjects from the Assaults of their Enemies. And God, who is our King,
will not neglect this care, when we do with an humble Faith urge him to it, by
representing to him that the Kingdom is his; for his interest is involved in
the safety and welfare of his People.

And thus I have briefly shown you in general, that all our Prayers ought to be
enforced with strong and cogent Reasons, which although they are not properly
motives unto God, yet are they good grounds for our Faith to build upon, and
therefore a good Evidence when we use them, that our Petitions shall be heard
and granted. And I have likewise particularly accommodated this first Motive
and Argument, taught us by our Savior, Thine is the Kingdom, to each of the
Six Petitions, which he has instructed us to present to God.

The Second Attribute that we are to consider, as a Reason and Motive urged in
this Prayer, is the Power of God: Thine is the Power.

Now Power, according to the usual acceptance of the Word, is nothing else but
an ability to work those Changes and Mutations upon created Beings, which were
not in them before; I speak only of Active Power, and the Two Terms of it are,
either the effecting of somewhat that was not, or the annulling and destroying
of that which was: This is the Notion of Power, whether it be ascribed to God
or Man; and in both it is either Absolute, or Ordinate. Absolute Power respects
the simple ability of acting; Ordinate Power respects also the will and
determination to act. And therefore in God, whose Power we are now treating of,
his Absolute Power is of a much larger extent, than his Ordinate, for the one
relates to all things possible, that is to all things whose existence does not
imply a contradiction, the other relates only to things future, and this
likewise such as shall exist according to the common course and method of God's
Ordinary Providence: for Miraculous effects although they are produced
according to the Will and Ordination of God, yet they appertain not to his
Ordinate, but to his Absolute Power. So then the Objects of God's Absolute
Power are things merely possible, or things future; which are without the
Compass and Sphere of second causes to produce. But the Objects of God's
Ordinate Power are things future, produced according to the Laws of Natural
Agents, and the Virtue of second Causes. Yet both these Powers in God are
infinite, the one Objectively, the other Formally.

First, God's Absolute Power is Objectively infinite, that is, the Object of it
is infinite; for all things possible are the Object of this Power, and all
things are in themselves possible, which do not imply a contradiction: And Oh
how vast and incomprehensible is the sum of these! God might have Created more
Worlds, more Angels, and Men than he has done; more sorts of Creatures, and
more of every sort, if he had so pleased. Yea, and he might have been Creating
and Acting from all Eternity to all Eternity; and in his infinite duration be
still producing new, and therefore infinite effects; for with God nothing is
impossible, Luke 1.37. And the only Reason why God has produced such effects
and no other, so many and not more, is not from want of Power, but merely from
the free determination of his own Will and Counsel. He might have hindered the
Fall of Man, restored the fallen Angels, raised the Stones to be Children unto
Abraham, brought more Deluges and general Plagues upon the World, if he had so
pleased: Yea, and though our fancy and imagination has a large Empire, and
seems boundless in these Fictions and Pourtraictures of things which we Paint
and Limn there: yet God can really Create more than we can only imaginarily
Create, for we can only patch together those things which we have seen, or have
otherwise been the Objects of our Senses, and by putting together several
pieces of things really existing, make an Idea of that which never was. But God
can actually cause those Species and kinds of beings in the World which never
were, nor ever was there a former resemblance of them, and so can infinitely
exceed the largest scope of what in us seems most unlimitted, even our Thoughts
and Fancies, for he is able to do above what we are able to think.

Secondly, God's Ordinate Power is infinite formally, that is, those things
which he works according to the Counsel of his own Will they are all effected
by infinite Power; for though the Objects themselves are finite, both for nature
and number, yet the Power that produces them is infinite: for since the
Essence of God is infinite, and each of his Attributes is his Essence, it
follows likewise that his Power is infinite, even in the production of things
that are finite. Now it appears that the Power of God is infinite,

First, By the Works of Creation; for though the things that are Created are
finite, and but a few in comparison with those that are possible, yet it is no
less than the infinite Power of God that can impregnate the vast Womb of
nothing, and make it bring forth a Being. It must needs be an Almighty Word
that can call forth a Creature out of nonexistence, and make it start up into
the rank of things that are. And therefore we find God often ascribing it to
himself as a Glorious demonstration of his Almighty Power, that he spreads
forth the Curtains of the Heavens, that he laid the Beams of the Earth, that he
hung out those Glorious Lights of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, that he breathed
forth all the various sorts of the Creatures which People the Universe, and by
the commanding Word of his Mouth they were made: His Power and his Hand formed
all those Beautiful Creatures we behold, out of a rude and confused Chaos, and
that Chaos it self out of the greater confusion of Nothing: And although second
Causes by their Power and Natural Energy, introduce various forms into things,
yet all the matter they have to work upon, was first God's Workmanship, and
there is nothing made by Man but it is the Creature of God, at least as to the
matter and first principle of it. Now, it is only infinite Power that can bring
something out of nothing; yea, and it is infinite Creating Power that can form
things out of matter utterly indisposed to receive the stamps of such Natures
as God imprints upon them: For no Created Agent can work either where there is
nothing to work upon, or where it is altogether unfit and incapable naturally
to be formed into such a Being as the Agent intends. And therefore the Apostle
tells us, Romans 1.20. That the invisible things of God from the Creation of the
World, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
Eternal Power and Godhead.

Secondly, The infinite Power of God is demonstrated in those Miraculous
effects which have been extraordinarily produced in the World. It must needs be
an Almighty Arm that can Arrest the course and impetus of Nature, and turn it
quite contrary to its own Bias: For no Created Power either in Heaven or Earth
can by their own efficacy work a Miracle; nay they cannot be so much as Natural
Instruments, but only Moral in the production of what is Miraculous. Indeed
Angels both good and bad may produce very strange and mavelous things by
their sudden, invisible, and effectual applying of proper Actives to Passives.
And by suiting the secret and unknown Virtues of Causes to fit and disposed
Patients. But they cannot produce any thing that is Miraculous, and wholly
either above or contrary to the Course and Sphere of Nature. And those Men who
have been so highly dignified as to be the Moral Instruments of Miracles, (as
we say that Moses and Elijah and the Apostles of Christ wrought many Miracles)
yet they did not perform those Works by any Natural or proper Physical
influence; but only by their Prayers and commanding Faith: It is God alone that
is the immediate efficient cause of whatsoever events have been Miraculous in
the World. And therefore when some raised the Dead, and others cured the Blind
and Lame, when Moses first cleft the Sea and afterward the Rock with his
wondrous Rod, when Joshua stopped the Sun in its course, and Isaiah turned it ten
degrees backward: all these extraordinary and supernatural effects, are no
otherwise to be ascribed unto them, than as to remote instruments, who by their
Prayers and Intercessions prevailed with God to manifest his Power, as an
attestation of that Commission they had received from him. His Infinite Power
is the sole Author of them, and to this end has he wrought them, that those
who take little notice of his Power, in the common and ordinary products of it,
may be seized with admiration and astonishment, when they hear of such events,
as neither Reason nor Nature can give any account of, and may be forced to
acknowledge with the Magicians of Egypt, that it is the Finger of God. Or more
Religiously with the Psalmist, Psalm. 89.13. Thou have a mighty Arm, strong is
thy hand, and high is thy right hand.

Thirdly, The Power of God is infinite even in the common course and effects of
his Providence. Whatsoever comes to pass is through the infinite Power of God.
There is not the least spire of grass that sprouts out of the Earth, not the
least Atom that plays and wanders to and fro in the Air, not any motion of any
Creature how inconsiderable soever it be, but the Almighty Power of God is to
be seen in it. For although one second Cause may depend upon another in a long
Series, yet are they all ultimately resolved into the first Cause of all, and
invigorated by his influence. See for this, Hosea 2.21. I will hear the
Heavens, says the Lord, and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall
hear the Corn and the Wine and the Oil, and they shall hear Jezreel. Be the
Chain of second Causes never so long, yet God holds the first link in his own
hands, and conveys his Power through them all to their last effects. So that if
we duly ponder the Mysteries and Wonders of Nature, it will appear that it is
as much Infinite Power to make a poor Worm to crawl, or a Sparrow to fly or to
fall to the Earth, as it was at first to Create the World. It requires no more
Power in God to work Miracles, than the most ordinary and common events that
happen; only those are said to be Miracles which are against or above the
course of Nature, and those to be Natural Events which are according to it; but
to a considering Mind, both the one and the other do equally declare the
Almighty and Infinite Power of God.

Now this Power is in the Text ascribed to God by way of Emphasis and Eminency:
Thine is the Power, which notes unto us some peculiarity in the Power of God,
which distinguishes it from ail Created Powers whatsoever, and it consists in
these following things.

First, In that the Power of God is infinite, (as has been demonstrated
already) but the Power of all Creatures is only finite and limited. God's
Absolute Power has no bounds; but whatsoever is possible to be, he is able to
produce. His Ordinate and Actual Power is indeed limited, but only by his own
Will. Psalm. 115.3. He has done whatsoever he pleased. But our wills are often
limited by our Power, and those things which we wish the accomplishment of,
yet many times fail in taking effect, only because we want Might and Power to
bring them to pass. And therefore when we ascribe Power unto God, Thine is the
Power, we Attribute unto him a Power that is infinite, a Power which can effect
whatsoever his Will has fore-determined, above, yea and contrary to all the
Power of all the Creatures both in Heaven and Earth. Hence it is called, The
exceeding greatness of his Power, Ephesians. 1.19.

Secondly, The Power of God is Originally in himself: But all Created Powers
are only derived from him. Whatsoever is in God is, (according to the known
Rules of the Schools) God himself. And therefore as God has not his being from
any other, so neither has he his Power from any other. But whatsoever ability
is found in any of the Creatures is from God, whether it be Natural or Moral
Power, Strength or Authority.

First, All derive their Natural Power from God. It is he that endues them with
strength, and with all that force and might which they enjoy. 1 Chronicles. 29.12.
In thy hand is power and might, in thy hand it is to make great and to give
strength unto all.

Secondly, All derive their Moral Power and Authority from God. Prove. 8.15, 16.
By me Kings Reign and Princes decree Justice, by me Princes Rule and Nobles,
even all the Judges of the Earth: says the Essential Wisdom of the Father.

Thirdly, The Power of God is Supreme, all other Power is but subordinate unto
him: And therefore he can weaken the strength and frustrate the attempts of all
that shall combine themselves together against him; for his Power is such as no
Creature can resist. And as Billows do but dash themselves in pieces, by
dashing against the Rock: So all the united force of Nature, should they make
head against God, would but dash themselves in pieces, by dashing against the
Rock of ages, whose Counsels and Purposes shall stand firm, though all the
World dissent from them, and endeavor to oppose them; yea, the Power of God is
so absolute and sovereign, that the greatest Created Powers are but Instruments
for God to make use of to bring about his own designs; and therefore they are
compared to Axes, and Saws, and Staves, Esai. 10.15. Shall the Ax boast it self
against him that heweth therewith? or shall the Saw magnify it self against
him that shakes it? Yea, in verse 5. God is said to take up a great King and a
great Nation, only as a Rod to Chastise his People with, O Assyrian, the Rod of
mine anger, and the Staff in their hand is mine indignation. And as a Staff, a
Rod, or an Ax, cannot move themselves without the hand and guidance of him that
makes use of them: So neither can the Mightiest Princes, nor the most Powerful
People move themselves but by the Power and Direction of God, who applies them
as so many Tools or Instruments to whatsoever work he pleases.

Now upon all these Accounts Power may be thus eminently ascribed unto God.
Thine is the Power.

Yet when we affirm God's Power to be thus Sovereign and Infinite, it does not
therefore follow, that it must take all things whatsoever within its reach and
extent; for there are several things, which as St. Austin speaks, lib. 5. de
Civitate Dei, cap. 10. God cannot do because he is Omnipotent. Quaedam Deus non
potest, quia est Omnipotens.

First, God cannot do the things that are contradictory. He cannot Will the
same thing to be and not be at the same time. That there should be a Body
without quantity, or any other Corporeal property belonging to it, as the
Papists absurdly dream in their Monstrous Doctrine of Transubstantiation; for
when they have recourse to the Almighty Power of God, by which they say, That
those things which are naturally impossible, may be effected: As for the same
Body to be in ten thousand places at once: For the same Body to have quantity
(as it has in Heaven) and no quantity as in the Sacrament. We truly Answer,
that the Power of God never reaches to verify contradictions; and that it is
as great a contradiction to affirm a Body to be in more places than one at
once, or to be and not to have quantity, especially to have it, and not to have
it; as it is to affirm that it is a Body and no Body.

Secondly, God cannot do any thing which may justly bring upon him the
imputation of sin; for sin is not from Power, but from Weakness: since all
Impiety consists of defect, and all defect is from impotence. And therefore the
Apostle tells us, James 1.13. God cannot be tempted with evil. Holiness and
Purity is an essential Attribute of the Divine Essence; and therefore God can
as soon not be, as be the Author of sin, for all sin must arise, either from
weakness in the understanding, or perverseness in the Will: but the Divine
Understanding is infinitely clear, and therefore cannot be dazzled with the
false shows and appearances of evil; and the Divine Will is infinitely Holy,
and conformed to the Sovereign Rule of his Sapience and Wisdom. And therefore
where there is no possibility of ignorance in the one, nor of irregularity in
the other, there can be no obliquity in those Actions which proceed from both,
but they must all needs be most Holy, Just, and Righteous.

Thirdly, God cannot do any thing that argues him mutable and unconstant. He
cannot change his purposes, nor break his Promises, nor alter the thing that is
gone out of his Lips. And though the Scripture makes frequent mention of God's
Repenting himself of what he has done: So we read Genesis 6.6. It repented the
Lord that he made Man. Exodus 32.19. The Lord repented of the Evil that he
thought to do unto his People. 2 Samuel 24.16. And the Lord repented him of the
evil. Yet these and such like expressions are spoken only by way of
Accommodation to our Capacities, and spoken (...), compassionately and after
the manner of Men, but must be understood, (...) after such a manner as is
befitting God. For as Men when they repent of what they have made, do again
destroy it, and act contrary to their former actings: So because God does
sometimes act contrary to his former actings, he is said to Repent of what he
had done; although in strict propriety of Speech, the immutability of his
Essence is such that all his purposes and Counsels stand firm and fixed for
ever, Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not. James 1.17. With him is no
variableness nor shadow of turning. And therefore because of this Eternal
fixedness of God's purpose, it is said, That he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy
2.13. That he cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. and that it is impossible that God should
lie, Heb. 6.18. because these things imply inconstancy and fickleness, which is
always an effect of weakness; for whenever we alter our Counsels and
Resolutions, it is because we see some inconvenience would follow upon them,
which we did not before consider, which to impute to God were the highest
Blasphemy.

Now these three things only excepted, all other things in the World fall
within the compass of God's Power. He is able to do all things (as Origin
speaks excellently) the doing whereof would not deny him to be God, or to be
Holy, or to be Wise.

And therefore he cannot bring to pass contradictions, nor can he alter his
Eternal Purposes, for this would derogate from his infinite Wisdom. He cannot
be the Author of sin, for this would be a stain and blot upon his infinite
Purity and Holiness, and both would be impotency rather than Power: and were he
weak enough to do those things, he would not be God, for it is Essential to
God, to be infinitely Wise, and infinitely Holy.

Let us now briefly show how this consideration of the Power, of God, may be
made use of as a prevalent Argument for the strengthening of our Faith in
Prayer, and the assuring of us that we shall obtain what we ask, for our
Savior has taught us to subjoyn it to all our Petitions as a Reason why we
should ask, and as a motive why we should speed, For thine is the Power.

Now the great strength of this lies here, in that it must needs be a mighty
encouragement to our Faith, to reflect and consider that whatsoever we ask, we
ask it of a God that is able to give it us; he is not a weak impotent Deity,
but a God who has all Power in his hands, and therefore can effect whatsoever
we desire of him.

Behold what care God has taken to strengthen our Faith when we pray unto him.
There are but two things that can make us doubt of speeding in our Requests,
the one is whether God will, the other is whether he can grant us what we ask:
And that our Faith might not boggle at either of these, our Savior has as it
were hedged in and enclosed all our Prayers with these two great fences for our
Faith, God's willingness, and his Power to help: the Preface to this excellent
Prayer, contains the one, and the Conclusion of this Prayer the other. He is
our Father, and therefore if Earthly Parents whose Bowels of Mercy are but
finite, are yet so tender over their Children, and ready to do their utmost to
contribute what assistance they can toward them; much more will our Heavenly
Father, whose Mercies and Compassions are infinite and boundless. But lest our
Faith should yet stagger and suspect the Power and Ability of God to relieve
and help us, the Conclusion of this Prayer puts in a caution against all
unbelieving scruples in this case; Thine is the Power. So that we have abundant
security for our Faith in whatsoever we desire of God, because he has declared
himself both willing and able to supply our wants, and satisfy our desires.
Indeed the Power of God alone is not a sufficient plea, for we have before
seen, that God is able to effect infinitely more than he will, but then the
Power of God is a strong and forcible plea, when it is joined with his Will:
And when we are once assured by the Promises of his Word, that God is willing
to bestow upon us the Blessings that we ask; then to bend the force of this
plea toward him, that he is likewise able, will most certainly prevail. And
that Prayer that is directed in Faith, and winged with both these motives,
shall never return into our Bosoms in vain and ineffectual.

Thus have I finished the two first Attributes of God made use of by our
Savior in this Prayer, his Sovereignty, and his Omnipotency. It remains now
that we speak something to the third Attribute of God, which our Lord here
teaches us to make use of in praying to him, and that is the Glory of God. For
thine is the Glory.

But this is an Attribute so bright and dazzling, so surrounded and fringed
about with Rays of inaccessible light, that the Holy Angels themselves cannot
steadfastly behold it, but twinkle and glimmer; yea, vail their Faces at the
full Beams of that Object, the Vision of which is yet their Eternal Joy and
Happiness. And therefore whenever weak or vile Man can either speak or
conceive of the infinite Glory of the great God, will instead of exalting,
debase it; and we shall but defame while we attempt to celebrate it; so
infinitely do the Perfections of the Deity surmount our most raised Affections,
that our very Praises thereof, are but lessening of it: And whatsoever we
ascribe unto God, is but detracting from him. Think with your selves a little,
if two blind Men that never saw the Sun, were discoursing together about it,
what strange, uncouth and improper fancies would they form of its Light and
Splendor? Surely such, yea vastly more confused and disproportioned, are all
our notions and conceptions of the Glory of God, which is a Light that is
invisible, obscurity that is dazzling, and whatsoever else is most inconceivable
to humane capacities. For the Scripture sometimes describes God's
dewlling place to be in that Light unto which no Mortal Eye can approach. And
sometimes that his Pavillion is dark Clouds which no Eye can penetrate: And
both to signify how impossible a thing it is to search out God, and to find
out the Almighty to perfection.

Yet since he has been graciously pleased to give us some refracted and
allayed Rays of himself, such as we are able to bear, both in the Works of
Creation and Providence, and likewise in his Holy Word; let us with all humble
modesty take notice of those discoveries which he has made of his Glory,
wherein we shall find enough, if not to satisfy our curiosity, yet to excite
our veneration, and by seeing some glimpses of his back-parts which he causes
to pass before us, our desires will be made more earnest after that Estate of
consummate Happiness, where we shall for ever behold his Face, where we shall
no longer see him darkly through a glass, but shall see him as he is, and know
him as we are known by him.

Glory therefore according to the true and genuine import of the Word,
signifies any Excellency or Perfection in a Subject that either is or deserves
to be accompanied with Fame and Renown. And hence we may well distingiush a
Twofold Glory in God, the one Essential, the other Declarative.

The Essential Glory of God is the Collection and System of those Attributes
which Eternally and immutably belong unto the Divine Nature.

The Declarative Glory of God is the manifestation of those his Attributes; so
that his Creatures may take notice of them with Praise and Veneration. Both are
here intended by our Savior when he teaches us to ascribe the Glory unto God.

God is Essentially Glorious in all those Attributes which appertain unto his
infinite Being, for each of them is infinitely perfect in its self, and the
complexion and concentring of them altogether; make up a Glory infinitely great
and incomprehensible. Thus his Holiness is Glorious, Exodus 15.11. Glorious in
Holiness. His Power is Glorious 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. They shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of
his Power, Col. 1.11. Strengthened with all Might according to his Glorious
Power. His Majesty is Glorious, Psalm. 145.5. I will speak of the Glorious
Honor of his Majesty. His Kingdom is Glorious, Psalm. 45.11. They shall speak
of the Glory of thy Kingdom. His Grace and Mercy is Glorious, Ephesians. 1.6. To
the Praise of the Glory of his Grace wherein he has made us accepted in the
Beloved. And from all these result the Glory of his great and terrible Name,
which has in it an excessive brightness and luster from the Constellation of
so many Glories united in it. Deuteronomy. 28.58. That thou may fear this glorious
and fearful Name, the Lord thy God. Yea, so infinite is this Essential Glory of
God, that it diffuseth and sheddeth abroad its Light and Glory upon those
things which have but Relation to him, therefore the Church is said to be
Glorious, because made in some faint resemblance like unto God, Psalm. 45.13.
The King's Daughter is all Glorious within. Ephesians. 5.27. That he might present
it to himself a Glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle. The Gospel is
therefore Glorious, because it is that Glass wherein we see the Glory of God by
a reflected Light. And as the Beams of the Sun falling upon a Glass, make it
shine with an exceeding brightness: So the Glory of God striking upon the
Gospel, and from thence re-bounding off to us, has stamped it with an excellent
Glory and Luster. 1 Timothy 1.11. According to the Glorious Gospel of the Blessed
God. His Throne is Glorious. Jerem. 17.12. A Glorious high Throne from the
beginning is the place of our Sanctuary. Yea, not only his Throne, but that
which might seem more despicable, his very Footstool is Glorious. Esa. 6.13. I
will make the place of my Feet Glorious. Now this Essential Glory of God is
both immutable and incomprehensible.

First, The Essential Glory of God is immutable, the same for ever, no addition
can be made unto it, nor no diminution from it; for before there were ever any
Creatures extant, God was the same Glorious Being that now he is. Our Praises
and Acknowledgements can no more contribute to this Glory, than the Eye that
sees the Sun can increase the Light of it: for God's Attributes that are his
Glory are no adventitious accidental things, that may be assumed or laid aside
at pleasure, but they are all as necessary as his Nature is: And therefore
though he be said to cloth himself with Light and Glory as with a Garment, yet
is it a Garment that cannot be put on or off: But whatsoever God is in any one
moment of Eternity, the same he is from all Eternity unto all Eternity. He is
the Lord who changes not, and with whom there is no variableness nor shadow of
turning.

Indeed there are some Titles in God's Style, which seem not to have been
always appertaining to him, and in respect of his Eternal Being, may appear as
new Stars in the Heavens; and argue some alteration and change in his Glory, as
to be Creator the Lord and Governor of this World, which he was not from all
Eternity, nor could be till the Creatures were formed.

But here we must carefully distinguish between the Absolute and Relative
Attributes of God. His Absolute Titles and Attributes, are such as belong unto
him simply, without depending upon any respect or reference to any thing
without and besides himself, and so he is Infinite, Eternal, Wise, Holy and
Merciful in himself, and was so for ever before there were any Created Objects
unto which, or upon which he might manifest these his Attributes. But now the
Relative Titles of God have a time wherein they began, and wherein they shall
likewise cease; as to be a Creator and Preserver of the World as it now stands;
wherein though there may be daily mutations, yet God is the same, immutable,
because these are only extrinsecal denominations, and arise merely from that
change that is made upon the Creature, not from any change that is made in God:
for still his Power is the same, whether he exert it in Creating or no: His
Wisdom is invariably the same before he manifested it in the Government of the
World as since, and in all the mutations that he brings upon the World, he is
still the same immutable and unchangeable God. Only as those who Sail, think
the Shore removes, when it is but the Ship: So are we subject to the same
mistakes, and are apt to think God is changed, when only our selves are
changed; that he moves from not being a Creator to be a Creator, when in Truth
we only move from not being Creatures to be Creatures. And therefore when we
say God is now a Creator which once he was not, it implies no more change in
God, than it would in any Object which now is seen, which before was not seen:
and this is only a different external denomination, that makes no real change
in the thing. But it may be these Speculations are too abstruse, and therefore
I shall not detain you longer in them.

Secondly, As the Essential Glory of God is immutable, so is it also
incomprehensible, for it is infinite and the entire perfection of the Deity. It
is the very Face of God, and therefore, Exodus 33.15. When Moses desired God to
show him his Glory, God Answers him in the 20 verse, Thou can not see my
Face, for there can no Man see my Face and live. And although the Angels in
Heaven and the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, have brighter and more radient
discoveries made unto them of the Glory of God, than any that we can bear, yet
neither they nor any other Creature can possibly comprehend the full Latitude
and utmost extent of that Glory, any more than it is possible for a finite
thing to contain what is infinite. And hence it follows, that when the
Scripture promises us as one great part of our Reward, that we shall see God
as he is, 1 John 3.7. We must not understand it as if ever we could arrive to
such a capacity as to see and know God as he is in his infinite Essence, for
God's Essence being altogether indivisible, to know God essentially, were to
know him comprehensively; to know him as much as he is to be known in himself,
that is to know him as much as he knows himself, which is impossible, for no
finite Understanding can comprehend an infinite Object. And yet our sight and
knowledge of God shall so far surmount those dim and glimmering discoveries
which here he makes of himself to us, that comparatively the Apostle might well
call it, a seeing him as he is, and a knowing him as we are known by him.

And thus much for the Essential Glory of God, which is himself and his own
Infinite and Eternal Excellencies and Perfections. But besides this,

Secondly, There is another Glory of God, and that is his Declarative Glory,
which is nothing else but that visible Splendour and Luster that reflects from
his Essential Glory, upon the notice and admiration of his Creatures. So that
there is a very great difference between God's being Glorious and being
Glorified. God is always equally Glorious in himself, so he was before the
Foundations of the World were laid. Before ever there were any Creatures to
Celebrate his Praise. But he is Glorified by his Creatures, declaring and
setting forth the infinite Excellencies that are in his Essence. We cannot set
any new Gems in his Diadem which did not shine there before; but when we
observe and admire those several coruscations of his Attributes which appear in
those various methods that God takes to manifest them; then are we said to give
Glory unto God. His Holiness is always the same, but when we endeavor to
imitate it, then we Glorify it. His Power is always the same, but we Glorify
it when we depend upon it. His Mercy and Goodness is always the same, but we
are said to Glorify it, when we praise and extol it. And therefore God tells
us, Psalm 50.23. Whosoever offers Praise, Glorifieth me. We can add nothing to God
by all the Glory that we ascribe unto him, but then we are said to give him
Glory when we admire and adore, and celebrate those Glories that are in him.
And so St. John 12.28. Christ prays, Father Glorify thy Name, that is, make
thine Essential Glory, the Glory and Brightness of thine Attributes conspicuous
to the World; to which Request there was an Answer returned from Heaven, I have
both Glorified it, and will Glorify it again, that is (as I suppose the words
may well be interpreted) I have already Glorified my Mercy, which is my Name,
in thy Incarnation and Mission, and I will also Glorify my Justice in thy
Passion and Crucifixion: by the one declaring how Gracious I am in providing a
Savior for the ruined World; by the other how Just and Holy I am in exacting a
full and complete satisfaction for the Sins and Transgressions of the World.

Now we may both add unto and diminish from this Declarative Glory of God. We
rob God of his Glory when we interpose between his Attributes and the
Manifestation of them unto others. We hereby wrong and injure his Repute and
Esteem in the World, and although we cannot pluck off any of his Attributes
from him, ( For if thou sinnest, what do thou against God? Job 35.6.) yet we
obstruct the shining of them upon others. As in an Eclipse of the Sun, the Moon
does not darken the Sun, but only darkens us, and hinders the Light which still
is the same in it self from breaking out upon the lower World. So wicked Men by
their sins, though they cannot deprive God of the Brightness of his Glory, yet
they impede the Emanations and out-flowings of his Glory, and hinder others
from admiring and adoring of it as they ought.

Now the ways whereby God uses to express and declare his Glory, are various.

First, He does it by his works, Psalm. 19.1. The Heavens declare the Glory of
God and the Firmament shows his handiwork. For they manifest to the World,
the Attributes and Perfections of their great Creator, even his Wisdom, Power
and Goodness. Some of God's Works are his Footsteps, and some are his Images.
The Image of God is seen in rational and intellectual Creatures, and by
considering the Wisdom, Understanding, and mental Faculties that God has
endowed them with, we may come to apprehend some faint shadows and resemblances
of the infinite Wisdom and Knowledge of the Original Cause of them; since
whatsoever is in them must needs be in a far more Eminent degree in the Author
and Maker of them. But all God's Works carry, quaedam vistigia Dei, some Prints
and Footsteps of God stamped upon them, whereby although they do not all show
his likeness, yet they show his Power and Wisdom in framing them. Romans 1.20.
The invisible things of God, from the Creation of the World are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead. But he especially Glorifies himself in the Extraordinary Miraculous
Works of his hands, whether in a way of Mercy, or in a way of Judgment. Exodus
15.11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, Glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises,
doing Wonders? Psalm. 85.9. Surely his Salvation is nigh them that fear him,
that Glory may dwell in our Land. That is, God by his wonderful deliverances of
his Church and People, establishes his Glory to dwell among them.

Secondly, God declares his exceeding and infinite Glory by his Word; For
therein he has given us the most clear and lively representations of himself.
And those Attributes which his Works could never have discovered to us, he has
manifested by his revealed Will. This is that Table on which he has drawn his
most resembling Image, this is that Glass wherein, We beholding the Glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. and
it consists of two parts, the Law and the Gospel, the one discovers to us the
Glory of God's Justice, the other the Glory of his Mercy; and both of them are
Glories. 2 Cor. 3.9. For if the Ministration of Condemnation, which is the Law,
be Glory; much more does the Ministration of Righteousness, which is the
Gospel, exceed in Glory.

Thirdly, The most clear manifestation of the Glory of God was made in Christ,
who was the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, Heb.
1.3. in him Heaven was brought down to Earth, the infinite comprehended the
invisible made conspicuous: And all the Miracle both of Grace and Glory
reconciled to our very Senses. In him all the Attributes of the Divine Nature
are so interwoven with the infirmities of the Humane, that (if I may so speak)
God in him studied to exhibit to us a person like our selves, to give us some
advantage for our apprehensions to conceive of his infinite Perfections. In him
Omnipotence became weak, Eternity Mortal; Innocence it self guilty, God, Man;
the Creator, a Creature; the Maker of all, its own Workmanship; Life it self in
him underwent the sentence of Death: And all these strange and impossible
Truths, as for other ends, so for this that we might have some clearer hints
and discoveries of the infinite Glories of God, which in their full brightness
would only dazzle and confound us; and were discernable by us only thus tempered
and obscured. And therefore the Apostle calls him, God manifested in the Flesh,
1 Timothy 3.16. Certainly God in Flesh must needs be rather veiled and hidden than
manifested. But although to himself he was obscured, yet to us he was
manifested, because if the Glory of the Deity had not been thus clouded and
allayed, it had not been manifested. For that Light which when tempered makes
us see, will strike us blind when too Glorious. As we may safer direct our Eyes
toward the Sun when it is under an Eclipse, than when it shines with uncheck'd
Rays. Hence St. John speaking of Christ in the mean Estate of his Humiliation,
says of him, St. John 1.9. We beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only
begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth.

Thus now you have seen what the Essential and Declarative Glories of God are;
let us now consider why this Attribute should so eminently be ascribed unto
God: Thine is the Glory. Now there may be three Reasons given of it.

First, Because all that is Excellent and Glorious in the Creatures, is to be
found in God; and that either formally or eminently. Is Grace or Holiness,
Wisdom or Strength, Duration, Justice or Mercy, any Excellency in those
Creatures to which they are Attributed? they are all in God Formally, and
infinitely more Glorious, and with infinite more Perfections, than they are in
the Creatures: For Created Beings have but their limited and stinted
proportions of these Qualifications, but God is infinitely Holy, infinitely
Wise, infinitely Just, and infinitely Merciful: these things are in him without
allays or mixtures from their contraries. He is Holy without any mixture of
Sin. Wise without any mixture of Folly. Just without any mixture of Iniquity.
Merciful without mixture of Cruelty. Yea, these are all in him without any
bounds set them by his Nature and Capacity; for they are his Nature, and
therefore as infinite and as unbounded as it.

Again, Those Excellencies that are in the Creatures and cannot formally agree
with the Divine Essence, yet they are all in him Eminently. Are any Creatures
Excellent for the Beauty and Symmetry of their parts, for Light, for Motion, or
such like Qualities, that do not belong unto the Divine Nature? Yet all these
are Eminently in God, for he is the Prime and Original Cause from whom they
derive their Being and Perfection; so that all Glory is his, his
incommunicatively from any other, communicatively from him.

Secondly, All Glory in respect of God is but darkness and obscurity. And so it
was both a True and Divine Conception of Plato, when he said, That Light was
but a shadow of God: for as Shadows are vastly dark when the Light that
surrounds them appears. So God is infinitely brighter than Light it self. Yea,
the Sun that Created Fountain of Light is but a black coal compared with this
Eternal Father of Lights. This is well expressed by Job, 25.5. Behold even to
the Moon and it shines not, and the Stars are not pure in his sight. As the
Light of the Sun when it arises, drowns and extinguisheth all other Lights
(for its brightness as it brings a Day to all the rest of the World, so it
brings a a Night to the Stars) So the infinite brightness of the Glory of God,
over-casts all other Glory whatsoever with Night and Obscurity. Hence it is
said, That God charge his Angels with Folly, Job 4.8. So that if those Wife
and Intellectual Creatures be compared with God, they are but foolish and
ignorant; for the Glory of his infinite and unsearchable Understanding so far
transcends their reach that they know nothing, in comparison with him who
knows all things. The two chiefest Glories of Men, are Wisdom and Strength;
Wisdom to contrive, and Power to execute; these perfect him as he is a Man: But
yet see how the Apostle undervalues both these, when compared with God. 1 Cor.
1.25. The foolishness of God is wiser than Men, and the weakness of God is
stronger than Men. And therefore because God's Glory is infinitely surpassing
all others, our Savior ascribes it to him peculiarly: Thine is the Glory.

Thirdly, Because all other Glories in the Creatures serve only to illustrate
the Glory of the Great God. See thou any Excellency and Perfection in any of
the Creatures? God has so endowed them with it, not that thou should fix
there, and make that thy Idol; but that thou might have a hint from thence
how much more perfect he himself is; and take thy rise from visible
Excellencies, to admire those that are invisible. Is there so much Beauty and
Harmony in the Frame of Nature? Think then how much more Harmonious and Orderly
are the Counsels and Designs of the Great God, who has contrived and disposed
the whole course and circuit of second Causes. Is there so much awe and dread
in the presence of an Earthly Majesty, to daunt all that are not impudent and
profligate Offenders? Think then how infinitely venerable is the Face of the
Great God, since it is only some Ray of his Authority and Majesty shining in
them, that makes them so dreadful. Is it such a pleasant thing to the Eye to
behold the Light? raise then not thine Eye of Sense, but thine Eye of Faith to
consider how infinitely Bright and Glorious that Light is, that is never
Clouded; that Light which though it infinitely diffuse it self, yet resides
always in its Center: For God is Light, and in him there is no darkness at all,
1 John 1.5.

Thus you see that God has therefore made any Created Being Glorious and
Excellent, that it might serve as a Monitor to put us in mind of his greater
Glory; and the more Excellent any Perfections are in the Creature, the greater
advantage have we from them to raise our Meditations unto God.

And having thus shown you why Glory is in such an especial manner attributed
unto God, Thine is the Glory, it reremains now to consider what force this Plea
has to confirm our Faith, that we shall obtain from God those things which we
pray for; and here let us see its influence upon every Petition.

First, The Glory is God's, therefore his Name shall be Hallowed. For his
Declarative Power consists in the Hallowing of his Name, since to Hallow, is
nothing else (as I showed you in the Explication of that Petition) but to
declare God to be Holy, and this is to give Glory unto God. Hence we have them
both joined together, Levit. 10.3. I will be Sanctified by them that come nigh
unto me, and before all the People I will be Glorfied. To Sanctify, is to
Glorify God. And therefore what better Argument can we urge that God would
provide for the Sanctifying of his Name, than this, that the Glory is his, and
if his Name be profaned in the World, his Glory needs must suffer. How can the
World know that God is infinitely Glorious in all his Perfections and
Attributes, unless he take care by his own methods to have his Name Sanctified
among his People in their Expressions and Actions, and to have it Sanctified
upon the Wicked in their Plagues and Punishments? Therefore we may well pray in
Faith, Hallowed be thy Name, for thine is the Glory.

Secondly, The Glory is God's; Therefore His Kingdom shall come. For where
should he be Honored but in his own Kingdom? God is greatly dishonored and
his Glory traduced in the rest of the World: And therefore if he will have any
Glory secured and maintained, he must take care of his Church to maintain and
propagate it. Psalm. 76.1. In Judah is God known, his Name is great in Israel.
The Glory of a King falls together with his Kingdom, and it lays a blot upon
his Honor if he should suffer his Enemies to overthrow it, while he has Power
to defeat their Enterprises; since therefore the Glory is God's, we may be
confident that he will provide for the security and welfare of his own
Kingdom, and will for his Honors fake establish it so sure, that the Gates of
Hell, all the Power and Policy of Men and Devils shall never be able to prevail
upon it, to its extirpation.

Hence then whensover we see the rage of the professed Enemies of the Name of
Christ, incroaching upon the Borders of his Dominions, when the State of the
Church Militant seems visibly to impair, or when the Hypocrisy and Wickedness
of those who are the professed Enemies of Christ seems to eat out the very
Heart and Power of true Godliness, we may well pray in Faith, Thy Kingdom come;
Lord raise, Lord enlarge, Lord establish it, For thine is the Glory, and unless
thou will confine thy Glory only to Heaven, and account the Praises and Eternal
Hallelujahs of Saints and Angels a sufficient adoration for thy Great Name;
Lord, have regard to this thy poor decaying Kingdom, for only in it, and in
Heaven is thy Glory Celebrated. And if thou leavest this thy Kingdom to be
overrun by the Agents and Ministers of the Devil, if Profaneness and Idolatry
gain ground in it, so as to thrust thee out of the Throne, What were this but
to give thy Glory to another, which thou have promised not to do?

Thirdly, The Glory is God's, therefore his Will shall be done in Earth as it
is in Heaven. The greatest Glory that God can receive from us is by our
Obedience, John 15.8. Herein (says our Savior) is my Father Glorified, that
ye bear much Fruit, God's chiefest Glory is his Holiness, and therefore he is
Styled Glorious in Holiness. And we have no better way to Glorify the Holiness
of God, than by endeavoring to be Holy as he is Holy. For then do we declare
it to be a thing which we value as most Excellent and Glorious when we strive
to imitate it, and would fain get as much of it as our frail Natures can
receive. And therefore we may well pray in Faith, Thy Will be done, for thine
is the Glory, because the greatest Glory we can give to God, is by doing his
Will.

Fourthly, The Glory is God's, and therefore will he provide for us our daily
Bread, and all things that are necessary for our good. And therefore when God
was Miraculously to provide Bread for his People in the Wilderness, he tells
them, Exodus 16.7. In the morning then shall ye see the Glory of the Lord. And
certainly it is not for the Glory of God that any of his should want things
fitting and necessary for them. Only let us leave it to him to Judge what is
so. For although he should reduce thee to a morsel of Bread, and a cup of cold
Water, yet he gives thee all that is fit for thee, and should he give thee
more, it would not be a boon but a curse.

Fifthly, The Glory is God's. Therefore he will forgive thy Debts and
Trespasses. The Wise Man has told us, Prove. 19.11. That it is the Glory of a
Man to pass over a Transgression, and shall it not much more be the Glory of
God, whose Mercies are infinitely more Glorious than our Charity can be? Yea,
he tells us, Prove. 25.2. That it is the Glory of God to conceal a thing, that
is to hide and cover our sins, so that they shall not be found against us. And
expressly, Ephesians. 1.6, 7. That we have redemption, even the forgiveness of sins
to the praise and glory of his Grace. And I have showed you in opening of the
Petition, that it is a very high Honor and Superiority to forgive, it is the
Prerogative-Royal of a King, and therefore we may well pray with Faith. Forgive
us our Trespasses, for thine is the Glory.

Sixthly, The Glory is God's, Therefore he will deliver us from the Assaults
and Incursions of our Enemies, he will deliver us from Temptations, or from the
evil of Temptation. He will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able
to bear, but will with every Temptation make a way for us to escape, hereby to
demonstrate the Glory of his Wisdom and Power, that it is above all the wiles
and power of the Devil and our Spiritual Enemies. And therefore we may well
pray, Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil, for thine is the
Glory; because it is the Honor of God to defend his Servants from the
incursions of his and their Enemies.

Thus we have treated on three of God's Attributes ascribed to him in this
Doxology: His Dominion, his Power, and his Glory. It remains now to consider
the Amplification of all these by that expression, For ever, which is to be
referred and accommodated to the foregoing Titles, The Kingdom is thine for
ever, The Power is thine for ever, and the Glory thine for ever. Now this
application of it denotes to us the Eternity of God's Attributes, and
consequently his Nature.

Indeed this Particle For ever, does not always in Scripture signify a strict
and proper Eternity, for it is often applied to things of various durations.

First, Sometimes (most improperly) those things which have both beginning and
end, are said to be for ever. So the Mosaical Paedagogy, and those rites and
observancies which were imposed upon the Jews by the Levitical Law, are said to
be everlasting, although they were not to continue any longer than between
Moses and Christ, which space was not completely Fifteen Hundred Years. Thus
the Priesthood is said to be eternal, Numb. 25.13. where it is called, The
Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood. So the sprinkling of the Blood of the
Passover is to be commanded to be observed for ever, Exodus 12.24. So
Circumcision is called, an everlasting Covenant, Genesis 17 13. And many more such
instances might be given.

Yea, things of a far shorter duration than these, such as are only to continue
during life, are yet said to be Eternal. The servitude of him that refused
freedom, was to be for ever, Exodus 21.6. that is during his natural life. And
so the Psalmist often resolves himself and exhorts others to Praise and
Magnify God for ever. And indeed it is very ordinary in Scripture that those
things are said to be for ever, which were not to alter their State for some
continuance of time, nor to be difused till the date prefixed to them were
expired.

Secondly, Some things which had no beginning but shall have an end, are yet
said to be for ever. And such (as they respect their Objects) are the Decrees
or Foreknowledge of God, which shall in their due time be fullfilled. Thus
Ephesians. 3.11. they are called, The Eternal purpose of God, and yet they cease
under the notions of Decrees and Prescience, when that which was from all
Eternity Decreed and Foreknown takes its accomplishment.

Thirdly, Those things which had a beginning, but never shall have an end, are
said to be for ever. And such are the Angels, all of them Created in the
beginning of time, but their future continuance is without bound or period. And
the Saints after the Resurrection are said to be made equal to the Angels,
because they shall not die, Luke 20.36. And Christ is said to be made a little
lower than the Angels, in that he tasted of Death, Heb. 2.9. The good Angels
live in Eternal Beatitude, they always behold the Face of God, Matthew. 18.10.
And the evil Angels live in Eternal torments and a never dying Death, They are
reserved in everlasting Chains, under darkness, Jude verse 6. And thus the
Souls of Men are everlasting. For being Spiritual substances, and free from all
principles of decay and corruption, they shall for ever continue in that Estate
and Condition for which their Actions in this life have prepared them. And not
the Soul alone, but the Body also shall be eternally preserved in its being;
This mortal must put on immortality, 1 Cor. 15.53. And then shall we for ever
be with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. And yet all these had once their beginning by
the Creating Word of God, but are Eternal, a part post and shall always retain
those natures and beings.

Fourthly, That is most strictly and properly said be Eternal and for ever,
which neither has beginning nor end, whose prospect both ways is infinite and
boundless. And thus God only is for ever, and it is an incommunicable Attribute
of his Divine Essence to be so. But because all the perfections and properties
of God are God himself, therefore this everlastingness here in the Doxology
ascribed to his Kingdom, his Power, and his Glory, are said to be for ever. Yet
not only these, but whatsoever is in God is absolutely Eternal. His
Righteousness is an everlasting Righteousness, Psalm. 119.142. His Truth
endures for ever, Psalm. 117.2. His Mercy is for ever, Psalm. 136.1. His Mercy
endures for ever, which is there made the burden of that most excellent Song
and the sweet close of every verse in it, His Love is for ever. Jer. 31.3. I
have loved thee with an everlasting love.

Now in treating of the Attributes of God, I shall endeavor to show these
three things.

First, What the true and proper notion of Eternity is.

Secondly, That God is Eternal.

Thirdly, What encouragement our Faith may have from this Attribute of God's
Eternity, that those things which we pray unto him for, shall be granted unto
us.

First, Let us see what Eternity is. And here though it be altogether
impossible, exactly to describe what is boundless and infinite, yet to help our
weak and shallow conceptions, we may take this notion of it. Eternity is a
duration which has neither beginning nor end, nor succession of parts. Or
according to the common description of Boethius, Est interminabilis vitae tota
simul and perfecta possessio. It is the complete possession of an endless life
all at once. So that it is distinguished from all other durations whatsoever.

First, In that other durations have had their beginnings; for all things were
Created either in time, or with time, but Eternity was before all time, and
shall be after it.

Secondly, In that all Temporal durations are successive, measured by the
motions of Heavenly Bodies, by years, days and hours; but Eternity is
permanent, it is but one abiding instant, and has no parts following one after
another, and though it comprehends all time within its infinite Circle, yet it
does not move along with time. For as Rivers are contained within their banks,
and flow along by them part after part, without any motion of the banks
themselves, so Time is contained within Eternity, and flows along in it without
any motion or succession of Eternity it self.

This I confess is hard, if not altogether impossible to be formed into an
Idea; yet conceiving Reason will infallibly demonstrate that Being which
neither has beginning nor end, can have no succession in its duration; for
wherever there is Succession, there must needs be a Priority, and wherever
there is a Priority, there must needs be a beginning. And if Eternity did
consist and were made up of such parts as are equal and commensurate to our
years and days, it must needs follow, that these parts themselves must be
infinite; for if they be but finite, we shall come to a beginning, which is not
to be granted in Eternity. And if they be infinite, then in Eternity there must
be as many Millions of Years as of Minutes, and consequently a Minute would be
equal to a Million of Years; yea, the least part of a Minute would be equal to
it, which is grossly absurd.

But I shall not detain you with these Philosophical Speculations. Only when we
say that God is from everlasting to everlasting, we ought not to conceive that
there is any Succession in his duration; that he grows older, or that he has
continued longer this day than he was yesterday. For though when we speak of
God, we are forced to use such expressions, and denote Succession in his Being,
as that he was from everlasting, and that he shall be to everlasting, yet to
say that God was, or that he shall be, is only allowable by reason of the
penury of our conceptions: But in strict propriety these are derogatory to him;
for God neither was nor shall be, but only is and enjoys his Eternal Essence
immutably and unsuccessively. And therefore when Moses demanded his Name that
he might inform the Israelites who that God was that would take pity of their
Sufferings, he tells him, thou shall say unto them, I AM has sent me to you,
Exodus 3.14. And this indeed is the best and fittest expression of his Eternity
and unchangableness.

Yea, and the Scripture has given us one more high and lofty expression of it,
Psalm. 90.4. A thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past,
what is yesterday to this day? but a mere nothing. So a thousand years, yea all
the thousand years, and all the time that ever the Orbs of Heaven shall spin
out to the World, is all to God but as yesterday when it is past; he lives not
by it, nor is his Being measured out by days or years, but it is a perpetual
Now, a standing Moment, an indivisible and permanent instant without flux or
vicissitude. Indeed it is wholly inconsistent with Eternity and an infinite
duration, that there should be any thing past, or any thing to come in it. For
what is already past, cannot be infinite, because it is already ended. And what
is to come cannot be Eternal, because there was something going before it. And
from hence it appears, that a duration which is Eternal, must be without
beginning, without end, and without any Succession of parts.

Now Secondly, That God is thus Eternal, appears both from clear Evidence of
Scripture, and invincible demonstrations of Reason it self.

First, The Scripture bears abundant witness to the Truth of this Attribute,
Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27. The Heavens are the Works of thy hands, they shall
perish, but thou shall endure; yea, all of them shall wax old as a Garment, but
thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end. Psalm. 90.2. Before the
Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the Earth and the
World, even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God. Isa. 43.10. Before me
was there no God formed, neither shall there be after me. 1. Tim. 1.17. Now to
the King Eternal and Immortal the only Wise God be Honor and Glory. But I
cannot stand to cite all the Testimonies that might be alleged.

Secondly, The Eternity of God may be demonstrated by clear and irrefragable
reason. And that I shall give you in these several gradations.

First, It is absolutely necessary that there be some first cause of all things
that are made, which is not it self made or produced by any. For the series of
Causes is not infinite, otherwise no effect could be produced, since what is
infinite cannot be passed through. And if all Beings that are, are caused by
some pre-existent Being, then there is not, nor ever was a Being, before which
there was not another, and so this gross absurdity will follow, That before
there was a Being, there was a Being, which is a contradiction. Therefore we
must necessarily rest in some first Cause, from which all things have their
Origin, and is it self caused by no other.

Secondly, This first Cause of all is God. For whatsoever is the first Cause of
all things, must needs be Almighty in that it produces them, and All-wise in
that it Governs and Maintains them; and incomprehensible; for that Being which
has no Cause, cannot be perfectly known, since a perfect and comprehensive
knowledge of things is derived only from the knowledge of the Causes of them.
Now whatsoever is Almighty, All-wise, and Incomprehensible, is that God whom we
adore.

Thirdly, God being the first Cause of all things, and not produced himself by
any other pre-existent Being, it is impossible that there should be any time
wherein he was not. For that which once was not, either shall never be, or must
be made. And therefore it being wholly inconsistent with the notion of a first
Cause to be made or produced; it clearly follows, that we can never conceive a
time wherein God was not.

Hence it appears that God is Eternal, a part ante, or from everlasting: And
that he is also Eternal a part post, or to everlasting, appears,

Fourthly, Because that which has no beginning of its duration, can have no
end of it. For the first Cause of all not depending upon any for the production
of its Being, can depend upon none for the continuation of it, and therefore of
necessity must exist to all Eternity.

And thus you see how much Reason alone can speak for the Eternity of God. The
demonstrations which I have now given you are so clear and perspicuous, that
would those Atheistical Spirits, who acknowledge no God but their Reason, duly
ponder the force of them, they would even by their Deified Reason be enforced
to acknowledge the Living and Eternal God, whom we adore. Possibly to some
these things may seem difficult, to others they may seem needless, because we
all readily acknowledge the Eternity of God. But certainly if ever there were
need to confirm the Doctrines and Articles of Faith by arguments drawn from the
principles of Reason, it is now in these days of ours, wherein Atheism has
gotten ground and credit, and it is looked upon as a sign of a pregnant wit and
mature and deep judgment daringly to dispute against the Being and Attributes
of God, and whatsoever is most Sacred and Venerable in Religion.

But certainly if there be Reason in any thing, there is Reason to believe the
existence of perfection of the Deity, not only from the Oracles of the
Scripture, which are enough to satisfy a Christian; but from the dictates also
of natural Light, and the evidence that Reason brings in: which are so cogent
and demonstrative, that he that will notwithstanding be an Atheist, must also
be irrational; and whosoever will say in his heart, there is no God, or that
God is not Eternal, or that God is not infinitely perfect, we may well say of
him as the Psalmist does, that he is a fool, The fool has said in his heart,
there is no God, Psalm. 14.1.

And thus I have showed unto you what Eternity is in its proper notion, and
have evinced likewise that God is in the strictest sense, Eternal.

And now before I come to the third thing propounded, let us here make some few
practical Reflections upon this Eternity of God.

First, Glorify this inconceivable and Glorious Attribute, extol and venerate
it with your highest thoughts and lowest prostrations, sending your adoring
thoughts as far into the Eternity of God as possible a humane and finite
understanding can dart them. For though Eternity be such a deep as can never be
fathomed, since it has no bottom, yet it is sweet and delightful to lose our
selves and be swallowed up in this Abyss of Being. Those prospects are most
pleasant to the eye, that have nothing to bound them, no limits to restrain the
sight in its free range, so it is the most pleasant prospect to the mind, to
contemplate such an Object where there can be no boundaries set to our
apprehensions, and where we can see no farther, not for want of Object, but for
want of Sight.

Secondly, Is God Eternal from everlasting to everlasting? let us leave then
the care of all future events unto him, for he is the same unchangable God, and
although we be but of yesterday, and may not be to morrow, and when we die,
then all our thoughts perish with us, yet the everlasting God can and will
order all affairs for his Glory, and carry on our purposes if they be
conformable unto his. We oftentimes are anxious and sollicitous about what may
happen after our decease either to the World, or to those we love best in it;
but let us commit this care to God; he ever lives, and has the same ever
infinite Power and infinite Wisdom to dispose of all events as it shall please
him. Let us therefore cast these burdens upon him who shall still survive, as a
Father for our Children, as an Husband to provide for our Widows, as a King and
Governor to provide for our Country, as the Universal Lord and Monarch to
provide for the affairs of the whole World according to the All-wise Maxims of
his Eternal Counsels.

Thirdly, Is God Eternal? Why then should we not give unto him the same Honor,
Respect, and Service that his Saints have done in former Ages and Generations?
He is still the same God, his Holiness and his Justice, and his Sovereignty
still the same. And if the consideration of these his Attributes had such a
mighty influence upon the Saints of former times, to engage them to a strict
and holy life, why should they not now have the like influence upon us? He is
the Lord, he changes not, and therefore as absolutely as he required Obedience
from them, so absolutely now does he require it from us. But the truth is, we
live as if God were grown old, as if his Justice were now out of date, or his
Power decrepit: We live as if there were decays in the Deity; yea, indeed as if
there were no God in the World to take notice of, and punish our sins.
Certainly that God who once lived to denounce threatenings, still lives to
execute them: He is the same Holy, the same Powerful, the same Just God that
ever he was: Why then should not we give him the same Honor, and Respect, and
Service? Why should we not love and fear him as the Saints of old have done,
since we have the same God whom they Worshipped, and a God who requires from us
the same Duties and Observances?

Let us now proceed to the third and last thing propounded, which was to show
you what encouragement our Faith may have from this Attribute of God, Eternity,
to expect the grant of those good things, which we pray for. For our Savior
has taught us to use this as a plea with God in our Prayers. For thine is the
Kingdom, etc. for ever.

And indeed this Encouragement is great and manifold. For hence we may with
confidence rely upon God for merciful supplies in all our wants, for
deliverance in all our dangers, for supports under all our troubles, and for
comfort under all our sorrows, because he is Eternal, and therefore the same
God, who has heretofore in all Ages of the World done great things for all
those who trust in him. And therefore the Kingdom, and the Power, and the
Glory, which were a forcible plea with God in former times, a plea to which he
could deny nothing when urged in Faith, have still the same efficacy and
validity now: For these and all other of God's Attributes are his for ever.
Therefore, O Christian, now lay hold on God's strength, and plead with him what
he has done for his Children in former Ages: How he has forgiven the
Penitent, revived the Contrite, restored Joy and Salvation to dejected and
despondent Spirits; how he has wrought for the Sanctification of his great
Name; by what wonderful providence, and wise methods he has established and
enlarged his Kingdom; how he has strengthened the weak hands and feeble knees,
and made those who were without Might, able by his Grace, to perform the
hardest Duties in fullfilling his Will and Commandments; how he has provided
for all their necessities, rebuked the temptations of the wicked one, and kept
them in the World from the evil of the World. And then urge: Lord, thou art
still the same God, Eternal in thy Essence, Immutable in thy Attributes; thy
Power, thy Wisdom and thy Mercy are the same that ever they were, and therefore
vouchsafe unto us the same Favor. This plea offers an holy violence to Heaven,
a violence that is pleasing and acceptable unto God, which he will not, he
cannot resist. If we endeavor to be of the same dispositions and affections
with the Saints of old, we may be sure to obtain of God's hands the same Mercy
and Salvation. See how Asaph instructs the Church to make use of the Memorials
of God's former loving kindnesses, and the great and wonderful works that he
had wrought for their Fathers, Psalm. 78.4, 6, 7. We will show to the
Generations to come, the Praises of the Lord and his strength, and the
wonderful works that he has done, that one Generation may declare them to
another, that they may set their hope in God. And therefore the consideration
of the Eternity and unchangableness of God, is of vast and infinite comfort,
and a mighty advantage for the strengthening our Faith, in pleading with God
for the same Mercies which he has formerly bestowed upon others, because he is
the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

And thus I have finished the Doxology, and therein considered the four
Glorious Attributes ascribed unto God in it; his Sovereignty, his Omnipotence,
his Excellency, and his Eternity.

There remains but one thing more to be spoken of in this Prayer, and that is
the Conclusion, and Ratification of all in that short Particle, Amen.

Of this I shall speak but very briefly, and so shut up this whole Subject.

This word Amen, is sometimes prefixed before a Speech, and sometimes affixed
after it. When it is prefixed before, it is assertory, and so we find it very
often in the Evangelists; for wheresoever our Savior uses the word verily, it
is no other but Amen. Verily, verily Isay unto thee; i. e. Amen Amen, I say
unto thee; which is a vehement assertion of the Truth and necessity of what he
speaks. And our Savior uses it to gain the more attention and belief to what
he desires. Thus John 3.5. Amen, Amen, I say unto thee, except a Man be born of
Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. So John
16.23. Amen, Amen, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father, in my
Name he will give it you. And so in many other places in the Evangelists. How
backward are we to believe, since our infidelity is such that it constrains
the Son of God, who is Truth it self, to use asseverations and protestations to
win our assent unto him?

Secondly, As this Particle Amen used in the beginning of a Speech, is
Assertory of the undoubted Truth of it, so when it is subjoined and used at the
end of it, is Precatory, and signifies our earnest desire to have our Prayers
heard, and our Petitions granted. Psalm. 41.13. Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel from everlasting to everlasting, Amen, and Amen. Psalm 72.19. Let the
whole Earth be filled with his Glory, Amen, and Amen. Psalm. 106.48. Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel, from everlasting to everlasting, and let all the People
say Amen. In the former sense of the words as it is prefixed to a Speech, it
signifies so it is. In this Latter, as it is added to a Petition or Request, it
signifies so be it.

Now this teaches us to put up all our Petitions, First, with understanding,
duly weighing and considering what it is we ask of God. For when we use vain
and insignificant babbling, how can we seal and close them up with an hearty
Amen? And this condemns the mockery of the Papists, who because God understands
what is uttered in a language to them unknown, think that they may lawfully
pray to him in a Tongue which they themselves understand not. But with what
Zeal, with what affection can they close up such Prayers with an Amen? This is
like setting a Seal to an Instrument which they know not what it contains: and
is expressly condemned by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.16. How shall he that occupies
the room of the unlearned, say Amen, at thy giving of Thanks, seeing he
understands not what thou say?

Secondly, It teaches us to present all our requests to the Throne of Grace,
with fervent Zeal and Affection: Amen is a wing to our Prayers; it is the Bow
that shoots them up to Heaven. And although every Petition as we utter them
before God, should be accompanied with an earnest and hearty desire to have
them heard and granted; yet at the close of them all, we are to redouble and
repeat this our desire in the word Amen. Wherein we do as it were briefly and
succinctly Pray over again all that we had prayed before; and in one word, beg
of God, That he would give us all that we had before asked of him.

And therefore whether we Pray our selves, or join in Prayers with others, and
make their Petitions ours, we ought to attest our understanding of, our assent
unto, and our earnest desires after the Mercies that are begged by Sealing up
the Prayers with an Amen. And certainly, it would be a very beseeming thing if
Amens were audible and sounding, unless we are ashamed to be thought to Pray
when others Pray, and to make use of others expressions to present our
Petitions. When we come to the public Worship, we are not to look upon the
Minister only as Praying for the People, but he is the Peoples Mouth unto God,
and it is or ought to be the Prayer of the whole Congregation which he
presents. They Pray with him, and by him, and every Petition that he makes to
God, ought to be ratified with an Amen sent from our very hearts: which if we
sincerely and affectionately perform, we have abundant assurance, that what is
confirmed by so many suffrages on Earth, shall likewise be confirmed by our
Father which is in Heaven. And how beautiful, how becoming, would this be when
the whole Church shall thus conspire together in their Requests? St. Jerome
tells us, It was the custom in his days, to close up every Prayer with such an
unanimous consent, that their Amens rung and echoed in the Church, and sounded
like the fall of Waters, or the noise of Thunder. This would be a Testimony of
our hearty consent to the things we Pray for. And if any two that shall agree
upon Earth, touching any thing that they shall ask, they shall have it granted
them, as our Savior has promised, Matthew. 18.19. then certainly, the joint
Prayers of a whole multitude of Christians, must needs have a kind of
Omnipotency in them, and be able to do any thing with God.

And thus I have with God's Assistance, given you a brief Exposition of this
most excellent Prayer of our Savior. The Lord Sanctify it unto you, and make
it a means to help you to Pray with more understanding, with stronger Faith,
and with greater Fervency.

The End of the Larger Exposition.
A Catechistical EXPOSITION OF THE Lord's Prayer, By way of QUESTION and ANSWER.
By the Right Reverend Father in God, EZEKIEL, Lord Bishop of Derry; by which
he examined the Youth each Lord's Day, during the whole Time he preached upon
the Lord's Prayer.

Quest. IS the Lords Prayer a Form of Prayer, or only a Pattern for Prayer?

Answ. It is both: That it is to be used as a Form, appears, Luke 11.2. When ye
pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. That it is a Pattern, Matt.
6.9. After this Manner therefore, pray ye: Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Q. What are the Parts of this Prayer?

A. They are Four.

1. The Preface or Introduction. 2. The Petitions and Requests. 3. The Doxology
or Praise-giving. 4. The Conclusion and Ratification.
Q. What is the Preface to this Prayer?

A. Our Father which art in Heaven.

Q. What observe you from it?

A. That in the Beginning of our Prayers, we ought seriously to consider, and
reverently to express the glorious Attributes of God; as an excellent Means to
compose us into an Holy Fear of his Divine Majesty.

Q. How many are the Petitions contained in this Prayer?

A. Six; Whereof the three first respect God's Glory, and the three last our
own Good.

Q. What learn you from this Order and Method?

A. That we ought first to seek God's Glory, before any Interests and Concerns
of our own.

Q. How are those Petitions divided, which immediately concern the Glory of God?

A. In the first of them we pray that God may be glorified; in the other two,
for the Means whereby he is glorified.

Q. How divide you those Petitions which concern our own good?

A. One relates to our Temporal, the other two to our Spiritual good.

Q. What observe you from placing the Petition for our Temporal good, in the
Midst of this Prayer?

A. That we are only to bait at the World in our Passage to Heaven, and only
refresh our selves with our daily Bread, in our Way and Journey thither.

Q. What are the Petitions which relate to our Spiritual good?

A. They are two: One whereby we beg the Pardon of our Sins; the other whereby
we beg Deliverance from them.

Q. What ascribe you to God in the Doxology?

A. Four of his most glorious Attributes.

1. First, His Sovereignty; Thine is the Kingdom. 2. Secondly, His Omnipotence;
And the Power. 3. Thirdly, His Excellency; And the Glory. 4. Fourthly, The
Eternity and Unchangeableness of all these; They are Thine for ever.
Q. What signifies that Particle Amen, at the End of this Prayer?

A. It signifies two Things.

So be it; Which notes our Desire for the obtaining of what we ask.

So it shall be; Which notes our Assurance of being heard.

Q. What is the Preface to the Lord's Prayer?

A. Our Father which art in Heaven.

Q. What does this teach us?

A. That in our Entrance into Prayer, we should seriously consider both the
Mercy of God as he is our Father; and likewise his Majesty as he is in Heaven:
That the one may beget in us Filial Boldness, and the other awful Reverence,
and by the mixture of both, we may be kept from Despair and Presumption.

Q. In what Respects may God be styled Father?

A. In three especially.

1. First in respect of the Eternal Generation of his Son. And so this Title is
proper only to the first Person of the Trinity.

2. In respect of Creation and Providence, and so he is the Father of all: Mal.
2.10. Have we not all one Father? Has not one God created us?

3. In respect of Regeneration and Adoption: And so he is the only Father of
the Faithful; John 1.12.13. But as many as received him, to them gave he power
to become the Sons of God, even to them that believed on his Name: Which were
born, not of Blood, nor of the Will of Flesh, nor of the Will of Man; but of
God: Romans 8.15, 16. For ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to
Fear: But ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father.
The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of
God.

Q. In what Respects do we call God Father in this Prayer?

A. In the two last: As he has created us and does preserve us, and as he has
regenerated and adopted us.

Q. When ye style God, the Father, do ye mean only God the Father, the first
Person of the Trinity?

A. No. For God the first Person is eminently called, the Father, not in
respect of us, but in respect of Christ. In respect of us the whole Trinity,
both Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is our Father which is in Heaven; Isaiah 9.6.
For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given; and the Government shall
be upon his Shoulder: and his Name shall be called, Wonderful, Counselor The
Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. John 3.5. Jesus
answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee; Except a Man be born of Water and of
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God?

Q. What is implied in this Particle Our, Our Father?

A. That God is the Father of all Men, He is the Father of the Wicked by
Creation, and Providence; but especially of the Godly by Regeneration and
Adoption.

Q. Is it proper in our secret Prayers to say, Our Father?

A. It is: For so we find: Dan. 9.17. Now therefore, O our God, hear the Prayer
of thy Servant, and his Supplications, and cause thy Face to shine upon thy
Sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord's Sake.

Q. What learn we by stiling God our Father?

A. First to esteem one another as Brethren; sinceall partake of the same
common Nature; much more as we partake of the same especial Grace: To interest
one another in our Prayers, and thereby maintain the Communion of Saints.

Q. But since God is every where present, why has our Savior taught us to
direct our Prayers to our Father in Heaven?

A. First; because Heaven is the most glorious Place of God's Residence; and
therefore God is represented to us in Heaven, to affect us with his Glory and
Majesty.

Secondly; Because God no where hears our Prayers with acceptance but only in
Heaven. For there only are they represented by Christ's Intercession, which he
makes in both Natures.

Q. What learn ye from our being commanded to direct our Prayers to God in
Heaven?

A. That we should so pray as to pierce Heaven, which cannot be done by the
strength and intention of our Voice, but of our Zeal and Affection.

Q. Is the Voice necessary in Prayer?

A. It is, only upon three Accounts.

1. As that which God requires should be employed in his Service. 2. When in
secret it may be an help to raise our Affections, still keeping it within the
Bounds of Decency and Secrecy. 3. In our joining with others it is an help
likewise, to raise and quicken their Affections.
Q What is the first Petition of the Lord's Prayer?

A. Hallowed be thy Name.

Q. What is here meant by the Name of God?

A. First, God's Name is himself: Psalm. 20.1. The Lord hear thee in the Day of
Trouble, the Name of the God of Jacob defend thee; and many other Places.

Secondly, The Name of God is any perfection ascribed unto him, whereby he has
made himself known unto us.

Q. What are the Names of God?

A. His Titles, and his Attributes.

Q. What are his Titles?

A. They are many; as Jehovah, which signifies Being, and giving being;
Creator, denoting his Infinite Power; Lord, and King, denoting his Authority
and Dominion; Father, signifying his Care and Goodness toward his Creatures;
Redeemer, noting his Mercy and Grace, in delivering them from Temporal Evils,
and especially from Eternal Death.

Q. What are the Attributes of God?

A. They are of two Sorts, either Incommunicable or Communicable.

Q. Which are his incommunicable Attributes?

A. Such as are so proper to the Divine Essence, that they cannot in any
Measure or Resemblance be ascribed to the Creatures. Such are the Eternity,
Immensity, Simplicity, and Immutability.

Q. What are his communicable Attributes?

A. They are such as may in some Analogy and Resemblance be found in the
Creatures. As Holiness, Justice, Mercy, Truth, Wisdom and Power.

Q. Since they are to be found in the Creatures, how are they then the proper
Names of God?

A. They are the proper Names of God, when they are applied to him free from
all those Imperfections that attend them in the Creatures.

Q. What are these Imperfections?

A. They are Three.

1. First, That all the Perfections of the Creatures, are not Originally from
themselves, but derivatively from God. 2. Secondly, They are not infinite, but
limited. 3. Thirdly, They are not unchangeable, but mutable.
Q. How then do these become the Names of God?

A. When we ascribe them unto God as Originally from himself, and infinitely,
and unchangeably in himself.

Q. What is it to hallow this Name of God?

A. It signifies to make his Name Holy.

Q. How can God or his Name be made Holy?

A. Neither by Dedication to Holy Uses, nor by Infusion of Holy Habits; both
which are frequently in Scripture called Hallowing or Sanctifying; but only by
Declaration of his Glory and Holiness.

Q. How do we hallow the Name of God by Declaration?

A. When in our most reverend Thoughts we observe and admire the Expressions
of his Attributes, and endeavor to set them forth to others, both in Words
and Actions.

Q. What pray you for in this Petition, Hallowed be thy Name?

A. For three Things in the General.

1. First, We beg such Graces for our selves, as may enable us to sanctify
the Name of God.

Q. What are they especially?

A. Knowledge and Understanding of his Nature, Will and Works; Thankfulness
for every Mercy, Patience under every Affliction, Faith in his Word and
Promises: For to believe God's Word gives Glory to his Name; Romans 4.20. He
staggered not at the Promise of God through Unbelief; but was strong in Faith,
giving Glory to God: An Holy and Exemplary Life whereby we especially glorified
God, and induce others to do so too: Matt. 5.16. Let your Light so shine before
Men, that they may see your good Works, and glorify your Father which is in
Heaven. And lastly, savoury and well ordered Speech, that we may not profane
the Name of God by Oaths, or Curses, or vain using it; but speak of him with
all Holy Fear, and Reverence.

Q. What else do we beg of God in this Petition?

A. We beg that others also may receive Grace to enable them to sanctify his
Name. And Thirdly, we beg that God would so overruled all Things; that his
Glory may be promoted by them.

Q. What learn you from Christ's making this the first Petition of his Prayer?

A. 1. First, That the Glory of God is to be preferred by us, before all other
Things whatsoever. John 12.27, 28. Now is my Soul troubled, and what shall I
say: Father save me from this Hour: But for this Cause came I unto this Hour.
Father, glorify thy Name. Then came there a Voice from Heaven, saying, I have
both glorified it, and will glorify it again.

2. Secondly, That in the Beginning of our Prayers, we ought to beg Assistance
from God, to present them that his Name may be hallowed.

Q. What is the second Petition of the Lord's Prayer?

A. Thy Kingdom come.

Q. How manifold is the Kingdom of God?

A. It is two fold, either Universal, or else his peculiar Kingdom.

Q. What is God's Universal Kingdom?

A. The whole World; both Heaven and Earth, and Hell it self and all things in
them: Psalm. 103.19. The Lord has prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his
Kingdom rules over all.

Q. How does God exercise his Dominion over this Kingdom?

A. By the Power of his Providence, disposing of all his Creatures and all
their Actions, according to his Will.

Q. But since wicked Men are Rebels against God, how does he maintain his
Dominion over them?

A. Three ways.

1. First, In that they cannot sin without his Permission. 2. Secondly, In that
he restrains them when he pleases. 3. Thirdly, In that he justly punishes
them for their Sins, sometimes in this Life, always in the next.
Q. What is God's peculiar Kingdom?

A. His Kingdom of Grace, which is the Church, and that, either Militant here
on Earth, or else Triumphant in Heaven.

Q. How is the Church Militant to be considered?

A. As it is either Visible or Invisible.

Q. What is the Visible Church of God here on Earth?

A. It is a Company of People openly professing the Truths that are necessary
to Salvation, and celebrating the Ordinances appointed by Jesus Christ.

Q. What is the Universal Kingdom or Church of God?

A. It is a Company of true Believers, who have Eternal and Invisible Communion
with God by his Spirit, and their Faith.

Q. What observe you of both?

A. Its Mixture and Imperfection; for in the Visible Church there is a great
Mixture of Persons, the Bad with the Good; in the Invisible there is a great
Mixture in Persons of Evil with Good, and Sin with Grace.

Q. You have formerly told us that the Church of Christ in its Progress is the
Church Militant, either Visible or Invisible; and that the Church of Christ in
its Consummation, is the Church Triumphant. What is this Church Triumphant?

A. The general Assembly of such glorious Angels as never fell; and such
glorified Saints, as are raised from their Fall.

Q. What is that Kingdom, which in this Petition we pray may come?

A. Not the Universal Kingdom of God, which is the World, for his Dominion
therein is always the same; but only the peculiar Kingdom which is his Church,
and more especially that part of it, which is Militant on Earth.

Q. In what Respects may God's Kingdom be said to come?

A. In Three.

1. First, In respect of the Means of Grace and Salvation; which are the Word,
and Sacraments; for where these are dispersed, there God's Kingdom is erected.

2. Secondly, In respect of the Efficacy of this Means in the Conversion of
Sinners; whereby they are brought into the Invisible Kingdom of Christ.

3. Thirdly, In respect of the Perfection of this Kingdom; for then God's
Kingdom comes, when the Saint's Graves are increased; when their Souls are
received into Heaven, and when both Souls and Bodies are consummated in Glory.

Q. What do we pray for, when we say, Thy Kingdom come?

A. 1. First, That God should plant his Church where it is not: That all the
Kingdoms of the Earth may become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ.

2. Secondly, That his Ordinances may be purely and powerfully administered; his
word truly preached, which is the Law of his Kingdom, and his Sacraments duly
dispensed, which are the Seals of it.

3. Thirdly, That God would send into his Church able and faithful Ministers,
to be faithful Stewards of the Mysteries of the Gospel.

4. Fourthly, That the Ministry of the Word may be successful to the
Conversion of those that hear it.

5. Fifthly, That all the Churches of Christ may be kept from Error, Schism,
Superstition and Idolatry, and that true Doctrine and due Discipline may be
continued in them to the End of the World.

Q. But may we not pray also for the Church Triumphant in Heaven?

A. We may for the fulfilling of what is promised.

1. First, That the Number of them may be completed.

2. Secondly, That their Persons may be completed. That the Bodies of those
Saints which now sleep in the Dust, may be raised, united to their Souls, and
both made Eternally glorious in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Q. Is not this praying for the Dead so, justly condemned of Popish
Superstition?

A. No: for we pray not for another State, as the Papists do, when they pray
for Souls to be delivered out of Purgatory, but we pray for the Perfection of
the same State, in which the Souls of the Faithful already are; we pray not for
their Release out of Torments, but for a joyful Resurrection, which both they
and we expect; and whatsoever may be the Object of our Faith and Hope, may well
be the Subject of our Prayers.

Q. Which is the third Petition?

A. Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven.

Q. How is the Will of God distinguished?

A. Into the Will of his Purpose, or the Will of his Precept; or into his
secret and revealed Will.

Q. What is the Will of God's Purpose?

A. His Eternal Counsels and Decrees whereby he has foreordained whatsoever
comes to pass.

Q. What is the Will of Gods Precept?

A. His holy Laws contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament;
wherein he has revealed to us the Duties we ought to perform for the obtaining
of Eternal Life.

Q. How do these two Wills differ?

A. 1. First, In that there are many things which God wills by his Will of
Purpose, that he has not willed by his Will of Precept. For God commands
nothing but what is Holy, yet he purposes to permit many things that are Evil.

2. Secondly, In that we may effectually resist his Will of Precept, so as to
hinder the Accomplishment of it, as we do whenever we sin; but we cannot
resist the Will of God's Purpose, though many times to endeavor it, is our
indispensible Duty.

Q. Ought not the Will of the Creature to be conformed to the Will of God in
all things?

A. Yes to the Will of his Precept; for that alone is the Rule of our
Obedience: But in all things to conform to the Will of his Purpose may involve
us in the greatest Guilt. Acts 2.23. Being delivered by the determinate
Counsel, and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have
crucified and slain.

Q. Is there not then a manifest repugnance between God's Will of Purpose, and
of Precept?

A. No: for the Object of God's Will of Purpose is Event; but of his Will of
Precept, Duty; and it is no contradiction for God to will, or permit that to be
which he has willed, or commanded us not to do.

Q. Which of these do we pray may be done?

A. We especially and absolutely pray, that the Will of God's Precept, may be
done in Earth as it is in Heaven.

Q. What considerations may excite us to be earnest in this Request?

A. First, because there is a great reluctance in our corrupt Nature, against
the holy Will of God; therefore we ought earnestly to pray, that he by his
Grace would subdue it.

Secondly, because the Glory of God is deeply concerned in doing his Will, for
by this we own his Sovereignty, and our Subjection to his Laws and Kingdom.

Thirdly, because our own Interest is deeply concerned in it; for it is only
by doing his Will we can inherit the Promises. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they
that do his Commandments.

Q. Ought we not absolutely to pray, that God's Will of Purpose may be done?

A. No: And that because many things are brought to pass by this Will, which we
ought to pray against; as Temporal Evils, and the Permission of Sin.

Q. How then do the Saints in Scripture pray for the Accomplishment of this
Will of God; as in 1 Samuel 3.18. And Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing
from him: and he said, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. 2 Samuel
15.26. But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let
him do to me as seems good unto him. Acts 21.14. And when he would not be
persuaded, we ceased, saying, The Will of the Lord be done. And our Savior,
Luke 22.42. Saying, Father if thou be willing, remove this Cup from me;
nevertheless, not my Will, but thine be done.

A. These are not so much Prayers, as Declarations of their Submission unto,
and Patience under the Hand of God.

Q. May we not pray at all, that God's Will of Purpose may be done?

A. Yes, it is for Temporal, or Spiritual, or Eternal Blessings on our selves
or others.

Q. What force does the Particle Thy carry in it, when we pray, Thy will be
done?

A. It may be taken either emphatically, or exclusively.

1. First, It signifies that God's Will ought to be preferred above, and before
all others. Acts 4.19. But Peter and John answered and said unto them, whether
it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge
ye. Both because it is most Sovereign, and because it is most Holy and Perfect;
so that we act most like Men, when we act most like Christians.

2. Secondly, It signifies exclusively that God's Will, and not our own, may be
done. For ours being carnal and corrupt, we pray for the subduing it to his.

Q. What mean you by praying that God's Will be done in Earth?

A. First, I pray that it may be done by my self, and all others living on the
Earth. Psalm. 67.2. That thy way may be known upon Earth, thy saving Health
among all Nations.

Secondly, We pray that we may improve the few Days, of this Mortal Life, in
the Service of God; for there is no Device nor Operation in the Grave.

Q. Having given this Account of the Petition in the Matter of it, what is next
observable?

A. The Proportion of it, As it is in Heaven.

Q. But is it not impossible to do the Will of God in Earth as it is done in
Heaven, where the Holy Angels do perfectly perform it?

A. It is as to the Equality of Perfection, but not as to the Similitude and
Proportion of our Endeavors after it. For we are commanded to be holy as God
is holy, and perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect: Matt. 5.48. Be ye
therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect: Which
Command we obey when we seriously endeavor it.

Q. How then is the Will of God done in Heaven?

A. First, Thine Obedience is absolutely perfect, both as to Parts and Degrees;
that is to say, they obey all God's Will enjoined them, and that with all their
might; and after this Perfection we ought to strive, and in this Petition pray
for a greater Measure of it.

Secondly, Their Obedience is cheerful, not extorted by Fears or Sufferings.

Thirdly, They do the Will of God with Zeal and Ardency. Psalm. 104.4. Who
makes his Angels spirits, his Ministers a flaming Fire.

Fourthly, They do it with Celerity and ready Dispatch; and therefore the
Angels are often in Scripture described to have Wings.

Fifthly, The Will of God is done in Heaven, with all possible Prostration and
Reverence. Rev. 4.10. The four and twenty Elders fall down before him that sat
on the Throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their
Crowns before the Throne, saying.

Sixthly, The Will of God is done in Heaven with Constancy and Perseverance.
Rev. 7.15. Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him Day and
Night in his Temple; and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them.
And thus we ought to pray and endeavor, that we may do the Will of God on
Earth.

Q. What learn you from this?

A. That we ought not to satisfy our selves in comparing our Obedience with
other Men's, as the boasting Pharisee did; but to take the Examples for our
Holiness from Heaven, and to endeavor to imitate the Purity of Angels, and the
God of Angels: For St. Paul himself when he prescribes his Life as an Example
for Christians, does it only as he followed the Pattern of Christ, 1 Cor.
11.1. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ.

Q. We have already considered the three first Petitions, which immediately
related to God s Glory; it remains now to treat of those which immediately
concern our own Good; Which is the first of them?

A. That, wherein we beg the good things of this present Life, in these words,
Give us this Day our daily Bread.

Q. What is here meant by Bread?

A. All Temporal and Earthly Blessings that contribute, either to our being, or
well being: For Bread being the most usual and useful Support of Life, it is
often in Scripture put for all kind of Provision necessary for natural Life.
Genesis 3.19. In the Sweat of thy Face shall thou eat Bread, till thou return into
the Ground, for out of it wast thou taken, for Dust thou art, and unto Dust
shall thou return.

Q. What learn we hence?

A. That it is not below a Spiritual Christian to pray for Temporal Mercies,
both because they are needful for us. Matt. 6.32. (For after all these things
do the Gentiles seek) for your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all
these things: And God has promised to bestow them. Phil. 4.19. But my God
shall supply all your need according to his Riches in Glory, by Christ Jesus.

Q. How ought we to pray for them?

A. Only conditionally; if it may consist with God's good Pleasure to bestow
them, otherwise we do not pray but invade; and if it may consist with our good
to receive them, otherwise we ask a Curse instead of a Blessing.

Q. What learn you from the word Give?

A. That God is the Giver of every Temporal Mercy.

Q. How is God said to give us our daily Bread?

A. First, by producing it, and bringing it to us; for though the Chain of
natural Causes be never so long, yet God holds the first Link of it in his own
hand; Hosea 2.21, 22. And it shall come to pass in that Day, I will hear, says
the Lord, I will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth. Verse. 22. And
the Earth shall hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and they shall hear
Jezreel.

Secondly, by blessing it to us, without which our daily Bread can never
nourish us; Deuteronomy. 8.3. And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and
fed thee with Manna, (which thou know not, neither did thy Fathers know)
that he might make thee know, that Man does not live by Bread only, but by
every word that proceeds out of the Mouth of the Lord, does Man live.

Q. What mean you when you pray for daily Bread?

A. By this we pray, That God would bestow upon us daily those Mercies which
are sufficient for the Day.

Q. What learn you hence?

A. That, as in praying for Bread, we pray for Conveniences; not for
Superfluities or Delicacies: So in our praying for daily Bread, we pray for
present supplies; not Goods laid up for many Years. Which teaches us to
moderate our Cares and Desires after Earthly Things, and to rest satisfied in
God's Providence and present Blessings.

Q. May we not then carefully provide for the Time to come, and the Support of
our Dependents?

A. We may, and ought; but our Care must be only prudent, and provident, not
perplexing, and desponding.

Q. Why is that Expression, this Day, added?

A. To show us, that every Day we stand in need of Supplies from God; and
therefore should daily pray to receive them.

Q. Since we pray for daily Bread, why is it called our Bread?

A. To note, that we ought to use lawful Means to acquire what we pray for.

Q. What pray you for in this Petition?

A. 1. That God would give us the good Things of this Life, as the Acquisitions
of our lawful Endeavors.

2. That he would bless the Increase of what is lawfully ours.

3. That he would bestow upon us a spiritual Right, in whatsoever we enjoy,
through Jesus the Heir of all Things.

4. We pray, that we may not desire nor covet what is another.

5. We pray for Life it self, that it may be prolonged, whilst God has any
Service for us to do in this World.

6. For all the Means that may lawfully preserve our Life and Health.

7. That he would strengthen our Faith and Dependence on his Providence, who is
the giver of all good.

8. That he would give us Contentment in that Portion of Earthly Blessings,
which he allots us.

Q. What is the fifth Petition of the Lord's Prayer?

A. Forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors.

Q. What things are observable in this Petition?

A. The Order, and the Matter of it.

Q. What observe you from the Order of it?

A. That after we have prayed for our daily Bread, we are taught to pray for
Pardon of Sin. Which Method is most rational.

1. Because the Guilt of Sin many times, withholds from us those Temporal
Comforts which we stand in need of. Isaiah 59.2. But your Iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your Sins have hid his Face from you,
that he will not hear.

2. Because without Pardon of Sin, our Temporal Enjoyments, are but Snares and
Curses.

Q. What observe you in the Matter of this Petition?

A. Two things: The Petition it self, Forgive us our Debts: And the Condition,
or Proportion, or Plea, and Argument for obtaining this Forgiveness; As we
forgive our Debtors.

Q. What mean you here by Debts?

A. The same which St. Luke 11.4. Calls Sins. And forgive us our Sins, for we
also forgive every one that is indebted to us.

Q. How stand we indebted to God?

A. We stand indebted to God, both as we are his Creatures; and as we are
Offenders; on the former Account, we owe God the Debt of Obedience; on the
latter, the Debt of suffering Punishment.

Q. Which Debt do we pray God to forgive?

A. The latter only; for the former is irremissibly due to our great Creator.

Q. How come we to be thus indebted unto God?

A. By the Sentence of the Law, which condemns every Transgressour of it, to
undergo the Penalty it threatens, which Penalty is all manner of Woes and
Curses, and Everlasting Death. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things, which are written in the Book of the Law to do them. Romans
6.23. For the wages of Sin is Death. Ezekiel. 18.4. The Soul that sins, it
shall die.

Q. Since the Suffering of these, is the Debt we owe to Divine Justice, why say
you that Sin is that Debt?

A. Because Sin alone is the meritorious Cause of these, and we owe the
Suffering of them only as we are Sinners.

Q. Are there no Sins venial in their own Nature, so as not to deserve Eternal
Damnation?

A. No, not the least; for the wages of every Sin is Death. All therefore are
Mortal in their own Nature, and all are Venial through the Mercy of God in the
Merits of Christ, excepting only the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

Q. Can we no way pay off these Debts, so as to satisfy the Justice of God?

A. No: for neither can we do it by Obedience, nor yet by Sufferings. Not by
the Duties of Obedience, for these are a Debt we owe to God's Holiness and
Sovereignty; and therefore cannot pay the Debts we owe to his Justice, and we
cannot pay Debts by Debts: Not by suffering; for Sin being an infinite Evil,
must be punished with an infinite Punishment; but we cannot suffer a Punishment
infinite in Degrees, therefore it must be infinite in Duration; so that the
Damned in Hell shall never be able to say, It Is finished.

Q. How then may we hope to be acquitted of our Numberless Debts?

A. Only through the free Mercy and Grace of God, pardoning them in Jesus
Christ; and therefore we pray, Forgive us our Debts.

Q. What is Pardon, or Forgiveness of Sin?

A. It is the removal of the Guilt of Sin.

Q. What is the Guilt of Sin?

A. The Guilt of Sin, is either the intrinsecal Desert of Punishment; or else
an Obnoxiousness and Liableness to it, through God's Designation of the Sinner
to undergo it.

Q. Does pardon of Sin remove both these Guilts?

A. No: it removes not the former, for still the Sins of those who are
pardoned, do in themselves deserve Eternal Death: But it removes the latter,
viz. it takes away our Appointment unto Death. 2 Samuel 12.13. And David said
unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord, and Nathan said unto David, the
Lord also has put away thy Sin, thou shall not die.

Q. How is it consistent with the Justice of God, to pardon Offenders without
Punishment?

A. Though Believers are not personally appointed to Punishment; yet Mystically
they are; which Punishment they have already suffered in Christ their Surety,
with whom they are made one by Faith.

Q. To whom is this Prayer for Pardon of Sin directed?

A. To God only, whose Royal Prerogative is to forgive Sins, Isa. 43.25. I,
even I, am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine own sake, and will
not remember thy sins. Mark 2.7. Who can forgive sins, but God only?

Q. Have not the Ministers of the Gospel power to forgive sins, according to
that of St. John 20.23. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted?

A. They have a ministerial and declarative Power, as Officers; not an
authoritative and judicial Power, as Sovereigns: As the Prince only pardons,
the Herald proclaims it: So God alone by the Prerogative of his Grace grants
pardon, the Minister by his Office publishes it to all that repent and believe.

Q. What then must we judge of that absolute and plenary Power, which the Pope
assumes of pardoning Sins?

A. That it proves him to be Antichrist, in exalting himself above God; 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped: so that he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. For whosoever can forgive wrongs done against another,
must be superior to him, and have Authority to cause the Person offended to
surcease the Prosecution, and sit down by the wrong done him.

Q. If God only can forgive Sins, how then are we bound to forgive those who
trespass against us.

A. We ought to forgive them so far forth as they have wronged us, but we
cannot forgive the wrong they have done to God in wronging us, but must leave
them to his Mercy, and their Repentance.

Q. Since it is God's Prerogative and Glory to pardon sins, what Inferences may
we collect from hence?

A. First, That our pardon is free, and gratuitous, without respecting former
Deserts, or expecting future Recompense.

Secondly, That our pardon is full and complete, because it is an Act of God
within himself; whereas what he works in us, is in this Life imperfect; Nothing
of Guilt is left upon the Soul when God pardons it, though still there is
something of Filth left in it when he sanctifies it; God does not pardon by
halfs, nor leaves any Guilt to be expiated by Purgatory.

Thirdly, That upon our Faith and Repentance, our sins, whether greater or
less, fewer or more, shall be forgiven; for this makes no difference in
infinite Grace and Mercy.

Q. But may not this encourage Men to continue in sin?

A. Many do so abuse it, but their Damnation is sure and just. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.
And it come to pass, when he hears the words of this Curse, that he blesses
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
Imagination of mine heart, to add Drunkenness to Thirst. Ver. 20. The Lord will
not spare him.

Q. You have formerly observed, that it is God alone who can forgive sins, and
from thence inferred both the freeness and fullness of pardoning Grace. What
observe you farther?

A. 1. That though God's pardoning Grace be altogether freely bestowed in
respect of us, Isaiah 43.25. I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy
Transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy Sins. Yet in
respect of Christ's Purchase, it is not free, but cost him the Price of his
Blood, Heb. 9.22. And almost all things are by the Law purged with Blood, and
without shedding of Blood is no remission. Matt. 26.29. But I say unto you, I
will not drink henceforth of this Fruit of the Vine, until that day when I
drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom.

2. That the obtaining of Pardon is not free from the Performance of Conditions
on our Part.

Q. What are the Conditions upon which Pardon is granted?

A. They are two; Faith and Repentance. Acts 10.43. That through his Name,
whosoever believes in him, shall receive Remission of Sins. Acts 3.19. Repent
ye therefore, and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted out.

Q. Is therefore a mere sorrow that we have sinned, a sufficient qualification
for obtaining Pardon?

A. No: for so Judas is said to repent. Matt. 27.3. Then Judas which had
betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, and brought
again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief Priests and Elders. But as true
Repentance includes in it a Sorrow of Heart, so Reformation of Life, and
Manners is always joined with a lively Faith.

Q. Is pardon of sin an Act only of God's Mercy?

A. It is likewise an Act of God's Justice to pardon the Sins of those, who
perform the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace.

Q. How prove you this?

A. Both by express Scripture: 1 Epistle of John 1.9. If we confess our Sins,
he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. And likewise by Scripture-Reason; because Believers being made
mystically one with Christ; therefore their Sins being already punished in him
their Surety, and their Debts paid by him, cannot be again justly punished in
their own Persons, nor demanded from them

Q. Is pardon of sin our entire Justification?

A. No: but it is one principal part of it. For Justification consists both in
Remission of Sins, and Acceptance of our Persons; the former depends upon
Christ's Passive, the other upon his Active Obedience; his Satisfaction applied
by Faith, makes us accounted guiltless of Death, and his Obedience worthy of
Life; both which complete our Justification, Ephesians. 1.6, 7. To the Praise of
the Glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved. Ver.
7. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, the Forgiveness of Sins
according to the Riches of his Grace.

Q. We have thus considered the Petition, Forgive us our Debts, what remains
further considerable?

A. The Condition upon which we ask it, or the Plea we urge for obtaining it;
As we forgive our Debtors.

Q. Who are meant here by Debtors?

A. Other Men.

Q. How are Men Debtors one to another?

A. Either, 1. By owing them a Debt of Duty, and thus all Men are mutually
Debtors to one another: Superiors to Inferiors, and Inferiors to Superiors,
and Equals owe one another Love, Respect, and Kindness.

2. By owing them a Debt of Satisfaction for Injuries, and Wrongs done to
others.

Q. Which of these Debts is here meant?

A. The latter only, for we are bound to forgive those who owe us Satisfaction
and Reparation.

Q. What learn you from hence, that those who have wronged others, are called
their Debtors?

A. That they who in any kind wrong others, are obliged to make them
satisfaction: If in their good Names, by acknowledging the Offense and stopping
slanderous Reports: If in their Goods and Estates, by a full Restitution.

Q. Is Restitution necessary to the obtaining of Pardon?

A. It is: For unjust Detainure is as Evil, as unjust Seizure, and it is a
continued Theft. And our Repentance can never be true, while we continue in the
Sin we seem to repent of; and without true Repentance, there can be no Pardon
or Salvation.

Q. But what if those we have wronged, be since dead?

A. We ought to make Restitution to those, to whom it is to be supposed, what we
have detained would have descended.

Q. If none such can be found, what must we then do?

A. Then God's Right takes place, as the Universal Lord of all, and we are
obliged to restore it to him, that is, to his Servants; and to his Family, and
in the Works of Piety and Charity.

Q. We have already considered the Debtor's Duty, which is to make Satisfaction
and Restitution; what is the Duty of the Creditor or Person wronged?

A. To forgive his Debtors. For we pray that God would forgive us, as we
forgive them.

Q. Wherein does this Forgiveness consist?

A. In two Things.

1. First, In abstaining from the outward Acts of Revenge upon them. 2.
Secondly, In the inward Frame and Temper of our Hearts toward them, bearing
them no Grudge nor Ill Will; but being as much in Charity with them, as though
they had never offended us.
Q. Must we then sit quiet under every petulant Wrong that is done us, and so
tempt others to the Sport of abusing us?

A. Private Revenge is in no Case whatsoever to be allowed. Romans 12.19. Dearly
beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto Wrath; for it is
written, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord. Revenge only
belongs to God, and the Magistrate to whom he has delegated it. Romans 13.4. For
he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does Evil.

Q. But if the Wrong done us tend to the Loss of our necessary Subsistence, or
our Life; may we not resist it, and require satisfaction for it?

A. We may: But it must be only in a public and legal Way; and even then we
must harbor no Malice against them, but be ready to perform all the Offices of
Charity, and Kindness within our Power.

Q. May we not prosecute those who have wronged us, unless the Injury be
intolerable?

A. We may when we cannot pass by the Wrongs without wronging others: But where
the Injuries are supportable, and we may forgive them without injuring of
others, the Law of Christianity commands us so to do. Matt. 5.39. But I say
unto you, that ye resist not Evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on thy Right
Cheek, turn to him the other also. Where the Scope of our Savior is, that we
should rather be willing to suffer a second. Injury, than to revenge the first
in Matters tolerable.

Q. But since this is a Duty so contrary to the revengefull Humor of Flesh and
Blood, what Arguments can you produce to persuade the Practice of it?

A. 1. First, That it is far more honorable to forgive a Wrong, than to
revenge it.

Q. How does that appear?

A. 1. First, Because by pardoning Wrongs we act like God, and imitate him in
that Attribute, wherein he chiefly glories. Exodus 34.6. The Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth.

2. Secondly, Because to pardon is always the Act of a Superior, and a
Christian expresses the Royalty of his Calling, by issuing out of Pardons.

Q. What is the second Motive?

A. Consider how many Offenses God has forgiven us, though the Distance
between him and us, is infinitely greater, than only can be between fellow
Creatures; and though our Offenses against him are infinitely more, and
greater, than which we are to forgive to others. Ours against him are but a few
Pence.

Q. Which is the third Motive to enforce this Duty?

A. The Consideration of that binding Particle, As: Forgive us as we forgive
others.

Q. Wherein lies the force of this?

A. By this we seal the Guilt of our Sins upon our own Souls, unless we be
ready and willing to forgive others. And so we turn our Prayers not only into
Sin, but into a direful Tremendous Curse.

Q. Which is the sixth and last Petition of the Lord's Prayer?

A. Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil.

Q. What learn you from the Method of this Petition?

A. In that it immediately follows the Petition, wherein we prayed for Pardon
of Sin; I learn that it should be our Care, not only to seek for the Pardon of
past Sins, but the Prevention of Future.

Q. How is this Petition divided?

A. Into two Branches, the one Negative, Lead us not into temptation; the other
Positive, but deliver us from Evil.

Q. What signifies the Word Temptation?

A. It signifies proving or trying. Which sometimes is done only by way of
Search and Exploration; and sometimes is joined with Suasion and Inducement; so
that Temptations are either merely probatory, or else they are likewise suasory.

Q. How many Sorts of Temptations are there?

A. Five in the general.

1. Whereby one Man tempts another. 2. Whereby a Man tempts himself. 3. Whereby
we tempt God. 4. Whereby God tempts us. 5. Whereby the Devil tempts us.
Q. How is one Man said to tempt another?

A. When either he persuades him to what is Evil. Prove. 1.10. My Son, if
Sinners entice thee consent thou not. Or to do that which may bring him into
danger, Luke 20.23. Why tempt ye me?

Q. How is Man said to tempt himself?

A. Two ways.

1. First, When he unnecessarily rusheth into Danger, and ventures upon the
next Occasions of Sinning.

2. Secondly, When he is drawn away by his own Lust, and enticed. James 1.14.
But every Man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own Lust, and enticed.

Q. How are we said to tempt God?

A. Two ways.

1. First, When we by our Sins provoke him to take Vengeance upon us. Psalm.
95.8. Harden not your Hearts, as in the Provocation: and as in the Day of
Temptation in the Wilderness.

2. Secondly, When we presumptuously try the Providence of God, having no
Warrant nor Necessity to cast our selves upon the extraordinary Effects of it.
Mat. 4.6, 7. And says unto him, if thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down.
Verse. 7. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

Q. How is God said to tempt us?

A. When in the Method of his holy Providence, he brings us into such
Circumstances, as will discover either our Graces, or Corruptions. Genesis 22.1,
2. And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, and said
unto him, Verse. 2. Take now thy Son, and offer him for a burnt-offering, upon
one of the Mountains which I will tell thee of. 2 Chr. 32.31. God left him, to
try him, that be might know all that was in his heart.

Q. How does the Devil tempt us?

A. Always by Suasion, inducing us by his Art and Subtilty, to the Commission of
Evil.

Q. What Temptations do we especially pray against in this Petition?

A. Three Sorts.

1. First, Such as proceed from our own Lusts and Corruption.

2. Secondly, Such as proceed from other Men's enticing us to Evil, or insnaring
us to Danger.

3. Thirdly, Such as proceed from the great Tempter, the Devil.

Q. What learn we hence?

A. That it is a Christian's Duty, not only to keep himself from Sin, but also
from Temptations to Sin.

Q. What Reasons confirm this?

A. First, Because it is designed of a rotten and corrupt Heart, to be content
to lie under a Temptation, though it consents not to the Sin. That Soul is not
chaste to God, that is well-pleased with Solicitations to violate its Duty.

Secondly, Because while a Temptation dwells upon our Hearts, we are in
imminent Danger of committing the Sin to which we are tempted.

Thirdly, Because most Temptations, are not only Temptations, but Sins too, as
all evil Thoughts and Desires. And as long as these abide in us with any
Complacency and Delight; so long are we in the actual Commission of Sin.

Q. How is God said to lead Men into Temptation?

A. Three ways.

1. First, When he providentially presents outward Objects and Occasions, which
do solicit and draw forth our inward Corruptions.

2. Secondly, When he permits Satan, or wicked Men, his Instruments to tempt
us. And in these two Senses there is no Temptation whatsoever that befalls us,
but God leads us into it.

3. Thirdly, When he withdraws the Influences of his Grace, and Spirit from us,
without which Dereliction no Temptation could prevail over us. 2 Chr. 32.31.
God left him to try him, that he might know all that was in his Heart.

Q. What therefore do we pray for, when we pray, Lead us not into Temptation?

A. We pray for three Things.

1. First, That God by his Providence would so order and dispose all the
Occurrences of our Lives, as not to lay before us those Objects, nor offer us
those Occasions which might excite or call forth our inbred Corruptions.

2. Secondly, That he would not permit the Devil to assault us, nor any of his
Instruments.

3. Thirdly, That he would continue the Influences of his Grace unto us, to
enable us to stand when we are tempted.

Q. For what ends does God thus lead Men into Temptation?

A. For many wise and holy Ends: especially Four.

1. First, To exercise and breath forth our Graces, to teach us the Wars of the
Lord, to administer Matter for our Victory, and Occasion for our Crown and
Triumph.

2. Secondly, To engage us to depend upon his Help and Assistance, and
earnestly to implore Divine Succors and Supplies.

3. Thirdly, To glorify his Justice and his Mercy; his Justice in giving up
wicked Men to the Rages of Temptations, to be hurried by them from Sin to Sin,
punishing one Iniquity with another, till at last he punishes all in Hell. And
his Mercy in supporting his Children under them, and delivering them out of all
their Temptations, making his Strength perfect in their Weakness. 2 Cor. 12.9.
And he said unto me, my Grace is sufficient for thee; for my Strength is made
perfect in Weakness.

4. Fourthly, That by our Victory over Temptations, he may confound the Malice
of the Devil, and commend the Excellency of his own Ways and Service. Job 2.3.
And the Lord said unto Satan, have thou considered my Servant Job, that there
is none like him in the Earth, a perfect and an upright Man, one that fears
God, and escheweth Evil?

Q. Which is the positive part of this Petition?

A. But deliver us from Evil.

Q. What observe you from the Order and Connection of this Branch of the
Petition with the former?

A. I observe, that the best Security against Sin, is to be secured against
Temptations to Sin.

Q. Are not strong Temptations to Sin, an Excuse for sinning?

A. No: for the Devil can only persuade, he cannot constrain; for if be could
compel, he would likewise Justify; since there is no Sin, where there is no
Liberty. All our Sins are of our own free Choice, and so by Consequence is the
Eternal Misery thy expose unto. Hos. 13.9. O Israel thou have destroyed thy
self, but in me is thine help. John 5.40. And ye will not come to me, that ye
might have Life. Matt. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee; how often would I have
gathered thy Children together, even as the Hen gathers her Chickens under
her Wings, and ye would not.

Q. Wherein consists the great Danger of being tempted?

A. In the Sympathy and Suitableness that is between Temptations, and our
corrupt Natures, whereby they are apt to excite our Affections, and our
Affections will sway our Actions.

Q. What mean you by the word Evil, when you pray, Deliver us from Evil?

A. First, Satan whose Style it is to be the Evil, or the Wicked One. Matt.
13.19. When any one hears the word of the Kingdom, and understands it not,
then comes the wicked one, and catches away that which was sown in his Heart.
John 2.13, 14. I write unto you, Fathers, because ye have known him, that is
from the Beginning. I writ unto you young Men, because you have overcome the
wicked one. Verse. 14. I have written unto you, Fathers, because you have known
him that is from the beginning; I have written unto you young Men, because ye
are strong, and the Word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked
one.

Secondly, All other Evils, whether they be of Sin, or for Sin; whether
Transgressions or Punishments. But especially Sin, which is the greatest of all
Evils.

Q. Why call you Sin the greatest of all Evils?

A. Because it is so both in its Nature and Consequents.

1. First, In its Nature, it is wholly defect and irregularity, and that only
thing which he always hates, and never made.

2. Secondly, Because all other Evils are but the Effects and Consequents of
Sin; since the Devil could not hurt us but by Sin, and no other Evils befall us
but for Sin.

Q. What collect you hence?

A. That in praying to be delivered from Sin, we pray to be delivered from all
Evils whatsoever.

Q. What observe you from our Saviors teaching us to direct our Prayers to our
Father in Heaven, that he would Deliver us from Evil?

A. I learn hence, that it is only the Almighty Power of God, that can keep us
from Sin.

Q. Whence does that appear?

A. First, From the Consideration of the Almighty Advantages, that our great
Enemy the Devil has against us.

Secondly, From the Consideration of the Disadvantages we lie under, to oppose
his Temptations.

Q. What are his Advantages, and our Disadvantages?

A. He is a Spirit, we are but Flesh; he is wise and subtle, we foolish and
ignorant; he long experienced, we raw and unpractised; he is diligent and
watchful, we careless and negligent: He lays a close Siege to us without, and
we betray our selves within.

Q. What ways does God take to keep Men from Sin?

A. In the General three.

1. First, He does it by restraining Providence. 2. Secondly, By common and
restraining Grace. 3. Thirdly, By renewing and sanctifying Grace.
Q. What are the Methods of God's Providence, whereby he delivers Men from the
Evil of Sin?

A. They are manifold and various; but Five are most especially remarkable.

1. First, Sometimes Providence cuts short their Power, whereby they should be
enabled to Sin; Thus God withered Jereboam's hand, which he stretched forth
against the Prophet.

2. Secondly, Sometimes God cuts off their wicked Instruments either for
Counsel, as he did Achitophel from Absalom; or else for Execution, as he did
the Host of Sennacherib.

3. Thirdly, Sometimes by raising up another opposite Power, to withstand the
Sinner. Thus the Rulers would have put Christ to Death, but durst not for fear
of the People.

4. Fourthly, By casting in seasonable Diversions. Thus the passing by of
Merchants, altered the Patriarchs Resolution from killing Joseph, to sell him.

5. Fifthly, Sometimes God removes the Object against which they intended to
sin. Thus he delivered David from Saul, and Peter from Herod.

Q. We have seen how God preserves Men from Sin, by his restraining Providence,
show now how he does it by his restraining Grace?

A. By restraining Grace God deals with the very Heart of a Sinner; and
although he does not change the habitual, yet he changes the actual
Inclination of it, and takes away the Desire of committing those Sins, which
are unmortified and reigning.

Q. To whom does God vouchsafe this Grace?

A. To many unregenerate Persons. As he did to Esau and Abimelech.

Q. To what End does he vouchsafe it?

A. That their Lives may be more plausible, their Gifts more serviceable, and
their Condemnation at last the more tolerable.

Q. How does God keep Men from Sin, by his special Grace?

A. By exciting the inward Principle and Habit of Grace implanted in his
Children, to the actual Use and Exercise of it?

Q. Is not inherent Grace alone sufficient to keep the Godly from sinning?

A. It is not without the continual Influence of God's quickening Grace; 2 Cor.
12.7. There was given to me a Thorn in the Flesh, the Messenger of Satan to
buffet me, lest I should be exalted above Measure.

Q. What are those Graces that God does especially excite, to keep his Children
from Sin?

A. They are Three, Faith, Fear and Love.

Q. How does Faith keep them from sinning?

A. Many ways, but more especially by Two.

1. First, As it lively represents unto us Eternal Rewards and Punishments; and
make them as real as they are certain. Heb. 11.1. Now Faith is the Substance of
things hoped for, the Evidence of things not seen.

2. Secondly, As it represents unto us, God to be the Observer of our Actions,
who must hereafter be the Judge of them. For by Faith we see him who is
invisible.

Q. How does the Fear of God keep Men from Sin?

A. By possessing our Hearts with awful Thoughts of his dread Majesty, whose
Power is infinite, and whose Justice is strict and impartial. Psalm. 4.4. Stand
in awe and sin not.

Q. How does the Love of God keep Men from Sin?

A. By working in them an holy Ingenuity, and Sympathy of Affection with God:
Loving what he loves, and hating what he hates; and therefore those who love
God, will certainly hate Iniquity. Psalm. 97.10. Ye that love the Lord hate Evil.

Q. What do we pray for in this part of the Petition, Deliver us from Evil?

A. We pray,

1. That if it shall please God to lead us into Temptation, yet he would not
leave us under the Power of Temptation, but would make a way for us to escape,
that we might be able to bear it.

2. That if at any time Temptations should prevail over us, God would not leave
us under the Power of Sin, but raise us again by true Repentance; that so we
may at last be delivered from the great Evil of Obduration and Impenitency.

3. That God would not only deliver us from gross and self condemning Sins,
but from every evil Way and Work.

4. That he would be pleased to deliver us not only from what is in it self
sinful; but from all the Occasions and Appearances of Evil.

Q. After the Petitions of the Lord's Prayer, what next follows to be
considered?

A. The Doxology or Praise, in these words, For thine, etc.

Q. Of what consists this Doxology?

A. Of four of God's most glorious Attributes. His Soreignty, Thine is the
Kingdom; His Omnipotence, Thine is the Power; His Excellency, Thine is the
Glory; His Eternity, All these are Thine for ever.

Q. What observe you in the Manner of our Savior's ascribing these Attributes
to God?

A. First, The Eminency of them, intimated in the Particle, The; The Kingdom,
the Power, and the Glory; signifying his the Highest and Chiefest of all these.
And,

Secondly, The Propriety of them in the Particle, Thine, to note to us that
they are God's only Originally, Independently, and Unchangeably.

Q. What observe you from the illative Particle, For, when ye say, For thine is
the Kingdom, etc.

A. This word carries in it the Force of a Reason, both why we should pray unto
God, and why we may expect to be heard when we pray.

Q. How is it a Reason for us to pray unto God?

A. We pray unto God, because he alone is able to relieve us, For his is the
Kingdom, and the Power and the Glory for ever.

Q. How is it a Reason for us to expect, that God should hear our Prayers?

A. Many ways.

1. His is the Kingdom, and we his Subjects; and therefore we may depend on him
as our King, for Help and Protection.

2. His is the Power, and therefore he is able to do for us abundantly above
what we are able to ask or think.

3. His is the Glory, and therefore what we ask for his Honor and Praise shall
be granted us.

4. All these are his for ever, and therefore we may be assured, that at no
time, the Prayer of Faith shall be in vain.

Q. What observe you from our Savior's teaching us to use these Arguments and
Pleas in our Prayers to God?

A. Two things.

1. In our Prayers we ought to plead with God, by weighty and enforcing Reasons.

2. That the most prevailing Arguments in Prayer, are to be taken from the
Attributes of God.

Q. What benefit is there in using such Reasons, since God cannot by them be
moved to alter his Purposes?

A The stronger our Reasons are to sue for Mercies, the more fervent will our
Prayers be, and the more confirmed our Faith.

Q. How does the Consideration of the Kingdom's being God s, confirm our Faith
that we shall obtain what we pray for?

A. Many ways.

1. The Kingdom is God's, and therefore he will see that his Name be hallowed
in it; for he is a King jealous of his Honor.

2. The Kingdom is God's, therefore he will take care for the Establishment and
Enlargement of it; since it is his own Interest and Concern.

3. The Kingdom is God's, and therefore he will look to be obeyed in it,
without which Royalty is but Pageantry.

4. The Kingdom is God's, and therefore we may expect our daily Bread, and
temporal Accommodations; for it is a Kingly Office to provide things necessary
for their Subjects.

5. The Kingdom is God's, and therefore we pray to him for Pardon and
Forgiveness, since it is a Royal Prerogative to forgive Offenders.

6. The Kingdom is God's, and therefore we may pray in Faith, that he would
deliver us from Temptations, and the Evils to which we are tempted; for one
great End of Government is to protect the Subjects from the Assaults of their
cruel Enemies.

Q. Which is the second Attribute ascribed unto God in the Doxology of the
Lord's Prayer?

A. Power; in these words, And the Power.

Q. How is the Power of God distinguished?

A. Into his absolute and his ordinate Power.

Q. What call you the absolute Power of God?

A. The absolute Power of God is that whereby he is simply able, to produce
whatsoever is possible to be, i. e. all things which imply not Contradiction.

Q. What call you God's ordinate Power?

A. God's ordinate Power, is that whereby he is able to produce those things,
which according to his Will shall come to pass.

Q. Why is it called God's ordinate Power?

A. Because the Effects of it are limited by the Ordination of his Wisdom, and
Will. Psalm. 115.3. But our God is in the Heavens, he has done whatsoever he
pleased. Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven and
Earth, in the Seas and all deep Places.

Q. Is God's Power in it self infinite?

A. It is, for his Power is his Essence.

Q. How does it appear that God's Power is infinite?

A. 1. By the Works of Creation, for it requires an infinite Power to bring
something out of nothing.

2. By the many Miracles which have been wrought in the World, above and
contrary to the Course of Nature.

Q. How then have many Men wrought Miracles, as Moses, Elijah, and the Apostles?

A. They wrought them not by any proper Virtue of their own, but only as the
Moral Instruments at whose Presence or Intercession, God was pleased to
manifest his Power, as a Seal to that Commission they had received from him.

Q. Is God's Power infinite likewise in the common Effects of Nature?

A. It is, for it is no less Power that preserves and moves the Creatures, than
did at first Create them.

Q. Is there nothing impossible with God?

A. Yes, there are several things which God cannot do, because he is Omnipotent.

Q. What are they?

A. Such as in the General, the doing of them would deny him to be God; or to
be holy, or to be wise.

Q. What are they more particularly?

A. God cannot do things that are contradictory, or rather such things cannot
be done, as to make the same thing to be, and not to be at the same time; or
that the same Body should at once have quantity and extension in Heaven, and no
quantity nor extension in the Host, as the Papists affirm of their breaden God,
for this were contrary to his Wisdom.

2. God cannot do any thing that may justly bring upon him the Imputation of
Sin; for this were contrary to his Holiness.

3. God cannot do any thing that may argue him mutable and inconstant, for this
were contrary to his Being. 2 Timothy 2.13. If we believe not, yet he abides
faithful; he cannot deny himself. Heb. 6.18. That by two immutable things, in
which it was impossible for God to lie.

Q. Is it not a Diminution of the Power of God, that he cannot do those things?

A. No; for these things argue Weakness, and Defect, not Power.

Q. Why has our Savior taught us to subjoin this Acknowledgment of the Power
of God to our Petitions?

A. To encourage our Faith, by considering that whatsoever we ask, we ask it of
a God who is able to give it us, yea, and to do for us abundantly above
whatsoever we are able to ask or think.

Q. What is the third Attribute ascribed to God in the Doxology?

A. Glory in these words, And the Glory.

Q. What is Glory?

A. Glory is any Perfection or Excellency that either is, or deserves to be
accompanied with Fame and Renown.

Q. How is God's Glory distinguished?

A. Into his Essential and Declarative Glory.

Q. What is the Essential Glory of God?

A. All those Attributes, which Eternally and Immutably belong unto the Divine
Nature: So Holiness is his Glory. Exodus 15.11. Glorious in Holiness. His Power
is his Glory. 2 These. 1.9. They shall be punished from, i. e. by the Glory of
his Power. His Majesty is his Glory. Psalm. 145.11. I will speak of the glorious
Honor of thy Majesty: His Grace and Mercy is his Glory. Ephesians. 1.6. To the
Praise of the Glory of his Grace. And from all these united, results the Glory
of his Name. Deuteronomy. 28.58. That thou may fear this Glorious and Fearful
Name, the Lord thy God.

Q. What is the Declarative Glory of God?

A. The Manifestation of his Attributes, so that they are observed to his
Praise and Honor.

Q. What is it to glorify God?

A. To glorify God, is to admire, and celebrate the Divine Attributes, shining
forth in those ways and works, wherein he is pleased to express them.

Q. Do we by glorifying God add any thing to his Glory?

A. We can neither add unto, nor diminish from the Essential Glory of God, for
his infinite Perfections are the same for ever. But we may add to his
Declarative Glory, by setting forth his Attributes; and we detract from it by
hindering the Manifestation of them.

Q. By what Means does God declare his Glory?

A. By three especially.

1. By his Works. Psalm. 19.1. The Heavens declare the Glory of God: and the
Firmament shows his handy Work.

2. By his Word, which discovers to us those Attributes, which we could never
have known by the Works of Creation and Providence; and therefore both Law and
Gospel, are said to be glorious. 2 Cor. 3.9. For if the Ministration of
Condemnation be Glory, much more does the Ministration of Righteousness exceed
in Glory.

3. By his Son, who is the Brightness of his Glory. Heb. 13. Who being the
Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person. And in whom the
Perfections of the Godhead are most visibly displayed.

Q. Why does our Savior in the Doxology, peculiarly appropriate Glory unto
God: Thine is the Glory?

A. For three Reasons.

1. Because all that is excellent and glorious in the Creatures, is in God
infinitely more perfect than in them; being neither limited by his Nature, nor
allayed with Contraries. 1 John 1.5. That God is Light, and in him is no
Darkness at all.

2. Because all Glory in respect of God, is but Darkness and Obscurity: Job
25.5. Behold even to the Moon, and it shines not; yea, the Stars are not pure
in his Sight.

3. Because all the Excellencies and Glories of Creatures, serve only to set
forth, and declare the Glory of God.

Q Why has our Savior added the Acknowledgment of God s Glory, at the End of
the Petitions he has taught us to present?

A. That the Consideration thereof may be a Means to strengthen our Faith, for
the obtaining those good things which we pray for.

Q. How is the Consideration of the Glory of God an Argument to strengthen our
Faith in Prayer?

A. Many ways, according to the Petitions we prefer.

1. The Glory is God's, therefore his Name shall be hallowed; for to sanctify
the Name of God is to glorify him: Lev. 10.3. I will be sanctified in them
that come nigh me, and before all the People I will be glorified.

2. The Glory is God's, and therefore his Kingdom shall come; for where should
a King be honored, but in his Kingdom?

3. The Glory is God's, therefore his Will shall be done, for our Obedience is
the greatest Glory we can give. John 15.8. Herein is my Father glorified, that
ye bear much Fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples.

4. The Glory is God's, and therefore he will provide for us daily Bread; for
it is not God's Honor, that any of his Family should want things convenient
for them. Exodus 16.7. And in the Morning, then shall ye see the Glory of the
Lord.

5. The Glory is God's, and therefore he will forgive our Trespasses, for it is
his Honor and Royalty to pardon penitent Offenders. Prove. 19 11. And it is his
Glory to pass over a Transgression. Ephesians. 1.6, 7. To the Praise of the Glory
of his Grace. Verse. 7. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, the
Forgiveness of Sins, according to the Riches of his Grace.

6. The Glory is God's, and therefore he will deliver us from the Assaults of
our Enemies; for it is his Honor to protect his own Subjects.

Q. What observe you from that Particle, For ever?

A. That God and his Attributes are Eternal.

Q. What is Eternity?

A. Eternity is a Duration, that has neither Beginning nor End, nor Succession
of Parts: or it is the complete Possession of an endless Life all at once.

Q. What collect you hence?

A. Two things.

1. The Duration of God is not to be measured by Days, or Years; and that he
waxes not elder, neither has continued longer this Day, than from the
beginning of Time.

2. That in strict propriety of Speech, God only is, and that it is only
allowable for want of Expressions, to say, that he either was, or shall be; and
therefore he calls his Name, I am. Exodus 3.14. I am, has sent me unto you.

Q. How prove you that God is Eternal?

A. Both by Scripture, and Reason.

Q. What Scriptures prove the Eternity of God?

A. Several; especially Psalm 102.25, 26, 27. Thou art the same, and thy Years
shall have no End. Psalm. 90.2. From everlasting to everlasting thou art God. 1 Timothy 1.17. To the King eternal, immortal, be Honor and Glory.

Q. How do you demonstrate the Eternity of God by Reason?

A. There must of necessity be a first Cause of all things: But that which is
the first Cause of all things cannot be made by any, and therefore is from
everlasting: Neither can it cease to be, because it is not dependent on any,
and therefore must be to Everlasting.

Q. What Duties does the serious Consideration of God's Eternity oblige us to?

A. 1. To venerate and adore so great and inconceivable an Attribute.

2. To leave the Care of all future Events, whether concerning our own private
or the public Interests, to his Eternal Wisdom and Providence, who for ever
lives to mind them.

3. To give unto him the same Honor, Respect and Service, as his Saints have
done in former Generations.

Q What encouragement has our Faith to expect the Mercies we pray for, from
the Consideration of God's Eternity?

A. That because he is the same God, who in all Ages has heard the Prayers of
those who trust in him; therefore we may be assured, that if we have the same
Dispositions and Affections with the Saints of Old, we shall obtain the same
Mercies and Favors. Heb. 1.12. But thou art the same, and thy years shall not
fail.

Q. What signifies that Particle Amen, which is the End and Close of the Lord's
Prayer?

A. As in the beginning of a Speech it is Assertory, and signifies, so it is;
so in the end of it, it is Precatory, and signifies, so be it; which denotes
our earnest Desires, to have our Prayers heard, and our Petitions granted.

Q. What learn you from hence, that our Savior has taught us to conclude our
Prayers with, Amen?

A. I learn two things.

1. That we ought to pray with understanding, and therefore not in an unknown
Tongue: for who can say Amen, to what he understands not? 1 Cor. 14.16. How
shall he that occupies the Room of the unlearned, say Amen at the giving of
thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say?

2. That all our Prayers ought to be presented to God, with fervent zeal and
affection. 1 These. 5.17. Pray without ceasing.

Q. What is Prayer?

A. Prayer is an humble representation of our wants and desires to God, through
the assistance of the Holy Ghost in the Name of Christ, for things according to
his Will, with reference to his Glory.

Q. What is it to pray by the Spirit, or by the assistance of the Holy Ghost?

A. To pray by the Spirit, is to present our requests to God, with holy and
fervent affections excited in us by the Holy Ghost. Romans 8.26. But the Spirit
it self makes intercession for us with groanings, which cannot be uttered.

Q. May those have the Spirit of Prayer, who have not the Gift of Prayer?

A. Yes, they may; and on the contrary, some may have the Gift of Prayer, who
pray not by the Spirit, for they who use prescribed and set Forms of Prayer,
pray by the Spirit, when their Petitions are accompanied with fervent
affections, stirred in them by the Holy Ghost; and again some who are most
fluent in conceived Prayer, may pray only from the strength of their natural
parts and endowments.

Q. But does not the use of Forms damp and quench the Spirit of Prayer?

A. Forms indeed are too often used formally, and so is any other kind of
Prayer; yet it is the truest Test, and the highest Excellency of praying by the
Spirit, when we are fervent in putting up these requests to God, where neither
Novelty, Variety, nor Copiousness of Expressions can be suspected to move our
affections, but only the genuine Importance of the matter which we pray for,
though in prescribed words.

Q. To whom must our Prayers be directed?

A. To God only, and not to Saints, or Angels.

Q. How ought we to conceive of God when we pray to him?

A. As an infinitely glorious, wise, powerful and gracious Being, whose
presence is every where, whose providence and goodness is over all things, and
thus we pray at once, to each Person of the ever blessed Trinity.

Q. May we not particularly address our Prayers, to some one Person of the
Trinity?

A. We may; especially in those Cases wherein their particular Offices and
Dispensations are more immediately concerned.

Q. What things ought we to pray for?

A. Only such as are according to the Will of God. 1 John 5.14. That if we ask
any thing according to his Will, he hears us.

Q. What are those things which are according to the Will of God?

A. Chiefly spiritual Blessings. 1 These. 4.3. For this is the Will of God, even
our sanctification, that we should abstain from Fornication. And for these we
ought to pray absolutely and importunately.

Q. May we not also pray for Temporal Mercies?

A. We may: but as these are promised only conditionally, so we ought to pray,
that God would be pleased to bestow them upon us, if it may stand with his Will
and Glory, and our good and benefit.

Q. How must we direct our Prayers to God?

A. 1. In the Name of Christ, trusting only in his Merits and Mediations, for
acceptance and answer. John 15.16. That whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father
in my Name, he may give it you.

2. In Faith and Persuasion of being heard. James 1.6. But let him ask in
Faith, nothing wavering. Mark 11.24. What things soever ye desire when ye pray,
believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.

3. With Fervency and Affection. James 5.16. The effectual fervent Prayer of a
righteous Man avails much.

Q. What ends ought we to propound to our selves in begging Blessings at God's
hands?

A. Chiefly the Glory of God, sincerely purposing to improve those Blessings,
which by our Prayers we shall receive in his Service, and to his Praise. Psalm.
50.15. And call upon me in the Day of Trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me.

Q. What directions have we concerning the Seasons, and Frequency of praying?

A. The Scripture commands us to pray without ceasing. 1 These. 5.17. Pray
without ceasing. To pray always and not to faint. Luke 18.1. And he spoke a
Parable to this end, that Men ought always to pray, and not to faint. To pray
always with all Prayer and Supplication. Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always with all
Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit.

Q. Must we therefore be always so actually engaged in this Duty, as to do
nothing but pray?

A. No: For therefore we pray that we may obtain Grace from God, to perform
other Duties of Religion, and a Christian Life; neither ought the Duties of our
particular Callings to be neglected by us, for we justle out one Duty by
another; besides the sinful Omission of what we should perform, that which we
do perform becomes unacceptable, because unseasonable; and so we commit two
Sins in doing one Duty.

Q. What then is it to pray without ceasing?

A. Prayer may be said to be without ceasing four ways.

1. When we observe a constant Course of a Prayer at fixed and appointed Times.
Thus Genesis 8. ult. God promised that Winter and Summer, Day and Night, should
not cease. And so the daily Sacrifice is called a continual burnt-offering,
Exodus 29.42. And yet it was offered only Morning and Evening.

2. When we are frequent and importunate in our Prayers, so Acts 12.5. The
Church is said to make Prayers for Peter without ceasing. And our Savior spoke
the Parable of the importunate Widow to this end, That men ought always to pray
and not to faint, Luke 18.1.

3. When we frequently dart up short mental Prayers and Ejaculations unto God;
which we may and ought to do, whatsoever else we are employed about. Neh. 2.4.
So I prayed to the God of Heaven.

4. When we keep our hearts in a praying Frame and Temper, so that they are on
all Occasions fit and ready to pour out themselves before God in Prayer; and
thus we habitually pray always.

Q. What must we observe to maintain and cherish such a praying Spirit?

A. Two things especially.

1. That we ingulf not our selves too deeply in the Businesses and Pleasures of
this Life, for these will dark and deaden the heart to Prayer.

2. That we fall not into the Commission of any known and presumptuous Sin. For
guilt will fill us with slavish Fear and Shame, and both will drive us from God.

Q. What are the kinds of Prayer?

A. Three.

1. Public, As we are Members of the Church. 2. Private, As we stand engaged
in Family Relation. And, 3. Secret, As we are particular Christians.
Q. Who is to send up public Prayers?

A. The Minister, and all the Congregation joining with him. And these Prayers,
though they must needs be more general, yet with all are more effectual than
any other. Matt. 18.19. Again, I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree
on Earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them
of my Father which is in Heaven.

Q. Who is to make private or family Prayers?

A. Every Master and Governor of a Family. And this he is not to do seldomer
than every Morning and Evening. In the Morning, Prayer is the Key that opens
the Treasury of God's Mercies: In the Evening it is the Key that shuts us up
under his Protection and Safeguard.

TWO SERMONS Preached by the same AUTHOR.
A Discourse upon Providenec.
Matthew. x.29, 30. Are not two Sparrows sold for a Farthing? and one of them
shall not fall on the ground without your Father.

But the very Hairs of your Head are all numbered.


THe Mystery of God's Providence, next to that of Man's Redemption, is the most
Sublime and Inscrutable. It Is easy in both to run our selves off our Reason.
For as Reason confesses it self at a loss when it attempts a search into those
Eternal decrees of electing Sinners to Salvation, and designing Christ to save
them, so must it likewise when it attempts to trace out all those entangled
Mazes and Labyrinths wherein the Divine Providence walks. We may sooner tire
reason in such a pursuit than satisfy it, unless it be some kind of
satisfaction when we have driven it to a Nonplus, to relieve our selves with
an (...); O the depth of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are
his Judgments and his ways past finding out! This knowledge therefore being too
wonderful for us, I shall not presume to conduct you into that secret Place,
that pavillion of Clouds, and surrounding Darkness where God sits holding the
Rudder of the World, and steering it through all the Floatings of Casualty and
Contingency to his own foreordained ends, where he grasps and turns the great
Engine of Nature in his hands, fastening one Pin, and loosing another, moving
and removing the several Wheels of it, and framing the whole according to the
Eternal Idea of his own understanding. Let us content us, to consider so much
of God's Providence as may affect us with comfort in reflecting on that
particular care which he takes of us, rather, than with wonder and astonishment
by too bold a prying, into those hidden methods whereby he exercises it.

Our Savior Christ in this Chapter giving Commission to his Apostles, and
sending them forth to preach the Gospel, obviates an Objection they might make,
concerning the great danger that would certainly attend such an undertaking. To
send them upon such an hated employment, would be no other than to thrust them
upon the Rage and Malice of the World, to send them forth as Sheep into the
midst of Wolves, who would doubtless worry and devour them; sure we are to have
our Message derided, our Persons injured, and that holy name of thine on which
we summon them to believe, Blasphemed and Reviled; and tho our word may prove a
word of life to some few of the Hearers, yet to us who are the Preachers of it,
it will prove no other than Death. A vile and wretched world the whilst, when
the Gospel of Peace and Reconciliation shall thus stir up Enmity and
Persecution against the Ambassadors, who are appointed to Proclaim it!

Now to this our Savior Answers.

First, By showing what the extent of their Adversaries power is, how far it
can reach, and what mischief it can do when God permits it to rage to the very
utmost. And this he does in the 28th. Verse, the verse immediately foregoing
the Text: Fear not them who kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul.
Or as St. Luke expresses it, Chap. 12.4. They can kill the Body, but after
that, have no more they can do. Alas, are such Men to be feared, who when they
do their worst, can only destroy your worst part, which if they do not, yet
Accidents or Diseases will? What, are your Bodies but Cloggs to your Spirit,
and Prisons to your Souls? And certainly those Enemies are not very formidable,
who when they most think to hurt you, only knock off your Clogg, or break open
your Prison and let your Souls escape to their desired liberty.

Secondly, Our Savior answers that though they can Kill the body when God
permits them; yet they cannot so much as touch it without his permission. And
this he does in the words of my Text, by showing how punctual and particular
God's providence is, even over the smallest, and those that seem the most
trifling occurrences of the World; a Sparrow, whose price is but mean, two of
them valued at a Farthing, which some make to be the tenth part of a Roman
penny, and was certainly one of their least Coins, whose life therefore is but
contemptible, and whose flight seems but giddy and at random; yet it falls not
to the ground, neither lights any where without your Father. His all-wise
providence has before appointed what bough it shall pitch on; what grains it
shall pick up, where it shall lodge, and where it shall build, on what it shall
live, and when it shall die. And if your Fathers providence be so Critical
about the small concernments even of Sparrows; fear not ye, for you are of more
value than many Sparrows, yea, of more value than many Men.

Our Savior adds, The very hairs of your head are all numbered: God keeps an
account even of that stringy Excrement. He knows how many fall off, and the
precise number of those that remain: and no wonder that he knows the number of
our Sins, which are far more.

Hence we learn that God governs the meanest, the most inconsiderable, and
contemptible Occurrences in the World by an exact and particular Providence. Do
you see thousand little Motes and Atoms wandering up and down in a Sunbeam? It
is God that so peoples it; and he guides their innumerable and irregular
strayings. Not a Dust flies in a beaten Road; but God raises it, conducts its
uncertain motion, and by his particular care conveys it to the certain place he
had before appointed for it, nor shall the most fierce and tempestuous wind
hurry it any farther. And if God's care and providence reaches thus to these
minute things, which are but as it were the circumstances of Nature; and little
accessaries to the World, certainly Man who is the head and Lord of it, for
whose sake and service other Creatures were formed, may very well be confident
that God exercises an especial and most accurate providence over him, and his
affairs.

By this you see what the subject is intended to treat of, even the overruling
and all disposing providence of God, not a Sparrow, not a hair of your heads
falls to the ground without your Father.

But before I proceed farther, I must take notice of two things in the words.

First, That our Savior speaking here of the providence of God, ascribes to
him the name of our Father: God has many names and titles attributed unto him
in the Scriptures; as Father, Lord, Creator, Redeemer, Judge, King and God. But
God is a word that denotes his Essence, Lord is a title of his Dominion,
Creator marks out his omnipotence, Redeemer commends his Love, Judge is a name
of fear and astonishment, and King is a title of Royal Majesty: But this
indearing name of Father signifies unto us his providence, for from him as from
a Father do we expect and receive guidance and government.

Secondly, Whereas nothing comes to pass without our Heavenly Father, this may
be understood three ways; without his permission, without his ordination, and
concurrence, without his overruling and directing it to his own ends.

First, No evil comes to pass without his permissive providence.

Secondly, No good comes to pass without his ordaining and concurring
providence.

Thirdly, Nothing whether good or evil comes to pass without the overruling
Providence of our Father, guiding and directing it to his own ends. But
concerning this distinction of permissive, concurring and over ruling
Providence, I shall have occasion to speak more hereafter. My work at present
shall be,

First, To describe unto you what the providence of God is in the general
notion thereof.

Secondly, To prove that all affairs and occurrences in the World, are guided
and governed by Divine Providence.

Thirdly, To answer some puzling questions and doubts concerning the Providence
of God, and some objections that may be made against it.

First, Let us see what providence is. Take it in this description: Providence
is an Act of God, whereby according to his eternal and most wise Counsel, he
preserves and governs all things, and directs them all to their ends, but
chiefly to his own glory.

This providence consists in two things. Preservation and Government of his
Creatures.

First. One remarkable Act of the Providence of God is the preservation of his
Creatures in their beings, He preserves them,

First, In their species and kind, by the constant succession of them one after
another; so that though the individuals of them are mortal and perish, yet the
species or kind is immortal. There is no kind of Creature that was at first
made by God, but it still continues to this very day, and shall so do to the
end of the World. And truly it is the wonderful Providence of God thus to
perpetuate the Creation; that whereas we see an inbred enmity in some sorts of
Creatures against others, yet his Wisdom so sways their mutual antipathies,
that none of them shall ever prevail to a total Extirpation and Destruction of
the other.

Secondly, He preserves them likewise by his providence in their individual and
particular beings, while they have a room to fill up, and an Office to
discharge in the Universe. Each Fly and Worm, as well as Man (who is but the
greater Worm of the two) has a work to do in the World; and till that be
finished God sustains its being: Nor shall the weakest Creature be destroyed,
within the prefixed time that God has set to its duration. There are none of
us here alive this day but have abundant cause thankfully to acknowledge the
powerful and merciful providence of God in preserving us in, and rescuing us
from many dangers and deaths to which we stood exposed. It is only his
Visitation that has hitherto preserved our Spirits, and to his never sailing
providence we owe it that such frail and feeble Creatures, who are liable to be
crushed before the Moth, liable to so many diseases and accidents, have yet a
name among the Living, and have not yet failed from off the face of the Earth.

Secondly, As God preserves, so he governs all things by his providence; and
this Government consists in two things. Direction of the Creatures actions, and
distribution of rewards and punishments according to the Actions of his
rational Creatures.

First, God by his governing providence directs all the Actions of his
Creatures, yea, and by the secret, but efficacious illapse and penetration of
the Divine Influence; he powerfully sways and determines them which way he
pleases. And from this part of his Providence, brancheth forth his permission
of Evil Actions, and his concurrence to good, both by the assistance of his
common and likewise of his special Grace; and lastly, his general influence
into all the Actions of our Lives; all which we are enabled to perform by the
Almighty power of the Divine Providence, which as at first it bestowed upon us
natural faculties; so by a constant concurrence does exite and assist those
faculties to their respective operations.

Secondly, God by his governing providence distributes rewards and punishments
according to our actions: And this part of his providence is oftentimes
remarkable even in this present Life, when we see retributions of Divine Mercy
and Vengeance, signally proportioned according to Men's demerits, but the more
especial manifestation and execution of it is commonly adjourned to the Life to
come; and then all the seeming inequalities of God's dispensations here will be
fully adjusted in the eternal recompense of the Godly, and eternal punishment
of the wicked and impenitent.

Now by this Almighty providence God overrules and sways all things to his own
glory. There is nothing comes to pass, but God has his ends in it, and will
certainly make his own ends out of it; though the World seem to run at random,
and affairs to be hudled together in blind confusion and rude disorder; yet God
sees and knows the Concatenation of all causes and effects, and so governs
them, that he makes a perfect harmony out of all those seeming Jarrings and
Discords. As you may observe it in the wheels of a Watch, though they all move
with contrary motions one to the other, yet they are useful and necessary to
make it go right: so is it in these inferior things, the proceedings of Divine
providence, are all regular and orderly to his own ends, in all the thwartings
and contrarieties of second causes. We have this expressed in that mysterious
Vision, Eccles. 1.18. where the providence of God are set forth by the Emblem
of a Wheel within a Wheel, one intersecting and crossing another; yet they are
described to be full of eyes round about. What is this, but to denote unto us,
that though providence are as turning and unstable as Wheels; though they are
as thwart and cross as one Wheel within another, yet these Wheels are all
Nailed round with Eyes; God sees and chooses his way in the most intricate and
entangled providence that are; and so governs all things, that whilst each
pursues its own inclination, they are all overruled to promote his glory. This
is providence, the two great parts of which are preservation and Government;
and the great end of both these the glory of the Almighty and All-wise God. And
this is it which our Savior speaks of when he tells the Jews, John 5.17. My
Father works hitherto (viz. in preserving and governing his Creatures) and I
work.

Secondly, The second General propounded, was to demonstrate to you, That all
things in the World are governed by the Divine Providence. The Old Philosophers
among the Heathens, had very different notions concerning the Government of the
World. Some held that all things were governed by an imperious and inevitable
fate to which God himself was Subject: So Chrysippus, and the Stoics. Others
thought that all was left to blind chance, and whatsoever came to pass here
below was only casual and fortuitous; so the Epicureans: Others that the great
God regarded only the more glorious affairs of Heaven, but had committed the
care of Earthly concernments unto inferior Spirits as his under Officers and
Deputies: So most of the Platonists, though their master was Orthodox. Others,
that God's providence reached only to the great and important matters of this
World; but that it was too much a disparagement to his infinite Majesty to look
after the motion of every Straw and Feather, and to take care of every trivial
and inconsiderable Occurrence in this World. So speaks Cicero in his Book de
natura Deorum, Magna Dii curant, parva neglignut. [vide Ariani Epictet. lib. 1.
cap. 12.] How much better is that most excellent saying of St. Austin, Tu sic
curas unumquemque nostrum, tanquam solum cures, and sic omnes tanquam singulos.
God takes as much care of every particular, as if each were all, and as much
care of all, as if all were but one particular.

And to demonstrate this all disposing providence of God, I shall take two ways.

First, From the consideration of the nature and perfection of the Deity.

Secondly, From the contemplation of that beauty and order which we may observe
in the World.

It is most necessary that we should have our hearts well Established in the
firm and unwavering belief of this truth, that whatsoever comes to pass, be it
good or evil, we may look up to the hand and disposal of all, to God; and if it
be good, may acknowledge it with praise; if evil, bear it with patience; since
he dispenses both the one and the other; the good to reward us, and the evil
to try us.

Now first, To demonstrate it from the being and nature of God.

This I shall do in these following Propositions, which I shall lay down as so
many steps and gradations.

First, That there is a God is undoubtedly clear by the light of Nature. Never
was there any People so barbarous and stupid, but did firmly assent to this
truth without any other proof than the deep impress upon their hearts, and the
observation of visible objects, that there was a Deity. It Is neither a Problem
of reason, nor yet strictly an Article of Faith, but the unforced dictate of
every Man's Natural Conscience; where Conscience is not violently perverted,
and under the force of those vices, whose interest it is that there should be
no God. Never was there any Nation that worshipped none, but their great
sottishness was, that they worshipped many.

Secondly, As all confess there is a God, so likewise that this God must
necessarily have in himself all perfections, as being the first Principle and
Source of all things. All these perfections of Wisdom, Power, Knowledge, or the
like, that we see scattered up and down among the Creatures, must all be
concentred in God; and that in a far more eminent degree, because whatever is
found in Creatures is but derived and borrowed from him, and therefore it must
needs follow, that because it is of more perfection to be infinite in each
perfection, therefore God is infinite in them all.

Thirdly, Among all the perfections that are dispersed among the Creatures, the
most excellent is knowledge and understanding. For this is a property that
agrees only to Angels and Men, who are the top and flower of the Creation; and
therefore certainly this perfection of the Creatures is to be found in God:
yea, and that infinitely. His knowledge and wisdom therefore is infinite.

Fourthly, His knowledge being thus infinite, he both knows himself, and all
other things in himself.

First, God perfectly knows himself, he knows the boundless extent of his own
being, and though he be infinite and incomprehensible to all others, yet is he
finite and comprehended to himself: and hence it follows,

Secondly, That he knows particularly all other things. For if he knew himself
perfectly, he must needs know all things besides himself; because none can
perfectly know himself, that does not fully know all that his power and
strength can reach unto. But now there is nothing which the power of God cannot
reach, for by his power he Created all things. And therefore knowing his own
Essence which is the cause of all, he knows every thing in the secundity of his
Essence. Thus we have demonstrated it from the principles of Reason, that God
necessarily knows all things. But providence denotes more than knowledge. And
therefore,

Fifthly, This knowledge that is in God, is not like that which we acquire;
it is not a knowledge that depends upon the objects known, and forms Idea's from
the contemplation of things already existing. But it is like the knowledge of
an Artificer which causes and produces the things it comprehends. God knows
them before they are; and by knowing them brings them to pass. God knows all
things says St. Austin, de Trinitat. 15. Not because they are, but therefore
they are because God knew them. So that his eternal knowledge and understanding
gives being to every thing in the World.

Sixthly, It appertains to him who gives being to a thing to preserve and
govern it in its being* And therefore God giving being to all things, he also
does maintain and provide for them. It Is the very Law of Nature that he has
imprinted upon all his Creatures, to provide for their own Offspring. We see
with what sollicitous affection and tenderness, even brute and irrational
Creatures do it. We are all the Offspring of God, and he our common Parent.
And therefore certainly he who has inspired such Parental care in all things
else, does himself much more take care to give Education to all to which he
has given being.

Thus you see is proved that God's Providence reaches unto all things. It
might likewise be demonstrated from God's omnipresence. He is present every
where, with, and in all his Creatures, and certainly he is not with them as an
idle and unconcerned spectator, but as the director, and governor of their
Actions. But I shall proceed to the second sort of Arguments to prove the
Divine providence.

And those are taken from the consideration of the frame and Compages of the
World, the beauty and harmony which we see in Nature. The World is a Book
wherein we may clearly read the wonderful Wisdom of God. There is no Creature
that does not proclaim aloud, that God is the wise Creator and Governor of it.
Who has Gilded the Globe of the Sun and put on his Rays? Who has set its
bounds, and measured out its race, that it should without sailing, without
error or mistake, know how to make its daily and Annual returns, and divide out
times and seasons to the World? Who has given a particular Motion to all the
Voluminous Orbs of Heaven, and beat out a path for every Star to walk in? Who
has swathed in the great and proud Ocean, with a Girdle of Sand, and restrains
the Waves thereof, that though they be higher than the Land, yet they shall not
overflow it? Who poiseth the oppositions and contrarieties that are in Nature
in so even a balance, that none of them shall ever prevail to a total
Destruction of the other? Who brings up the great Family of brute Beasts
without tumult and disorder? Do not all these great and wonderful works speak
forth the watchful Providence of God; who as he makes them by his word, so
still governs them by his Power? Therefore whatsoever we receive beneficial
from them, whatsoever seems to provide for our necessities or conveniences; it
is God that has so dispensed the Government of the World as to make it
serviceable. If the Heavens turn and move for us, if the Stars as so many
burning Torches light us in the obscurity of the Night; if the Angels protect
and defend us, let us acknowledge all this from the Providence of God only. It
is he that turns the Heavens round their Axis: He lights up the Stars, he
commands the Angels to be Ministering Spirits, Guards, and Sentinels about us.
If the Fire warm us, the Air refresh us, the Earth support us, it is God that
has kindled the Fire, that has spread forth the Air, stablish'd the Earth
upon the Pillars of his own decree that it should not be shaken. And let us
know too that when we want these Creatures for our sustentation, if the
Heavens, if the Angels, if the Earth, if the Sea, if all things should fail us,
yea, bandy and set themselves against us, yet God who provides for us by them,
can also if he please provide for us without them.

Thus we have dispatched the two general inquiries, and have described and
demonstrated unto you the Divine Providence.

The third which remains, is to answer some questions and doubts which may be
made, and have indeed been strongly urged against the Government of the World
by Providence.

As First, If the World be governed by Providence, whence comes it that wicked
and ungodly Men flourish and prosper? that God shines upon their Tabernacles,
and drops fatness upon all their paths? Whereas on the conrary the Godly are
often exposed to Poverty, Contempt, Reproaches, persecuted by Men, afflicted by
God. Would it not be as agreeable to the Divine goodness, to cast abroad the
Wealth, the Pomp, and Glory of this World with an undeciding hand, leaving Men
to scramble for them as they can, as that he should with a particular and
studied care advance those who contemn him, and crush those who humbly trust
and depend upon him? Can I think the World is governed by the Providence of a
just God, when usually unjust. Men govern the World under him? When swaggering
Sinners, who despise him have power likewise to control others? Is it Wisdom
to put a Sword into that hand which will turn the point of it against the
giver? Or Justice to empower them to all those Acts of Rapine, Violence, and
Oppression, which they commit? And shall we call that Providence which is
neither wise nor just? One has an unexhausted store to supply his dissolute
Luxury and Riot, another scarce necessaries to maintain a poor Life spent in
the commands of God. Here a wicked Dives, who worshipped no other God but his
own Belly, feasts deliciously every day; whilst a Godly Lazarus starves at
this glutton's Gate, and entertains the Dogs with licking of his Sores. And
what, does God's particular care furnish the glutton's Table with daily excess,
who will not give the remaining Scraps to God's Children? If there be Divine
Providence in this, what is become of the Divine Equity? This inequality of
Affairs seems to persuade. that it is not the Holy and Righteous God of Heaven,
but rather the God of this World, that Governs the concerns of it, and that he
spoke truth, when he told our Savior, Luke 4.6. The Power and Glory of this
World is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will I give it.

Now to Answer this. First, This quarrel is not only of late commenced against
Heaven; but it has been the complaint of all Ages. It raised controversies
among the very Heathens themselves, some of them upon this ground denying, and
others again by whole treatises defending the Government of the World by
Providence. And no wonder it should puzzle them, since the very best of God's
Saints and Servants have likewise stumbled at this stone of offense. Thus the
Psalmist, Psalm. 73.2, 3, etc. As for me my Feet were almost gone, my steps had
well nigh slipped: For I was envious at the Foolish, when I saw the prosperity of
the Wicked. So likewise the Prophet Jeremy, 12.1. Righteous art thou, O Lord,
when I plead with thee, yet let me talk with thee of thy Judgment: Wherefore
does the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they happy that deal very
treacherously? This therefore is an old grief, which in all Ages of the World
has been complained of. And though at first sight it seems to confute the
Providence of God, yet if we more narrowly consider it, it is a strong
confirmation of it. For since virtue and goodness is so despicable a thing in
the World; since holy and good Men have been always injured and persecuted,
certainly were there not an all wise providence that finds out ways and means
of its own to counterpoise these disadvantages, and to preserve them amidst the
rage and hatred of their implacable Enemies, long ere this there had been none
of them left, either to have suffered, or complained. Were there no other
argument to prove that God governs the World, this would suffice, even, That
his Servants have been continually oppressed in it, yet never could be rooted
out of it. Though Men and Devils have combined together against them, and God
(as they have complained) has deemed to abandon them; yet such a fenceless and
forlorn generation as this, has been hitherto, and shall still be preserved to
the very end of the World. Does not this speak forth the Power and care of
Almighty God, thus to keep a bush unconsumed in the midst of fire? to preserve
fuel untouched in the very embraces of flames?

Secondly, God does chastise his own People, and prosper the wicked, that he
might thereby rectify our Judgments, and teach us not to account adversity the
greatest Evil, nor yet prosperity the chiefest Good. For certainly were they
so, only the Righteous should enjoy the Grandeur, Pomp, and Glory of this
World, and only the wicked and ungodly become miserable. Concerning this, St.
Austin, speaks excellently in his 70th. Epistle, Worldly things, says he, are
in themselves but indifferent, and good and evil only as they are improved, but
least they should be thought always evil, therefore God sometimes gives them to
those who are good, and least they should be thought the highest and the
chiefest good, they are sometimes given to those who are evil. And a like
saying to this has Seneca, in his Book de provident. cap. 5. There is no such
way to traduce the Riches, the Honors, the Pleasures of this Life, those vain
nothings which are so earnestly desired, and eagerly pursued by the most, no
such way to beat down their price in the esteem of all wise and good Men, as
for God to bestow those upon the vilest, which he sometimes denies to the best
and Holiest.

Thirdly. When God bestows any temporal good thing upon wicked and ungodly Men,
he gives it as their Portion; and when he brings any calamity on his own
Children, he inflicts it for their trial. Is it not ordinary that a Servant
receives more for wages, than a Son may have for the present at his own
command? God is the Father, and bountiful maintainer of the whole Family both
in Heaven and Earth; a Father to the Faithful, a Lord and Master over all. He
may give his Slaves large wages, when his own Children possibly have not so
much in hand. Is he therefore hard or unjust? No: The inheritance is theirs,
and that is kept in reversion for them. What wicked Men possess of this World,
is all that ever they can hope for. Why should we grudge them filled bags, or
swelling Titles! It Is their whole Portion. They now receive their good things.
Have thou Food and Clothing? That is Childrens fare: Envy not ungodly Men, who
flaunt it in the Gallantry of the World. They have more than you; but it is all
they are like to have. The Psalmist gives us an account of their Estate, Psalm.
17.14. They are the Men of this World, who have their Portion in this Life,
whose bellies God fills with his hid Treasure: whereas thou, O Christian, who
possessest nothing, art Heir apparent of Heaven, Coheir with Jesus Christ, who
is the heir of all things, and have an infinite Mass of Riches laid up for
thee: So great and infinite that all the Stars of Heaven are too few to account
it by. You have no reason to complain of being kept short; for all that God
has is yours: Whether Prosperity or Adversity, Life or Death, all is yours.
What God gives is for your comfort, what he denies or takes away is for your
trial; it is for the increase of those graces which are far more gracious than
any temporal enjoyment. If by seeing wicked and ungodly Men flow in wealth and
ease, when thou art forced to strugle against the inconveniences and
difficulties of a poor Estate, thou have learnt an Holy contempt and disdain of
the World, believe it God has herein given thee more, than if he had given
thee the World it self.

Fourthly, God does many times even in this World expound the mystery of his
Providence, by the fatal and dreadful overthrow of those wicked Men whom he for
a while suffered to prosper. The triumph of the wicked, says, Job, 20.5. is
short. At longest it is but short, because measured out by a short Life. Now is
their triumph, hereafter their torment: But many times God brings them to ruin
even in this Life. He turns the Wheel of Providence and makes it pass over
those who but a while before set vaunting a top of it. And then will thou doubt
whether God governs the World by Providence? Will thou doubt whether God be
just in suffering wicked Men to prosper and flourish? God lifts them up on
high, only that he may cast them down with the more terrible fall. When the
workers of iniquity prosper (says the Psalmist Psalm. 97.2.) it is that they
might be destroyed for ever. Now when God comes thus to execute Judgment upon
them those who questioned the Providence of God in their advancement, will the
more glorify it in their downfall. The Righteous shall see it and be glad, and
shall say, verily there is a reward for the Righteous, verily there is a God
that Judges in the Earth, Psalm 58.11.

Fifthly, If God does not clear up this inequality of his providence in this
Life, yet he will certainly do it at the day of Judgment. And indeed the
strange dispensation of Affairs in this World, is an Argument that does
convincingly prove that there shall be such a day, wherein all the Involucra
and intanglements of providence shall be clearly unfolded. Then shall the
riddle be dissolved, why God has given this and that profane wretch so much
Wealth, and so much power to do mischief. Is it not that they might be
destroyed for ever? Then shall they be called to a strict account for all that
plenty and prosperity for which they are now envied: and the more they have
abused, the more dreadful will their condemnation be. Then it will appear that
God gave them not as mercies, but as snares. It Is said Psalm. 11.6. That God
will rain on the wicked Snares, Fire, and Brimstone, and an horrible tempest.
When he scaters abroad the desirable things of this World Riches, Honors,
Pleasures, etc. then he rains snares upon them: and when he shall call them to
an account for these things, then he will rain upon them Fire and Brimstone,
and an horrible tempest of his wrath and fury. Dives who carowsed on Earth, yet
in Hell could not obtain so much as one poor drop of Water to cool his scorched
and flaming Tongue. Had not his excess and intemperance been so great in his
Life, his fiery thirst had not been so tormenting after Death. And therefore in
that sad Item that Abraham gives him, Luke 16.5. he bids him remember, that
thou in thy Life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus Evil
things; but now he is comforted, and thou tormented. I look upon this as a most
bitter and a most deserved Sarcasme, upbraiding him for his gross folly, making
the trifles of this Life his good things: Thou have received thy good things,
but now thou art tormented. Oh, never call Dives's Purple and delicious fare
good things, if they thus end in torments! Was it good for him to be wrapped in
Purple, who is now wrapped in Flames? Was it good for him to fare deliciously,
who was only thereby fatted up against the day of slaughter? Could you lay your
Ears to Hell Gates, you might hear many of the Grandees and Potentates, the
great and Rich ones of this World Cursing all their Pomp and Bravery, and
wishing they had been the most despicable of all those whom they once hated,
oppressed and injured: And as it will appear at that day that none of the
enjoyments of this World are good to wicked Men; so that none of those
Afflictions and Calamities which good Men suffer are Evil. Lazarus's Sores are
not Evil, since now every Sore is turned into a Star. His lying prostrate at
the Rich Misers door is not Evil, since now he lies in Abraham's Bosom: And
this day all these intricacies of Providence will be made plain, and we shall
have other apprehensions of things, than what we have at present. Now we call
Prosperity, Riches, and Abundance, Good things; and Want, and Affliction, Evil.
But when we come to consider these with relation to Eternity, the true standard
to measure them by, then Poverty may be a Mercy, and Riches a Judgment; God may
bless one by Afflictions, and Curse another by Prosperity: he may bestow more
upon us in suffering us to want, than if he should give us the store and
treasures of all the Earth. And certainly whatever our thoughts of it are now,
yet within awhile this will be the Judgment of us all. When we are once lodged
in our Eternal State, then we shall acknowledge that nothing in this World
deserved the name of good, but as it promoted our eternal Happiness, nor of
evil, but as it tends to Eternal misery.

And thus you see this grand Objection answered, and the Providence of God
cleared from that unjustice which we are apt peevishly to impute unto it.

Other doubts are of less moment, and therefore shall be brieflier resolved.

As Secondly, If God's Providence ordains all things to come to pass according
to the immutable Law of his purpose, then what necessity is there of Prayer?

We cannot by our most fervent Prayers alter the least circumstance, or
punctilio in God's Decrees. If he has so laid the method of his Providence in
his own Counsels as to prepare mercies and blessings for us, our Prayers cannot
hasten, nor maturate them before their time: Or if he determine by his
Providence to bring Afflictions upon us, our Prayers cannot prevent, nor
adjourn them beyond their prefixed time. Now to this Aaequinas 2.29.83. Art. 2.
Answers well, that the Divine Providence does not only ordain what Effects
shall come to pass, but also by what means and causes, and in what order they
shall flow. God has appointed, as the effect it self, so the means to
accomplish it. Now Prayer is a means to bring to pass that which God has
determined shall be. We do not Pray out of hope to alter God's Eternal
purposes, but we Pray to obtain that which God has ordained to be obtained by
our Prayers: We ask that thereby we may be fit to receive what God has from
all Eternity determined to give by Prayer, and not otherwise. And therefore
when we lie under any Affliction, if we languish under pain or sickness, if we
are pinched by Want or Poverty, if we are oppressed by the injuries and
persecutions of others, Prayer is necessary, because as God by his Providence
has brought these things upon us, so likewise possibly the same Providence
has determined not to remove them, till we earnestly and fervently Pray for
our deliverance from them. And therefore when God had promised great mercies to
the Jews, he tells them by the Prophet Ezekiel. 36.37. Yet will I for this be
enquired of by the House of Israel to do it for them. Prayer therefore does not
incline God to bestow that which before he was not resolved to give, but it
capacitates us to receive that which God will not give otherwise.

Thirdly, Another Objection may be this. If Providence orders and disposes
all the Occurrences of the World, then there can nothing fall out casually and
contingently.

I Answer. In respect of God it is true, there is nothing casual nor contingent
in the World. A thing may be casual in respect of particular causes; but in
respect of the universal, and first cause nothing is such. If a Master should
send a Servant to a certain place, and command him to stay there till such a
time, and presently after should send another Servant to the same, the meeting
of these two is wholly casual in respect of themselves, but ordained and
foreseen by the Master that sent them. So is it in all fortuitous events here
below: They fall out unexpectedly as to us, but not so as to God; he foresees
and he appoints all the vicissitudes of things, and all the surprises of humane
Accidents. So that you see there may be contingencies in the World, though
God's Providence be most particular and punctual.

Fourthly, Some may object that this would destroy the liberty of Man's will,
and subject all things to a fatal necessity, even humane actions themselves.
For if Man can do nothing but what God has by his Providence fore-appointed
shall be done, how then is Man free either to do, or not to do?

This question requires much more time to answer it at large than I can allow
it. Some seeing it a very difficult thing to reconcile Providence and Liberty,
have presumed to deny that Providence intermeddles at all in such affairs as
depend upon the free will of Man. And of this opinion Tully seems to have been;
for which St. Austin chastises him as injurious to God; when he says,
Voluntatem dum faceret liberam, fecit Sacrilegam. I shall not here stand to
distinguish of a necessity of Coaction, and a necessity of Infallibility, and
that the Providence of God does not bring upon the will a necessity of
Coaction, but only of infallibility, which very well consists with the liberty
of the will. All that I shall at present answer, is, That God does indeed
efficaciously determine the will to do what it does, yet this determination
leaves it in a perfect State of liberty, because the liberty of the will does
not so much consist in indifferency to Act, or not to Act, as in a rational
spontaneity. When we do what we have an appetite to do upon grounds that to us
seem rational, then we Act freely. Now though God does absolutely sway the will
which way he pleases, yet he never forces it contrary to its own
inclinations. For that to which God determines it by his Providence seems at
that present most rational to be done: and upon that representation of good in
the Object, the will embraces it and acts accordingly. So that its Providence
is not violated by any boisterous and compulsive sway, that the first cause
has over it, but God attracts it with such a powerful and insinuating
sweetness, that though the will can incline to nothing but what it seems to
have reason for; yet withal it wills nothing but what God by Providence
overrules it unto. So Austin De Civitate Dei, lib. 5. Cap. 9. Nos dicimus and
Deum scire omnia antequam fiant, and voluntate nos facere quicquid a Nobis non
nisi volentibus fieri sentimus and novimus. Though God foresees and decrees all
things before they are, yet we do that with a free will, which we do not
otherwise than willingly.

Fifthly, The last doubt and query is this: If God govern all Actions, and all
Affairs, by an exact and critical Providence; how then comes it to pass that
there is so much Evil, Villainy and Wickedness committed in it? The
Disquisition of this is the more obscure and intricate, because it is hard to
conceive how God, who is infinite goodness it self, should interest his
Providence in what is so contrary to his Nature.

Now here we must affirm that there is no Evil whatsoever, whether it be of
Sin, or of suffering, that comes to pass without the Providence of God. As for
the Evil of punishment or suffering, it is clear, Amos, 3.6. Shall there be
Evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? But for the Evil of Sin it is
not effectively from God; yet does he by his Providence, for most Holy and wise
ends, permit wicked Men to commit those sins which his Law prohibits, and his
nature abhorrs. Though they refuse to be subject to the Written Law, yet they
are and must be subject to the eternal Law of his own Councels, and there is
not a sin they commit, but as his Authority condemns, and his purity hates it;
so his Wisdom both suffers it to be, and overrules it when it is, to his own
ends. It Is true, all Men naturally are Slaves to their Lusts, but God holds
their Chain in his own Hands; sometimes slackening it by his permission, and
sometimes straitning it by his powerful restraint. And therefore to plead
Providence the warrant of our Actions (a boisterous argument which of late has
been most used amongst us, until Providence it self had signally confuted it)
is to plead that for the justification of our Actions without which they could
not be sinful. Thus Cain killed his Brother by a Providence. and Achan Stole
the Wedge of Gold, and Judas betrayed Christ, and the Jews Crucified him by a
Providence, yea and all the Villainy that was ever acted under the Sun, was all
brought forth out of the Cursed Womb of Men's Lusts, by the Providence of God,
that is, by his permission to the Evil, and concurrence as to the Act: neither
is this any stain at all to the infinite Holiness and Purity of his nature; for
though we sin, if we hinder not the Commission of Sin in others when it is in
our power to do it, because we are commanded and obliged to it both by the care
we ought to have of his Honor, and the Charity we owe unto the Souls of
others; yet no such obligation lies upon God, who may justly give Men over to
their perverted inclinations. And though he can easily keep the most Wicked Man
in the World, from rushing into those Sins which he daily commits, yet not
being bound to interpose his power to hinder them, he permits them holily, and
at last will punish them justly.

But the question is not so much whether God does not by his Providence permit
sin, as why he does it. And St. Austin answers it excellently in that known
saying of his; God, says he, who is infinitely good, would never permit Evil
were he not also infinitely wise, and knew how to bring good out of Evil. It is
the primary object of his hatred, and that alone for which he hates wicked Men.
As he is an Holy God, so he hates it, and as he is a wise God, so he permits
it. And there is a twofold good for which God does sometimes permit Evil.

First, The manifestation of his own Glory.

Secondly, The exercise of his Peoples Graces.

First, God by permitting sin manifests the glory of many of his Attribute.
Surely the wrath of Man shall praise thee, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 76.10.
Every Sin strikes at some of the Divine Attributes. One denies his Justice,
another his Mercy; one his Power, another his Wisdom, and all are contrary to
his Purity. But yet God has in his own Councels such secret Screws and Wiers
whereby he does so wreath and invert these Pins, that eventually they advance
what they seem directly to oppose. A Child perhaps would think when he sees an
Husbandman cast Dung and Soil upon his Field, that it were but improvidently
done thus to spoil the flourishing verdure and gayety of the Grass and Flowers.
Why, that very Dung which covers them, makes them afterward sprout up more
fair and fresh. So God permits wicked Men to Dung the Earth with their filth,
that those Attributes of his which seem to be buried under them, may afterward
spring up with the greater luster and Glory. From hence he will reap the richer
crop of praise to himself. Sometimes he glorifies the severity of his Justice,
by hardening them in their Sins to their own destruction; sometimes the riches
of his mercy, by calling the greatest and most flagitious Sinners to
Repentance, and granting them Pardon; and always his infinite patience and
forbearance in not executing present Vengeance upon those who so daringly
provoke him. But although we cannot now so clearly, comprehend the advantages
that God makes out of the Sins of Men, yet when we come to stand in the general
Assembly at the day of Judgment; God will then comment upon, and explain the
mysteries of his Providence, and make us understand how those Sins for which he
will then condemn the World, put a gloss and shine upon his Attributes.

Secondly, God by permitting sin exercises the Graces of his People. The sins
of others give us matter for the exercise of an Holy zeal; for God who is daily
affronted by them, of an Holy Pity and Commiseration over those who like
Madmen wound, and gash, and destroy themselves: for the exercise of an Holy
caution over our selves, least we be induced to sin after their Example. Our
own Sins give us daily occasion to renew our Repentance to humble our Souls
before God, to fortify our resolutions, to double the guards we set upon our
own hearts and ways, to watch over our selves more circumspectly, that we
relapse not into the Commission of them again. Thus a true Christian may gain
some advantage by his very falls. As Husbandmen make use of the very Thorns and
Briars that grow in their Fields to stop the Gaps, and strengthen the fences
about them, so should we improve our very Sins and failings, to fence our Souls
that we lie not open to the like temptations for the future.

Thus, you see that God brings good out of all the Evil which he permits, he
glorifies his own Attributes, and exercises his Peoples Graces. And thus you
see likewise, God's Providence both Proved and Vindicated; asserted to be
particular and punctual over all Occurrences that happen in the World, and
cleared from all the Imputations of Injustice, that the Folly or Atheism of Man
can lay against it. I shall conclude with two or three Inferences or
Corollaries.

First, If the accurateness of God's Providence reach unto all the little
concernments of the World, we may be well assured, that those which are the
more considerable and important Occurrences of it, are all guided and governed
by a special hand of Providence. And thus our Savior himself urges as a
strong encouragement for our confidence and trust in God: Not a Sparrow falls
to the ground without your Father; fear not ye therefore, you are of more worth
than many Sparrows. Yea, not an Hair of your head falls without a Providence,
and think ye that the head it self shall? Certainly, God does not like
Domitian, busy himself about Flies, and neglect the great and weighty Affairs
of his Government. And this is the reason of that question the Apostle Asks, 1. Corinthians. 9.9. Does God take care for Oxen: Yes, certainly he does, nor did the
Apostle intend to deny it, but thereby to infer that certainly his care is
much more particular toward us. This then may establish our hearts under any
personal Sufferings or public Calamities, when evil is upon our selves or the
Nation, when Uproars and Confusions seem to reduce the World back to its
Ancient Chaos, when Storms and Waves over-whelm the Ship, and we with the
Disciples think our God asleep, and begin to cry out with the Psalmist, Awake,
O Lord, why sleep thou: Our God is not sleeping, but even then at the Helm,
he Steers, he Governs and Guides all these Disorders, and will conduct the
whole Tumult and Hurry of Affairs to his own Glory and our Good.

Secondly, If God's Providence has the command and sway even over the Sins of
Men, this then may be abundant matter of Peace and Satisfaction in the worst of
times, when wickedness does most of all rage and abound; let us then consider,
that if God permits them, he also can when he pleases Check, put a Stop and
Period to their Rage and Madness. Their hands are Fettered by the adamantine
Chains of a most strong Decree, which they can neither reverse nor exceed;
whatsoever they do, is but by permission; a limited, and a limiting Permission.
Our Savior tells us, Pilate, thou could have no power over me, except it
were given thee from above. The very power that Men have to Sin against God, is
from God; and therefore certainly he will withdraw it, when it does not work
out his own ends. This was it that satisfied David, when Shimei pelted him with
Stones and Curses, 2 Samuel 16.10. Let him alone, let him Curse, because the Lord
has said unto him, Curse David.

Thirdly, Hence see to what we ought to abscribe it, that there is no more
notorious wickedness committed in the World; when we hear of any prodigious
Villainy, we are apt to wonder that ever such abominations should be incident
to the Sons of Men. Wonder not at the matter as if any strange thing were
happened to them, but rather wonder at the goodness of God which is the sole
cause that such things as these are wonders. Were his permissive Providence as
large as Men's lust are outrageous, these things would soon cease to be wonders,
and become the common and ordinary practice of all Men. Why are not our Streets
continually filled with Violence, Rapine, Murders, and Outcries? Whence is it
that we enjoy our Possession, and our Lives in Safety? The wickedness of Men
lies hard, and presses upon God's restraints, and wheresoever there are any
gaps in it, it breaks forth naturally and violently, and if this Dam and Mound
of Divine Providence, were but broken down, it would break out till it had
overflowed the whole face of the Earth, and covered it with a Deluge of Impiety
and Profaneness. But that God who sets bounds to the raging of the Sea, and
says hitherto shall thy proud Waves come and no farther, does by the same
Almighty Providence, set bounds to the Lusts and Corruptions of Men, which are
altogether as unruly, and curbs in the fury of their madness, which else would
drown the whole World in Perdition and Destruction.

Fourthly, Lastly, This should teach us, to acquiesce and rest satisfied in
every Providence of God, as that which will certainly in the end redound to his
own Glory. When we see disorders and confusions abroad in the World, we are apt
to despond and to cry out, Lord, what will thou do for thy great Name, thy
Honor, thy Glory lies bleeding, and suffers through the Sins of Men? Why,
commit thy care to God: He will certainly so weild their Lusts, as that they
shall bring about and effect his own ends. God is glorifying himself, even by
these things; and why then should we be troubled? This thought kept alive on
our hearts would cause us, to rest satisfied amidst all the tumults we observe
and hear of in the World. For though we know not how to unwind these ravelled
dispensations to the bottom of his Glory, yet he can and will. There is an
invisible and wise hand that moulds and fashions all; and though the parts by
themselves may appear rude and unpolished, yet put the whole frame and series
of Providence together, and that will appear most admirable and glorious.

Now to the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God, Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, be honor and glory for ever, and ever, Amen.

The End of the first Sermon.
A Discourse concerning the use of the Holy Scriptures.
Colossians III.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all Wisdom.


THis Epistle, if any other, is a rich mine of Heavenly Treasure, and abounds
both in the discovery of Gospel Mysteries, and the injunction of Christian
Duties. It is furnished throughout with that which may either instruct us in
Knowledge, or direct us in Practice: And the Apostle having already laid down
many Excellent things in order to both these; and seeing it would be an endless
task to discourse unto them all the Truths, or exhort them to all the Duties of
Religion in particular; he therefore speaks compendiously in the words of my
Text, and referrs them to the perfect Systeme in which is contained an account
of what a Christian ought to know or do; and that is the Holy Scriptures. Let
the word of Christ dwell in you richly.

The words of this Exhortation are very full and laden with weighty Sense. We
may resolve them into two parts.

First, Here is the Nature and Substance of the Exhortation, which is to a
diligent Study, and plentiful knowledge of the Holy Scriptures.

Secondly, The manner how we ought to be Conversant in them; So that it may
dwell in us richly in all Wisdom.

In the former, we may take notice that the Scripture is called the word of
Christ; and that upon a double account: both because he is the Author that
composed it, and likewise, he is the subject matter of which it principally
treats. Now though in both these respects, the Scriptures of the New Testament
be more especially the word of Christ; yet also may the Scriptures of the Old
Testament as truly and properly go under his Name. For,

First, He is the Author of them all: He may well write this Title upon our
Bibles, The Works of Jesus Christ. All the Prophets before his Incarnation,
were but his Amanuenses, and wrote only what he by his Spirit dictated to them,
2 Pet. 1.21. Prophecy came not in old time by the will of Man, but holy Men of
God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and certainly the Holy Ghost
inspired them by Christ's Authority and Commission; and what he declared, he
took from him, and showed it unto them, John 16.14, 15. He shall receive of
mine, and shall show it unto you.

Secondly, Christ also is the principal subject and matter of the whole
Scripture. The sending Christ a Savior into the World, is that great Business
which has employed the Counsel of the Father, the Admiration and Ministration
of Angels, the Tongues and Pens of Prophets, Apostles, and holy Men of all
Ages, before the Scriptures were Written, when Revelation or Tradition were yet
the only positive Rules for Faith and Practice. The Patriarchs saw him by
these. Abraham saw my day and was glad, Joh. 8.56. Afterward the People of the
Jews saw him by Types, Promises, and Prophecies recorded in the Scriptures. He
was that Excellent Theme that has filled up many Chapters of the Old
Testament; as the first draught of a Picture represents the features and
proportion of the Person, but afterward is added the complexion and life to
it. So is it here, the Pens of the Prophets drew the first Lineaments and
Proportion of Christ in the Old Testament, and the Pens of the Apostles and
Evangelists have added the Life and Sweetness to it in the New. Yea, Christ is
so truly described in the Old Testament, by his Life, by his Death, by all the
greater Remarks of either, that in his Contest with the Jews, he appeals
thither for a Testimony, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for they are they
which testify of me. And St. Peter, Acts 3.24. Affirms, That all the Prophets,
as many as have spoken, have foretold of these days. And Acts 10.43. To him
give all the Prophets Witness. Christ who is the true Expositor, being himself
the true Author, makes them all speak his Sense. Luke 24.27. Beginning at Moses
and all the Prophets, he expounded to them in all the Scriptures, the sayings
concerning himself. So that St. Chrysostom's Observation holds true, that the
Gospel was in the World before Christ. (...). It took root in the writings of
the Prophets, but flowed forth in the preaching of the Apostles; so that in
both these respects, the Holy Scripture may well be called the Word of Christ;
of Christ as the Author, and as the Subject of it.

And in both these lies coucht a very cogent Argument, that may enforce this
exhortation of the Apostle, and excite them to a diligent study of the
Scriptures. For,

First, Is Christ the Author of them, and shall we not with all care and
diligence peruse these Books which he has Composed? The writings of Men are
valued according to the Abilities of their Authors. If they be of approved
Integrity, profound Knowledge, solid Judgment, their works are Esteemed and
Studied. And shall we not be much more Conversant in these, which are set forth
by the Author, who is truth it self, and the essential wisdom of the Father?
These that were dictated by the imediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and
writ as it were with a Quill of the Heavenly Dove?

Secondly, Christ is the subject of the Scriptures: And what is all other
Learning and Knowledge but beggarly Elements, if compared with this? Here we
have the Cabinet of God's Counsels unlockt, the Eternal purposes of his Grace,
in sending his Son into the World publicly declared. Here we have the
Stupendous History of God's becoming Man, of all the Miracles this God-man did
upon Earth; of all the Cruelties he Suffered. Here we have the Description of
his Victory in his Resurrection, of his Triumph in his Ascension, of his Glory
in his Session at the right hand of the Majesty on High. Surely, great is the
Mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit,
seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received
up into Glory, as the Apostle with admiration recounts it, 1 Timothy 3.16. And of
all these wounderful passages, the Scripture gives us a perfect Narrative. And
what have the great Wits of the World ever treated on like this, either for
Strangeness or Truth? All their Learning is but idle and contemptible
Speculation, compared to this great Mystery of a Crucified Savior; who subdued
Death by dying, and without force, converted the World to believe a Doctrine
above Reason. It was a very odd saying of Tertullian, de carne Christi cont.
Marc. and yet there is something in it that strikes, Natus est Dei filius, non
pudet, quia pudendum est, the Son of God was Born, we blush not at it, because
it is shameful. Mortuus est Dei filius, prorsus credibile est, quia ineptum
est: The Son of God dyed; it is credible, because it is unfit and unlikely it
should be so: Sepultus resurrexit, certum est, quia impossible est; he rose
from the Dead, it is certain true, because it is impossible. Now these unlikely
and impossible things, judged so by humane Reason; these deep things of God,
the Scripture declares, and declares them in such a manner as convinces even
Reason it self to assent to them, though it cannot comprehend them. If
therefore you desire to know Christ and him Crucified, and those Mysterious
Doctrines which the Wit of Man could not invent, for it can hardly receive
them, be conversant in the Holy Scriptures; for they are the word of Christ,
and reveals all the wonders of Wisdom and Knowledge, to which all the Wisdom of
the World is but folly. This therefore I suppose lies in the expression, the
word of Christ, viz. the word of which he is both the Author, and the Subject.

Secondly, We may observe in the Text, the manner how we ought to be Conversant
in the Scriptures, and that is set forth very significantly.

First, Let the Word of Christ dwell in you. Do not only give it the hearing,
as a strange and mavelous story: let not the memory of it vanish out of your
minds, as soon as the sound of the Words vanishes out of your Ears, but lay it
up and lodge it in your Hearts, make it familiar and Domestic to you; that it
may be as well known to you, as those that live in the same House with you.
Read it, ponder and meditate upon it, till you have transcribed the Bible upon
your hearts, and Faithfully printed it in your memories.

Secondly, Let it dwell in you Richly or Copiously, which may be taken either
Objectively, or Subjectively: Objectively, and so the sense is, that all the
word of God should dwell in us. Content not your selves with some part of it;
that you read the Gospel, or New Testament, but neglect the Old, as is the
practice of some flush Notionists. Or that you know the Historical part of
both, but neglect the Doctrinal, which is the fond and Childish custom of some,
who read the Scripture as they would Romances, skipping over the moral
discourses as impertinent to the story. But when we receive the whole Doctrine
contained in it, and are diligent in revolving the Prophets, Evangelists,
Apostles, every part and parcel of the Heavenly revealed truth.

Again the Word of Christ may dwell in us richly in the latter sense, or
Subjectively. And so it does when not only every part of it dwells in us, but
when it dwells also in every part of us. In our memories to retain, it in our
minds to meditate on it, in our affections to love it, and in our Lives to
practice it. Then does the Word of Christ dwell richly, or abundantly in us.

Thirdly, Let it dwell richly in all Wisdom.

The highest Wisdom is truly to know, and to serve God in order to Eternal Life.

Now says the Apostle, so acquaint your selves with the Scriptures, that you
may from thence learn true Wisdom, the saving knowledge both of what is to be
believed, and what is to be done, in order to the obtaining of everlasting
happiness.

To be conversant in it only, to know what it contains, is not Wisdom but
folly. But then it dwells in you in Wisdom, when you study it, to practice it,
when you endeavor to know the rule that ye may obey it. This is Wisdom here,
and will end in happiness hereafter. And thus you have the words of my Text
explained.

In handling this Subject, I shall only pursue the design of the Apostle, and
endeavor to press those exhortations upon you. And indeed I need not many
Arguments to persuade those who have already any acquaintance, with these
Sacred Oracles, still to be conversant in them. Have you not your selves found
such clear light, such Attractive sweetness, and persuasive Eloquence in the
words of God, that all that the Tongue of Man can utter for it, falls
infinitely short of what it speaks on in its own behalf? Who of us have not
found direction from it in cases of difficulty, Solution of doubts, support
under Afflictions, comfort under sadness, strength against temptation,
quicknings of Grace, warmth of affection; and in brief, whatsoever we could
expect from the mercy of God have we not found it in the Scriptures? And shall
we need further to commend it to you by Arguments, since it has commended it
self by manifold experiences? But so it is that the Devil knows we are disarmed
and disabled if once he can wrest the Sword of the Spirit from us, as the
Apostle calls it, and therefore labors all he can to strike the Bible out of
our hands: Or if we do read it, he strives to put on such false Spectacles as
shall misrepresent every thing to us, and possess us with prejudice and
Objections against it. I shall therefore before I proceed any farther,
encounter with some of those prejudiced opinions, which make this a Clasped and
Sealed Book to many.

First, Some may fear lest the study and knowledge of the Scriptures, should
only aggravate their Sin and Condemnation. On the one hand the precepts of the
Law are so various, the duties so difficult, and Flesh and Blood so infirm and
opposite; that they cast a dispairing look at them, as impossible to be
fulfilled. On the other hand they have been told that knowledge without
practice will expose them to damnation without excuse. They have read, Ja.
4.17. To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is Sin: it is
an Emphatical and weighty Sin, and Luke, 12.47. He that knew his Masters Will,
and did it not shall be beaten with many stripes. This they have read, and this
deterrs them from reading any farther. If they cannot practice what they know;
and if to know and not practice, be only to inflame their last reckoning, and
make their torments more intolerable, it is best for them to muffle up
themselves in a safe ignorance.

To this I Answer.

First, Though the word abounds with multitudes of sublime precepts, and
difficult duties, yet this is no discouragement from the study of it. For
consider that this same word is not only a light to discover what you ought to
do, but an help to enable you to do it. It is the very means that God appointed
to overcome your averseness, and assist your weakness. And if ever this be
effected, it must in an ordinary way, be by conversing with the Scriptures.
That Sick Man has lost his Reason, as well as his Health, who should refuse to
take Physic, because if it does not work, it will but make him the worse. Why
the way to make it work is by taking it. So it is a distempered kind of
arguing, against the word of God, the Physic of our Souls, that it is mortal
and deadly if it does not work into practice. The way to make it work into
practice, is to take it first into our knowledge; it is true, it were a great
discouragement if the Scripture only showed you how much work you have to do,
what Temptations to resist, what Corruptions to mortify, what Graces to
exercise, what duties to perform, and left all that upon your own hands. But
the Leaves of the Bible, are the Leaves of the Tree of Life, as well as of the
Tree of Knowledge; they strengthen as well as inlighten, and have not only a
Commanding, but an assisting Office. And this the Scripture does two ways.

First, It directs where we may receive supplies of ability for the performance
of whatsoever it requires. It leads thee unto Christ, who is able to furnish
thee with supernatural strength, for supernatural duties. His treasury stands
open for all concerns; and his Almighty Power stands engaged to assist those
who rely upon it. Be not discouraged therefore, he that finds us work, finds
us strength: and the same Scripture that injoyns us obedience, exhibits God's
promise of bestowing upon us the power of obeying. Thou who workest all works
in us and for us, Isaiah, 26.12. And work out your own Salvation, for it is God
that works in you both to will and to do, Phil. 2.12, 13. Why then should we
so complain of hard sayings, and Grevious Commandments? Have we not God's
Omnipotence obliged by promise to assist in the same words, wherein we are
commanded to obey? What says the Apostle, I am able to do all things through
Christ strengthening me, Phil. 4.13. When in reading the Scripture, thou
meetest with difficult and rigorous Duties, the severity of Mortification, the
self cruelty of plucking out right Eyes, and cutting off right Hands; commend
they self to these promises of aid and assistance, that the same Scripture
holds forth, and lift up thy heart in that divine Meditation of St. Augustine,
Lord, give what thou Command, and command what thou please. Whilst thou
thus duly dependest on Christ's strength, and make use of thine own, it is as
much his Honor and Office to enable thee, as it is thy Duty to perform what he
requires.

Secondly, The Scripture as it directs us to rely on the strength of Christ; so
it is a means that God has appointed to quicken and excite our own strength
and Power, to the discharge of those Duties it Discovers. Wherefore are those
pressing Exhortations, and those dreadful Threatenings, every where so
dispersed up and down in the Book of God, but that when we are slow and dull
and drowsy, the Spirit may by these, as by so many goads, rowze us, and make
us start into Duty? Such a spiritual sloth has benumbed us, that without this
quickening, we should not be diligent in the Work of the Lord, and therefore
David prays, Psalm. 119.88. Quicken me, so shall I keep the Testimonies of thy
Mouth, but yet it is also the word it self that quickens us to the Obedience of
the word, Psalm. 119.50. Thy word has quickened me. And indeed, if you can come
from reading the word, that so abounds with Promises, with Threatenings, with
rational Arguments, with pathetick Expostulations, winning Insinuations,
importunate Entreaties, heroic Examples propounded to our Imitation, with all
the persuasive Art and Rhetoric that becomes the Majesty of the great God to
use; if you can read this word, and yet find from it no warmth of Affection, no
quickening to Duty; let me tell you, you either read it without attending to
it, or else attend without believing it. It is therefore no discouragement from
searching and studying the Scriptures, that its commands be many and difficult,
for it directs you whither to go for promised strength, and the more you
converse with it, the more will you find your hearts quickened to a due
Obedience of it. That Is the first Answer.

But then secondly, Whereas many think that it is better not to know, than not
to practice; we must here distinguish of Ignorance, which is of too kinds,
either invincible, or else affected: Invincible ignorance is such as is
conjoined with, and proceeds from an utter impossibility of right information,
and it arises only from two things.

First, Absolute want of necessary Instruction: or,

Secondly, Want of natural capacity to receive it.

Affected Ignorance, is an ignorance under the means of Knowledge, and always
arises from the neglect, or contempt of them. Such is the ignorance of those
who do, or may live where the Gospel is preached, and where by pains and
industry they may arrive to the knowledge of the truth.

Now here for ever to answer this Objection, and to show you how necessary
knowledge is, I shall lay down these two particulars.

First, I grant indeed, that unpracticed knowledge is a far greater sin than
invincible Ignorance, and exposes to a much sorer Condemnation. Hell Fire
burns with Rage, and meets with fuel fully prepared for it, when God dooms unto
it an head full of Light, and an heart full of Lusts. Those who know God's
will, but do it not, do but carry a torch with them to Hell, to fire that Pile
that must for ever burn them. We have a common Proverb. That knowledge is no
Burden: But believe it, if your knowledge in the Scripture be merely
Speculative, and overborn by the violence of unruly Lusts; this whole Word will
be no otherwise to you, than the burden of the Law, as the Prophets speak, a
Burden that will lie insupportably heavy upon you for ever. Better far you
were born under Barbarism in some dark Corner of the Earth, where the least
gleame of Gospel Light never shone, and where the name of Christ was never
mentioned, than to have this weighty Book, a Book which you have read and
known, hung about you to sink you infinitely deeper in the Burning Lake, than a
Millstone hung about you can do in the midst of the Sea. What St. Peter speaks
of Apostates, 2 Pet. 2.21. is but too well applicable to the knowing Sinner. It
had been better for them not to have known the way of Righteousness, than after
they have known it, to turn aside from the Commandments delivered to them. How?
Better not to have known it? Why, is there any possibility to escape the
Condemnation of Hell without the knowledge of the way of Righteousness revealed
in the Scriptures? No, Damnation had been unavoidable without this knowledge;
yet it had been better they had not known it. For here is the Hyperbole of
their Misery; better they had been Damned than to have known these Truths, and
this rule of Righteousness, and yet turn from the Obedience and practice of it.
O fearful state! O dreadful doom! when a simple and genuine damnation shall be
reckoned a gain and favor in comparison of that exquisite one which God will
with all his Wisdom prepare, and all his power inflict on those who knowing the
righteous Judgment of God, that they who commit such things are worthy of
Death, do notwithstanding, persevere in them, He that knew his Masters will and
did it not, shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke 12.47. And, if I had not
come and spoken unto them, they had not had Sin, but now they have no Cloak for
their Sins, says our Savior, John, 15.22. The Sin and punishment of those who
are invincibly ignorant, is as nothing compared to what the knowing Sinners lie
under.

But do not flatter your selves, your ignorance is not invincible. Are you not
called to the knowledge of Christ? Do you not read or hear the Scriptures? Do
you not enjoy Gospel Ordinances and Ministry? May you not, if you will be but
diligent and industrious, understand what you are ignorant of? Certainly there
is nothing that can prove your ignorance invincible, unless it be your
obstinacy, that you will not be prevailed with to be instructed by all the
means of Instruction. Your Ignorance must therefore be affected. Well then
attend unto

The second particular. Affected Ignorance is a greater Sin, and will be more
sorely punished at the day of Judgment, than unpractised knowledge. This kind
of ignorance is so far from being pleadable as an excuse, that it is an
aggravation of Men's guilt, and will be so of their Condemnation. There be but
two things that complete a Christian, Knowledge and Practice. Both these God
does strictly require. Knowledge may be without practice, but the practice of
Godliness cannot be without knowledge. God, I say, requires them both. Now
Judge ye which is the greater Sinner, he that labors after knowledge, though
he neglect practice, or he that neglects them both: He that fulfills some part
of God's will, or he that fulfills nothing of it. Certainly in your own
Judgment, this latter deserves to be doubly punished; once for not doing his
duty, and again for not knowing it when he might. Truly it is but just, and
righteous that God should with the highest disdain and indignation, say unto
them, Depart from me, ye Cursed, I know you not, since they have audaciously
said unto him, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. The
Apostle, speaking of God's patience toward Heathens, who were invincibly
ignorant of the truth, tells us, Acts 17.30. That the times of this ignorance
(and yet an ignorance it was that put them upon no less than brutish Idolatry)
God winked at. Ignorant persons, in ignorant times, whilst as yet the World
was destitute of the means of knowledge, and darkness overspread the face of
it, God connived and winked at. But ignorant persons in knowing times, God does
not wink at but frown upon. I am the more earnest in pressing this, because I
perceive that vile and rotten principle, unworthy of a Christian who is a Child
of light and of the day, is taken up by many, That it is no matter how little
we know, if we do but practice what we know. What a cheat has the Devil put
upon them! Has not God commanded you to know more, as well as to practice what
you know? Is it likely you should practice what you know upon God's command,
who will not upon his command increase your knowledge? And yet this is the
usual Plea of profane Men. Ask them why they frequent the public Ordinances so
seldom, they will tell you, they know more by one Sermon, than they can
practice. But how can such make Conscience of practicing, who make none of
knowing, though the same God has enjoined them both? Yea, though they cannot
practice what they know, yet let me tell them, that for those who live under
the means of Grace, and may be instructed if they will, it may be as great a
Sin to omit a duty out of neglect of knowing it, as out of neglect of doing it;
yea and much greater. We should our selves Judge that Servant, who while we are
speaking to him, stops his Ears on purpose that he might not hear what we
command him; we should, I say, Judge him worthy of more stripes, than he who
gives diligent ear to our commands, although he will not obey them So it is in
this Case. Thou who stoppest thine Ears, and will not so much as hear what the
will of thy Lord and Master is, deservest much more punishment, than he who
takes pains to know it, although he does it not. It is damnable not to give God
the service that he requires. But O Insolence! not to give God thy Lord and
Master so much as the hearing? Has God sent Man into the World, and sent the
Scriptures after, as Letters of instruction, what we should do for him here,
and will it think thou be a sufficient excuse when thou returnest to thy
Lord, that it is true thou had instructions, but never opened'st them, never
looked'st into them? What a fearful contempt is this cast upon the great God,
never so much as to enquire what his will is? Whether or no he commands that
which is fit and reasonable for us to perform? And therefore refuse not to
search and study the Scriptures, upon pretense that the knowledge of what you
cannot fulfill, will but aggravate your Sin and Condemnation. For be assured of
it, greater Sin, and sorer Condemnation can no Man have, than he who neglects
the means of knowledge, thereby to disoblige himself from practice. And again
the Scriptures were given to assist us in the performance of those duties which
it requires from us. They do not only inform the judgment, but quicken the will
and affections, and strengthen the whole Soul to its duty. And this is in
answer to the first Objection.

Secondly, Some will say the reading of the Scriptures possesses them with
strange fears, and fills them with incredible terrors. It raises up such
dreadful Apparitions of Hell, and the wrath of God, as makes them a terror to
themselves.

To this I Answer, First, It may be thy condition is such as requires it.
Possibly thou art in a state of wrath, and would thou not be under the
apprehensions of it? Thou art under the guilt of thy Sins, and then no wonder
that the voice of God should be terrible unto thee. It is most unreasonable to
hate the word, as Ahab hated Micaiah, because it prophesies no good concerning
thee. Alas! What good can it speak, as long as thou thy self continuest Evil?

Secondly, It is not so much the Scripture, as thine own evil Conscience that
haunts and terrifies thee. When thou read that dreadful Threatening, Ezekiel.
18.4. The Soul that sins it shall die, there were nothing of terror in it,
did not thy guilty Conscience witness against thee, that thou art the Man: It Is
this that turns and levels all God's Artillery against thee. Get therefore a
Conscience pacified upon good Grounds, and the very threatening of the Word will
speak to thee, not so much terror from the dreadfulness of the Wrath, and
Condemnation denounced, as Joy, that thou have escaped it.

Thirdly, It may be, the Word of God by working in thee, the Spirit of fear, is
preparing thee for the Spirit of Adoption; for that usually ushers in this. We
find the Jailer trembling, before we find him rejoicing: There were mighty and
rending Winds, Earthquakes, and Fire, all Terrible; before these came the
still voice, in which God was, 1 Kings 19.12. So God in Convictions many times
prepares the way by Thunders, and Earthquakes, by the Thundering of his Word,
and the Trembling of our own Consciences, before he comes to us in the still
and sweet voice of Peace and Comfort. And certainly they are much more afraid
than hurt, whom God by his Terrors thus frights into Heaven.

But, Thirdly, Some may still say, their Fears are so strong that they will
drive them into Desperation, or Distraction, if they longer pore on those
dreadful things, the Scripture contains.

I answer, there is not one line or syllable in the whole Book of God that
gives the least ground for Despair. Nay, there are the most supporting Comforts
a poor Fearful Trembling Soul can desire; Come unto me all that are weary and
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Come unto me and I will in no wise cast
you out, return unto the Lord and he will abundantly Pardon, Isaiah 55.7. I,
even I, am he that blots out and forgets your Sins; and innumerable such like.
Now if Men will only take the Sword of the Spirit to wound them, and not also
the Balm of the Spirit to heal them, they may through their own fault,
especially when they read the Scriptures with the Devil's Commentaries, fret
themselves into Despair.

Fourthly, Some may say, certainly it cannot be thus necessary that the word of
Christ should dwell thus richly and abundantly in all Christians. It is
requisite indeed for Ministers, whose calling it is to Teach and Instruct
others, that they should have this abundance of Scripture dwelling in them; but
for us who are to receive the Law at their Mouth, a competent knowledge in the
Fundamentals of Religion may well be sufficient. We know that Christ is the Son
of God, that he came into the World to save Sinners, and that if we would be
saved by him, we must believe in him, and such chief points of Christianity
which are sufficient to Salvation.

To this I answer, First, God may well expect a more plentiful measure of the
Word to dwell in Ministers; because it is not only their General, but
particular calling to peruse and study it. There is therefore a twofold
fullness, a fullness of the private Christian, and a fullness of the treasurer
or steward, to whose charge the Oracles of God are committed, and who is to
communicate Knowledge to the People. This being the Minister's Office, it is
his Duty especially to abound and be enriched in the knowledge of the Scripture.

But Secondly, Wherefore must the word of Christ dwell so richly in Ministers,
is it for themselves only, or is it to instruct their Flock? What? And can it
be necessary for them to Teach, and yet unnecessary for you to Learn? Are they
bound to search into the depth of Gospel Mysteries to inform you of them, and
is it enough for you only to know the first Principles and Rudiments?
Certainly, whatsoever God requires the Minister to Teach, that he requires you
to Learn. Now would you your selves Judge the Minister to have sufficiently
discharged his Duty, that should only in the general preach, that we are all
Sinners; that Christ the Son of God came into the World to save us, that the
Glory of Heaven, and the Torments of Hell, shall be the rewards of Obedience,
or Disobedience? If these few absolutely necessary and fundamental Truths were
all, you might well think the Ministry to be a very easy, or a very needless
Office.

If then it is our Duty to reveal to you the whole Counsel of God, and to
withhold nothing from you of all those Mysteries which the Scripture contains,
whereof some give Life, others Light, some are Vital, others Ornamental; you
cannot with Reason but conclude, that if we are obliged to Teach these things,
you also are obliged to learn and know them.

Thirdly, It is a most destructive Principle that many have through Sloth and
Laziness taken up, That a little knowledge will suffice to bring them to
Heaven. Certainly God would never have revealed so many deep and profound
Mysteries in his Word, if it were not necessary they should be known and
believed. Shall we think all the rest of the Bible superfluous, except a few
plain practical Texts? What God has recorded in the Scripture, is written for
our Instruction. It Is true if we have not the means of instruction, nor are in
a possibility of attaining it, a less measure of knowledge, answered by a
Conscientious practice may suffice for our Salvation. But for us we have line
upon line, and precept upon precept, for us to satisfy our selves with a few
of the common Principles, slighting the rest as nice and unnecessary points,
for us to neglect knowledge, argues defect of Grace. For wheresoever true Grace
is, there will be a most earnest endeavor to grow daily in both; and yet
multitudes every where, even of those who abhor grosser Sins, as Swearing,
Drunkenness and the like, yet take up with a few Notions of Religion that all
are Sinners and all must perish, unless Christ save them, etc. This they knew,
as soon as they knew any thing; and more than this, they will not know: They
will not trouble their heads with any farther discoveries, nor look deep into
the Mysteries of Godliness; contenting themselves that they have, as they
think, knowledge enough to bring them to Heaven. Let me tell them, that though
where there is not means of knowledge, a little may suffice for Salvation; yet
where God does afford plentiful means, the knowledge of these very things
becomes necessary to them, which others might safely be ignorant of. This is in
answer to the 4th. Objection.

Fifthly, Some may object that they have found by Experience, that the study of
Scripture has many times made them the worse, it has alarmed their Lusts, and
put them in an Uproar. Such and such Suits were quiet, till they read in the
Word a command against them; therefore they are discouraged and think it best
to forbear the study of the Scripture, since they find that by forbidding Sin,
it only rowseth and awakens it.

First, I answer, First this was St. Paul's very Case, Romans 7.8. Sin taking
occasion by the Command, wrought in me all manner of Concupiscence; now this
effect is merely accidental, and is not to be imputed unto the Holy Word of
God, but to the wicked Heart of Man, which takes an hint (so desperately
corrupt is it) from God's forbidding Sin, to put it self in Mind of committing
it.

Secondly, Thou complainest that the Word exciteth to Corruptions, but it does
it no otherwise than the Sun draws Smoke, and stink out of a Dunghill. It does
increase but unhappily excite them. The very same Lusts lay hid in their Hearts
before. There they lay like so many Vipers and Serpents asleep till the Light
and Warmth of the Word makes them stir and crawl about. And this Advantage thou
may make of it, that when thy Corruptions swarm thick about thee, upon the
disturbance the Law of God has made among them, thou may thence see what a
wicked Heart and Nature thou have, how much Filth and Mud there lies at the
bottom of it, which presently rises upon the first stirring. This may make
thee vile in thine own Eyes, and deeply humbled under the sad and serious
Consideration of thy indwelling Sin. It Is the very use the Apostle makes in the
same Case. Romans 7.24. O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
Body of this Death! When Humors are in Motion, we soon perceive what is the
state of our Body, and when Corruptions are once stirred, we may thereby easily
know the State and Condition of our Souls.

Thirdly, The same Word that does thus occasionally stir up Sin, is the best
means to beat it down. You may perceive by this, there is somewhat in the Word
that is extremely contrary to their Sins, since they do so rise and arm against
it, their great Enemy is upon them, and this alarm that they take, is but
before their overthrow. It may be the Mud is only stirred that it might be cast
out, and their Hearts cleansed from it. Be not discouraged therefore, for there
is no Means in the World so apposite to the destruction and subduing of Sin as
the Scripture, though at first it may seem instead of subduing of Sins to
strengthen them.

Sixthly, Many are discouraged from studying the Scriptures, because their
Memories are so treacherous and unfaithful they can retain nothing; when they
have read the Scripture, and would recollect what they have read, they can give
no account of it either to themselves or others. Nothing abides upon them, and
therefore they think it were as good give over as thus continually pour Water
into a Sieve, and inculcate Truths upon such a leaky Memory, where all runs
out. This is indeed the Complaint of many. But,

First, This should put thee on a more frequent and diligent study of the
Scripture than discourage thee from it. More pains will supply this Defect,
thou must the oftener prompt, and the oftener examine thy Self, the more
forgetful thou art. Memory is the Soul's Steward, and if thou find it
unfaithful, call it the oftener to account. Be still following it with Line upon
Line, and Precept upon Precept, and continually instill somewhat into it. A
Vessel set under the fall of a Spring, cannot leak faster than it is supplied.
A constant dropping of this Heavenly Doctrine into the Memory, will keep it
that though it be leaky, yet it never shall be empty.

Secondly, Scripture Truths, when they do not enrich the Memory, yet they may
purify the Heart. We must not measure the Benefit we receive from the Word
according to what of it remains, but according to what effect it leaves behind.
Lightning you know than which nothing sooner vanishes away, yet it often
breaks and melts the hardest and most firm Bodies in its sudden Passage. Such
is the irresistible force of the Word; the Spirit often darts it through us; it
seems but like a flash and gone, and yet it may break and melt down our hard
Hearts before it, when it leaves no impression at all upon our Memories. I have
heard of one who returning from an affecting Sermon highly commended it to
some, and being demanded what he remembered of it, answered, truly I remember
nothing at all, but only while I heard it, it made me resolve to live better
than ever I have done, and so by God's Grace I will. Here was now a Sermon lost
to the Memory, but not to the Affections. To the same Purpose, I have somewhere
read a story of one that complained to an aged Holy-Man, that he was much
discouraged from reading the Scripture, because his Memory was so slippery he
could fasten nothing upon it that he read. The old Hermet (for so as I remember
he was described) bid him take an earthen Pitcher and fill it with Water; when
he had done it, he bid him empty it again, and wipe it clean that nothing
should remain in it, which when the other had done, and wondered to what this
tended; now says he, though there be nothing of the Water remaining to it, yet
the Pitcher is cleaner than it was before; so though thy Memory retain nothing
of the word thou read, yet thy Heart is the cleaner for its very passage
through.

Thirdly, Never fear your Memory, only pray for good and pious Affections.
Affection to the truths we read or hear, makes the Memory retentive of them.
Most Men's Memories are like Jett, or Electrical Bodies, that attract and
hold-fast only straws or Feathers, or such vain and light things; discourse to
them the Affairs of the World, or some idle and romantic story, their Memories
retain this as faithfully as if it were engraven on leaves of Brass. Whereas
the great important truths of the Gospel, the great Mysteries of Heaven, and
concernments of Eternity, leave no more impression upon them, than words on the
Air in which they are spoken; whence is this, but only that the one sort work
themselves into the Memory through the interest they have got in the Affections
which the other cannot do. Had we but the same delight in Heavenly Objects, did
we but receive the Truth in the love of it, and mingle it with Faith in the
hearing, this would fix that Volatileness and Flittiness of our Memories, and
make every truth as indelible, as it is necessary. That Is in Answer to the 6th.
Objection.

Seventhly, others complain that the Scripture is obscure and difficult to be
understood; they may as well, and with as good success, attempt to spy out
what lies at the Center of the Earth, as search into the deep and hidden
Mysteries, which no humane understanding can fathom or comprehend. And this
discourageth them.

To this I answer First, it is no wonder if there be such profound depths in the
word of God, since it is a System and Compendium of his Infinite and
unsearchable Wisdom, that Wisdom which from the beginning of the World has
been hid in God. Those deep Truths which your understanding cannot reach,
require your humble Veneration.

Secondly, The Scripture is suited to every Capacity. It is (as it is commonly
expressed) a Ford wherein a Lamb may wade, and an Elephant swim; and herein is
the infinite Wisdom of God seen, in wreathing together plain Truths with
obscure, that he might gain the more Credit to his Word, by the one instructing
the ignorance of the weakest, by the other puzling and confounding the
understanding of the wisest. This also adds a Beauty and Ornament to the
Scripture.

As the Beauty of the World is set off by a graceful variety of Hills and
Valleys, so is it in the Scripture. There are sublime Truths, that the most
aspiring reason of Man cannot overtop, and there are more plain and easy
Truths in which the weakest Capacity may converse with Delight and
Satisfaction. No Man is offended with his Garden, for having a shady thicket in
it, no more should we be offended with the word of God, that among so many fair
and open Walks, we here and there meet with a Thicket that the Eye of Humane
Reason cannot look through.

Thirdly, Those Truths that are absolutely necessary to Salvation, are as
plainly without either Obscurity or Ambiguity recorded in the Scripture as if
they were (as the Mahumetans think concerning their Alcoran) written with Ink
made of Light, there is the necessity of Faith in Jesus Christ, of repentance
for dead works, of an holy and mortified Life, so clearly set down, that scarce
have there any been found so impudent as to raise Controversies about them, and
is it not peevish to quarrel at the word for being obscure in those things,
which if thou have used thy utmost Diligence to understand, the ignorance of
them shall not at all prejudice thy Salvation? Bless God, rather that he has
so clearly revealed the necessary and practical Duties of a Christian Life,
that those are not involved in any mystical or obscure Intimations, but thou
may without doubt or dispute, know what is of absolute necessity to be either
believed or practiced in order to Salvation. Be assured of this, that what with
all thy Labor and Diligence thou can not understand thou need not, and
what is needful, is plain and obvious, and thou may easily understand it.

Fourthly, the Scripture is obscure, but has not God offered us sufficient
helps for the unfolding of it? Have you not the promise of his Spirit to
illuminate you? 1 Cor. 2.10. God has revealed them to us by his Spirit, for
the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God. Have we not his
Minister, whose Office it is to instruct us, and lead us into the inmost Sense
of the Scriptures? Nay, have we not the Scripture it self, which is the best
interpreter of its own meaning; usually if it speak more darkly in one place,
it speaks the same truth more clearly in another. Now compare Scripture with
Scripture, you will find it holds a Light unto its self. The oftener you read,
and the more you ponder on those passages that are abstruse, the more you will
find them clear up to your understanding. So that neither is this any
reasonable discourgement from studying the Holy Scriptures.

Eighthly, Others may say, they are doubtful, because they see many of those
who have been most Conversant in the Scripture, how they have been perverted
and carried aside into damnable Errors, and yet still have pleaded Scripture
for the defense of them.

I answer, True, the Devil has in these our days busied himself to bring a
reproach upon Scripture, through the whimsies and giddiness of those who have
pretended most acquaintance in it. But let not this be any discouragement, for
this arises not directly from the influence the Scripture has on them, which
is the rule of truth only; but from the pride and self conceit of a few
Notionists, who wrest it to their own Perdition. And though they boast much of
Scripture to countenance their Opinions; yet Scripture misunderstood and
misapplyed is not Scripture. Indeed there is no other way to discern truth from
Error, but only by the Scripture rightly understood, and there is no way
rightly to understand it, but diligently to search it.

But to say that therefore we must not read the Scripture because some wrest it
to their own Destruction, is alike reasonable, as to say that therefore we must
not Eat nor Drink, because that some eat to Glutony, and others drink to
Giddiness and Madness. The Apostle St. Peter tells us, Epist. 1 Chap. 3. v. 16.
that in St. Paul's Epistles there were some things hard to be understood, which
the unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Sriptures, to their
own destruction. Shall we therefore conclude, that neither his Epistle nor any
other of the Scriptures should be read by us; because that in some, instead of
Nourishment, they have occasioned only Wind, Flatulency and ill humors? If
this had been his purpose, it had certainly been very easy for him to have
said, Because they are hard to be understood, and many wrest them to their own
destruction, therefore beware that you read them not. But in stead of this, he
draws another inference, verse 17. Ye therefore beloved, beware, least ye also
being led away with the Errors of the Wicked fall from your own stedfastness,
but grow in grace and in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. He says not,
beware that you read them not, but, beware how you read them: This is the true
Apostolical Caution, which tends not to drive us from the Scriptures, but to
make us more studious and inquisitive in them, least we also be perverted by
the cunning craftiness of Men, who lie in wait to deceive. And this the
Primitive Parents thought the best and surest means, to preserve their People
from Error and Seduction. It were almost endless to recite to you those many
passages wherein they do most Pathetically exhort all, of all Ranks and
Conditions, of each Sex, of all Ages, to a diligent perusal of the Holy
Scriptures. And so far were they from taking it up in a Language unknown to the
Vulgar, or debarring the Laity from Reading it, that the Translations of it
into the common Tongue of each Country were Numerous, and their Exhortations
scarce more vehement and earnest in any thing, than that the People would
employ their time and thoughts in revolving them. It is therefore a most
certain sign, that that Church has false wares to put off, which is of nothing
more careful than to darken the Shop. And assuredly the wresting the Scriptures
by some who read them, cannot occasion the Destruction of more, than that
damnable Idolatry, and those damnable Heresies have done, which have been
brought into, and are generally owned and practiced by the Church of Rome,
through the not reading of them.

Thus you see (as it was in Josiah's time) how much dust and Rubbish this Book
of the Law lies under. I have endeavored to remove it. And shall now proceed
to those Arguments, that may persuade you to a diligent search and perusal of
the Scriptures. The Jews indeed were so exact, or rather Superstitious in this,
that he was judged a despiser of those Sacred Oracles, who did not readily know
how often every Letter of the Alphabet occurred in them. This preciseness God
has made use of to deliver down his word to us, unvaried and uncorrupted. It
is not such a scrupulous search of the Scripture, I now exhort you to: but as
God has left it to us a rich Depositum, a dear pledge of his Love and care, so
we should diligently attend to a rational and profitable study of it.

There are but two things in the general that commend any writing to us, either
that it discovers knowledge, or directs practice; that it informs the Judgment,
or reforms the Life. Both of these are eminently the Characters of this Book of
God. And therefore David tells us, Psalm. 19.7. The Law of God converts the
Soul, and makes wise the simple. It is a light not only to our heads, but it is
a Lamp unto our Feet, and a light unto our paths, Psalm. 119.105. Let us
consider it as to both.

First, In point of knowledge, as it perfects the understanding, and so it will
appear in sundry particulars how excellent a study it is. For

First, The Scripture discovers unto us the knowledge of those truths that the
most improved natural Reason could never sift out; and are intelligible only by
Divine Revelation. God has Composed two Books, by the diligent study of which,
we may come to the knowledge of himself. The Book of the Creatures, and the
Book of the Scriptures. The Book of the Creatures is written in those great
Letters of Heaven and Earth, the Air and Sea, and by these we may spell out
somewhat of God. He made them for our instruction, as well as our service.
There is not a Creature that God has breathed abroad upon the face of the
Earth, but it Reads us Lectures, of his infinite Power and Wisdom. So that it
is no absurdity to say that they are all the Works of his mouth so they are all
the works of his Hands. The whole World is a speaking workmanship, Romans 1.20.
The invisible things of God, are clearly seen by the things that are made, even
his eternal Power and Godhead. And indeed when we seriously consider how. God
has poised the Earth in the midst of the Air, and the whole World in the midst
of a vast and boundless nothing; how he has hung out those glorious lights of
Heaven, the Sun, the Moon, and Stars, and made paths in the Sky for their
several courses, how he has laid the Sea on heaps, and so girt it in, that it
may possibly overlook, but not overflow the Land, when we view the Variety,
Harmony, and Law of the Creation, our Reason must needs be very short, if we
cannot from these collect the infinite Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of the
Creator. So much of God as belong to these two great Attributes of Creator and
Governor of the World, the Book of Nature may plainly discover to us. But then
there are other more retired, and reserved Notions of God, other truths that
nearly concern our selves and our eternal Salvation to know and believe, which
nature could never give the least glimpse to discover. What Signature is there
stamped upon any of the Creatures of a Trinity in Unity, of the eternal
Generation, or temporal Carnation of the Son of God? What Creature could inform
us of our first fall, and guilt contracted by it? Where can we find the Copy of
the Covenant of Works, or of grace printed upon any of the Creatures? All the
great Sages of the World, though they were Nature's Secretaries, and ransacked
its abstrusest mysteries, yet all their Learning and Knowledge, could not
discover the Sacred Mystery of a Crucified Savior. These are truths which
Nature is so far from searching out, that it can scarce receive them when
revealed. 1. Corinthians. 2.14. The natural Man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, neither can he know them, because they are Spiritually
discerned. The light that can reveal these, must break immediately from Heaven
it self. And so it did upon the Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles; the
Penmen of the Holy Scriptures.

And if it were their singular Privilege, that the Holy Ghost should descend
into their breasts, and so possess them with Divine inspirations, that what
they spoke, or wrote, became Oracular, how little less is ours; since the
Scriptures reveal to us the very same truths which the Spirit revealed to them.
God heretofore spoke in them, and now he speaks by them unto us. Their
Revelations are become ours; the only difference is, that what God taught them
by extraordinary inspiration, the very same truths he teaches us in the
Scripture, by the ordinary, illumination of his Spirit. Here, therefore whilst
we diligently converse in the Book of God, we enjoy the privilege of Prophets.
The same word of God which came unto them, comes also unto us; and that without
those severe preparations, and strong agonies, which sometimes they underwent,
before God would inspire them with the knowledge of his Heavenly truth. That is
the first Motive and Argument.

Secondly, The knowledge which the Scripture teaches, is for the matter of it
the most sublime and losty in the World. All other sciences are but poor and
beggarly Elements, if compared with this. What does the Naturalist, but only
busy himself in digging a little drossie knowledge, out of the Entrails of the
Earth. The Astronomer, who ascends highest, mounts no higher than the
Celestial Bodies, the Stars and Planets; which are but the outworks of Heaven.
But the Scripture pierces much farther, and lets us into Heaven it self. There
it discovers the Majesty and Glory of God upon his Throne; the Eternal Son of
God sitting at his right hand, making a prevailing and Authoritative
intercession for us: The glittering train of Cherubims and Seraphims, an
innumerable company of Angels, and the Spirits of Just Men made perfect. So
that indeed when you have this Book laid open before you, you have Heaven it
self, and all the inconceivable glories of it laid open to your view. What can
be more sublime than the nature of God? And yet here we have it so plainly
described by all its most glorious Attributes and Perfections, that the
Scripture does but beam forth light to an Eye of Faith, whereby it may be
enabled to see him who is invisible. But if we consider those Gospel Mysteries
the Scripture relates, the Hypostatical Union of the Divine, and Humane Nature
in Christ's incarnation, the Mystical Union of our persons to his, by our
believing, that the Son of God should be Substituted in the stead of guilty
Sinners; that he who knew no sin, should be made a Sacrifice for sin, and the
Justice of God become reconciled to Man, through the blood of God: these are
Mysteries so infinitely profound as are enough to puzzle a whole College of
Angels. Now these the Scripture propounds unto us, not only to pose, but to
perfect our understanding. For that little knowledge we can attain unto in
these things, is far more excellent than the most comprehensive knowledge of
all things else in the World. And where our scanty apprehensions fall short of
fathoming, these deep mysteries, the Apostle has taught us to seek it out with
an, (...), Romans 11.33. O the depth of the Riches, both of the Knowledge and
Wisdom of God! how unreasearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding
out!

Thirdly, The Scripture is an inexhaustible Fountain of Knowledge, the more you
draw from it, the more still springs up. It is a deep Mine, and the farther you
search into it, still the richer you find it. It is tedious to read the works
and writings of Men often over, because we are soon at the bottom of what they
deliver, and our understanding has nothing new to refresh it. But in reading
the Scripture it fares with us as it did with those whom Christ miraculously
fed, the bread multiplied under their Teeth, and increased in the very chewing
of it. So here, while we ruminate and chew on the truths of the Scripture, they
multiply and rise up thicker under our meditation. One great cause of the
neglect that many are guilty of in reading the Holy Scripture, is a fear that
they shall but meet with the same things again, which they have already read
and known; and this they account tedious and irksome. Indeed if they read it
only Superficially and slightly, it will be so. But those who fix their minds
to ponder and meditate upon the word, find new truths arising up to their
understanding, which they never before discovered. Look as it is in a Starry
night, if you cast your Eyes upon many spaces of the Heavens, at the first
glance perhaps you shall discover no Stars there; yet if you continue to look
earnestly and fixedly, some will emerge to your view, that were before hid and
concealed: So is it with the Holy Scriptures. If we only glance curiously upon
them, no wonder we discover no more Stars, no more glorious truths beaming out
their light to our Understanding. St. Augustine, found this so experimentally
true, that he tells us in his third Epistle, that though he should with better
capacity, and greater diligence, study all his Life time, from the beginning of
his Childhood to decrepit Age nothing else but the Holy Scriptures; yet they
are so compacted, and thick set with truths, that he might daily learn
something, which before he knew not. God has as it were studied to speak
compendiously in the Scriptures. What a Miracle of brevity is it, that the
whole Duty of Man, relating both to God and his Neighbor, should be all
comprised in ten words? Not a word but were the sense of it drawn out, were
enough to fill whole Volumes, and therefore the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.96. I have
seen an end of all perfection, but thy Commandments are exceeding broad. When
we have attained the knowledge of those things that are absolutely necessary to
Salvation, there yet remain such depths of Wisdom, both in the manner of
Scripture expression, and in the mysteriousness of things expressed, that after
our utmost industry, still there will be left new truths to become the
discovery of a new search.

Fourthly, The Scripture exhibits to us that knowledge which is necessary to
Eternal Salvation. This is Life Eternal to know thee, the only true God and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, John 17.3. And this knowledge the Scriptures
alone can afford us, John, 5.39. So 2 Timothy 3.15. We need not therefore enquire
after blind traditions, or expect any whimsical Enthusiasms: the written word
contains whatsoever is necessary to be known in order to Eternal Salvation, and
whosoever is wise above what is written, is wise only in impertinences. Now
has God contracted whatever was necessary for us to know, and summed it up in
one Book, and shall not we be diligent and industrious in studying that which
does so necessarily concern us? Other knowledge is only for the adorning and
embellishment of Nature; this is for the necessity of Life, of Life Eternal. I
have before spoken enough concerning the necessity of knowledge unto Salvation,
and therefore shall not farther enlarge. Therefore as St. Peter said to Christ,
Lord whither shall we go, thou have the words of Eternal Life: So let us Answer
whatsoever may seem to call us off from the diligent study of the Scriptures,
Whither shall we go, to this we must cleave, with this we will converse, for
here alone are the words of Eternal Life.

Fifthly, The Knowledge that the Scripture discloseth is of undoubted
Certainty, and perpetual Truth; it depends not upon Probabilities or
Conjectures, but the infallible Authority of Christ himself; he has dictated
it, for whom it is impossible to lie. The rule of our Veracity or Truth, is the
conformity of our Speech to the existency of Things; but divine Truth and
Veracity has no other Rule besides the Will of him that speaks it. He must
needs speak infallible Truth, who speaks things into their beings, such is the
omnipotent Speech of God. Whatsoever he declares, is therefore true, because he
declares it. Never matter how strange and impossible Scripture-Mysteries may
seem to Flesh and Blood, to the corrupt and captious understandings of natural
Men; when the word of God has undertaken for the Truth, it is as much impiety
to doubt of them, as it is Folly to question the reality of what we see with
our very Eyes. Nay the information of our Senses, what we see, what we hear,
what we feel, is not so certain, as the truth of those things which God reveals
and testifies in the Scriptures. And therefore the Apostle 2 Pet. 1.18, 19.
Speaking of that Miraculous Voice that sounded from Heaven. Matthew. 17.5. This
is my beloved Son in whom I am well Pleased. We, says the Apostle, heard this
Voice when we were with him in the Holy Mount, but we have also a more sure
word of Prophecy; or as the Greek may well be rendered, We account more sure the
word of Prophecy, unto which ye do well, that ye take heed. What a more sure
word than a Voice from Heaven? When God himself shall vocally bear witness to
the Truth? Yes, we have a more sure Word, and that is the Word of Prophecy,
recorded in the Old Testament. And hence it will follow, that because the
Prophecies concerning Christ, may seem somewhat obscure in Comparison with this
audible Voice from Heaven; therefore the testimony of obscure Scripture, is to
be preferred before the testimony of clear Sense. Now therefore if you would
know things beyond all danger, either of Falsehood or Hesitation, be Conversant
in the Scripture, where we may take all for certain upon the Word and Authority
of that God, who neither can deceive, nor be deceived.

Sixthly, The Scripture alone gives us the true and unerring Knowledge of our
Selves. Man that busies himself in knowing all things else, is of nothing more
ignorant than of himself, the Eye that beholds other things, cannot see its own
shape; and so the Soul of Man, whereby he understands other objects, is usually
ignorant of its own Concernments. Now as the Eye that cannot see it self
directly, may see it self reflexively in a Glass; so God has given us his
Scripture, which St. James compares to a Glass, James 1.23. and holds this
before the Soul, wherein is represented our true State and Idea.

There is a fourfold state of Man, that we could never have attained to know,
but by the Scriptures.

His state of Integrity. His state of Apostasy. His state of Restitution. His
state of Glory.
The Scripture alone can reveal to us, what we were in our Primitive
Constitution. Naturally, Holy bearing the Image and Similitude of God, and
enjoying his Love, free from all inward perturbations or outward Miseries;
having all the Creatures subject to us, and what is much more, our selves.

What we were in our state of Apostasy or Destitution, despoiled of all our
Primitive Excellencies, dispossessed of all the Happiness we enjoyed, and of
all hopes of any for the future; liable every Moment to the revenge of Justice,
and certain once to feel it.

What we are in our state of Restitution, through Grace, begotten again to a
lively hope, Adopted into the Family of Heaven, Redeemed by the Blood of
Christ, Sanctified and Sealed by the Holy Spirit, restored to the Favor and
Friendship of God, recovering the initials of his Image upon our Souls here on
Earth, and expecting the perfection of it in Heaven.

What we shall be in our final State of Glory, clothed with Light, Crowned
with Stars, inebriated with pure spiritual Joys. We shall see God as he is,
know him as we are known by him, love him ardently, converse with him
eternally, yea a state, it will be so infinitely happy, that 'twill leave us
nothing to hope for.

This Fourfold state of Man the Scripture does evidently express. Now these
are such things as could never have entered into our Hearts to have imagined,
had not the word of God described them to us, and thereby instructed us in the
knowledge of our selves, as well as of God and Christ.

Now let us put these six particulars together. The Scripture instructs us in
the knowledge of such things as are intelligible only by divine Revelation, it
teaches us the most sublime and lofty Truths, it is a most inexhaustible
Fountain of Knowledge, the more we draw, the more still springs up; it teaches
that Knowledge that is necessary to Salvation. It is of undoubted certainty,
and perpetual Truth. And Lastly, it informs us in the knowledge of our Selves;
and certainly, if there be any thirst in you after Knowledge, there needs no
more be spoken to persuade you to the diligent study of the Scripture, which is
a rich Store and Treasury of all Wisdom and Knowledge.

Thus we have seen how the Scriptures inform the Judgment. Let us now briefly
see how they reform the Life, and what practical influence they have upon the
Souls of Men. Now here the word of God has a mighty Operation, and that in
sundry particulars.

First, This is that word that convinces and humbles the stoutest and proudest
Sinners. There are two sorts of secure Sinners. Those who vaunt it in the
Confidence of their own Righteousness; and those who are secure through an
insensibility of their own Wickedness. Both these the word when it is set home
with Power, convinces, humbles, and brings to the Dust. It despoils the
Self-Justitiary of all that false Righteousness he once boasted of and trusted
to. I was alive once without the Law (says St. Paul) but when the Commandment
came, sin revived and I dyed, Romans 7.9. It awakens and alarms the senseless,
seared Sinner. How many have there been, that have scorned God, and despised
Religion, whom yet one curse or threat of this word has made to tremble and
fall down before the convincing Majesty and Authority of it?

Secondly, This is that word that sweetly comforts and raises them after their
Dejections; All other Applications to a wounded Spirit are improper and
impertinent. It Is only Scripture Consolation that can ease it. The leaves of
this Book are like the leaves of that Tree, Rev. 22. which were for the healing
of the Nations. The same Weapon that wounds must here work the cure.

Thirdly, This is that word that works the mighty change upon the heart in
Renovation. Take a Man that runs on in vile and desperate Courses, that sells
himself to do Iniquity, and commits all manner of Wickedness with Greediness,
and makes use of all the Arguments that reason can suggest; these seldom
reclaim any from their Debaucheries. Or if in some few they do reform the Life,
yet they can never change the heart. But now that which no other means can
effect, the Word of God can, Psalm. 19.7, The Law of God is perfect converting
the Soul.

Fourthly, This is that word that strengthens and arms the People of God to
endure the greatest temporal Evils, only in hope of that future reward which it
punishes.

Fifthly, This is that word that contains in it such a Collection of Rules and
Duties, that whosoever observes and obeys, shall in the end infallibly obtain
everlasting life. Though I can but just mention these Heads unto you, yet there
is enough in them to persuade you to be diligent in the Scriptures. In them
(says our Savior) ye think to have Eternal Life.

We are all of us guilty Malefactors; but God has been pleased to afford us
the Mercy of the Book: And what, shall we not so much as read for our Lives?

This is that Book according to which we must either stand or fall, be
acquitted or condemned Eternally. The unalterable Sentence of the last day will
pass upon us, as it is here recorded in this Scripture. Here we may beforehand
know our Doom, and what will become of us to all Eternity. He that believes
shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. It Is said, Rev.
20.12. That when the dead stood before God to be Judged, the Books were opened:
That is, the Book of Conscience, and the Book of the Scripture. Be persuaded to
open this Book, and to judge your selves out of it before the last day: It Is
not a sealed Book to you, you may there read what your present State is, and
foretell what your future will be. If it be a State of Sin and Wrath, search
farther; there are Directions how you may change this wretched State for a
better. If it be a State of Grace and Favor, there are Rules how to preserve
you in it. It Is a word suited to all Persons, all Occasions, all Exigencies. It
informs the Ignorant, strengthens the Weak, comforts the Disconsolate, supports
the Afflicted, relieves the Tempted, resolves the Doubtful, directs all to
those ways which lead to endless Happiness; where, as the Word of God has
dwelt richly in us, so we shall dwell for ever gloriously with God.

FINIS.

