A BLOW AT Profaneness, In a Description and a Rebuke of it, taken out of the
Right Reverend Bishop Hopkins Exposition of the Ten Commandments.
PRofaneness, is the slighting and neglecting of things Holy and Sacred.
Whosoever is guilty of this, let his outward Demeanor in the World, be as fair,
and as plausible as Morality and Hypocrisy can adorn it, yet he is a Profane
Person.

The Spiritual Sacred things, are,

First, God in his Nature and Essence. Whom we Profane when we entertain any
Blasphemous or Unworthy Thoughts of Him.

Secondly, God in his Name. Which we Profane, when we rashly in our trivial
Discourses, boult out that great and terrible Name, at which all the Powers of
Heaven and Hell tremble. It does sadly fore-bode the growing Profaneness of the
next Age, that Children be Taught or Suffered to call upon God in their Play,
before they be taught to call on him in their Prayers.

Thirdly, God in his Attributes. Which we Profane, when our Affections or
Actions are opposite or unsuitable. e. g. Our Unholiness profaneth his
Holiness. Our Despondence profaneth his Omnipotence. Our Hypocrisy profaneth
his Omniscience. Our Despair profaneth his Mercy. Our Presumption profaneth his
Justice. Our sinful Policy profaneth his Wisdom. Our Security notwithstanding
his Threatenings, and our Slothfulness notwithstanding his Promises, do profane
his Truth. Every Sin is a kind of Profaneness, a Contempt of the Excellencies
of God. How much more that which is sinned for nothing, and defieth his Wrath
and Justice without a Temptation?

What should tempt the Impious Buffoon to deride Religion? Travest the Holy
Scriptures? And turn whatsoever is Sacred and Venerable into Burlesque and
Drollery? And,

Fourthly, The Time God has set apart and Consecrated for his Service. Unto
the holy observance whereof God has condescended to use three cogent
Arguments; viz. 1. His own Example in Resting on it. 2. The Liberal portion of
Time that He has allowed us for the Affairs of this present Life. 3. The
Dedication of this day unto his immediate Service. [ Vid. p. 207.] But we
profane it, when we do not Rest from the common works of our ordinary Callings.
And do not diligently and conscientiously attend upon all God's Ordinances,
appointed to be performed on this day. And that whether in Public, Private, or
Secret.

The Day is not done, when the Church dissolves. The whole of it is Holy to the
Lord. Walks and Visits are not to be the Evening Work of the Sabbath; but holy
and spiritual Conferences. Those who have Families to look after, be best
employed, in seeing them spend the vacant time of the Sabbath in Holy
Exercises. Sc. Reading the Scripture, giving an account what Truths they have
been taught, joining with them in Praises and Prayer unto God. In all of these,
in their Courses and Order, till Night calls for Repose.

Fifthly, The Ordinances of Jesus Christ. Which we profane, when we Neglect, or
are Remiss in our attendance upon them.

Some particular Characters of a Profane Person here follow.

First, He is a Profane Person that thinks and speaks but slightly of Religion.
Religion, our chiefest Excellency, the Crown of our Beings.

But have we not many, who deride Piety, and make a scoff of Religion? Who take
up their Religion by Chance, never examining it. Thinking that any may suffice
whatever it be. Secretly despising the holiness and strictness of others;
thinking they make more ado to get to Heaven than needs. But indeed, they are
not too precise; but these are too Profane, who contemn Religion as unnecessary
and superfluous.

Secondly, He is a Profane Person who neglects the Public Worship of God, when
he has opportunity and ability to attend it. Gods special Presence is in two
places, Heaven and the Church.

Thirdly, He is a Profane Person who neglects the performance of Religious
Duties in private. Every House ought to be a Temple, Dedicated to God. And
every Master ought to be a Priest, to offer to God the daily Sacrifice of
Prayers and Praises. Such Profane Families as those which are without them, God
ranks with Infidels and Heathens, and devotes them to the same common
Destruction.

In the Morning, Prayer is the Key that opens to us the Treasury of Gods
Mercies and Blessings. In the Evening, it is the Key that shuts us up safe
under his Protection and Safeguard.

Excuses are vain, and cannot take off your Obligation.

Are you Ignorant? Many are the helps that God has provided you. Are you
encumbered with your Worldly Affairs? The weightier they are, the more need you
have to ask Counsel and Direction of God. Are you Bashful and Modest? Alas, Be
ashamed to Sin, be ashamed to Talk Loosly, be ashamed to Neglect thy Duty
before thy Family; but be not ashamed to Pray, and do thy Duty. Our Savior
has told us, Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in
this adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be
ashamed when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels., Mark
8.38. What will become of them who are ashamed of their Duty.

Fourthly, He is a Profane Person that performs Holy Duties slightly and
superficially. Our whole Hearts must go into our Holy Duties. And the strength
and vigor of our Spirits must diffuse themselves into every part of them, to
animate and quicken them.

Sacrifices of old, were commanded to be offered up with Fire. And no other
Fire could sanctify them but that which shot it self down from Heaven. The
which was ever after to be kept burning for that use. Our Christian Sacrifices
of Praise and Prayer must be offered with Fire; and that Fire must be darted
down from Heaven. The Celestial Flame of Zeal and Love, which comes from
Heaven, and has a natural Tendency to carry up our Hearts and Souls thither.

But indeed commonly our Duties are either offered up with strange, unhallowed
Fire; some unruly Passion of Hatred, Self-love, and Pride: Or else they are
very Cold and Heartless. Our Prayers are dull and yawning, and drop over our
Lips without any Spirit or Life in them.

Fifthly, He is a Profane Person that performs Holy Duties for Worldly Ends and
Advantages. For what greater contempt of God can there be than to make his
service truckle under base Designs? A Hypocrite is the most profane Wretch that
Lives. He entitles the Holy God unto the Wickedness he commits, and makes God
the Patron of his Sin. And the Wound that Religion receives from Hypocrites, is
far more dangerous than that which open Sinners inflict upon it.

When he that speaks Scripture, lives Devilism, this tempts Men to think that
all Religion is but Mockery.

Sixthly, He is a Profane Person who makes what God has Sanctified, Common and
Unhallowed. And have we not many such profane Persons! Many that abuse the Holy
and Reverend Name of God about frivolous matters? Who make mention of him in
their idle Chat, but are Mute and Dumb when any thing should be spoke to his
Praise?

There are but two Ends that can warrant and justify the use of any of God's
Names, Titles, and Attributes. And they are, 1, Gods Glory, and, 2. The
Edification of our selves and others. Gods terrible Name is so full of Glory
and Majesty that it should never be uttered, but where the Discourse is Serious
and Weighty. Those who rend it with Oaths and Blasphemies, ought to be punished
by the Judges. And, would to God, Law were put in severe Execution, to cramp
the Black Tongues of all such Profane Wretches.

Others fill up their Familiar Tattles with the Name of GOD and LORD making
them to express some small Wonderment, and fill up a gap in their Discourses
These, God will not hold Guiltless. He holds himself contemned, and will
revenge the Dishonor that they do him by it.

What! Will you dare to bolt out the great Name of God without considering it?
Is it a Name to be sported with? To be tossed to and fro upon every light and
vain Tongue? Whenever we mention it, we ought to bow our Hearts in the deepest
prostration before it; to which all the Powers in Heaven and Earth bow down
with most humble Veneration.

Can thou in Duty easily compose thy self to Reverence the holy and dreadfu^
Name. When thou have accustomed thy self to Name him without any Respect in thy
common Discourses?

Let me beseech you, O Christians, as you tender his Glory, of which He is
jealous whenever you speak of God, or bu^ mention his Name. Do it with an
Holy Awe and Dread of his Divine Majesty.

And you, who are Masters of Families, and have Children, beware that you stop
in them the growing Sin of profaning God's Name!

To attest any thing by their Faith, or by their Truth, is a wicked Oath. More
Impious in effect, than Louder ones. The Byword Marry, is no less than
Swearing by the Virgin Mary. It is a notable Device of the Devil to bring
foolish masked words into common use. 1. That they may Swear who use them,
though they know it not. And, 2. That by using unknown Oaths, they may be
brought in time to take up known ones.

Vehement Asseverations, be also dangerous beginnings of Oaths. By the
Customary use of them, we shall insensibly be tripping upon an Oath. [This, and
more, see p. 163. and up and down on the third Commandment.] To return,

Many Profane Gods Sabbaths, invade impiously the Time that he has set apart
for himself, his own Worship and Service. Many make the Bible their Jest-Book;
prostituting those Expressions which God has sanctified to convey to us the
knowledge of Himself, and of Eternal Life, unto the Laughter and Mirth of their
loose Companions.

Those very words which the Holy Ghost inspired for the Edification of the
Church, the Devil inspires into these profane Wretches for their own Damnation,
and the Damnation of those that have pleasure in such horrid Profaneness.

Seventhly, He is a Profane Person, who despises Spiritual Privileges and
Enjoyments. Upon this very account, the Scripture sets a black and indelible
Brand upon Esau Lest there be any Fornicator, or Profane Person, as Esau, who
for one morsel of Meat sol^ his Birthright, Heb. 12.16. They are Profane, who
vilify the Ministry in Themselves and in Others. Who dishonor God's
Ambassadors. And who despise his Children, whom God so highly honors as to
adopt them into his Family. He who despises him that is Begotten, despises
him likewise that Begets. Contempt of Children and Servants, argues secret
contempt of the Master and Father.

Now lay these things to your own Hearts and bring them home to your own
Consciences, and see whether you are in none of these particulars guilty of
Profaneness!

Do none of you think slightly of Religion, accounting it a Politic Design, or
a Needless Preciseness?

Are none of you Negligent in the Public Worship of God? Nor in Private and
Family Duties?

Or, if you perform them, is it not very carelessly and perfunctorily?

Or, if you seem Zealous in them, is not your Zeal excited by some Temporal
Advantages and Worldly Designs?

Do you not make that Common and Unholy, which God has made Holy? Either, by
Abusing his Name, Polluting his Sabbaths, or Vilifying his Word in your
ordinary Raillery?

Lastly, Do none of you Despise Spiritual Privileges, and the Persons who are
invested with them?

If you do, how fair soever your Lives and Actions may be; although you may
think the rude debauched Sinner at a vast distance from your selves, and
account him the only Profane Person; yet certainly this black style belongs as
properly to you. And you are profane Violaters of the First Commandment. Which
requires you to take the Lord for your God, and accordingly to Honor and
Reverence Him, and whatsoever appertains unto Him.

FINIS.
London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the B^ble and Three Crowns in Cheapside
nea^ Mercers-Chapel. 1692.


