IMPRIMATUR, July 13. 1687.

Hen. Maurice, Reverendissimo in Christo. P. D. Wilhelmo. Archiep. Cant. a
Sacris.

A Fair and Methodical Discussion OF THE First and Great CONTROVERSY, BETWEEN
THE CHURCH of ENGLAND, AND Church of Rome, Concerning the INFALLIBLE GUIDE.

In Three Discourses.

Whereof the FIRST is Introductory, and states the Points, which are
Preliminary to this, and all the other Controversies between the two Churches.
The SECOND considers at large the Pretense of Modern Infallibility, and shows
it to be Groundless. The THIRD, by the help of the Former, briefly examines the
Pretended Rational Account of the Roman Catholics, concerning the
Ecclesiastical Guide in Controversies of Religion; and detects its Artifice.
LONDON, Printed for R. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and R. Bentley in Russel Street in Covent Garden. MDCLXXXIX.

An ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THE two former Discourses were begun, and almost finished nigh four years ago,
on a design of bringing the whole Romish Controversy into a natural Method,
for the Author's private satisfaction. Neither was he brought to think, that
there was any need of them for the Public, during the late Religious Debate;
our Cause having been so warmly, and so successfully undertaken by abler hands,
against the Imprudent Aggressors. But because there was in these Papers some
respect had to the Arguments of the Famous Romish Guide, and that whole Book
might very easily and very briefly be refuted thence; it was thought fit, that
they should however appear abroad for that Service: and accordingly, as much as
is now Printed, was Licensed the last Summer was Twelvemonth. But then, it
being stopped by some Accidents from coming out to its Date, and our Adversaries
seeming to have given up the Dispute, this Design was quite given over too. Nor
had it been resumed, had not the Author been told, that now the Romanists have
had so little to say of their own, they would the rather call for the formality
of an Answer to their Old Champion; and had he not besides considered, that the
Pains here taken, of examining at large such Trifling Arguments, might be so
far useful to the World, as to save some one else the ungrateful Labor, who
might bestow his time better for the Public Good.

ERRATA.
PAge 29. in the Margin over against line 33. put Iren. l. 3. c. 4. p. 42.
after the 14 l. put Basil. de Sp. Sanct. cap. 27. p. 66. l. 9. for Impenitent
read Impertinent. l. 14. read to stick to the Conclusion. p. 79. l. 32. for 200
read 100. p. 96. l. 4. for a read no. p. 100. place over against the 11th. l.
VIII. and after in the running Contents of the Chap. for 7. read 8. p. 116.
over against the 14 l. place. III.

DISCOURSE I. Concerning the PRELIMINARY POINTS, etc.
The CONTENTS.
THat the Pretense of any Modern Church to Infallibility, is to be proved by
that Church, from the word of God, Written, or Unwritten. Chap. I. That there
is no Dispute between our Church and the Church of Rome, concerning the
Authority of those Scriptures, that are to decide this, or any other Point in
difference; except that only of Prayer for the Dead. Chap. II. Tradition, or
the Unwritten Word Considered. The Nature of Tradition. Chap. III. The
Uncertainty of Oral Tradition, particularly in Temporal Affairs. Chap. IV. That
there is not much more reason for its Certainty in Ecclesiastical, than in
Temporal Matters. Chap. V. The Case of Tradition, as to Ecclesiastical Matters,
particularly considered. Chap. VI. Some Articles to be observed, concerning
Traditional Authorities. Chap. VII.

DISCOURSE I. Concerning the Preliminary Points, etc.
CHAP. I.
That the Pretense of any Modern Church to Infallibility, is to be proved by
that Church, and that the Proofs must be brought from the Word of God Written
or Unwritten. Chap. 1. Proofs for Infallibility must be brought, and whence.


AS Religion is a common Concern, and of the greatest Moment; so it is to be
expected, that every Man should apply himself to the Consideration of it, with
great Diligence and Zeal; and should take care, if Disputes arise concerning
any material difference in it, that he be not of the wrong side; his Future
Eternal Happiness depending so much on the right choice.

Now the differences between the Church of Rome, and ours of England being very
great; The one pretending God to be well pleased with the Service, at which the
other says he is extremely Offended; The one requiring such things to be
professed as necessary Truths, which the other avows to be falsities: Every
Ingenuous Man, who is a Lover of Truth, and desirous to serve his God
acceptably, is obliged to inform and satisfy himself concerning the Matters in
Debate.

And if one of these Churches shall positively command us not to question her
Determinations, and tell us that she ought to be believed without further
Examination; that she is the Infallible Judge, and if any Difference arises, it
must be determined by her Authority: If this shall be the pretense of one of
the Parties, to be such a Judge in her own Cause, and the other denies the
Jurisdiction; it is plain that this now is another new question between them,
to be decided some indifferent way.

The Church of Rome, if she challenges this Privilege of Infallibility, must
however be content to wave it for a time, and to submit it to a Trial. And not
only so, but she is to remember too, that the Burden of the Proof lies
altogether on her side; all common Humane Presumption being so violent against
her in this case. For we suppose she understands the nature of Christian Faith
better, than to impute any want of that, to such a Reasonable Inquiry. We
should indeed, we confess, be guilty of the want of it, should we not believe
the Infallible Authority of our Savior, and his Apostles; and should we not be
ready to assent to what ever they shall have delivered; and this our Faith, the
Roman Church is now desired to try, and to see whether we will not immediately
yield to any good Argument they shall be able to bring us thence: But for us,
without such Apostolical Direction and Warrant, to believe any Modern number of
Men Infallible: This, we conceive, would not be an Act of Divine Faith, but a
fond unaccountable Credulity, a Credulity below Human, that would not only by
its easy Folly disgrace the rest of our Belief, but may in the consequence be
carried to destroy it.

Now that Church when it claims such an Infallible Judicature, must claim it by
virtue of some Power derived from Christ, and this Commission must some way or
other be produced and vouched.

This Commission then to be produced, must either be under the Hands of one of
the Evangelists or Apostles, and so it would be undeniable; or some Authority
by Word of Mouth, signified from Christ or his Apostles, of which we may have
some certain notice.

This is the way that Question is to be debated; and it is plain that every
Christian is to judge of it seriously and carefully; that he may either
immediately submit to this Authority, if it be just; or if it be not, that he
may not be led by a voluntary Subjection to Men, to do such things as may
displease his God.

It appears then, that in this Cause we are to be determined by Scripture and
Tradition: And if the Roman Church is able to make good its Authority thence,
we are to look no further, but submit in the other points: But if she shall be
judged to have no such Power, then those other points must be tried the same
way, by Scripture and Tradition also.

Seeing then that Scripture and Tradition are the only Rules, by which we are
to judge of the Truth of that Pretense, and consequently of all other Disputes
that depend between the two Parties: We ought first to take Knowledge of these
two great Principles, fixing and ascertaining them, before we undertake to
proceed further.

CHAP. II.
That concerning the Authority of those Scriptures which are to decide this
Point of Infallibility, (or any other, saving that of Prayers for the Dead,)
there is no Dispute between us and the Church of Rome.

AS to Scripture, the two Churches do not differ much. The Books of the New
Testament are the same with them and us; received equally on both sides, as
Divinely Inspired, and of unquestionable Truth. The Books of the Old Testament
are the same too, excepting the Apochryphal Books, which they esteem as
Canonical as the rest, we with great Reason and Authority denying them that
Sacred Character. However for the present let them be admitted and stand by,
till the time comes to remove them: For they have nothing to say, I think,
between those of Rome and us, but in the Case of Prayer for the Dead.

Chap. 2. The Scriptures agreed on.
Both sides therefore are obliged to assent immediately to any thing affirmed in
those Books, commonly received by us, of the Old and New Testament.

But here the Church of Rome is not to fancy, that when we receive the Holy
Scriptures for Divine, we receive them by virtue of her Infallible Authority.

We receive them from her hands, as we might have received them from the Greek,
or more Eastern Churches. We receive them from her, not as a Judge over us, but
as a Library Keeper, and a Witness: a Witness too, in such a Case, where her
Testimony is corroborated by the Concurrence of others.

For, under favor, where her vulgar Latin disagrees from the Greek Copies, we
may take the liberty to prefer the Original: and if her Greek Copies had
differed materially from those in the hands of the Greeks, or from the Copies
in other Languages; we should not have deferred so much to her, as to have
trusted her single Authority without better enquiry. But God be thanked, we
find by collating the several Copies of several places and Languages, and the
many Citations scattered in infinite Books, that we cannot complain of any
falsification in this point.

But Honesty in one instance, where they could not well do otherwise, is not
therefore necessarily to be presumed in all. And besides, if we should allow
that Church to be so honest, as not willingly to deceive; yet it would be a
great strain to say, that therefore she cannot be deceived, and is Infallible.

We receive then the same Scriptures that they, and submit our Differences to
that Authority; and this we do, without being foreclosed, or obliged to stand
to the Judgment of that Church in other things, and own her Infallibility.

CHAP. III.
The Nature of Tradition.

NOW besides those Truths or Precepts delivered down by the Evangelists or
Apostles in Writing, there may be supposed many others spoken by them, which
were of equal Authority with the Written, and obliged the Hearers as much; and
which would too equally oblige us, had we any certain information concerning
them.

Such Sayings not put in Writing by the inspired Persons themselves, but taken
from their Mouths, and delivered down by others, are called in Ecclesiastical
Language Traditions; and as long as they are transmitted down by the Mouth, and
not yet reduced into Writing, they are called Oral.

These Traditions of either kind, Written or Oral, how many there are we would
be glad to know: a great Body of them is pretended, some already authentically
declared by Councils, or Popes; others mentioned by several Men, in several
places, and standing for the next promotion; the rest reserved in Petto, to be
produced on Occasion Eternally.

Now because we may suspect that we shall be pressed mainly by Evidences of
this nature, it will be best beforehand to enquire into their Circumstances and
Character, and see how credible Deponents they may prove.

These Sayings therefore pretended to be spoke by Christ or his Apostles, are
given us either word for word, or the sense and substance only; and are for
some time at least supposed to be delivered down by strength of Memory.

Now as to what is transmitted Orally, and to be preserved by successive
Memories, we may consider; that to take and make the report of a Discourse word
for word, these things are necessary: Attention to what was spoke, a due
Perception of it, and a Memory that shall retain it. To give an exact Summary
of a Discourse, there is besides necessary, a Judgment both comprehensive
enough to take in the whole meaning, and so upright and unprejudicate as to
give it no turn or biass; and besides that the Sense, if spoke in new words,
should be truly expressed. And therefore further there must be considered
another requisite of Care and Diligence, that must be all along supposed in
each part, either to attend, conceive, and retain, or else fully and uprightly
to consider and to express properly: Not to mention that Fidelity that is
required, as in the custody or transmission of a Writing, so in the delivery of
an Oral Narrative.

There lies this Difficulty on all Oral Records: and it is plain there is very
little or none of it on the Written. To keep the Written is, in the general,
only to let it lie where it does; and to deliver it to another, is no more than
to deliver so much Paper or Parchment into his hands; a matter of no wonderful
Skill or Capacity, to be discharged by any who is not an Idiot. So too, to
Transcribe the Original into other Copies, be it never so long or Intricate,
requires no more Learned Ability of a Man, than to Read and Write; and no
greater strength of Memory, than to bear in his head three or four Words, the
while he writes them down: For this performance, one would think there is no
such need of great Clerkship; and it is easy to conceive how it may be done.

Those therefore in our Age, who could disparage the Invention of Letters so
much, as to prefer Oral Tradition before the Written, for the more easy and
certain conveyance of the two; must have had some great Pique at some certain
Writing: and must too have thought the Truth of their Cause very unevident,
when such an unreasonable Propo^ition was to be brought for its proof, and
premised as the more undeniable of the two.

I insist not therefore on the ridiculous Comparison, whether it be easier to
copy a Book, or to get it by heart; to carry it in ones hand, or let it lie
where it does, than to charge it upon ones Memory, and bear it in ones Head:
which is the surer way of Record, to desire an Officer to remember a Deed, or
to Exemplify it: and whether it be safer to send a Message by Word of Mouth,
from Stage to Stage, or by Letter. It is a hard case to be put seriously on
such Determinations, not worthy certainly of an Infallible Judge. But I think
the Readers patience, as well as my own, will have exercise enough, while it
stoops to the following considerations: Where we proceed to enquire, what
Credibility Oral Tradition can challenge after some tract of time; examining
its Authority in Temporal Matters FIRST, and THEN in Spiritual.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Uncertainty of Oral Tradition in Temporal Affairs.

ORal Tradition, after it has gone but a little way, finds small Credit in
Affairs of the World; it is called Hearsay, or Fame; and goes for uncertain at
least, if not reputed a Liar. A Story told at the third or fourth hand, is
commonly so changed in its circumstances, that in common Conversation, though it
passes for Discourse, it is never relied on without nearer Enquiry; nay, will
hardly be repeated in the next Company, without this Addition; that he heard it
not himself, and was only told so at such a distance. For the Person that gave
me the Relation of a Discourse or an Action, may be believed by me, that he
heard it so punctually from another, whom I know; and that other I may verily
believe, upon his Affirmation, had it as he reports from a third Author; if
too, I know that third Man for Honest and Exact, I may believe verily that, if
he affirmed it, he gave a true recital of what he received from a fourth, etc.
And yet, notwithstanding I have such a particular Confidence in each of these
Men, that I would believe the Relation from each of them apart at the first
hand; I should not however give the same entire credit to it, when it comes
derived so far. For though I have Opinion enough of the Sincerity and Capacity of
each; yet if the Subject of their Report was any thing long or nice, Chap. 4.
The Uncertainty of Oral Tradition in Temporal Affairs.
and so liable to a Mistake; and I therefore not absolutely sure, but that some
one of them might have mistaken: That Defective incomplete certainty diminishes
in a continual progression; and will at a proportionable distance bring me to a
suspense; as afterward, if carried further, it will begin to increase in me a
contrary inclination, rather to believe the conveyance Erroneous, than True.

It is known that Human Understanding in respect to belief, is considered as a
Balance, whose Scales are of a Determinate Capacity, and will turn upon some
certain Weight. As then, if in one Scale there be a considerable Weight, and in
the other an Equal, there is an equiponderance; if that other Weight abates but
little, there is some doubtful Equiponderance still: But if it abates notably,
the first Scale begins to fix, growing still the more and more unmovable,
according as the Weight in the second diminishes; which we may suppose to
decrease so long, till it is either none, or of no moment at all: In like
manner in our Understanding, if the Evidence on one side be considerable, but
that on the other as great, our Belief is in a suspense; If that on the other
be but a little less, we are still in a suspense, though wavering and inclining
to the opposite; Afterward when the difference of Weight is momentous, we begin
to settle and rest on the preponderating side; but grow more and more fixed, as
the probability for the other does decrease; which at last may be either none,
or such as the Balance shall not feel.

Now, when to this observation we add further, that the Understanding of Man is
such a Balance, as leaves out often what it is to weigh; and, to what it
weighs, does not always give the due weight: we shall then easily perceive that
Human Belief has its several Degrees; and though it rests on one side and is
fixed, yet all the while there may be Probabilities too for the contrary, in
the other Scale. Though therefore the Opinion we have of the Capacity, Care, and
Integrity of a Man, may determine us to believe his Report; yet our belief is
not always so determined, that there is nothing of Verisimilitude on the other
side. If he avers a Fact in which he could not well be deceived, we immediately
and firmly believe it; as that he received this Writing from another: But if he
affirms the truth of a Verbal Recital, that is long and intricate, and after
some length of Time; he cannot expect to be believed, but in a less degree. For
no Honest Prudent Man would in this case depose to the Words of a Discourse,
without this Caution, to the best of his Memory; nor to the substance of it,
without that other, to the best of his Understanding. But lastly, if such a
Relation be not positively averred, but told without such formality of
Assurance; or averred but by a stranger, or one in whose Integrity we do not
absolutely confide; the degree of our Belief will be yet less: The odds for the
Truth of the first, may be a thousand, or if you please a Million to one; for
the truth of the second, it may not be that of Ten; and for the third, not
above that of Two. Now this last measure of Belief generally serves in all
ordinary Conversation; and something much less than the first, even in Causes
of Life and Death.

To return then to our first Case; let us suppose the four successive Relators
to aver, what they successively said; and let it be supposed, that I would have
given each of them in my Belief, such an odds or preponderance as 5. to 1.
which in many cases is a very liberal Allowance: It is demonstrable then, that
although I give a very great Credit to such a Relation at the first hand, at the
4th I must not give any; as it is also certain by the same undeniable
computation, that a Report which at the first hand has the Odds in certainty,
of 10 to 1, at the 7th hand would have none: And alike certain, that if at the
first hand there be two to one for the probability of a Narrative, the
advantage at the second will lie on the other side.

Those that are versed in Calculation, know it to be supposed here: That the
Continuity of an Oral Tradition, or the progress of a Report, is as a Chain
composed of several Probabilities or Contingencies: That the probability of the
whole diminishes still, as the particular Contingencies multiply; in the same
kind of proportion in which the present value of Money lessens, upon rebate of
Compound Interest, by the distances of the future Payment: And lastly, that as
the likelihood for preserving the continuity of Truth abates, so the likelihood
for Interruption and Mistake arises.

The Computation we have made from these Supposititions is exact, the Reader
may be assured; and gives the precise reason of that uncertainty, of which the
World is so very sensible in gross, as to give but small Credit to Hearsay
Relations. In any matter of Consequence, they are still rejected, and any Jury
marks them with an Ignoramus. I take leave to add, though in another Case, that
the same way of Speculation will discover how justly a great difference in
value is still made between the Testimony of a single Witness, and that of two
concurring: For the certainty is not only doubled by the addition of their
Persons, but multiplied by the proportion of their credibility, in such a
manner, that if the Credit of each Witness singly was as ten to one, there
would be above six score to one for the truth of what they deposed jointly.

But as to the Subject in hand, and that I may dispatch these Niceties all at
once, the Reader may consider further; that in the numbering of the years of
any successive Generations of Men, thirty years are commonly assigned to the
duration of each, taking them one with another. This is the Calculation of the
Ancients, from some old Successions. However we are content to allow about
forty, a Number that may be tried in the two last fourteen Generations of our
Savior. But of that something must be necessarily abated in our purpose; for a
Child of a day, though he begin then to live, and continue a course of years, yet
cannot take up a Tradition, and bear his part in that till he is of riper Age:
So that we in our case are very reasonable, when we follow the Vulgar
Reckoning, and let a 100 years go for three Generations.

This number of years beyond which no single Witness can be supposed to reach,
(for he must be nigh a hundred and twenty years old, and then of good memory;)
and for which three successive ones must, in ordinary computation, be allowed;
is therefore deservedly by some Civilians, made the utmost limit of Humane
information; and what is beyond it, is all in the dark, and out of the memory
of Man. But if we shall pass further, and suppose our selves at the distance of
three or 400 years, what was said then might have been thrice seccessively
forgotten; and must be presumed to be buried in a multiplied Oblivion: It must
have passed through ten or twelve several hands at least; been preserved by each
of them thirty or forty years together; and were the odds upon each of them
that of ten to one, that they would be so diligent and of so happy Memories, as
to transmit each in his own time, (whereas it is by no means even,) yet that so
much was not performed by the whole twelve, the odds on the contrary side would
be as of two to one.

Let us then suppose that an Act of Parliament, of any length and niceness,
were to pass from Constable to Constable, through twelve Parishes, by way of
Oral Tradition, to be delivered over faithfully, and if you please on pain of
death: How often must it be repeated, and how much conn'd, or how well studied
and examined by each, to bring it either Verbatim, or in exact Abstract, to its
journeys end? How fit do we think it would be, at the ordinary rate of Humane
Capacity, to be proclaimed for Law in the last Town, and to be the ground there
of a Judicial Decision? Nay, suppose the Officers successively to be very
intelligent Men, and of more than common Memories; as the Performance would be
difficult to take up such a Charge, and carry it immediately cross the Parish;
so much more, if each Man should be obliged, without help of Writing, to keep
it for twenty, thirty, or forty years, and then at last to discharge himself on
his Neighbor: It is too much to think that his Memory in that time shall not
faulter; but where would the Tradition be if he himself should dye? But further
yet, let us imagine all the Parish to come in and help; it is plain, that
without the assistance of writing, they would rather help to confound and
distract, than to ascertain; and would easier agree to give a wrong Report,
than know how to set it right; the burden of the Trust must at last rest upon
some one, or very few; whose Memories are as frail as their Lives; either of
which failing before the day, the Tradition is lost.

But all this is an extraordinary supposition. What then, if the distance of
time continuing the same, the Successive reporters are not presumed to be any
such Choice Men, but of the ordinary Size? what if they acted under no great
apprehension of danger from the miscarriage? what too if they were not denied
the help of Writing, but were all along so little careful as not to think of
using it? what great stress do we judge is to be laid at last upon this report
(if any such come,) so accidentally preserved by the successive Memories, and
so contingently transmitted?

We perceive from what is said, that it is no very feasible project to devise
an Vtopian Succession of Men, either by single Persons, or in Society; (propose
what choice Regulation, Rewards, or Punishments you please;) that shall convey
Orally any Record of ordinary length, through three or four hundred years, with
such a proportion of certainty as shall weigh with an understanding Man; there
must be in that tract of time so much chance for failure and mistake, that the
Report at last, though not impossible to be true, yet shall be too unlikely ever
to be admitted. If therefore we make no such fiction, and remove all fanciful
suppositions, if taking things and Men as they usually are, we let this
memorial Conveyance pass in common course; we may easily conceive what will
happen to it, and to what a miserble degree of incertitude it must sink; it
must long before its period run out all its credit, and at last not retain so
much probability as may poise with the dust of the Balance.

For if sayings are to be transmitted verbatim, Oral report, like an Echo, may
possibly keep something of them up for a while; and the Repetitions, by Chance
or Art, may be larger, or more: but by degrees they will faulter, diminish, and
grow fainter, and at last expire. There is this difference, that the Vocal
Tradition of an Echo, though defective, is always true; and delivers faithfully
every Syllable it returns: whereas our Oral Tradition is subject to the
infirmity of falcifying, as well as forgetting; and does not only let fall, but
alters and confounds: so that its Voice how-ever loud it may continue, grows
insignificant and uncertain; its Credit at least, like the sound of the Echo,
becoming fainter and weaker upon each repetition, and dying at some distance in
the air.

This is the fortune of Sayings that pass through the memory only: but where
they are to pass through the understanding too, and are to come out in Abstract
new molded, and worded, they are in greater danger of being misconceiv'd or
misrepresented; of receiving some new turn, according as the Bent of the
Person, or Age is inclined. Some tincture of the Vessel in which they have been
kept and digested, will pass along. If therefore they have went through many
Persons, or much time, they must be presumed to be much altered; even such
Rules and Maxims as are intended to regulate Men's thoughts and manners,
accommodating themselves so, and complying in such measure with the Minds that
convey them, that at some distance they receive the change they ought to have
produced.

Neither is the Case in this matter different between single Persons, and a
Company of Men. For as single Men alter their Opinion of things often with
their Age, and sometimes in their thoughts and humors become as it were other
Men: so in Bodies or Societies, the same Mutations happen, and in an Age or two
there are commonly new Maxims of thinking, and Modes of living, as certainly as
there is a new Generation. A Society as it insensibly changes its Persons, so
changes its Opinions insensibly too: there cannot be assigned a time, when the
Corporation begins to be a new set of Men, so neither, when the new Opinions
come in; but both come in by degrees: and as it is sure by the Law of Nature,
that a hundred year will make a total change in the Persons, so a hundred or
two hundred more may make a change in their Judgments. A Change of Judgment
being easier than that of the Persons, because it may be made in the self same
Persons: and then, when it is once passed, there is no more Memory of an old
Opinion forsaken, than of an old Collegiate departed.

Now when Men alter by degrees, and all of them toge^^^^ it may easily happen,
that they themselves shall not ^^^eive the variation. For they cannot discern
it but by something without them, and which at the same time stands still. And
if too they look on that direction, their Imagination may then be deceived; a
those are who Sail by the Shore, and are apt to impute their own change of
place to the fixed Land. Upon which Account, two Societies may no more agree,
which of them has varied; than Astronomers can resolve us, which it is that
moves, the Earth and all its Company, or the Sun.

But of this, Language is a sufficient Instance: which in time changes
imperceptibly, Men altering their Words and Phrases, and Pronunciation
unawares; forgetting by degrees the old, as they take up new. And this happens,
without any violent Intrusion of a Foreign Speech; but only from freedom of
fancy, and voluntary acceptance: Some Men refining, or affecting, and others
imitating, as the Humor and Mode may be. And this at last prevails so
indiscernably, that those of the City when they go into the distant Countries,
think they are come unto a People of another Language, who yet it may be speak
the truer English. Which indeed is the truer; the Eastern, the Northern, and
Western Man may differ: and the Dispute without writing could never be decided,
except one of our Great-Grandfathers should arise and inform us. But Books will
easily end the Controversy, and Old Chaucer produced, will tell us the
variation that has passed in less than 300 years.

Now as Oral Tradition would not tell us a Discourse of 400 years old in the
same Language in which it was spoke; so neither is it likely to give it us in
the same Sense. Neither, if the present Age shall agree in the same Report, is
it a greater argument of its antiquity, than it is of the antiquity of our
present Phrase, that we all now speak it. Languages alter either by force, the
old being driven out totally, as the British by the Saxon; or in part only, as
the Saxon after by the Norman, from the mixture of which our English sprang: or
else they voluntarily change by importation, as from our former French Wars, or
later Travels; by imitation, as in Habit so in Phrase, of Italy or France; by
the Influence of those Nations on our Courts, and their influence then on the
People; by new business, or new humor. Customs too and Manners, both in Civil
and Religious Matters, alter in like manner; either by command and force, or by
the gentler power of Example, and Contagion of practice. Now as without Books,
we might have thought our Language the same it was spoke in Julius Caesar's
time, and should not have been sensible of the changes since past; so neither
should we have known any thing of the Government and Laws; but imagined this
Form we now live under had been from the beginning, and that the City (for
example) had a Mayor and Court of Aldermen by Charter from the Romans. For if
Laws, though written, are often in a little time antiquated by desuetude, and
abrogated by contrary custom, so that the Statute-Book it self secures them not
the notice of the present Age; much more therefore may what was never Written
be laid aside in a while, and at last utterly and irrecoverably be forgotten.

But there is no more need of such reasoning speculation, than of that formal
supposition, and scrupulous calculation we made before. For who is there that
does not in fact see, what blind Stories are told of former times by those
People that are without the use of Letters? what a darkness there dwells upon
time, at a little distance; and still as the World goes forward, how fast night
comes on behind; the Ages past, growing as obscure and unknown as those that
are to come. So true it is, what was said by the Egyptian to Solon, (a Saying
as good as any other of those Wise Men) That the Graecians without the use of
Writing were always Children; being still as of yesterday, without any
knowledge of the World, and experience of former years.

For this purpose, we of this Nation need but look upwards toward Edward the
Third's Reigns, (I might have said Henry the Fifth, or even the Eighth,) and
then reflect how much we know of that Victorious busy time, more than what
Writing has informed us. What Action of War or Peace, what Passage or Saying is
now pretended to be told, other than what we read? Let all the Old Men and Old
Women be consulted, and see what Traditional Memoirs they can furnish for a
Supplement to our Histories and Records. If there be a tittle of Law or Story
to be learnt that way, then we may begin to think, that the Statutes of that
Reign might have been transmitted by Tradition, and the year Books by Oral
Reports. But who does not see, that if Paper and Parchment were out of the way,
there would be no footstep nor Memorial of those times; not a much better
account of Edward the Third, than we have now of a Tenth Edward? The World must
then begin with us, short of that Age; and all before be but as the Chaos,
darkness covering its face. All that we could then do, must be to judge the
former days by our own; to imagine the same Proceedings, the same Rules of
Government, and Courts of Justice, the same Customs and Interpretations of Laws
by which we now live. And had any ancient Law or Form come down by chance
unvary'd; yet it could have brought no certainty with it of its Rise: it must
have passed in account with the rest, and could not have given any proof of its
elder descent. From what distance it came, and what in the mean time had happened
to it, who should have informed us?

It is manifest, that the interval of some three hundred years must cast so
much uncertainty upon all Oral Report; that it can never pretend to any the
least Credit, at the distance, suppose of Edward the Third. But how shall any
be afforded it, if we mount up three hundred years higher, and suppose the
Hearsay to descend from the Conquerours Days? For (to speak at the easiest
rate) of Him, had there been no writing, we should, I presume, have known as
much as we do of King Arthur; or have had just as much certainty of his descent
from Normandy, as we have of Brute's coming from Troy. A believing People we
once were, when from that Story of Brute we challenged precedence in a Council:
But we had, it may be, a further design in it, a very considerable one for
those days; and had a mind to claim kindred with Rome.

To conclude therefore, a certain term of years there is, beyond which all the
foregoing Time, is Time out of mind, and utterly fabulous: whether it be two,
three, or four hundred years, the Reader shall determine. But such a limited
Sphere there is; as in space, for our Sight, and for our Hearing; so in time,
for humane Memory. At such a distance of years the truth of Tradition grows so
obscure, that the addition of as many more years does darken it but little
more: the Uncertainty before being so great, that it was scarce capable of any
Accession.

CHAP. V.
That there is not much more reason for the certainty of Oral Tradition in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, than in Temporal.

THis is the Case of Humane Affairs, and whether in Religion it be much
different, we shall now enquire. For it may be allowed us that such a
concurrence of extraordinary Attention, Memory, Comprehension, and Uprightness
of Understanding, that is requisite for a Verbal or Summary Tradition, cannot
be supposed to continue to very many descents in Temporal Subjects: But is it
not to be imagined (they will say) that the uttermost ability and care of Man
will be employed, where the Discourse is made by God, or his particular Order,
and the reporting of it infinitely concerns the Eternal Welfare of Humane Kind?
To prevent the suspicion of such a Disparity, and to preserve to our selves the
liberty of Judging in this matter by our ordinary measures, let us observe,

(1.) That no gift of Memory is here to be supposed: For though the Text of
bringing all things to remembrance, might prove an indefectibility of Memory,
as well as that other of leading into all Truth, argues an Infallibility of
Judgment, yet that Fancy not being advanced by our Adversaries, Chap. 5. No
more reason of Certainty in Ecclesiastical than, in Temporal Tradition.
I desire their pardon for bringing it into their Minds. Further we must not
imagine any Art of Memory invented and used on this occasion. Neither yet have
they told us of any Order of Men instituted for this purpose; that there were
Recorders and Remembrancers amongst the Christians, as Readers there were, we
know. Those too whose Lips should preserve this Knowledge, succeeded not by
Families, where the Tradition might have been sucked in with the Milk, and
descended by Inheritance; as with the Jews and Egyptians. There were not
neither any Academies then Erected, in which men might have been supposed to
have been trained up from their youth, for this Traditional Performance: And in
the Ecclesiastical Family of each Church, the inferior Orders did but meanly
prepare toward it; neither requiring any great comprehension of things, nor
exercising the faculty of Memory much; such as the Office of keeper of the
Door, of Reader, etc. The Employment too of the Deacons, was chiefly
Oeconomical, to receive and to distribute the public Money, and to make
Provision for the Clergy and the Poor. The Presbyters themselves, by reason of
the dispersion of the People, and the exigence of the times, had very little
leisure, from Visiting, Catechizing, Exhorting and Encouraging; and accordingly
they were chose into that Order, more for their Godly Simplicity, and holy
Zeal, than for the greatness of their other Talents: That of Memory
particularly, being never required at an Election, nor understood by any
Interpreter, to be one of those Qualifications St. Paul prescribes, either for
a Priest, or a Bishop. And lastly, when the Episcopal See was vacant, it was
filled, not by the Senior Presbyter, or by such a one whom the Bishop had
designed, and to whom he had left the Tradition; but by any other person, whom
the Congregation did otherwise value and desire. So were men then taken to
govern the Church; some that were but just come into the Presbytery, as St.
Cyprian; very often from the other Orders, as in Rome frequently from that of
the Deacons; often from other courses of life, from Politic Administrations,
the Bar, or profane Philosophy; and those sometimes not yet Baptized, as St.
Ambrose, Nectarius, and Synesius; from very mean Employments, and Mechanic
Trades, as Carpenters, Smiths, etc. if Gregory Nazianzen may be credited in his
time for the East, who speaks (to say no more) as if Synods had been then
filled with that sort Carmin. 11. (...).
. Now, what was the study generally of those at that time in the West, St.
Hierom will inform us, in his Dialogue against the Luciferians. Deceptio tam
Laici quam Episcopi communis est. At Episcopus errare non potuit. Revera de
Platonis and Aristotelis sinu in Episcopatum alleguntur. Quotus enim quisque
est qui non apprime in his eruditus sit? Denique, ex literatis quicunque hodie
Ordinatur id habent ^^rae non quomodo Scripturarum medullas ebibant, sed
quomodo aures Populi declamatorum flosculis mulceant.
Where he pleads, that the same Excuse of Ignorance is to be allowed both to
the Bishop, and to the Layman, who had fallen into the Arrian Heresy. For a
Bishop (says he) may be deceived as well as a Layman. But a Bishop you will say
could not be misled. As if Bishops were chose to their Sees, from the Schools
of Plato or Aristotle; and as if there were but a very few of them that were
not extraordinarily skilled in such Knowledge: as if too those in Orders of our
days that are Learned, did study to understand the depth of the Scripture; and
did not make it their chiefest care how they shall tickle the Peoples ears with
Declamatory Flourishes. So much St. Jerome says in his Patron Pope Damasus his
Family, and at Rome. But under the next Pontificate the Characters of that
Clergy and City are described more plainly, Cum in Babylone versarer, and
purpuratae Meretricis essem colonus, volui garrire aliquid de Spiritu Sancto,
etc. and ecce Pharisaeorum conclamavit Senatus, and nullus Scriba vel fictu,
etc.

Hieron. Praef. in Librum Didymi. de Sp. S.


The place is called Babylon, and the Scarlet Whore, the Clergy a Senate of
Pharisees, and not so much as a pretended Scribe amongst them. Something indeed
is to be abated in that place, for St. Jerome's heat; but that cannot be done
without impairing the Credit of a Witness our Adversaries sometimes want; (who
must admit his Satyr if they take his Complement) and without confessing, that
Holy men might misrepresent in the Judgments they give down. For,

(2.) We must not think that former Ages were not subject to Passions and
Infirmities as well as the latter, so we shall not wisely enquire of these
things. We must not imagine, that always in every Generation, the care and
diligence of the Successors, was equal to that of the Apostles; and that the
want of extraordinary Abilities or Institution was supplied by extraordinary
labor and application. For the sincere endeavor of Man does not always answer
the great moment of the Errand, or the Majesty of the Author: neither need we
any thing more than our own experience to inform us; that Mankind is as much
concerned for this life as for the next; and for the Commands of Man, as of
God; notwithstanding the vast disproportion. We might say further, for ordinary
reason will tell it us, that those who break Laws will not much care to keep
them any way; and will not be at any wonderful pains to instruct their Memory,
to upbraid their Judgment and their Will. So that as few Ages will suffer us to
presume of any extraordinary Industry or Integrity in this Affair; some there
are which will not allow us to say there was any at all: when it was well, that
even Books could keep themselves; and that the less they were used, they lasted
the longer; or that they were so far neglected, as not to be destroyed.

Instances of perverse Inclination, and stupid negligence of this kind, might
be given in Christian Ages: But, because these are the subject of our Dispute,
we will at present look in the Old Testament. and there, not to take notice
that the Serpent was able to obscure in Eve the first Command, she, new made,
received from her Husband, he just before from God; not to mention that
forgetfulness of God, that over ran the World in less time (according to the
Hebrews) than has now passed since Christ, and which deserved the Deluge: you
find, after that terrible punishment and exemplary warning, the new washed
world, the Descendants of Noah, entirely relapsed into Idolatry within 500
years, say the Hebrews; (the Seventy but a thousand,) though Noah himself, the
Preacher of Righteousness, lived three hundred of them, warning the new world,
with as little Success as he had the old.

Further, the Israelites, the Seed of Faithful Abraham, and a peculiar People,
after their miraculous Redemption from Pharaoh, their Law wonderfully and
terribly delivered by God himself, after all the mighty Signs by the hands of
Moses, and Joshua; all their several Exhortations and Precautions, which we
read, but they neglected; fell back again into Heathenism in the Third
Generation, within the compass of 200 year. So little reason is there to
presume of any miraculous Care or Sincerity from the Sons of men in Religious
Subjects; for, besides that Interest and Humor take place there too; it is
well if our Attention is not slacker, and our perception duller, and the
Impressions on the Memory consequently weaker, on this, than on other Occasions.

(3.) But, besides all this, such care and industry of Memory is not to be
supposed, where there was no such extraordinary need of its help. For in the
first years of Christianity the Skill of Writing was as common all over the
Roman Empire, as now it is in Europe: and, though some Superstitions had forbid
the use of it in things Sacred, yet our Religion practiced it from the
beginning. The Evangelists writ their Narratives, the Apostles sent Letters; in
which Scriptures Mysteries are spoke out, as Sacred, and as Opposite to Jewish
or Heathen Opinions, as any Oral Tradition would pretend to whisper. There
Christ Crucified was published, and the foolishness of Preaching was to be
read; the Sacrament of Christ's Supper laid down, its Elements and Form of
Institution Recorded by the Evangelists, by St. Paul, and afterward openly
mentioned without scruple by Justin Martyr and Ireneus: However it came to
pass, that in the following Ages Christians grew to be more shie on that
Subject before the promiscuous People; and began to think it convenient to have
Mysteries and Secrets, as well as the Jews, or Heathens. But even then when
they did not speak plain in their common Sermons, they were not so reserved in
their Writings that came abroad, but their meaning might be easily spelled; for
why should they make such an impenetrable Secret of that, which every Christian
knew, and any false Brother might tell?

And besides, had they been more reserved on some few Matters, yet in others
there was no need. For suppose to avoid Scandal, they would not publish in
Writing their Adoration of what appeared to be Bread, for fear of giving
Countenance to the Superstition of the Egyptians toward Beef, and Mutton, and
Sallets; nor their Worship of Angels, of the Virgin and Saints, or of Images,
for fear of encouraging the other Gentile Idolatries: yet what harm had there
been if the rest had been writ; that there were seven Sacraments, that the
Intention of the Priest was necessary to them, that there was a Purgatory, etc?
Or where had been the offense, if that had been seen in Writing which we now
look for; that the Bishop of Rome, or the Majority of the rest should never
mistake in the Rules of their own Religion? But after all, if Christians would
not have made any writing public, yet nothing hindered but that they might
have had them for their private use, in the Custody of the Bishop and
Presbytery: in whose hands the Doctrine (for Example) of Transubstantiation it
self, though written, was as likely to be kept Secret; as it would be, though
unwritten, by those thousands of Laymen that knew it as well as the Clergy.

Against the first and last of these three Reflections, I have been making,
there is but one Instance that can be alleged in Christianity, of the enjoined
use of memory, and the prohibition of Writing; and that is in the case of the
Creed, which the Catechumens were sometimes heretofore ordered to get without
book, and forbidden to write. But the Apostles Creed we know is a very short
lesson, that any man's memory may easily retain; and in some places it was then
shorter than it is now. And as it will be always necessary for a Christian to
have in his mind the Abstract of his Faith; so it was more necessary then, in
the midst of Unbelievers; for whom he was to be prepared, either to resist, or
to instruct them. It was too thought fit at that time, when Christians were
afraid lest their Rites and Forms should be mimick'd, or otherwise ridiculed by
the Heathen, to the scandal of the weaker Brother, or the obduracy of the yet
Unconverted; that this Sacred Form of our Belief, should not be lightly exposed
into Strangers hands. For both those Reasons, the young Christian was directed
to commit the Creed to Memory, and not to trust it to Paper; as he was too for
the last of them admonisht not to con it, or repeat it, in the hearing of an
Unbeliever. But all the while, this brief form, to be remembered by each for
their particular use, was so far from depending upon Memory for its
Transmission, that it was actually written for the use of the Church; and that
those very Authors who have told us of the Prohibition, (for we are beholding
to Writing even for the knowledge of that) have at the same time given us the
Creed in Writing, and their own large explications of it beside. Their
explication of that Article concerning the Church, we shall have an occasion to
thank them for hereafter; See the fourth Chapter of the 2d. Discourse.
and we shall find too, not only that the Creed might be wrote; but that it was
nothing else than what was expressly writ in the Scriptures before.

It appears then, that Oral Tradition has no peculiar place in Christianity.
This the Modern Patrons of it should in discretion have considered betimes; and
not have suffered themselves to fall so short of their Masters in the advantage
of the Supposition.

The Jews, from whom they borrowed the Fancy, did not think it fit to go alone;
but supported that Fable with others. For first, they suppose it forbid by God
to write down some sort of Precepts; and that of those Precepts this
prohibition was one: and then, Pocockii Porta Mosis, page 5 ta. etc.
when they had made Memory so necessary, they provided a peculiar method to
inform it. Moses must be supposed, in his long Conversation on the Mount, to
have been sufficiently instructed himself; and when he came down, he took a
very singular Course with the Children of Israel. He first sent for Aaron and
declared to him alone all the Precepts distinctly: then for his Sons, and
repeated the same Lesson to them, in the presence of the Father. Afterward the
seventy Elders were called in; and they, in the hearing of Aaron and his Sons,
were taught in like manner: and lastly, the whole People were admitted to the
Company, and received the same Instruction. So that from Moses his mouth, Aaron
had now heard the Law four times, his Sons thrice, the Elders twice, and the
People once. This done, Moses departs, and leaves the like Task to Aaron, for a
trial of his Memory: who accordingly rehearses to the whole Audience, and then
withdraws. Then his Sons stand up, and after a like repetition, retire too. And
lastly, the Elders, having been four times informed, make to the People their
fourth Recital, upon which they all go home, and instruct their several
Families.

By this contrivance, the Law at its first setting forth, has passed so often
through the mouth, that it deserves already the name of Oral: and we by these
Circumstances of Care in the beginning, are prepared to imagine the same
diligence in the following successions. These Elders, one may think, would not
fail to transmit to the next; and so the Tradition descended through hands
either unknown, and whose names it would not take along with it; or else so
remote, that they must stretch very far to meet; 'till it came into the care of
Samuel. and now we are well; for he was a great Person, and discharged his
trust no doubt. From him, by Persons that must too be nameless, it went down to
Jeremiah, thence to Baruch, and so to Ezra. In his Custody it was lodged safe,
and after that found a conveyance, by men scarce ever remembered but on this
occasion, for six or seven hundred years together; 'till at last sometime after
the utter dispersion of the Jews by Adrian, it was thought necessary to
consider the accidents that might happen to this Tradition, if trusted any
longer to memory: upon which, Rabbi Juda the Holy, ventured upon the breach of
one Precept, to secure all the rest, and so reduced them into Writing. This
Book is the Misnah, and the Commentary upon it, made not long after, the Talmud.

This is the Pedigree of Jewish Tradition; something like that of our Kings
from Adam; drawn at length with formality enough, and wanting nothing but
certainty. However the Jews are to be commended for this, that they dress up
the Story as well as they can; and appear so much in earnest, as to endeavor
for credit. The great performance is not supposed by them to be done in our
days, and by such men as now live, but to have been finished fourteen hundred
year ago: And then they are so ingenuous as to put another stop to their
Traditions, and to take some care that we be not oppressed by their overflow;
allowing us to believe no such Oral account, that has been ever under a
dispute: so far are they from taking that sort of conveyance for the surest.

Whereas on the contrary, our Modern Traditioners are so bold with us, as to
use no caution, nor set any bounds: neither are they at any pains, or show any
contrivances; bunglingly setting up their extravagant conceit without either
Support or Ornament. They bestow none of their Legends upon this Fable, and
prepare us with no inducing Circumstance; not telling us so much as the hands
that should transmit the Tradition: unwilling, it may be, to name to that
Office any other Bishops than the Popes; and then not daring to trust their
Story to the Credit of such Reporters. The whole therefore is left at large;
the Father is to tell the Son; and so the Tradition is to be propagated as
naturally as Mankind.

A Tradition propagated in that manner, is certainly no better descended than
any common Spurious Relation, that has no other father but the People. But that
absurd Hypothesis, though mentioned here, yet is too gross to be pursued further.
Our Design in this Chapter was more general, and against wiser Adversaries:
being only to show, that Christian Tradition is not to be exempted from the
common frailties and uncertainties incident to Oral Reports.

CHAP. VI.
The Certainty of Ecclesiastical Tradition particularly Considered.

WE are then at Liberty to Judge of Tradition in Spiritual, and in Temporal
Matters, much after the same manner; and cannot in prudence, after some
assignable Tract of years, admit for Testimony hear-says of one sort, rather
than another.

All, I say, which on this Subject has been laid down before, must be allowed
to be as true in Ecclesiastical Tradition; and we need not here proceed any
further to draw the easy Parallel; but reckon on the same distance of time as
absolutely immemorial; and look upon the Ages beyond it, as fabulous, and in
utter darkness.

But we will not use the extremity of our Right, nor pass Sentence in so
peremptory a manner; but will, with the Readers leave, give these
Ecclesiastical Hear-says more respect; consider them more particularly, and
have the patience to make the following deductions.

If then of 1600 years that have passed since Christ, we consider the space of
two or three Centuries, and those of a middle indifferent rate, supposing them
extraordinary neither in their Care nor Negligence; remembering that Memory was
no particular qualification of a Christian; and that their mediocrity of Memory
needed not to be strained, when Writing was so much in use, and at hand; this
considered, and supposed,

1. As to Verbal Reports: if we will favorably suppose that something in our
Saviors or the Apostles own words might have descended down to the Survivers
of the two or three hundredth year, preserved by such uncertain accidental
memory, yet it can never be furmis'd to have been any thing of length, of the
length of a short Chapter we may say, were it a Parable or continued Story;
much less if it were a number of Unconnected Sayings, like a Chapter of the
Proverbs. We see therefore that we cannot expect either much new Text, nor much
interpretation of the old in Apostolical words: the Bulk after three or indeed
two hundred years could not be very considerable.

And besides, (2dly) if they pretend not to any continued Discourse, but only
to Unconnected Sayings, we are to consider, that such Sayings, if any, coming
down without the Context and Circumstances of the Discourse to which they
related, may have often an uncertain Authority. For though spoke by an Apostle,
yet distinction must be made, whether they were spoke in our Lords name, or in
his own; whether too by way of permission or advice only, or else of positive
precept. And then further, if we take their Authority for certain, yet their
sense will frequently be ambiguous and undetermined, not to be securely limited
or amplified without more precise direction. For Example, Suppose these words,
This is my Body, had been transmitted Orally, as said on occasion of the
Blessed Sacrament: if they had been taken for an Answer of Christ's to a
Disciple enquiring what the substance of the Sacrament was, they would have
attested to Transubstantiation: but if it had been known that no such question
was made, and that Christ spoke of that Bread which he took and brake at
Supper, their meaning must then be perfectly different; especially if it had
been told, that it was ordinary for Christ to speak in such Figures; and that
particularly, something like this was frequent with the Jews in their Paschal
Phrase.

But (3dly) Admit there were any Sayings came so contingently down, whose
Authority was certain, and sense determined; they must have been such as were
kept up and remembered, because there was all along present occasion for them.
For if they had not been in ordinary use, there is no reason to think they
would have been distinctly preserved. Of this kind are those Traditions, Iren.
l. 1. c. 2. Tert. de Praescr. c. 13.
mentioned by Ireneus and Tertullian; being nothing else than some of those
Articles, that make what we call the Apostles Creed: As that God the Father was
Maker of Heaven and Earth; and that his Son Jesus was born of the Virgin, that
he Suffered, was Crucified, Dead, and Buried, and rose up again. etc. These
Circumstantial particulars were such as directly opposed the first Heresies of
Christianity, that either denied the Father of Christ to be the Creator, or
that Christ was born really a man, or really suffered etc; (Those against whom
the Apostle St. John and Ignatius writ.) And such plain Truths as these, of
such constant and daily use, no wonder if they were remembered in the first Age;
and not forgot neither in the second, when Marcion and Valentinus broached
again the same Heresies, and denying the Authority of the Scriptures were
properly refuted by this Traditional Evidence.

But then we must observe; that these Traditionary Articles, remembered
occasionally and on particular Exigences, when brought out by Ireneus and
Tertullian, are produced by the last of the two at no great distance, not much
above a hundred years after the death of St. John; neither yet are they
supplemental to the Scripture, but a brief recital only, of some few passages,
of those which are there found written at large.

These Articles, properly speaking, belong not to this head, not being reported
verbatim; as may appear from the difference of Phrase even in these two
Authors. But if the Transmission of such few necessary Articles in exact words
for so little a time, would not induce us to allow Verbal Tradition much more
scope, nor much longer continuance: neither is the Transmission of their sense,
should we suppose that, to prevail further with us. For in the general,

2. If Tradition shall pretend not to the very Sayings, but only to the Effect
and Substance: it is obvious with what uncertainty they must be transmitted.
For how know I with what Judgment the Apostles saying was understood by him
that gave the Abstract, whether he conceived the meaning aright, did not give a
Byas to it, and whether he rightly expressed it. This might well happen at the
first hand, but that it did not in any of the 10 or 15 that were to give it
down, who can promise? The Scripture it self informs us of two such mistakes
which arose immediately; one in matter of Fact, and another in Doctrine. Our
Saviors indeterminate Answer concerning St. John, Joh. 21.23.
If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? went abroad among
the Disciples for a positive affirmation, that that Disciple should not dye:
whereas, Jesus said not he shall not dye, but, etc. So easily were the
Hypothetical words of our Savior lost in the Relation; and other Categorical
ones reported by the Disciples: either from their want of attention, or
misunderstanding; their minds being prepossessed with the thoughts of our
Savior's particular love to St. John, or led by the humane inclination to
believe and tell a strange Story. This mistake would have set up for a
Tradition in matter of Fact: see another in an Article of Faith. Certain men,
say the Apostles in Council to the Gentiles of Antioch, which went out from us,
Acts 15.24.
have troubled you with words, subverting your Souls, saying, ye must be
Circumcised, and keep the Law; to whom we gave no such Commandment. They
Preached, it seems, the necessity of Circumcision; concluding it from some
Words or Actions of the Apostles, and delivering it for their mind: Whereas the
Tradition came not from them, but from the weakness or prejudice of the
Reporters. No stress therefore can be laid on such Summary Traditions: They in
proportion abating of their Evidence, as they ease the Memory.

We see then, that Oral Report, after some Successions, as many as may happen
in much less than 300 years, can have no Authority of its own: whatever it has,
even at lesser distances, must be borrowed from other Supports; and it can be
credited only, as it comes confirmed by concurring Testimony.

Now corroborating Testimony there may be of two sorts, either from other
agreeing Reports, or from Writing.

(1.) If Oral Tradition will accept the assistance of Writing; it may gain
credit, and deserve to be believed. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 5. c. 20.
For so, those Traditions Ireneus mentions, that obtained among the Barbarous
Nations, were confirmed fully by the Apostolic Writing; and what Ireneus heard
from Polycarp of our Savior's Miracles and Discourse, which Polycarp had
received from those that were present, was gladly heard by him, for it was
agreeable to the Holy Scriptures.

But such an Attestation our Oral Tradition cannot pretend to; for it is set up
in opposition to Writing, and is to tell us those things which we no where read.

(2.) As to the other way of Confirmation; if a Discourse be spoke in an
Assembly; and the Persons of that Audience, without conferring together before,
agree after in the same report, it shall be taken for unquestionably true; and
if they differ in some Circumstances, yet the Substance in which they consent,
shall be credited: But if they have been influenced one by another, and there
has been Communication between them, their Evidence will not have the same
force, and if too punctual, will be justly suspected of Confederacy. Now when
the Apostles went Preaching over all the World, delivering the Doctrine of the
Gospel as they went; as their Disciples might remember the chief Heads of their
Discourse; and the Auditors even of these might remember such as were
remarkable, and in which they took themselves to be principally concerned: so,
when the Believers of several distant Countries, came at some distance of time,
to compare their several Traditions received apart; there could be no possible
doubt of the truth of that Doctrine, in which they all concurred. And, if then
those Traditions had been reduced into Writing; their Authority would have been
justly sacred with us; and had they not been admitted into the Canon, they
would have deserved to be bound up with it, and regarded in a very near degree.
From such Traditions, the Ancient Writers, Tertullian particularly and Ireneus,
argue against the Heretics that denied or depraved the Scriptures; and the
Argument, in their Circumstances, as it was proper, so was absolutely
Convincing. By such a Comparison of Truths the Scriptures themselves, though they
wanted not such an Evidence, were confirmed in their Authority; and their Canon
or Rule settled. Now 'till that time and somewhat after, Oral Tradition might
well serve, especially in some eminent notable Articles of necessary daily use;
and the report of one place be strengthened by the Concurrence of the rest.
But, in after Ages, when the Churches came to inter-communicate more
frequently, and imbody by Politic constitutions; and especially, when the
lesser Bishoprics came to be more formally under the direction of the greater,
Rome, Alexandria, Antioch, Constantinople, etc; it was no wonder that the
meaner and dependent followed the Advice of the greater and more Potent: and
then, if the World was found to be in the same Lesson, the Common consent might
as well proceed from the Influence of the Court, from the Authority of some one
or more of the great Bishops gaining the rest, from Imitation and Contagion of
Example in the generality; as from the Unity of Truth, and simplicity of an
unconstrained unaffected agreement. For which reason, Traditions that continued
Oral for 500 year, as they are to be utterly rejected by reason of that
distance from their Original, so cannot have any accessional Authority given
them from the agreement of the Churches of that Age. Much less is the present
Roman Church in any Article to urge upon us her consent with the Modern Greeks
with whom she actually corresponded for eight or nine hundred year, and upon
whom she is known to have been practicing ever since. But of much less
Authority yet, is the Agreement, or rather Conspiracy of the Western since that
time: a sworn Conspiracy of the Clergy under the Pope their General, to beat
down any Truth, that should be against the Interests of the Churchmen, and
contradict the Common gainful Superstitions.

When therefore the Authority of a precedent Age is pressed upon us; we are not
so much to consider, how long we come after that Age, as how long that Age came
after the first. For they they are to be believed concerning things said
before, not by their distance from us, but by their nearness to the Apostles:
as a man that lives all his time at Kensington, is of his own knowledge no
better a Witness of what was said at Westminster Hall, than if he had lived at
the Lands-end. If then the Age that was mentioned to us was out of the hearing
of the first, and removed at a fabulous distance; its Tradition, which was
uncertain a thousand year ago, will become no more certain a thousand years
after, than what is a lie now, will grow true a thousand years hence. The
Tradition will be in it self no truer; though it may, we confess, be told by a
Church so long, that she may at last believe it her self.

And therefore when the times of Gregory the Pope, and Austin the Monk are
vouched; and they are said to be Saints of above a thousand years old: we are
to reckon upon the 600 years that went before them; and to remember, that all
the Oral Tradition of that time must be twice an arrant Fable. Nay, if the 5th
Age be alleged, we must consider then too the immemorial Distance, and
oblivious force of four hundred years; that as there was room enough for some
superstitious conceits to creep in, so it was utterly unlikely that much of
Apostolical Sayings should be memorially conveyed fo far.

For those Persons that then lived, however we at our great distance call them
Ancients, looked upon themselves as of latter date. Vincentius, who wrote in
the year 434, in the Rules he gives for Catholic Doctrine, orders Antiquity to
be followed, as he there calls it: and of those Ancients he refers to, St.
Cyprian was the Eldest; who lived before him not 200 year. Those too of St.
Cyprian's age, esteemed themselves far removed from the Apostles days; and he
himself reckoned upon the past time, as large enough, not only to render the
Truths of the Gospel Ancient, but to bring in after-errors, and let them grow
old too. For, when Pope Stephen would have regulated a controvered Practice by
his Roman Tradition, Cypr. ad Pompeium. Unde est ista Traditio? utrumne de
Dominica and Evangelica Autoritate, etc.
St. Cyprian asks what Tradition was meant, whether that of the Gospels and
Epistles, to which he was ready to Subscribe? if any other was intended, the
Ancient Tradition (he says) might be an Ancient Error: that in any doubtful
Case, they were to consult the Scriptures; and when they were at a loss for
Truth, they were not to trust such Aquaeducts as would hold no water, but pass
by those faulty Pipes, and immediately repair to the Fountain that was at hand.
These are but part of St. Cyprian's expressions on this Subject; who treats the
unwritten Tradition of his own times with as little respect, as we can show to
any that shall offer it self now 1400 years after.

For to come from Speculation to Fact; we shall find the Course that Oral
Tradition had in the Christian World, was very narrow, and very short. For so
it came to pass; by reason, I suppose, of those Uncertainties we have traced
out; that Oral Reports, many no doubt in the first Age, and by which Christians
were in many places chiefly directed, yet in a little longer time, and as soon
as the Canon of Scripture was brought together, began to decrease in their
number, and to lose their Authority; insomuch, that those who lived within the
distance of 200 years from the Apostles, and whose Books are full of
Allegations from Scripture; scarcely make use of a Saying or two from that
Traditional Authority: whether it was, that they were then most of them lost;
or few of them credited; or those that were credited, did not differ from what
was written. Of this Observation the Writings of Ireneus, Tertullian, Origin,
and Cyprian are pregnant Testimonies. From Ireneus alone, one might recover a
good part of the Gospels; but of Traditional Doctrine, not six lines. And by
one of those Traditions, (to observe the fate of them) that Holy Father was led
into the Millenary mistake.

The fortune which the Labors of Papias found, is another instance. He was
Bishop of Hierapolis, an Acquaintance of Polycarp's; Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3.
c. 39.
and had familiarly conversed with several Auditors of the Apostles, from whom
he studiously enquired concerning their Actions and Discourses; What Peter,
what Thomas, what James or John were wont to say: (for he was of the Opinion,
as Eusebius tells us, that what was to be read in the Scriptures was not so
edifying, as that which might be had by the living voice.) Of these Relations
he picked up so many, that he made up five Books; and then we were in a fair
way, if ever, of having some certainty in this kind. But he had gathered
together so much Fable and Paradox, that Eusebius, upon occasion of his
Millenary Tradition, was forced to give us his Character; how he was a very
weak man, as might be discerned by his way of Writing; and that he put down
things in one sense, which were spoke in another. The little therefore of his
Writings we have, we owe to Eusebius; for so small account was made by the
World of his five Books, that they were all quickly lost, and that well-meant
Collection of Hear-says returned again upon Oral Tradition.

There is, I confess, honorable mention made by some Ancients of Unscriptural
Traditions; and such a mention, as might at first sight incline one to believe,
that there had been some very weighty thing preserved that way: but a nearer
view of those places will quickly undeceive us; and the particular they give in
of those matters easily instruct us; how much the general expressions are to be
restrained, or how far disregarded.

For to begin with Clemens Alexandrinus, the honor he does to Unwritten
Tradition, is so justly disparaged by the Apocryphal particulars he produces,
and by the Allegories he derives thence, (things in which Fancy has more to do
than Memory;) that our very Adversaries never think fit much to insist upon it.

Tertullian indeed is always alleged for this purpose, in that famous place of
his Book de Corona Militis. There the Author, at other times over-subtle and
over-proving, but now a rigid Montanist endeavors to prove the wearing of a
Garland unlawful for Christians, by their former abstaining from that Common
fashion. In order therefore to the raising an Argument from Negative Custom, he
thinks himself obliged by his Subject, as well as by the Confirmation of
Montanus, to make the Positive of great Authority: There are several Examples
of observations which we hold by virtue of no Writing; but only by the Title of
Tradition patronized by Custom. To begin with Baptism, when we are going into
the Water, and before too in the Church; we profess under the hands of the
Priest, that we Renounce the Devil, and his Pomp and Angels: after that, we are
dipped thrice; answering something more than our Lord has prescribed in the
Gospel. When we come out we taste the mixture of Milk and Honey: and from that
time for a whole Week we abstain from our daily Bathing. The Sacrament of the
Eucharist, which our Lord appointed to be taken at Meals, and by all
promiscuously, we take in our Assemblies before day, and only from the hands of
the Presidents. We make Oblations for the Dead, and keep yearly their
Birth-days [into the other World.] We hold it a great Crime to Fast, or to
Kneel at Prayers on a Sunday. The same Privilege we enjoy, all the time from
Easter to Whitsontide. We are much troubled that any, even of our own Bread or
Drink should fall upon the ground. When ever we move or go about any thing;
when we come in, or go out; when we put on our Shoes, when we Wash, when we
are at Table; when Candles are lighted, when we lie or sit down; what ever
Action we are upon; we still wear away, as it were, our Forehead by Signing it
with the Cross. Tert. de Coron. Mil. Cap. 3.
and accordingly he gives out the Present Observations then practiced in common
by the Catholick-Church, and the Montanists, for Primitive necessary
Ordinances; as you have them in the Margin rendered from his own words.

Now, because such Observations as these are the man things ascribed by
Ancients to Tradition; I shall, with the Reader's leave, take this occasion to
consider them more particularly. These Usages then are, we perceive, of two
sorts; either Forms of Words, or Rites Practical: and in both, two things are
to be minded; the Fact of their Antiquity, and the Opinion either of their
Necessity or Legality.

1. Now, as to the Antiquity of Usages, we have seen already how uncertain that
must be in Forms of Words Orally delivered; and how easily they may be
interpolated and changed. Rites too and Gestures, to be transmitted by
Imitation, or practical Tradition, are as subject to vary in a little time, and
to pass into another mode; either by Addition or Substraction, from the Fancy,
or from the mistake of the Imitator: so that at last they may retain but little
resemblance of what they were at first; and appear no more akin, than a Copy a
little removed would be to an Original, however it might go under the name of
the first Master. Besides this, it is very easy too for foreign Usages of the
Neighborhood to slide in afterward: and then, when they are once admitted
into Company, and pass for some time with the Elder, they very securely pretend
to the same Antiquity. Such introduced practices might without much difficulty
get themselves styled Apostolical; either because used in an Apostolical
Church, that is where an Apostle had been heretofore; or because brought in by
an Apostolical, that is a Reverend and Orthodox Bishop; or because having been
used immemorially, and descending from a time higher than the present, they
were presumed to have descended from the Highest, as Rain that comes from the
Clouds, is said to come down from Heaven. For in those sensible things our
Opinion acts as our Sight; and at such an assignable Distance, confound all
further Distances; taking every thing to be equally remote, that is removed
beyond such a degree: as our Eye and Fancy place the Planets, or even a Meteor
of the lower Region, in the Firmament among the Fixed Stars. Now such Errors of
Place, any small observation discovers, and their correction is presently
admitted: but these of time, though easy to be observed, are not so easily
corrected, because favored and indulged by the nature of Man; who, as he loves
to consecrate the Original of his City, or antedate that of his Family, so is
willing to have all his solemn Actions as venerably Ancient as he can. And in
such things it is not perhaps Civil to be very difficult; and we are rather to
imitate the Courtesy of St. Jerome. Unaquaeque Provincia abundet in sensu suo
and praecepta Majorum Leges Apostolicas arbitretur. Hieron. ad Lucinium.
Let then every Province as to this matter, enjoy its own Opinion, and think as
honorably of its Customs as it pleases; provided such Customs will be Civil
too, not make any claim by their Antientry, nor prescribe upon us for our
Sufferance. The Tradition of these Usages is much like that of Relics: that
there were some such indifferent Ceremonies practiced by the Apostles, we do
not much question; but the number of them is strangely increased, and which are
the Genuine we know not how to tell; they are multiplied like the wood of the
Cross; and the Counterfeit is never to be discerned. We are therefore ready to
show those that seem to be Ancient; a decent respect; but for Swearing to the
Truth of them, or however, for falling down and Worshipping them, we desire to
be excused. The Antiquity of Rites is a matter of Fact, and in that we see the
mistake is easy.

2. The other thing we are to consider of them is either their Lawfulness, or
their Necessity: and this is a matter of Doctrine; descending down with them,
or accruing to them, in common presumption; but admitted often upon mistake.
For as such Usages are always presumed Lawful, not only from ancient Practice,
but by our own; so we know how easily an Opinion of their necessity may arise.
In all Customary Proceedings, Precedents at pleasure, are apt however to pass
into standing Rules: and as we are naturally willing to have our own practice
followed, and our Example go for Law; so, when we can recommend it from more
ancient usage, we fail not to urge the Authority; and make it a point of
Reverence and Duty to our Ancestors, to follow their steps and ours. For which
reason it is no wonder, that Rites which had once gained to be esteemed
Apostolical, should not only be taken for Lawful, but for Obligatory too, by
less thinking men. Whereas on the contrary, it is so far from being certain,
that Practices reputed Apostolical are necessary and perpetual; that the very
true ones often were not so much to be ascribed to the Apostles, as to the Age
they lived in, not being purposely instituted, but provisionally taken in, some
out of Compliance merely, and to avoid present Offenses; and consequently they
were not only indifferent, but might grow inexpedient, if not unlawful, in
tract of time: such were the Kiss of Love; the Love Feasts; to take the
Eucharist at Meals; to abstain from Blood, and things Strangled; to Circumcise
a Timothy, etc.

For a Right Originally Expedient, remaining the same and unvary'd in it self,
may yet grow to be of a contrary nature, by change of outward Circumstances: it
may too in time deserve to be laid aside, for the Superstition that may be
tacked to it by the inclination of the Age. But if it has been varied, it may
either suffer so much alteration, as to become another thing; or at least it
may be brought by a slight, and after a little time indiscernible inoculation,
to produce a Fruit of a far different kind Not to say how one that is
sub-introduc'd and Novel, if it be not at the first rise apparently and grossly
erroneous, may however have in it some Seed of Superstition, not then
perceived, nor affecting therefore the first Users, but which shall afterward
grow and exert it self, as it may be improved and displayed by the Corruption
of the succeeding Imitators. We of our Church think we have very good instances
of these Matters, in many of the Roman Usages. For so the Latin Language, once
necessary to the Prayers of the Western Church, because it was the Language of
those Countries; is now, by their alteration of Speech, grown as improper for
the same reason, and is most absurdly retained. So the Sign of the Cross, which
formerly accompanied Prayers, visibly showing them to be made in the name of
Christ Crucified; has been since used Superstitiously alone, and I know not
what Virtue attributed to the airy Figure. By the insertion of the
Transubstantiating Doctrine, the Respect due to the Holy Elements of the
Eucharist has passed into absolute Adoration; and the nature of that Sacrament
is almost Transubstantiated too. And lastly, to mention no more; Prayer for the
Dead, which, besides the Testimony it gave to another Life, was no more at
first than a holy Wish for the Deceased, expressing our Concern for their
Condition; whereby our Desire, or our Joy and Thanks for their happiness was
rather professed, than any want of it supposed to be relieved; and which
therefore was made as frequently and as solemnly, for the Apostles and Martyrs,
consummate Saints, as for less Righteous Men; such a Prayer was after thought
to have some real effect for the Dead; then it was surmis'd to contribute to
their present advantage, however as yet but sparingly offered, and at set
times: at length it came to be esteemed of some great benefit or other, and to
be highly recommended to the Piety of their surviving Relations: 'till at last,
by the coming in of Purgatory, it had a stated use, and grew to be a most
necessary Office; Men beginning to make it the greatest care of their lives not
to want this Help after their death, erecting and endowing Societies for this
purpose. So did the Error, when once insinuated into the Practice, grow on
still like a grain of Seed; till by degrees it became a Tree: which, after it
was once well grafted, has since spread so wide, and bore such Fruit, that
under it all the numerous kinds of Romish Orders have been lodged and fed.

It were obvious to find many such like Examples: but, as they may not be
agreed to by our Adversaries; so they are not necessary to our Design. It must
be granted us that such changes are easy, and such Errors very natural: and
as to Tertullian, to whom we now return, he himself affords an Instance of one
sort; it being manifest that he was mistaken in the Duty of these Observations,
even by the Confession of our Adversaries themselves, who have made no scruple
of discontinuing one half of them long ago.

This his Error about the Necessity of those Practices, will easily lead us to
think him capable of the other concerning their Antiquity: an Error the old
Bishops of Rome have often committed, ascribing still their Modern Usages to
St. Peter and St. Paul. But with this we have no just cause to charge
Tertullian: he for his part speaks very warily in the Point, and declines to
father the Observations, he reckons, upon the Apostles; giving great reason of
suspicion to those who are acquainted with his manner of gaining all advantage
to his Cause, that he himself was conscious enough of their later reception. It
is certain that none of them needed an Apostolical Institution; that the Forms
might have been devised by un-inspired Bishops; and that several of the Rites
might as well have been brought in by succeeding Converts, from the Customs of
their former Life. For that carefulness about their Bread and Drink, is still a
Jewish Observance; and was too heretofore, in part, a Roman Superstition
Ceremonies des Juifs par Leo de Mod. Part 2. Chap. 10. Cibus e manu prolapsus
redebatur, utique per mensas. Plin. Lib. 37. C. 2.
. To Pray for the Dead, was in some sort used both with the Heathens, and the
Jews. Not to Fast, or Kneel, on a Sunday, was only to pay to that day the
honor of the Sabbath. The frequency too of the Sign of the Cross here
mentioned, might have nothing more it it, but so many Benedictions, as the Jews
use to this day on the same occasions Leo de Moden. p. 1. Chapter 9. Buxtorf. Syn.
Jud. C. 12. Coloss. 3.17.
; only in this distinguished to the Eye, that they were made, as the Apostle
directs, in the name of Christ. Tertullian himself tells us in other places
Tert. Apol. c. 16. Ad Nation. l. 1. c. 13. Diem Saturni Otio and Victui
decernere. Aliis diebus Lavacrum subtrahere, aut in vesperam differe. Ritus
Lucernarum. Jejunia cum Azymis. Orationes Littorales. A Judaico more, quem
ignorant.
of several Jewish Customs, which the Heathen Romans of his time practiced, not
knowing whence they had derived them. With much less difficulty we know might
the Customs of that Religion have passed into Christianity; and the Christians
too, might in some time be as ignorant of their Original: and then it followed
of course, that what had no known Author, and it may be no apparent ground, was
to be referred to the common Authors of our Religion, and attributed to their
positive appointment. That something of this was the Case of these Rites
Tertullian produces, his wariness, we observed, will incline us to believe. But
as to the fifty days after Easter, it is more particularly probable that their
Festival Solemnity was not of so early a date, at least at Rome: (not to take
notice of St. Paul's contrary practice observed by St. Jerome.) Acts 21. Hier.
Ep. ad Lucinium.
For it is not likely that the Interdiction of Fasting after the Resurrection,
was earlier than the observation of Fasting before: and there are some words of
Ireneus preserved by Eusebius, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24. Edit. Vales.
which give us a shrewd intimation, that Good Friday was not long kept at Rome
before Pope Soter's days, if Easter was. But to Conclude, however these
Reflections may be received, we are not much concerned in their Success. For
should we allow, that a few indifferent Changeable Usages might make a shift to
pass down sincere from the Apostles, thorough some eightscore years; yet
Tradition would not have much to boast of: it should rather be out of
countenance, that so accurate and so vehement a Writer as Tertullian, when he
had a mind to recommend it, should have nothing more considerable to produce
for it at so small a distance.

Having thus considered this passage of Tertullian, we have at the same time
dispatched another of St. Jerome, which is nothing else but a Transcript of this,
and not made the better by being put into a Luciferians mouth. And indeed,
Tertullian being once set aside, a Writer so exact, and so near the Apostolic
times, the remarks we have made will easily help us to examine the Junior
Authority; the eldest of which is as distant from him, as he from the Apostles.
For which reason, the Reader, I presume, Of Decrees and Declarations preserved
in the Church, the one we have in Writing; and the other we have received by
Tradition from the Apostles, delivered down to us in a more private manner:
both which are of the same use to Religion. And this will be contradicted by
none, who is but ever so little conversant in Ecclesiastical Constitutions. For
if we shall go about to reject all Unscriptural Usages, as things of no great
moment; we shall be in danger of maiming Religion in its Principal Parts, or
rather of reducing the Preaching [ or Declaration] to a mere sound. As for
Example; to begin with the first and most common Rite; who has taught us in the
Scripture that those should be Signed with the Sign of the Cross, who hope in
the Name of our Lord Jesus? what Scripture has directed us to turn toward the
East when we Pray? The form of Holy words said over the Elements at their
Consecration, which of the Holy Writers has left us in the Scripture? For we do
not think that sufficient, which the Apostle or the Gospels have Recorded; but
we say both before and after, other words, as very necessary to the Mystery;
which we have received by an Unscriptural Information. The Consecration of the
Water and Oil at Baptism, and of the Baptized Person, and the use it self of
Oil, and the Dipping thrice, and the Renunciation, are none of them from the
Scripture; but from that secret and undivulg'd Instruction, which our Fathers
have privately preserved, without any busy Curiosity, or impertinent inquiry:
understanding well that Mysteries, which are to be kept venerable, were to be
kept in Silence. For how was it proper that those things should stand
perpetually exposed in Writing, which Strangers are not so much as once allowed
to look on? Or why did not Moses admit every one promiscuously into every part
of the Temple? -- Was it not out of his Wisdom, because he knew, that what is
common and obvious is subject to Contempt; and that what is reserved and rare,
is naturally endeavored after and esteemed? After the same manner the Apostles
and Fathers, who first Ordered the Church, procured veneration to their
Mysteries, by keeping them unspoken and concealed. This is the reason of
Unscriptural Tradition; that the knowledge of, [ or Speculation imported by]
the Decrees [ or Ordinances] should not be an ordinary Theme, and grow into
contempt by familiarity. For a Decree is one thing, and a Declaration is
another. Decrees are [generally] kept under silence: but Declarations are
Published. Now one sort of silence is, that Obscurity the Scripture uses, when
it makes it a difficult thing to find out the meaning of the [Decree or]
Ordinance: For so, all of us look toward the East at Prayers; but few of us
know that we are seeking our old Country, that Paradise which God planted in
the East in Eden. And all of us on Sundays pray standing; but all of us do not
know the reason. For it is not only because we are risen with Christ, and are
to seek those things which are above; that therefore, on that day of the
Resurrection, we put our selves in mind, by our posture, of the Grace then
given us: but because that day is, in some manner, the Image of the Eternity we
expect. Upon which account, though it were the first of days, yet it is not said
by Moses to be the first, but the one day. For, says he, the Evening and the
Morning were the one day: as being the same day, that returns to us in a
frequent Revolution; and so represents to us the future State, the endless Day,
that is to have no Evening, etc. (For the Author pursues the Speculation
further, and at last concludes) The time would fail me, should I rehearse all
the Churches Unscriptural mysteries. I therefore pass over the rest; but the
very Confession of our Faith, to Believe in the Father, and in the Son, and in
the Holy Ghost; from what Scripture is it? for, if by a Religious consequence,
we frame our Confession from the institution of Baptism, because as we are
Baptized, so we are to Believe; let our Adversaries then give us leave to use
the same way of consequence, and to express our Doxology conformably to our
Belief: but, if they reject the form of our Doxology, because it is
Unscriptural, let them then show us the place, where the Creed, and the other
things we have mentioned above, are set down in Scripture too.
would hardly excuse any further enquiry upon this Subject; were not St.
Basil's great Name offered for the next Testimony, and that very much insisted
on by our Adversaries: which therefore I give here in the Margin.

(...) and (...) I have rendered distinctly, as St. Basil I conceive has
directed. For (...) is plainly a Decree, whether Speculative or Practical, both
in the Civil and Philosophic use; (for so the (...) of the Philosophers are by
Tully interpreted Decreta:) and accordingly is either an Opinion and
Persuasion, or an Ordinance of something to be done; most commonly the latter,
in Civil and in Sacred acception. And then because being only a resolve of the
Mind, or of a Council, it does not in its nature imply Publication, and
ordinarily is not published: It is therefore supposed by this Author to be
Private, and contradistinguish'd to (...) which is the Declaration or
Proclamation of such Opinions or Ordinances. This I take to be the Authors
meaning, and our Adversaries have no disadvantage by it: for I do not make
(...) here to signify an Ordinance only, but a Doctrinal Persuasion too, when
the sense admits it.

This Passage of St. Basil, which I have not been afraid to give at full
length, seems to aggrandise Tradition much, and to make its use of very high
and necessary importance: but, if we consider the words nearly, and refer them
to their occasion; they will not be found to make any great matter. The
intention of the Father is only to show, that a Glory be to the Father, and to
the Son, with the Holy Ghost.
Form of Doxology, which he has before proved at large to be substantially
contained in the Scripture, although it be not found there precisely in the
same words, may however be lawfully continued in the Church. And with this
regard his highest Sayings for Tradition are undoubtedly true: as that the
Church uses Forms and Rites delivered down from their Fathers, and no where to
be read in Scripture; that they are of great importance to Devotion; and that,
if the Church were denied the use of any thing that is Unscriptural, she would
be left naked and almost mute. In such a respect St. Basil's Sayings are exact,
and this was enough for his purpose. But to make him say, that there were any
necessary Truths consigned to Tradition, different from those of the Scripture;
or that any of the particular Ordinances he mentions, were determinately
necessary; is to make him speak more than he himself asserts. And further, to
understand him, as if he positively affirmed all those things to be of
Apostolical Institution; is to deal too rigorously with an Eloquent man, and
not to give his Style those favorable allowances that are usual in his Case.

The General expressions with which he begins, are best to be interpreted by
the instances he gives. And therefore when we find him reckoning the Creed for
Unscriptural, we are no longer at a loss for his meaning concerning Doctrinals
Unscriptural, but know that in his account all Declarations and Confessions of
Scriptural Faiths, are however Unscriptural, if they have not been writ by the
Apostles just in that very form. And in this sense it is he truly affirms, that
the Declaration or Preaching of Gospel Truths would be too much straightened, and
brought almost to nothing, if confined to Gospel Text, and not allowed the
liberty of proper and larger Explications.

In like manner it is apparent, that St. Basil could not intend those
particular Forms of Belief or Prayer, or those Particular Rites, to be so
necessary, as that they must never be varied or enlarged, or some of them
totally laid aside. The Church of his Age, did not understand it self to be
under such a Confinement, for even the Creed that is called Apostolical, was
then variously conceived in several Churches, and admitted besides great
enlargements in the Council of Nice. The Forms too of Prayers were very
different: not to mention the other Rites. And as to these few usages which
happened to be observed more generally; their perpetual necessity was never, I
suppose, believed then by any wise man; and has since been sufficiently
disowned by the practice of the Roman Church.

St. Basil seems indeed to speak for the Apostolic Antiquity of those things
something plainly: but to name no more now, the Differences we before observed
of the Creed it self so named peculiarly, do not agree with the conceit, as old
as our Author, that it was Composed by the Apostles in common. It is very well
known how easy the Churches of his time were in giving that Venerable Title to
every respected Usage; and how easily Usages were then multiplied. Of this St.
Basil gives unawares an instance in this very Book: where, drawing an Argument
from the practice of the Church of Neocaesaria, founded by Gregory
Thaumaturgus, he commends that Church much to the disadvantage of the rest, and
tells us, (...) c. 29.
That she was so punctual to the Customs of her first institution, that she
seemed to others to be very defective.

Then, (...); Ibid.
in St. Basil's days the Antiquity of two hundred years, and the practice of
such an eminent Apostolic Person as that Gregory, were sufficient to procure
to any Rite the name of Apostolical: much less was it refused to such as were
esteemed Old, even before that Old Bishop's time; especially if they had the
chance to be somewhat universally received. And therefore it is no wonder, if
St. Basil followed the Phrase of his time, and was content to speak not very
exactly, in a style that would favor his Argument, and be admitted by his
Adversary. Neither could any one have been much misled by this modern way of
Expression, that had observed how cautiously the more Ancient Doctors had
abstained from it, when the Argument equally required it. But however, St.
Basil seems here in this very place to have recollected himself, and to
Interpret his meaning; when, upon the Resumption, he mentions not the Apostles
only, but adds other Authors for his Traditions: The Apostles, says he, and
Fathers, who first ordered the Churches.

He speaks too according to the singular practice of his latter times, when he
makes such a secret of these Rites: and then he supposes them not written, that
they might lie concealed; as if the Apostles could not have ordered a Writing
to be kept secret. Whereas I suppose the true reason, why the Apostles wrote
not down such kind of things, was not to keep them either private, or
venerable; but because they were not worth the writing; as not being designed
for perpetual memory and use, but left to the discretion of each Age that was
to follow.

When those Ceremonies were made so venerable, by their secrecy, and by the
names of their Authors; it was as fit to find out some profound reasons for
them, as it was agreeable to the Allegorical humor of some Great men,
particularly of those who followed the Alexandrian way. And these Mysterious
ones, St. Basil here gives us, have indeed that qualification he supposes, and
are not very obvious. For so few knew his true reason for turning to the East,
that the Author of the Orthodox Answers, subjoyned usually to Justin Martyr,
was utterly ignorant of it. That too for standing at Prayers on Sundays, etc.
is very Mystical. But had our Author been acquainted with the Jewish Rituals,
he would never have went so deep for the Rationale of an ordinary practice:
much less, if he had known their Language, would he ever have founded it upon
the Septuagints bad Greek. For our part we need desire no more, than that the
Customs, and their Reasons should go together; and the one not be admitted for
Apostolical, without the other.

What is said upon this place of St. Basil, I desire may be understood with all
due respect to his just Authority; whose Testimony in weightier Matters, or
such as were under his own knowledge, I should be unwilling to decline. But it
is not, I presume, any imputation upon his Integrity or Capacity, to say that
he lay under the common prejudice or ignorance of a distant Age; and that he
spoke concerning slighter things, and such as were not in question before him,
according to the fashion of his time, and as he was carried away by the stream
of his flowing Eloquence.

These Remarks, we have made, as we have been obliged by truth, and for the
more abundant satisfaction of our Adversaries; not that they are much necessary
to our present Intention. For upon this Testimony of St. Basil we needed not to
have made any other observation than this: that he was willing enough, as
appears by the Preface, to have advanced the Honor and Truth of Tradition, and
that the Argument of his Book led him to instance in Doctrines; but that he was
forced to descend very low for his Examples, having nothing to reckon but a few
indifferent mutable Usages, whose meanness he endeavors to cover with
mysterious reasons, never certainly intended at their Introduction.

Neither is it necessary to proceed any further, and to examine the remaining
authority for Tradition, that is usually brought out of Epiphanius, a something
later, and a much less exact Writer than St. Basil. His Sayings are much the
same, and there need no other Reflections upon them, than those we have already
made.

The Assertion which led us to the discussion of these Testimonies, the Reader
may remember was this: That our Reasonings concerning Oral Tradition were
confirmed by Fact; and that actually the Use and Authority of it in the Church
lessened very much in a little time, and as soon as the Code of the Scriptures
was Collected. Now this Assertion is so far from being impeached by these
Authorities, that it is absolutely verified by them, and wants no further
confirmation: it manifestly appearing thence, that in those days Tradition had
nothing to tell, but a Story of some ancient Modes and Practices; and that she
could not pretend to remember then any one Unscriptural Article of Faith;
however it has happened since, that she has been made to rub up her memory, and
been suborned by after Ages to depose to the truth of Precepts, and Doctrines,
of which 1400 years ago she knew not a Syllable.

My Lord Bacon, considering that few things of value were conveyed to us from
Antiquity, aptly compares Time to a River, in which lighter things swim down,
but the weightier are drowned. We may too, with St. Cyprian, suppose Oral
Tradition to be the River, and to descend down through some Tract of Time or
Place. This then, if it will preserve it self pure and unmixt, must be content
to run like one of those Eastern Brooks, which, receiving no accession,
diminish as they pass; subdivided still into lesser Branches, and wasted
continually, if only by the drowth of the Air, and the leakiness of the
Channel, till at length they are entirely lost. But the ordinary Course of
Tradition is (we see) like that of a common River; many a stream falls into it
by the way from either hand, and it comes down to the lower grounds a wide and
a mighty Current, bearing all along the old name: but no one thinks it was as
great at its Head; or knows where to find below a drop of the first Water.

This uncertainty of Traditional Evidence in gross, has been the designed
Subject of the present Chapter. For, as we have not insisted on the probable
Objections we had to make against the Divine Right of the abovementioned
Rituals; so we do not stand neither upon that advantage our Adversaries
Testimonies have incidentally given us, in favor of the Sixth Article of our
Church, which admits no Doctrine to be of Faith that is not contained in the
holy Scripture. We do not therefore pretend here, to set aside all Unscriptural
Articles at once; we are only preparing to examine them hereafter, as they
shall be offered singly: having only endeavored now to bring Oral Tradition
within some compass, and to prescribe it some certain limits and conditions, to
which it ought to submit. And in order to such particular Enquiries, I have
deduced the general intent of this long Discourse into the following
Corollaries.

CHAP. VII.
Articles to be observed concerning Traditional Authorities.

I. IF any Apostolical Sayings of Moment had been Orally delivered down, it
would have been convenient that they should not have passed many descents, and
that at the second or third hand they should have been compared and attested by
some unconcerted concurring Tradition, and then have been reduced into Writing
by good and credible hands, and that Writing received for true by some
considerable part of the Catholic Church.

The wisdom of our Law has thought fit to use a nicer Caution in matters of far
less importance. In the Nuncupative disposal of any Sum above 30 l. it requires
three Witnesses deposing to the words of the Testator, or their effect; and
that they should not be accidental Hearers, but called on to that purpose: it
trusts not neither their Memories at the distance of half a year; but is so
scrupulous, as to require that whatever Evidence they bring in after that
time, should have been written down, not only before the half year was expired,
but within six days after the words were first spoke. Of the necessity of some
such exactness that Author seems to have been sensible, who first put out in
writing the Donation of Constantine, and amongst the Letters of the first
Popes, that Nuncupative Testament of St. Peter under St. Clemens his hand. But
that way ought to have been thought of earlier, and then it might have deserved
a greater credit. For though it found so much with the Popes as to be made Law,
and has been defended for good Tradition, even in this Age: yet a Deed never
produced till 400 year after the Maker's death, was shrewdly to be suspected of
Forgery; and a Nuncupative Testament not all proved in Seven hundred years, was
manifestly barred by the reason of that Statute against Frauds and Perjury.

II. However the Sayings of our Savior and his Apostles might have been
delivered down Orally in Barbarous Countries; yet no doubt, had there been any
Traditions considerable, and different from what were written by the Apostles,
known for authentic in the Roman World, especially to the end of the second,
the third, or fourth Ages; they would not have wanted some one that should have
recorded and fixed them in writing, in perpetuam rei Memoriam, amongst those
many Zealous, Inquisitive, and Learned men that flourished in those times.

This was to have been expected from them, out of ease to their own memory, and
out of a pious care for Posterity. Something of this kind was too attempted by
some of them: but the success of their labor showed, how little need there was
thought to be of it; and that the holy Spirit had already written all the
necessary Doctrines he designed to be transmitted. For, besides the Heretic
Gospels and Revelations, besides the spurious Recognitions of Clemens, and the
Apostolical Constitutions and Canons known to be suposititious; there were
Traditional Collections made by Papias, whom we have mentioned, and by
Hegesippus; there were Doctrinal Memoirs, (...).
going under several venerable names; there were too the Apostolical
Constitutions alleged by Epiphanius: all which have been neglected and lost,
either for their insignificancy, or uncertainty, their Spots and Faults having
been discovered, or their lesser light obscured quite and extinguished, by the
Scripture our great Luminary.

III. But further, suppose the men of those Ages so much wanting to themselves
and us, upon I know not what by respects; yet however we cannot think them so
careless in their Argument, and so forgetful of what they knew, (if any such
considerable Sayings they did know) as not to bring them out on proper and
exigent occasions. No more than now for a whole Age together, Hoc est Corpus
has been omitted for Transubstantiation; or Tu es Petrus, for the Pope's
Supremacy.

IV. And for the same Reason, it cannot be demanded that any Traditive
interpretation of holy Scripture should be allowed for Authentic now by us,
which the Holy Fathers of those Ages, commenting upon the Scripture
professedly, either knew not, or else passed by. To say there were such
Traditions, unknown to such men, is to bring the Authority of those Traditions
too much in question: for to whom, or by whom else should they be transmitted?
and to think that an Authentic interpretation, as Divine as the Text it self,
should be omitted by the Commentator who knew it; and that he would, instead of
that Sacred one, substitute one of his own, is unreasonably absurd.

V. But further yet, so much we must take leave to demand, that whatever
Traditive Interpretation shall be brought to control the Text, and wrest it
from its own natural obvious sense; much more that shall impose upon the Text a
sense seemingly absurd to Humane Apprehension, and introductive of new Duties,
otherwise unlawful; that then such a Traditional interpretation should be as
Authentic, and as well attested as the Text it self.

VI. And lastly; to return to our proper Argument in hand, this too we must of
right expect; that no place of the written word of God, should be more express,
or more Authentic; than that of the unwritten word, which is to set up and
authorize an Infallible Interpreter of all that Scripture, and an infallible
propounder of all Articles of Faith.

In this view of Oral Tradition, we have seen, first in the general, how little
of it we are to expect to meet, and how uncertain its evidence must be; and
then, if any particular of it be urged, upon what terms it must be admitted.
And now so prepared, we may proceed to examine the pretenses of the Roman
Church. The first and grand one is their Infallibility, which therefore we are
to consider in the next place.

DISCOURSE II. Concerning Infallibility, etc.
The Contents.
THE Hypothesis of Infallibility explained according to its pretense. Chap. I.
The Nature of the Proof that is to be requied for this pretended Infallibility.
Chap. II. The Authorities or Positive Proofs for it considered. The Proofs
alleged from Scripture insufficient. Chap. III. The Proofs from Tradition
insufficient, For an Infallibility at large. Chap. IV. For the Infallibility of
the Pope. Chap. V. For the Infallibility of the Majority of the Church
Universal. Chap. VI. For the Infallibility of a Council. Chap. VII. For the
Infallibility of Pope and Council together. Chap. VIII.

The Indirect Arguments pretended to be drawn from Reason, and to conclude ad
Absurdum, considered. As, That otherwise God has not sufficiently provided for
his Church. Chap. IX. That without Infallibility there can be no certainty of
Faith. Chap. X. That without Infallibility there can be no Authority in the
Church. Chap. XI. That without Infallibility the Church may fail. Upon this
Occasion there follows Chap. XII. A Digression in two Enquiries. 1. Whether the
whole Church may possibly Err. Chap. XIII. 2. Whether Salvation may be obtained
in an Erring Church. Chap. XIV.


The Conclusion. That no Modern Ecclesiastical Body is by any antecedent Grant
made incapable of Error; that their Judgment may be sometimes justly suspected;
and that it must be discerned by their consequent Decrees, whether actually
they have Erred or no. Chap. XV.
DISCOURSE II. Concerning Infallibility, etc.
CHAP. I.
The Hypothesis of Infallibility explained according to the usual Pretense.

INfallibility, is a word of very easy meaning, and needs not any
extraordinary Proponent for its definition; it being nothing else but an
impossibility of erring, or being in the wrong: which as it is an Eternal
Attribute of God, whose Dictates are necessarily true; so is pretended by his
Gift, at some times, and in some Cases to belong to Men.

But as plain and simple as it is in its first notion, when it comes to be
applied to men, it grows more encumbered, and includes several respects; as (1)
the Persons to whom it appertains, (2) the Cases in which it takes place, (3)
how and in what manner it is wrought and works.

1. The Consideration of the Persons alone includes great variety. For though it
be allowed by Pretenders on all sides, that this high Privilege belongs to
none but Christians; yet whether it be appropriated to a single Person, as the
Pope; or whether it results from the consent of a Body, and what that Body is:
or whether, lastly, it be not tied to the united concurrence of that Body of
Men, and of the Pope together; these all are questions made to our hand, and
which we ought not to overlook.

For the claim may be put in, in the name of the present Universal Church; and
that be Truth in which all Christians, all the Clergy, or all the Bishops now
living shall Unanimously agree; or else it may be said that Truth shall go
along with the consent of the greatest part.

Now if the Consent of the greatest number be Infallible, it may be then
supposed, that such as have been voted out by Majority of Voices heretofore,
have no share in this Privilege now; and that Heretics therefore, though
greater in number at present, yet are not to be taken into consideration: The
Infallibility belonging only to that Body of Men, who are the Majority in
remainder, after the several successive Exclusions.

And then further, it may all along be surmis'd that this Grace is so
dispensed, as not to belong either to the whole Body of the Christians, or to
any particular Church, without the Concurrence of some certain Bishops, or
Bishop, as that of the Roman See; presumed therefore to be of the Quorum in
that High Commission.

And then lastly, if any single See has that Prerogative; it may be thought to
be Infallible of it self, and to want no other concurrence.

The Reader, it may be, that is in a zealous search after this Infallible
Guide, thinks himself impertinently delayed by such an enumeration. He expected
perchance that the Seat of that Authority should have been perspicuous, and
visible; that the Decider of Controversies, should himself have been subject to
none; and that it should immediately have been known, to whom resort was to be
made: But he will be pleased to stay 'till the several pretenses are laid open;
both that he may not be mistaken in the Person of his Guide, and that he may
know what assistance from him he is to expect.

First then, the common Interest has been so much considered by Great Men of
the Roman Communion, Chap. 1, etc. Car. Alliacen. apud Richer. vindie. Sch.
Paris. Coloniae. Lib. 3. page 16, etc. 42, 43, etc.
that it has been sometimes questioned, whether this Inerrancy is not to be
placed in the Collective Body of all Christians, Children only excepted.
However it has not been thought extraordinary, to vest it in the Consent of the
whole Clergy, or of the upper part, or at least of the Bishops; so that, that
only should be necessarily true, in which all respectively should agree. By
this means every Person, at least of the Superior Rank, would be secure enough
against the infallible Sentence: and a Heretic Bishop must be self Condemned,
formally, and not without the concurrence of his own Vote. But this
supposition, at the best, would end but few Controversies: and it is thought
necessary for the Church to have a more practicable and ready Decision.

Let us then have no regard to those Popular Sorbonnists; and let us too set
aside the Decree of their whole Theological Faculty, Facult. Theol. Paris. apud
Richer. lib. 1. page 3. De Potest. Eccles. apud eund. Richer. lib. 3. page 144.
exclude the Domini Curati from the Hierarchy, and deny them the Decisive voice
allowed them, particularly by Gerson. Let us suppose that this Infallibility
rests only in the Episcopal College; and let us grant further, that the
Consent of the whole may be taken from the greater part; yet still there are
many Points remaining to be settled. As, what shall the odds of number be on
that side, on which Infallibility must go? Is it a simple Majority, as in
ordinary Assemblies? or will not the Holy Ghost come down but upon two Thirds,
as in the Election of a Pope? And besides, are the Voices of those Bishops
supposed to be taken at home? or are they not Infallible till convened and met
together? if they are met together, will the present, though a Minor part,
include the absent? if so, what Power is to Summon them, and make their absence
contumacious? or can the absent make Proxies, and is the share in this
Privilege such as may be delegated? or lastly all along is every Bishop to
have an equal Voice? or shall they not be considered according to the largeness
of their Diocese, and in proportion to the number they represent? has every
Petty Italian Bishop with his small Care, or a Titular Bishop with none, the
same share of Infallibility with the real and greater Diocesans? A thing not
allowed by the Councils of Constance and Basil, though necessary to the Council
of Trent. Concerning these Circumstances, we ought to have determinate
satisfaction, and express warrant. But besides, we are to consider, that
Infallibility this way will be very difficultly, and very uncertainly attained.
The Poll of the Christian World is numerous, and cannot be exactly taken as the
Episcopal Votes lie dispersed: and if they are to meet, the Controversy
concerning the freedom of the place, the notice given, etc. is so manifold,
that it can never be a clear Case.

Upon which account, the Particular Church, that shall now pretend it self to
be Heir, as it were, to the Old Universal by Successive Exclusions, can never
be too sure that those several Exclusions were duly made; that the Poll was
rightly taken, and all necessary formalities observed: for she is to know, that
upon so many contingent suppositions her claim of Infallibility depends.

These Difficulties and Inconveniences arise upon placing Infallibility in the
general Body of Christian Bishops: and they still increase, if besides the
consent of that Body, we suppose the Concurrence of any certain Bishop, or
Bishops, precisely necessary.

All the Great Bishops put in heretofore a claim somewhat equal; though not of
this kind. Those of Antioch, Alexandria, and Rome, founded a preeminence partly
upon Apostolical Succession, partly upon the greatness of their Cities.
Constantinople afterward insisted upon the Privileges of its City singly. The Sea of Jerusalem had its pretense too, a weak one as the World went; for it was
purely Spiritual, and in right of the first Church. Now great Reason there was,
that in common Causes no innovation should be made in the Christian World,
without the Advice of the several Patriarchs; because they were supposed to
speak the sense of their several Districts, whom upon such occasions they
consulted, and in whose Name they pronounced. Accordingly all these Patriarchs
were nigh equal heretofore, when Rank and Precedence were only thought on: but
the Pope has since advanced such a singular pretense, and it is pressed upon us
so much, that we need take no notice of the other, but only of the Roman.

Here then it may be considered, whether the Pope challenges his Power in this
Infallibility, whether of a Negative Voice, or absolute Determination, in
virtue of his See, the place of his residence, or in virtue of his Succession
to St. Peter. It is fit that this should be known, in order to the discerning
the Person whom we are to look after, and the Proofs that are to be produced.

If he presides in virtue of the place, we may enquire whether Infallibility
will not be lost, if Rome be destroyed, or become either Heathen or Mohammedan?
Whether the Gates of Hell are never to prevail against that City? or if they
do, whether a Titular Bishop must be made, and the Style be Bishop of Rome,
consumptae per Hosts, or in Patribus Infidelium? Or lastly, we may ask,
whether the Privilege was good to a Pope errant, or to the Residentiaries of
Avignon?

If he presides by virtue of the General Title of Successor to St. Peter, it
then comes naturally to be enquired, by what grant the Cardinals, as the Clergy
of Rome, choose a general Officer for the whole World? and whether the Bishops
of all Christendom ought not to join in his Election to make it valid? whether
the Authority be particularly annexed to Rome? or may not be translated to
another place, at the pleasure of the Electors, and at least revert to Antioch?

If then the Pope be of the Quorum; all the uncertainty to which the Papacy it
self is incident, from the forementioned Causes, or to which the Papal Person
is obnoxious from Simony, or any other common Nullity of Election, must fall
upon Infallibility. It will be but ill founded, when the Sea is full. But it
must be in Nubibus, in a Sede Vacant, and as much in suspense, during a
competition of Antipopes, of which there have been many; the last of above 50
years continuance. For in that Case, not a General Council of Bishops can
resolve us certainly who is the right Pope; they being by themselves, and
without him, but fallible Judges in the present supposition.

Though therefore a Conjunction of the Pope and a Council compounds the
Difference, and unites their several Titles; Though the Infallibility of them
both together, seems to be the surer, yet it will be rarer too, and of much
less service to the World. For either there will not be a right Council, or not
a right Pope; or else a right Pope and right Council will very seldom agree.

Therefore lastly, those seem to have taken the more expedite Course, that make
the Pope Infallible alone: for then Infallibility may be had with more
certainty and ease than in the former Cases. For though many questions might
arise concerning the true Pope, and though his residence at Rome would be at a
very inconvenient distance for those of China and America; yet, when you are
got thither, an Infallible answer you might have, if the Oracle would speak.

Now these Scruples are not imaginary, and of our own raising; but have been
occasioned by eager Disputes among themselves. Dante ad hoc ipsum vexatione
praesentis Schismatis Intellectum. Gers. opusc. laudat. page 128.
The Schism of Antipopes made the Western Church consider of these things. For
when for a long while together this part of Europe had owned one Infallible,
and that another, to whom there was as length a third added; The Church then
wearied and ashamed of the Scandal, assembled it self, and proceeded to the
deprivation of all the Concurrents: upon that occasion, declaring its Power
above that of a Pope, and determining even in Faith without one. Then too it
was thought fit to vote by Nations of Bishops, and not by their persons; so
that they were considered in their share of Infallibility, according to the
number of their Flock. There they made Constitutions to be observed by the
Popes; which were however regarded no more, than the solemn promises made in
the Conclave to the Cardinals are used to be: for after that the Popes began
quickly to reassume their old extravagance of Power, their absolute
uncontrollable Authority was taught by their Benificiaries and Stipendiaries;
and the Jesuits a new Order erected, whose greatest perfection was their blind
Obedience to the Roman See, and whose great endeavor it was, to recover
Infallibility to the Pope, and bring all, if not into their Order, at least
into the like subjection.

Now indeed the Jesuits (at least of France) seem to have dispensed with that
solemn Vow; and the French have by late Declarations carried the Authority of
Councils up to the height of Constance: but the rest of the Popish Communion
are not agreed in that point. The Spanish, Italian, German, and Polonian Clergy
stand off in the behalf of their Lord and Master; and were they all of a mind,
yet we were never the surer, except the Pope would declare against himself too.
But this we are not to expect; for though they have been content to join Head and
Body against the Reformation, yet they have still kept their separate Pretenses
on foot. The Popes, even in the Council of Trent, resolving not to give up
their Infallibility to the common Cause; and ordering it so at last, that the
sanction of the Decrees might still be said to proceed from their single
Authority.

That Council of Trent, if examined by our former Reflections, will have a very
uncertain Authority; not to mention the Nullities that are alleged from other
Reasons. For we see it is very justly questionable, whether the Pope has that
Authority to call all the World together, that they are obliged to meet upon
his assignation of time and place; so that if they are not there then, they
shall be reputed either contumacious or consenting, and the Holy Ghost will
proceed without them? whether those that are there, are to vote by Heads or by
Proxies? whether the after consent of those that were away, is to be presumed
to concur to the Infallibility, and their votes can be taken at home? By what
Reason the Greek Church is excluded? By what General Council declared
Schismatical and deprived of Suffrage? By what General Council the Lutherans
were shut out for Heretics? whether guilty for not believing
Transubstantiation by the Lateran, a Council disowned by some now of the Roman
Communion? whether offending in the point of Images against the 2d. of Nice, a
Synod heretofore rejected by the West? whether as Unbelievers in the Articles
of Purgatory, etc. defined by the Schismatical Conventicle of Ferrara and
Florence? Concerning these Particulars we may justly expect satisfaction, and
that they should let us know, by what Rules they have proceeded, and on what
formal precise word from God their Authority is founded.

Such doubts may be raised on the Council of Trent, of all since the first
four; (nay of them too had the Romanists a mind to quarrel.) And as our
Adversaries do not allow one Council to be Infallible because not free, another
because not General, another because not called, or because not approved by the
Pope: so need not we allow any of them all to have been Infallible; because
there has never yet been any, that has not been subject to some of these
Queries and Uncertainties we have now suggested. For as to precise
Infallibility, what certainty of it can we have, unless it be precisely known,
what those requisites are, which God has made peremptorily necessary to the
production of such an extraordinary thing?

The Romanists indeed, dextrous in finding their advantage, would raise one
even from their own Differences concerning the Infallible Person; and because
Infallibility is still supposed in the Dispute, would impose therefore upon the
World that the thing it self is out of question. But the contrary Conclusion
will be made by all thinking Men: who will not be persuaded that God gave a
Commission of Infallibility with a Blank for the Person; and that he would, in
order to the ending of all differences among Christians, have added a new one.
It will not, I say, be thought that God would have left a doubtful uncertain
direction, (terms almost inconsistent,) if he intended any; and that such
Texts, as cannot ascertain the Person, ought ^o be construed to the Authority.

For although our Modern Romanists, sensible of the disadvantage they have
suffered by their falling out among themselves, have piec'd up the Quarrel, and
accommodated Affairs; proposing to us some few Councils, as that of Trent
particularly, for unquestionably good by the Title, on both sides, both Pope
and Bishops; yet this will not do, and they are wise too late. For as in the
Case of Land or Franchises supposed held from the King, to which two
Competitors make several Titles; they may go to Law so long, and prove against
one another so well, till it be found that neither have any Title; and that the
thing in Controversy belongs not to them: but is still in the Crown; so here
it has happened, that both Parties have already exposed the weakness of their
common pretense too far; it appearing plainly from the former hearings, and
mutual opposition, that the Evidence produced on either side is of no force,
and that the Infallibility they contend for belongs only to God; the
Prerogative that is said to be granted, being of so high, and withal of so
peculiar a nature, that if it be not expressly mentioned and determinately
assigned, it can never be supposed to be conveyed. They may go therefore, and
get a new Grant if they can, but as yet they have none.

II. But this Uncertainty concerning the Person of our Infallible Judge is not
all; there are other very material Questions concerning the extent of his
Jurisdiction.

In the first place, one would expect, that all commands of such a Person, or
Body, should lay an indispensable Obligation upon Inferiors: for so it seems
good to the Holy Ghost, and to them; and the Holy Ghost, we know, must be
obeyed when commanding, as much as assented to when defining. Neither is it to
be presumed, that this Body knows not the limits of its own Power; or that it
will transgress them. For if Infallibility be given to a Pope, and a Council
for our direction, how shall they direct more properly than by Commands? and if
even our Infallible Director may err out of its Sphere, and Command where it
ought not; what an uncertain direction is this? and instead of being a help,
what a Snare is it to the Consciences of Men? But so it is, for those who
receive the Doctrines of the Council of Trent, think it not so much as a Venial
Sin, to refuse some of its Precepts; and a very great and most Christian
Country will not to this day submit to its Holy Decrees. By what just Authority
they exempt themselves from obedience, and where in the word of God they find
this exception, we would willingly learn, for Reason would lead us to make none.

But however, although it be not in the Power of a Council, by their Precepts
to make indifferent things Obligatory; yet still shall not their Commands be
supposed to be lawful? and can an Infallible Body ordain a thing to be done,
which must not be done, and is against the will of God? For shall it be
supposed, that they decree an Action, either knowing it to be unlawful? or not
considering whether it be lawful or no? or did they think it lawful? for a Body
of Bishops, with a Pope in their Head, to decree an Action without considering
its Legality, is an absurd supposition; much more to imagine, that they decree
it conscious of the Illegality; (for why then may they not decree a false
Doctrine, conscious of its falseness?) But if they judged it Legal, why are
they not Infallible in that Judgment, as well as others? and why is not their
Command as manifest a Declaration of that their Judgment, as any other way of
Expression? shall not therefore their Command presume manifestly the Thing to
be lawful? and a Command under pain of Excommunication, suppose it to be
necessary? but here too the Infallible Judge is cut short, and he shall never
be supposed to be exempt from error, but when he determines Affirmatively: for
fear the Council of Lions, when it deposed an Emperor, and ordered his
Subjects to Rebel, should be as Infallible as any other that decreed
Transubstantiation. When therefore the Commission for Infallibility is
produced, you are to remember to look for this Clause of exception too.

Well, but then are they always Infallible when they expressly and positively
determine? are they so concerning the Truth of Matters of Fact? and will a
Council of Bishops impannel'd, be an Infallible Jury? The Jesuits of France
indeed, to serve an Occasion, would have had the Pope not only Infallible, but
Infallible in matter of Fact too: and then it was absolutely to be believed on
his word, that such condemned Propositions were in Jansenius; though they
themselves would not undertake to turn to the Page, and show the place. But
they were overruled in this new point of Divinity; and it was laid down for
Catholic Doctrine, that Modern Infallibility obtained in Matters of Doctrine
only.

But this Exception must not be taken too grossly, for the Church proposes many
matters of Fact, in the Creed, and in the Scriptures, to be believed. And
besides, every speculative Article which the Church determines, is supposed
always to have been taught de facto before, by Christ or his Apostles: and too,
if a Council shall determine, that such a Proposition is found in the Bible;
though they cite neither Chapter nor Verse, and we cannot find it, must we not
believe them? Infallibility therefore must take place in Ancient Facts,
recorded or done by the Apostles; and other Modern Facts only are to be
excepted. This Exception has something more of Reason in it than the other, and
we may be tempted to like it the better, for the sake of the Inconvenience our
Adversaries may find from it; (for so, they will never be able to determine
Infallibly, concerning the Legality of any preceding Council, or Papal
Election:) however they will be pleased not to deal with us here, as the
Jesuits would have dealt with the Jansenists; but do us the favor hereafter to
show it, when they come to produce their Proofs.

Suppose we then that the Holy Ghost will assist the Church in no other
Subject, but only concerning the mind of the Apostles, and in explanation of
their words; yet, Guide. in Cont. Disc. 3. S. 101.
thus much is not said without mincing and restriction. For some will not dare
to say that the Church is Infallible in the Affirmation of any, but necessary
Articles; that the Council of Trent, for Example, was not Infallible in its
Doctrinal Chapters, but only in its Canons with Anathema: so that, as in some
other Affairs we do not use to credit men, but upon their Oaths; we are not
bound to believe the Church, except she Curses. This is indeed a cunning
Restriction, it does not diminish the Power of the Church; for she is to be
Judge of what is necessary, and may therefore give her Anathema as she pleases:
But her other Doctrines, which she puts on Trial, if you are a good Catholic,
you cannot refuse; and yet she is not obliged, if they grow inconvenient, to
maintain them. This subtle, but strange Clause of restriction, we desire
likewise to see, whether it be in the body of their pretended Charter.

Well then, are we at an end yet? Is a Declaration of the Supreme
Ecclesiastical Power, Pope and Council, made in form, and enforced with an
Anathema, infallibly certain, and a sure direction to the Conscience? no, there
are still some excepted Cases, relating to the Temporalty, in which, after all,
it will be of no Force, however Authoritatively pronounced. Traite Histor. des
Prerogat. de l'Egl. de Romans Chap. 29.
If, says Maimbourg from the Sorbonnists, Some Councils since Gregory the
Seventh have threatened Kings with Deposition, and if one has actually deposed
an Emperor; yet this was not done by way of Decision. And if any Council had
made a Decision in this Case, it would have went for nothing but an
unjustifiable Enterprise, etc. For this will be Eternally true, which all
Antiquity still believed; that the Church, though it be Infallible, (that which
the Pope never was in the Opinion of the same Antiquity,) yet never received
the gift of Infallibility from its Divine Spouse, but only for things purely
Spiritual, and entirely separate from the Temporalty, and the Kingdom of this
World, with which Jesus Christ, who said, my Kingdom is not of this World,
would never intermeddle.

The Church then is Infallible, that you are sure of, but who this Church is,
it is hard to tell; as after, to come to the speech of this Church, is a very
difficult thing. When too she does speak, she is not to be hearkened to, if she
speaks in the Imperative Mood; and in the Indicative, she is Infallible but in
one sort of Phrase; and after all, she is not to be believed neither, but in
one kind of Affairs; in other Causes her Sentence is null, and she no Judge:
There lies a Prohibition against the whole Church, as well as against any other
Judge Ecclesiastical, and her Excommunication may be alike discharged by the
Municipal Laws. She says indeed that her Declaration seems good to Her, and to
the Holy Ghost; but whether what seems good to the Church, does indeed seem
good to the Holy Ghost, that must be determined finally, in France by the
Parliament of Paris, and with us in the Exchequer Chamber or Upper House. So
that after all this pretense to Ecclesiastical Authority, those Temporal Bodies
it seems, are indeed the supreme Courts, and last Resort.

III. But lastly, let us suppose, that the Council do keep within their Bounds,
and pronounce an Infallible Sentence: yet in what manner I pray was this
Infallible Sentence produced? did it result from premises? was it concluded
from Arguments? and was the Church assisted to find out proper Reasons, from
whence the Definitive Judgment should be inferred? No, this is dangerous to
say; for the Reasons alleged in Councils, are often Unconcluding, and their
weakness apparent. It remains therefore that the Holy Ghost assists the Church
in the Conclusion only, and comes in after the Ergo. Well: this indeed is the
Authoritative way: but then, (not to ask whether the Premises were thought true
or false,) to what purpose were they brought? why reasoning and debate, all
that humane jangling, in which the Holy Ghost does not concur? Why do they not
propose the Question, and immediately proceed to Placet? to what intent are all
the Doctors called in? or what need the Bishops should be better Theologues,
than Innocent the 10th. or this 11th.? There is it seems as little need that
the Bishops in a Council should understand the question, as that the People
should understand their Prayers; and Placet may be said in the one Case, as
Amen is said in the other. How indeed the unlearned People should say Amen, St.
Paul makes a doubt; (for he neither supposed a Miracle, or that they should
hear a strange Language so long, till they had their Queues by rote: but how
the Unlearned Bishops should say Placet, is very easy to imagine. For a
Miracle we must suppose; and there will be need of no greater to rebuke a
Heresy, than served heretofore to forbid the Madness of the Prophet.

This Hypothesis of theirs, however odly it may appear, yet salves all the
Phoenomena of the Church admirably well. All the Ignorance, Artifice, and
Passions, all the irregular Motions, that may have ever been observed in
Conciliary proceedings; all these it accounts for consistently, and preserves
Infallibility still. For whereas in other Affairs, want of understanding may
render Men unqualified to pass a Judgment; and Bribery, or Force, Fear, or
Affection may make it justly suspected; these in our Case can have no
Influence, and will neither impeach nor disparage the Resolutions of our
Assembly: The Conclusions will be true, though taken up upon false Reasons; and
the Resolutions just and good, be the Motives and Inducements never so corrupt
and ungodly. We Heretics therefore are impenitent, when we talk of such kind
of Nullities; and those of the Romanists, who have required freedom in a
Council, understood not its nature: For what force can there be upon it, that
the Holy Ghost cannot overpower.

The Roman Church does wisely to the Conclusion: and to her own Children the
Logic is good, by an Enthymem without either of the Premises. But, though Reason
signifies nothing in a Council, yet out of a Council it is used to be
considered. This Hypothesis therefore of theirs they will be pleased to prove;
and, on this occasion at least, bring such Arguments as shall be found
concluding.

Whoever has viewed with us the Differences and Difficulties concerning the
Seat of Infallibility, its Subject Matter, and the manner in which it is to be
produced, will be very much inclined to suspect their pretense, if he goes no
further: but now he is desired to proceed to the main Question, and examine the
Arguments that are brought in its defense.

CHAP. II.
The Nature of the Proof that is to be required for this Infallibility.

TO Forego then all the Advantages, their Disputes among themselves, and their
crude Assertions, may give us; let us suppose, that as yet there is no Heretics
in the World; that all the Bishops and all the Clergy are assembled about some
new question; and let the Question be about the meaning of our Savior's or his
Apostles words, and in such a Subject as may challenge Infallibility; supposing
all this; yet I take leave to say, it is not impossible but the Pope, and all
the Patriarchs, and the Majority of the rest, may be mistaken in their
Decision, and that the contrary Article may be true.

For so it is, All men appart are acknowledged fallible, and various ways
obnoxious to Error. They may pronounce wrong, for want of knowledge or
consideration, out of Interest, and design, to abet others, to assert
themselves. When too they are met together in an Assembly, though they have
greater opportunities of Information from a Company, yet they are found too to
be as often misled by it. They are often surpised into Error, by a conceived
good Opinion of other men, by their Arts, their Rhetoric, their Confidence;
often frighted, or tempted to the wrong side; voting either for favor and
Affection, or supposed duty, as their Friend or Patron goes, or out of
Emulation and Opposition, as they see their Adversary inclined: they are often
unaccountably fermented in the Mass, and overborn and carried away from their
Judgment by the Crowd.

For such Reasons these single fallible Men cannot be supposed to make up an
Infallible Body: and it will not be absurd to say, that an Assembly of them may
Err, Nemine Contradicente; much less is it impossible, that a Major part of
them should vote wrong.

Now as Men, not yet Christians, are fallible Creatures; so the grace in
Baptism renders them no more infallible than they were before. After too they
have received their new Character in Orders, it is no benefit of their Clergy
to be exempt from the same humane frailties; and every ordinary Priest or
Bishop asunder remains the same fallible man: it is neither impossible that he
should be deceived himself, nor that he should endeavor to deceive another,
even in matters of Religion, and Articles of Faith.

By what Change then is it, that the majority of these fallible Christians, or
Ecclesiastics, or Bishops, are more infallible, than the Majorities of other
fallible men? it must be by some supernatural Power, and from some
extraordinary gift of God. We must suppose that God at that time shall not only
enlighten their Understanding, so as to be able to perceive the Truth, and
pronounce it with certainty; but also that he shall so control their wills,
that they shall not be moved by Fear or Favor, Interest or Dependence, to
overlook that Truth, and pass a contrary Vote. That is, they must be, not only
infallible; but, to that purpose, impeccable: and it must be impossible for
them, in the giving of that suffrage, to deceive, as well as to be deceived.

This is the Miracle that must be presumed to make good such a Pretense.
Neither must our Adversaries think to persuade us, that such an ascertained
fixed Influence of the Holy Ghost, is ever the less miraculous and
extraordinary; because there are other supernatural influences, which we
acknowledge to proceed hourly from his good and free pleasure.

The Holy Ghost has determined its assistance to certain circumstances of time
and place, in the Sacraments only: there too the Operative Grace that is given,
works not irresistably, but concurrently with the will of the Person, and as he
joins to promote or hinder the Action. Nay in the Sacrament (as they call it)
of Orders it self, a Character indeed is conceived to be impressed on the
Ordained, like a mark upon his Body, by force of the Holy Ceremonies; whereby
he is distinguished from the Lay: but no more knowledge or honesty given, than
the Party himself shall please to retain, or endeavor to acquire. So the Holy
Spirit acts in the very Sacraments themselves; but out of them it blows as it
lists, and dispenses it self not in certain places and times, by certain
measures, but according to its secret pleasure: so that no man from the
sincerity of his Prayers, or from any promise, can secure himself such a
Determinate degree of Assistance; much less can he be secure, that it is
vouchsafed another, at such a peremptory minute, and on such an occasion. And
consequently, if all the Christians of the World should meet together, and pray
that the Holy Ghost would conferr such an extraordinary Grace on such a Person,
at such a time; they might hope it would be done, if they referred it to the
good pleasure of God: but they could not peremptorily challenge it, without a
presumption, that would forfeit even the favor they might otherwise expect.

If then any Church had made a Sacrament of Conciliary Actions; they had made
us a very extraordinary Sacrament, that should have conferred the Graces of
Knowledge and Truth, and been liable to no impediment from the pravity of the
Persons: but to suppose no Sacrament, and yet to presume upon such an
extraordinary Gift; must be to suppose a strange Miracle of Grace, something
that surpasses the ordinary Methods or Laws, which the Holy Spirit observes
even upon extraordinary occasions.

For there are ordinary Laws, which the Holy Ghost has prescribed to himself in
the second Creation, as we allow others in the first. The Divine Power may go
beyond them, when it thinks fit: but when it does, the Action is extraordinary
and miraculous; and not to be supposed done without good Proof, nor to be
expected afterward without sufficient Authority. For even in the supernatural
works of God, as in the infusion of Humane Souls, though God can give the
rectitude of the first Soul, and a stability such as Angels have: yet he always
continues in that extraordinary Action, an ordinary Course; neither is the
Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary her self, supposed by any immaculate
without a Miracle.

Now a Miracle, whether in the Corporeal or in the Spiritual World, though easy
to be done by God, yet is not so easily to be imagined by us. We are to
suppose, that he keeps his usual methods, until we have notice to the contrary.
A visible Miracle when doing needs no other notice, and demonstrates it self:
but it cannot be presumed for the future, without express warrant; otherwise to
expect it, is to tempt God. An Invisible miracle therefore, for the same
reason, is neither to be believed for the past or present, nor expected for the
future, without the same express Authority. Even in speculation to allow it
done, is unwarrantable credulity; and to wait for it, is Temerity and
Presumption.

such Invisible Miracles the Church of Rome thinks she may suppose at pleasure;
and that Gods Omnipotence is always at her service: where she thinks she cannot
be disproved, she securely asserts; never considering that the simple belief of
such things requires some good Evidence; and that they cannot be imposed as
necessary Articles of Faith, but upon such Evidence as carries along with it
necessary Conviction.

Were there therefore no consequence to be heeded upon the Admission of the
Churches Infallibility, were it a single speculation; as it would be highly
presumptuous in the governing part of the Church, to depend upon such an
extraordinary Grace, without extraordinary warrant; so to enforce the rest to
believe it, without such due warrant, would be absolute Tyranny.

But if they intend to govern by this Maxim, and make it the foundation of an
uncontrolable Authority, demanding upon this supposition, an absolute assent to
whatever else they shall say: it is plain that then we have greater reason to
be more rigorous in our Demand; and that our Assent cannot be required from us,
but upon full Evidence, and such to which we cannot but submit; it being but
fit that they should give us some very good reason for this Proposition, who
upon our admitting it, are afterward discharged for ever from giving us any
reason more.

So much difficulty we should make of granting this Infallible Authority in
General; had we no notice at what it aimed, and to what purpose it would be
used.

But further, the Proof for this pretense, as great as it should be, however
ought if possible to be greater yet; if this Proposition comes actually loaded
with others, that want very great proof themselves, and cannot be maintained
but upon this fond. For then it is not a simple Miracle we are persuaded to
believe; nor a miracle which may possibly engage our belief a little further;
but such a one, as has actually undertaken the maintenance of many more
miracles, some of them more strange than it self, and scarcely reconcilable to
humane understanding; that for example, of Transubstantiation, as wondrous and
as much above ordinary miracles, as any other miracle is above the effects of
Nature.

But further yet, whereas if these unlikely hoods and miracles, appendant on
Infallibility, were purely speculative, and rested in the Brain; yet, if we had
not an Evidence proportionably extraordinary, we could not without violence to
our understanding give assent to their truth, nor without breach of honesty
profess it: so by greater reason, if they are not speculative only, but pass on
to practice; and oblige us to Actions, at the first sight unlawful, and no
otherwise justifiable but by this pretense, of Infallibility; it is apparent
then, that we are much less at our liberty, to give up our selves to its
hazardous obedience; but are bound in our duty to God, and care of our Souls,
to examine it with the utmost severity.

When therefore I am to prescribe the Proof, I might well demand such a one,
that shall be able enough to sustain all the Definitions of the Council of
Trent. For, it being manifest that the Laity depend upon this Principle for
their assurance in all their Belief; and that the Learned leave, upon all
occasions, their want of proper Arguments to be supplied by this Common
Theoreme: it follows, that this Article, so fundamental, must have some very
extraordinary support it self; not only sufficient to bear its own single
weight, but all that vast additional load that rests upon it.

As for Example, whether these are Articles of Faith, and necessary to
Salvation; That the Sacraments, truly and properly so called, are Seven Conc.
Trid. Sess. 7. Canon. de Sacram. 1o.
: That in the Conferring them, the intention of the Minister is necessary Ibid.
Can. 2o.
: That in the Church of Rome, who is the Mother and Mistress of all Churches,
the Doctrine concerning the Sacrament of Baptism is true De Bapt. Can. 3o.
: That the Body and Blood of Christ, with his Soul and Body, are really and
substantially in the Sacrament of the Eucharist Sess. 13. de Euchar. Can. 1.
: the substance of Bread and Wine not remaining, but converted Can. 2o.
: and this not only during the Sacramental use, but before and after Can. 4o.
; That Christ in that Sacrament is to be worshipped with external Sovereign
Worship, and to be carried about for that purpose Can. 6o.
: That Auricular Confession was always used in the Church, and is necessary by
Divine Command Sess. 14. de Sacr. Penitent. Can. 6o.
; to the remission of Sins Can. 7o.
: That all Christians are not obliged by Gods Command to receive the Sacrament
of the Eucharist in both kinds Sess. 21. Can. 1o.
: That the practice of the Romanists in that Case is just and reasonable Can.
2o.
: That in the Mass there is a true and proper Sacrifice offered Sess. 22. Can.
1o.
: That it is to be offered not only for the Living but for the Dead, in
Purgatory Can. 3o.
: That the Priest may, and does well, to Communicate (as they call it) alone
Can. 8o. collat. cum cap. 6o.
: That Matrimonial Causes belong to Ecclesiastical Judges Sess. 24. Can. 12.
: etc. whether, I say, these Articles are so necessary, that neither these can
be denied, nor the Church of Rome left without the loss of Salvation; are
Propositions each of them highly questionable, and much easier to be asserted
by the Church of Rome, than proved: the proper Demonstration of all of them
being so very defective, and of some, the very principal, so short and lame;
that some in part, and others nigh altogether, are left to subsist on this
general Infallible Ground. So that the Arguments, borrowed at other times from
this common place, are here to be accounted for; and so much super-abundant
Evidence is to be brought in, as shall not only serve to outweigh the
particular improbabilities of this Point, but shall besides make good all the
other defects of Argument, under which the rest of the Roman Doctrines labor.

But we are ready to abate of this justifiable Rigor, and are content to
require only such Proof, as shall be necessary properly to this Article.

Now, to be as easy as we can, and not to insist upon hard terms, thus much
our Adversaries must observe; that a miracle so strange as this, of such an
influence on our whole Lives, and of so great consequence in Religion, cannot
be pretended but from the word of God; nor then presumed, much less necessarily
collected, from equivocal large expressions, capable of an easier sense; and
that therefore we shall not think our selves bound to expect it, and rely upon
it, except they bring us some Divine Saying, of certain Authority, and express
meaning, for our Warrant and Command.

Thus much it may have been fit to premise: but I am scarcely to be excused,
for thinking any of them so weak as to need the following Premonition; that the
Authority of the Church is now, for a while at least, set aside; and that as
the Doctors of the Sorbon will not admit a Popes Definition, to prove the Popes
Infallibility, no more are we to admit the same assertion, (were there any)
from a Council and Pope, as a Decisive Evidence on their own side. The Pope or
a Council must in this point demonstrate from Scripture or Tradition, the
written, or unwritten word of God, and to that we are now going.

The Reader therefore who cannot but have heard much of this wonderful
Authority, lodged somewhere in the Church; who may have been counseled to
repair to that Oracle, and bid upon pain of Damnation to take the infallible
direction of that Guide; may be pleased to reflect with himself, that his first
thoughts must naturally have fancied some express and frequent mention of such
a Power in the word of God; some plain designation of the Persons to whom it is
committed, and a Peremptory Order to the Faithful to obey it for ever without
scruple: and then from that Reflection, he may be pleased to go on with me, and
see how much of this those Pretenders are able to show; and what pitiful
Allegations they bring in so wonderful and momentous a Case.

CHAP. III.
The Proofs for Infallibility brought from Scripture Insufficient. First, those
for the pretended Infallibility of the Jewish Church considered, (Sect. I.)
Then those concerning the Christian. Particularly the 28th. of St. Mat. v. 19,
20. (Sect. II.) 14 John 16.26. Chapter 16. v. 15. 15. Act. 28. 1 John 5.20. 1 Cor.
12.7, 8. (Sect. III.) 18 Mat. 17, 18, 20. (Sect. IV.) 1 Timothy 3.15. (Sect V.) 4
Ephesians. 11.14. (Sect. VI.) other scattered Texts seeming to presume it. (VII.) A
Conclusion from the whole against it. (VIII.)

THE Places of Scripture alleged for an Infallible Guide, relate either to the
Old or the New Covenant. Those which are to prove such a standing Infallibility
under the New, and which are the most proper to our Purpose, Disc. 1.. 7.
I shall take, as they are proposed in the Rational Account concerning the
Guide in Controversy; neither shall I alter the order, that I may not seem to
abate any thing of their force: only I shall take leave to add, upon occasion,
something of the Context; that the sense may better appear.

The rest of the Romish Champions do not fail, on this Subject, Chap. 3. The
Proofs from Scripture insufficient. Sect. 1.
to lead us on to the admittance of Infallibility in the Christian Church, by
preparing a supposition that there was such an establishment in the Jewish. But
this Rational Guide to their Great Guide, led us not this way: it may be,
because he saw, that if the supposition were never so well proved, yet the
Consequence might fairly be denied. For the Methods and Polity of the
Christian and Mosaical Dispensations are so different, that no Argument can be
drawn from the existence of such a standing Officer, or Power, under the one,
to the same under the other. Whatever of that Law was not from the Law of
Nature, all the rest of its constitutions Judicial and Ceremonial, were
Temporary and Arbitrary, appropriate to that People and Season. And though some
of its appointments looked forward, and presignify'd; yet those Types were set
to be Earthly shadows of Heavenly Things, not to be Forms and Models of a
future Administration here below: as the High Priest is known to have
represented Christ, no Apostle or Bishop; and those Sacrifices then continually
offered, That one Sacrifice once for ever offered for our Sins. As therefore
the Ephod, Breast Plate, and Bells, are no Pattern for Pontifical Garments now;
so we are not to expect that their Vrim and Thummim should be answered by any
Modern Oracle; no more than any High Priest of our days will pretend to
Prophesy, from that extraordinary Power which belonged to their Priests, even
when their Vrim and Thummim ceased; and which was not withheld, no not from
Caiphas himself. Old Things are passed, and all Things are become new. All
Commands of Positive Institution, and all Gifts of extraordinary Favor, given
out by Moses, are vacated and expired; not to be pleaded now, except revived by
a new Sanction, or a new Promise, from our proper Lawgiver. For this Reason,
had our Guide offered any Proofs for his Cause relating to the Old Testament,
we might have passed them over, and used our right to consider only his
pertinent Arguments: but the Reader, who is to exercise much Patience during
this whole Debate, will give me leave to entreat it here; that we may not seem
to take an advantage of one Authors Omission; especially when he will be found
to have made it, not through forgetfulness, but design; and to have done his
Cause more service, by concealing this Evidence, than by his producing all the
rest.

The Fundamental Proof for a standing Infallibility in the Jewish Government,
is from the 17. Deuter. where, after the appointment of Judicatures in their
several Cities, made in the 16th. Chap. and after the ennumeration of some
Crimes of a very heinous and notorious nature; it is ordained in the 8th verse,
that in all doubtful Cases the last resort should be, to the supreme Tribunal
sitting in that place, unto which they are commanded in that 16th. to repair
thrice in the year, for the service of their God.

The words are these. If there arise a matter too hard for thee in Judgment,
between Blood and Blood, between Plea and Plea, between stroke and stroke,
being matters of Controversy within thy Gates; then shall thou arise, and get
thee up into the place which the Lord thy God shall choose; and thou shall come
to the Priests, the Levites, and to the Judges that shall be in those days, and
enquire; and they shall show thee the Sentence of Judgment. And thou shall do
according to the sentence which they of that Place (which the Lord shall choose)
shall show thee, and thou shall observe to do according to all that which they
inform thee: according to the sentence of the Law which they shall teach thee,
and according to the judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shall do: thou
shall not decline from the sentence which they shall show thee, to the right
hand nor to the left And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not
hearken unto the Priest that stands there to Minister before the Lord thy
God, or unto the Judge, even that man shall dye, etc. Josephus gives the sense
of this place so. And if those Judges know not how to determine, in some Cases
which may be brought before them; (and such cases often happen among men:) Let
them then transmit the Cause to the Holy City; and let the High Priest, and the
Prophet, and the Senate meet together, and decree the Sentence. As to the
Persons of whom this Sovereign Court was composed, some would have the High
Priest with his Brethren to be the Supreme Moderators, in all Ecclesiastical
Causes; and the Temporal Judge or Prince to decide unappealably in Civils.
Others give the Senate or Sanhedrim, (a Body consisting not of the Tribe of
Levi only, but of all the rest promiscuously) the Preeminence in all Causes,
and over the High Priest himself: the constant received Opinion of the Jewish
Doctors. And Josephus, we see, joins all Titles together, and adds a Prophet,
if there be any, besides. If now we are to regulate our Christian proceedings
by this Rule; Josephus will assign the Authority to the Pope and a Council
together: the Rabbis will give it with those of Basil, to a Council: and the
first Opinion, to the Pope and his Consistory. But a Council will find little
satisfaction hence: because Laymen may pretend to an equal voice; and it must
be assembled in the Holy City. The Advantage in truth lies fairer for the Pope:
for he may well be the High Priest; and by St. Peter, the Successor of Aaron:
the Cardinals may be the Priests, the Levites, and Rome the Place which the
Lord our God has chosen. And then it follows plainly from the Text, that
whatever is commanded thence, we are to observe to do: and further, that he
who fails to do it, is not only to be Excommunicated, but to be put to death
for his presumption.

Now for our part, we shall leave this Controversy concerning the Persons to
be d^bat^d by the Jews, and those Christians who are concerned in the advantage
of it. If too the Pope or a Council shall gain the Cause; if either of them, or
both, can derive to themselves the Authority of the Text; we must then, we
confess, grant them a Power of Life and Death over us; (a Power I know they
will not lose by non user:) but as for this privilege of Infallibility, we
shall not yet be obliged to allow it.

For as the design of God, in ordering his People to meet for their Devotions
in one place thrice every year, seems to have been, in part at least, to
Cultivate the Brotherly Love, and continue the Unity of that Family of Israel:
so the adjourning all the more weighty Causes to the same common place, seems
intended to knit that Politic Combination faster and closer, and to prevent
any such breach as happened afterward by the Sin of Jeroboam. The last
Sentence therefore of that Court was to be Final; and peremptorily obeyed under
the highest Penalty; but it is to be supposed no more Infallible, than the
Sentence of other last Resorts, and humane Sovereign Judicatures are thought to
be.

This, and no more, Josephus expresses; and no more can be collected from Moses
his words, than that, what such a High Court pronounced, should be taken for
Law; and that the Person who opposed its jurisdiction, should be put to death,
as opposing the Supreme Authority, and Fundamental Establishment of that Polity.

Here is then an Authority settled with Power of Life and Death;
Uncontrollable, but not Infallible; supposed to judge in questions of doubt and
difficulty, and then to determine righteously; but not created incapable, (such
is the nature of all humane Bodies) of determining wrong even in plainer Cases,
and of Decreeing such a Sentence, as might possibly be more intolerable to the
Righteous, than the Sentence of Death. This is the plain natural meaning of the
place, agreeable to common sense, and the known practice of all Governments.

Had therefore the Jews been willing to have raised a Miracle on this Text, as
their Usage at other times is; and had we wanted some gross instance of Error
to prove upon them; yet we could not justly be obliged to prefer their
wonderful strange interpretation, before a more ordinary and more Familiar
sense. But here it so happens, that the Jews themselves make no such pretense;
and that if they did, we Christians are not only able, but bound to convict it
of falsity. Their High Priest, the rest of the Priests, the Sanhedrim, and the
whole body of the People, (that there might be no question of the Legality of
the Court,) having committed the most execrable Error, and by a most solemn
Sentence condemned our Blessed Savior for an Impostor.

Some I know of the Romanists, being indeed very hard pressed, fly to this
subterfuge; that the Error of the Jews, though a grievous one, was only an
Error of Fact. But were not Matters of Fact, by this very Ordinance, triable
before that Court, as well as matters of Right, and alike determinable by final
Sentence? where too will they lay this Matter of Fact? was it whether he said,
he was the Christ? or whether he was that Christ? that he said he was the
Christ, was true, and they erred not in it: and the other Point, whether Jesus
was that Christ, was as much a matter of right, as whether the Person called
Tiberius was then Emperor: And was too at that hour the same Article of Faith
that it is now. This Solution therefore is justly rejected by Cardinal
Bellarmine, who chooses rather to give a less Competent one, than one so grossly
absurd. That Court, says he, was Infallible 'till our Savior's coming; but
upon his appearance their Infallibility was withdrawn, as the Vrim and Thummim
had ceased for some time before. This is as much as to say, wherever you can
prove they did err, there I will grant you in that particular case they might:
an answer that amounts to this plain Confession, that he had nothing to reply.
For does the Text that constitutes this Authority make any such reserved Case?
or has he any other just cause to surmise this pretended failure? That the
Jewish Dispensation was to determine at last by the Christian, there is no
question: But that this determination was not to be made till our Savior's
Death, is as certain too. Until that time the Mosaical Law did abide in the
same state; the High Priest continued to Prophecy to the last Passover; and
our Savior himself, not long before, had re-inforc'd the Authority, whatever
it was, of those that sat in Moses his Chair. As to the Oracle of the
Breast Plate, it had indeed ceased, but long before our Savior's time: above
200 years says Josephus, Josephus Archaeol. l. 3. c.
as we read him; with the first Temple say the Rabbis. But then too That,
whenever it ceased, ceased sensibly; like the Sun, disappearing as visibly as
it had appeared: whereas this invisible Oracular virtue, except there was some
supernatural notice given of its being taken away, must be supposed to be
withdrawn from the former Owners, they knowing nothing of its absence, and
presuming that they still possessed it. For as these Men could never have known
they were Infallible, unless God had told them; so neither could they know when
they ceased to be Infallible, unless informed by the same Author. Now if the
Cardinal would have such a supernatural notice here understood, he should have
told us whence he learnt it, for otherwise it is not to be presumed: and if
there was no such notice given, we are then to discharge the Elders and People
of the Jews, from that accursed Crime of which they have been so long accused.
For the Elders, they gave sentence under their old Confidence, and as far as
they knew, assistance of Infallible direction. And as for the People, they in
their blind obedience subscribed to the sentence of their Superiors; doing no
more than what in the present supposition, they were ordered of old to do by
Moses, and but lately by our Savior himself.

Had that High Court been then owned for Infallible by the Mosaical
institution; it must have been a very difficult thing, if not impossible, to
have converted any Jew to the Religion of Christ. For how should they have
admitted that Person to be Christ, who was Condemned by their Infallible
Judicature for an Impious Blasphemer? and how absurd as well as impious must it
have been in any, to have judged those Judges, and to have pretended to know
better than themselves, whether they continued fallible or no? Was it not to be
presumed, that in case of such a failure, the Court should have first known it
from God; and the People, by the confession and surrendry of the Court? we
Christians therefore do not consider well, when to gain a present
Infallibility, we give one against us; which though we raise at pleasure, yet
should the Jews lay hold of it, we cannot at our pleasure dissolve.

But, God be thanked, the Jews, however willing they might be to accept of any
Argument against us, and also to render the Constitution of their Fathers as
Sacred as they can, have not yet taken this Course, nor arrogated to their
celebrated Sanhedrim any such extraordinary Authority. As, since the
destruction of their first Temple, they have jealously abstained from all
manner of Idolatry; so too they have preserved themselves from this Spiritual
Sacrilege, of taking to themselves what belongs to God, and invading so high a
gift without his Grant.

The constant received Doctrine of the Jewish Masters concerning this matter,
is as follows.

(1.) With them it is no impossible supposition, that the whole Sanhedrim might
err in their Judgment, not only unwittingly, but knowing, even against an
express Law; and that, not only against some part of it, Libr. de Sacrif. ex
Interpretat. Lud. de Veil. Tract. 4o. Cap. 12, 13, 14.
but against the whole, both root and branch. These Cases are all supposed
possible in Practice, and accordingly Offerings for the Sins consequent to such
a false judgment, are assigned in Maimonides; according as the guilt should be
supposed to lie, either upon the particular Persons who followed the false
direction, or on the Government that gave it.

(2.) And therefore in Doubtful Cases, the proper subject of the Sanhedrim's
Authority, the Truth of their Decisions was not supposed to proceed from the
concurrence of any Divine Inspiration, but from rational Motives and
Inferences: so that if upon a division in the Senate concerning the
Interpretation of the Law; Maimon. in Pocockii Porta Mosis. page 32.
thirty five Prophets as great as Elija, and Elisha, had been of one Opinion,
and thirty six Elders learned in the Law of the other, the Opinion of the
un-inspir'd majority should have prevailed.

(3.) And lastly, it may be observed, that the duty of obeying the Decree of
the Majority, is supposed by the Jews to be intimated by that very Text, whose
positive meaning is to forbid a blind Obedience: they presuming it implied in
the general, that we should follow the most, or a Multitude; because we are
commanded in particular, 23 Exodus 2.
not to follow the most, or a multitude to do evil.

We see then that Infallibility is not given by Moses to the great Senate; that
such a claim was never made by the Jews; and must not be allowed them by
Christians.

We cannot therefore suppose that our Savior gives the Sanhedrim, in the 23d.
of St. Matthew. more Authority, than they had before from Deuteronomy. The words
are these. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses his Seat: all therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do. But do not ye after their
works; for they say, and do not. Now it is not well imaginable, that Christ
should direct an Obedience without reserve to be paid to those, whom presently
after he calls Blind Guides, and whose Error in Doctrine he taxes, together
with the vitiousness of their Lives: no more than we can think, that he there
orders the multitude to join hereafter with the Senate in the demand of his
Death, and to promote his Crucifixion. But such a sense of the place is too
gross, even for the Roman Commentators to own. Maldonate, A Lapide, etc. are
ashamed of it; and make it unnecessary for us to cite St. Chrysostom, or any
other Ancient to the contrary. And indeed nothing is plainer, if we take the
words positively, than that our Savior, being to censure the conduct, and not
yet designing to lessen the just Authority of the Jewish Magistracy, prefaces
therefore to the multitude the injunction of a due obedience. But they may be
taken comparatively, not enjoining but supposing an Obedience; and then
directing that the Commands of those Men should be observed, rather than their
Examples: because, though they were Blind and Fools, yet they were greater
Hypocrites, and their Lives were still more corrupt than their Doctrines; an
intimation that has sometimes had its place in the Christian Church, even by
the Confession of our Adversaries themselves.

After this tedious Enquiry into Jewish Infallibility, we may think we had
reason to thank the Ingenuity of the Guide in Controversy; who, if we would
have followed him but in this, would have spared us at least so much pains. But
we shall find there was as much of Discretion, as Ingenuity in him; and that we
have not lost our labor, while we gained the following Corollaries.

FOR NOW WE KNOW,

I. That a Church of God may be founded without the Institution of an
Infallible Judge.

II. That the Infallibility pretended by the Roman Church, is an Original, and
that this controversy is a new Case, and of the first Impression; to be
debated therefore by proper Arguments from the Christian Religion.

III. That the Authorities to be vouched for it, ought to be very full and
precise, more full and more express, than those of Deuteronomy, or St. Matthew.
For we see, that if our Savior had either commanded us on any doubt to go up
to Rome, and consult a Congregation of Bishops assembled there, and to observe
and do according to all they should inform us, under the Penalty of
Excommunication or Death; or had enjoined us to observe, etc. all which a
Council should bid us observe and do, etc; that yet, even from words so
positive and large as these, so extraordinary a thing as the Infallibility of
that Council must not have been concluded.

Whether then our Author has any such proper Christian Authorities, more clear
and plain to the point, than those would have been; we are now going to enquire.

We come now to the Scriptures alleged by our Author.. II.
The first place is the 28th Chapter of St. Matthew, the 19th. and 20th.
verses, take in the 17th and 18th verses, and the words are these. And when
they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted, and Jesus came, and spoke
unto them, saying, all Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth. Go ye
therefore, and teach all Nations, Baptising them in the Name, etc. teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo I am with
you always, even to the end of the World.

These words, lo I am with you always, etc. are a promise of Assistance,
conceived in general terms, to be restrained therefore in all reason at the
pleasure of God the Donor; and which are to be supposed sufficiently fulfilled,
in what ever particular they shall be found to have been made good. All sort of
assistance which God could give, and at all minutes, was not to be expected
from them, not by the Apostles themselves, to whom they were spoke immediately.

Consequently therefore, if we of the later Ages shall take this Promise to our
selves, we cannot determine its performance to what particular we shall think
fit: neither if we find it fulfilled to the Apostles in some very extraordinary
ways, amongst others more ordinary; are we therefore to demand the higher
assistances, but to rest abundantly content, with those other Divine Graces
that shall be vouchsafed us.

This easy observation is a sufficient answer to all pretense of Modern
Infallibility from this place. But because we deal with Adversaries, that are
not so easily satisfied; and this Text is offered to us first, and brought into
the Front; we will therefore, with the Readers leave, take a more particular
notice of it.

1st. Then we will consider the words, as spoke to the Apostles, and to be
accomplished to them. Now here, though the Assistance promised under such a
general expression, may seem to include that Infallibility, with which the
Apostles were afterward eminently endowed from on high; yet it may be thought
principally to be intended of other aids. The Guide indeed, who therefore
brings in only the precedent verse, would refer the Promise to the subject of
Doctrine, and their capacity of Teaching: but it is plain even thence, that
their knowledge is supposed, and the Commands mentioned, as received already;
their Courage and assurance were rather wanting, to the undertaking so
dangerous a Mission, and such an incredible Errand; as the preaching up to the
Jews a Messiah, but now Crucified by them for an Impostor, might well seem. Of
the truth of their Lord's Resurrection and Doctrines they could not well doubt;
but how they should be believed, they might justly distrust. To this purpose it
was that our Savior first arms them with the knowledge of the Power, with
which he was invested; and then afterward, under the protection of that Power,
commands them on their Duty, bidding them not to fear now, nor despond
hereafter; for notwithstanding he was now to leave the Earth, yet he would
still be with them, to give their hearts courage, and their words Authority,
that they might speak the word with all boldness, and that Signs and Wonders
might be done by the Holy Name they were to Preach; so he would always be with
them in the discharge of their Office here, till at last they should be with
him for ever in Heaven. This seems to be the natural scope and sense of the
words, and therefore what we read ordered and promised in the end of St.
Matthew's Gospel, that in the close of St. Mark's we find accordingly
performed: They went forth and Preached every where, they doing as they were
commanded; and the Lord, pursuant to his promise, working with them, and
confirming the word by Signs following.

But then 2dly, supposing Infallibility comprehended equally with those other
gifts to be vouchsafed the Apostles; yet it will not follow, that the Promise
was equally meant to the Doctors or Disciples of all Ages. For (1.) it may be
said, that this Promise made to the Apostles might be Personal, and needs not
by any necessary construction be carried to their Successors at all. For
though these words, to the end of the world, taken by themselves, may continue
the Grant till that time, and may be supposed in the failure of the Apostles,
to leave the benefit of it to their Successors for the remaining term: yet the
same words may too bear a very proper sense in conjunction with the Persons of
the Apostles; either that our Savior would be with them to the worlds end,
that is always with them in this World, as long as they should continue in it;
21 Exodus 6. 15 Deuteronomy. 17.
as in our Law, and sometimes in the Scripture, an Estate for ever, is an
Estate for Life; or else, that he would be with them on Earth till their Death,
and then when they should go hence, in Heaven. However, in the 2d place, not to
insist on such strictness, but supposing the promise of Assistance to go along
with the command of Teaching and Baptizing, yet it cannot be presumed to go
down in its whole latitude, and widest extension; that our Savior should be
bound by it, to be with the Bishops of this time, just in the same manner, and
by the same measures, he was heretofore with the Apostles themselves. For, as
he that should offer to prove, that the Apostles yet live, and shall live here
to the worlds end, because the Lord promised to be with them till that time;
would bring a ridiculous interpretation, notoriously untrue: so he, who shall
assert that the same their extraordinary Gifts still continue; must be
contented to have his interpretation contradicted by as plain Evidence of Fact.
For such a sense cannot be confirmed but by Signs and Wonders following, the
same which were wrought by the Apostles. We might therefore put our Adversaries
upon a very difficult proof, and desire they would demonstrate their
Infallibility by a Concomitance of the other Miracles: but we need not go so
far on this Text. For here their pretense to Infallibility destroys it self;
neither do they presume to claim it, as it was granted at first. They will not
say that every Bishop, though of an Apostolical See, has always been
Infallible; and by what reason then, from this Promise, must the Majority prove
so? for this place gives no more Infallibility to them in a Body, than asunder:
nay what it promises to them, it promises apart; that our Savior should be
with them Teaching and Baptizing, an Office performed by the Apostles apart,
and in their several Missions. They have therefore from this Text, construed
too for them in the most favorable manner, no more Authority to assign
Infallibility to any Number of Bishops, than to any single Bishop; and have as
much reason hence to ascribe it to any other Bishop, Successor of the
Apostles, as to the Bishop of Rome.

But notwithstanding common sense and ordinary reason finds nothing for that
Infallibility of after Ages in this Text, yet does not Tradition interpret
otherwise? and has not God somewhere, by some unwritten word, given the Roman
meaning to this part of the Written?

No Ancient Commentator that I know, has strayed into such a sense. But had
any, yet we might have known that they learnt it not from Authentic Tradition:
for then it would not have been omitted by St. Chrysostom for the Greeks, and
St. Jerome for the Latins, both purposely commenting on the Place. The
Interpretation I gave at first as the most natural, is St. Chrysostom's: and
what St. Jerome gives is in part the same; he who promises that he will be with
the Disciples to the end of the World, both shows that they are to live for
ever, and that he will never depart from the Faithful. Chapter 7. Art. (...).
It appears therefore by these Fathers, that our Adversaries sense has no
Authority from Tradition: a Remark I make expressly on this Text, with a
request, that the Reader himself would be pleased to observe it on those that
follow.

The indifferent Reader will not, I hope, need to be advertised, that the
various interpretations we give to this, or the other places of Scripture, are
not brought by us, to cast an ambiguity upon the Text; but only to show, that
almost any meaning that can be offered, deserves to be preferred before the
Roman.

But here he is desired to take notice, that as yet we see neither Infallible
Judge mentioned, nor his Person assigned, nor the Causes of which he is to
determine expressed, nor any thing else so much as hinted at, which we might
have expected to find positively declared: nor, to speak once for all, is he to
hope to see any such thing hereafter. He may too observe on this place, and
find it verified in the rest, that those who exercise Infallibility in voting
Conclusions, are not very good at Inferring. Whatever is any where promised to
the Apostles our Infallible Guides is challenged to their Successors as Guides
too: and no difference made, between the extraordinary Gifts vouchsafed to the
first Founders of the Church; and those ordinary Graces that were still to
continue to its ordinary Ministers. But here they are quickly at a loss. For
working of Miracles should then belong to the Churchmen: but because every one
sees that neither Pope nor Councils work them, they are obliged to wave their
pretenses on that side. Personal Infallibility should belong to all Successors
of the Apostles on the same account, and all Bishops be Infallible, for the
better guidance of the People; but they are forced to drop this claim too, for
the vanity of it would be too apparent. This High Privilege is therefore to be
given by them only to one Bishop as the Pope, or to an Assembly of all Bishops:
but this is not safe neither; for the Popes have showed where Councils have
erred, and Councils have found the same infirmity in Popes. The best way then,
one would think, is to challenge it to the Pope and Council jointly and
together: for there have not been many of those Conjunctions in 1600 year; and
it is to be hoped that these few have kept from contradicting one another, or
from any of the more gross absurdities. But because it may have happened that
some particular extravagancies of those Bodies may have displeased even their
own Communion; it is thought expedient not to allow even to the Trustiest
Infallible, an Infallibility at large. For notwithstanding its Apostolical
Endowment, it may command some things unlawful: and even a Decree in form, if
it presumes to meddle with the Secular Power, may be false. So do they give
ground, as absurdities press on; retrenching still as they go: but as for any
Right the word of God gives them, they have no more legal title to the place on
which they stand, than to the rest which they have deserted. From all this
shuffling course it manifestly appears, that the Charter on which they proceed
is not from God: for they limit it as they please; and they could not be so
bold with it, if it were not of their own making.

We are directed next to see St. 111.
John 14.16, 26. and 16.15. with reference to the 15th Acts 28.1 John 5.20. and
1 Cor. 12.7, 8.

In the Citations from St. John, let us, with our Guide's leave, begin at the
First verse of the 14th Chapter: (remembering, that the whole discourse of our
Savior is addressed particularly to his Disciples, under their present
Melancholy Circumstances, expecting his Imprisonment and Suffering.) [1.] Let
not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. [12. [v.]
Verily I say unto you, he that believes on me, the works that I do shall he do
also, and greater works than these shall he do; because I go unto my Father.
[13. v.] And what soever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the
Father may be glorified in the Son. [16. v.] If ye love me, keep my
Commandments. [16 v.] And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, who shall abide with you for ever. [21. v.] He that loves me shall
be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him.
[25. v.] These Things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you. [26.
v.] But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all Things to your Remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you. 16 Chap. 12. I have yet many things to say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. [13. v.] Howbeit, when He the Spirit of
Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth; -- and will show you things to
come.

After the Reply Mr. Chillingworth has made to Mr. Knot [ Chapt. 3.. 71.]
concerning these Texts, they ought not to have been brought forth to the same
purpose again. Mr. Chillingworth had observed, that those promises of the Holy
Ghost were made to the Apostles themselves conditionally, upon supposition of
their Divine Love and Obedience; such terms, upon which they were not to be
Challenged by the Majority of Bishops of every Age.

This Observation the Guide excepts against; because, Guide in Controver. Disc.
1.. 7.
as he says, (1.) It makes the Apostles Infallibility uncertain, and to depend
upon suppositions: and (2dly,) because the duration of a Christian Church,
being inferred from the like Promises, must be as uncertain as its
Infallibility.

Now this last Reason is a perfect fallacy: for though we grant, that in all Ages
there shall be such a Degree of Divine Love and Obedience, as shall save some
of the Clergy; yet it follows not, that there shall be always so much, and in
so many, as to make a Majority Infallible. Chap. XIII.
But of this in its more proper place. And as for the first Reason, it is an
unholy reflection upon all the Apostles; and particularly (as one would think
he might have discerned) on St. Peter the denyer of his Master; as if there
were any question to be made, after the descent of the Holy Ghost, of their
performing the Conditions; and as if God had not wrought in them all that
Holiness he had made necessary to their Infallibility.

But we need only to observe the unreasonable arrogance, wherewith these Texts
are challenged to the present Clergy. Our Savior here comforts his Disciples
in a very particular manner; and makes them Promises of an extraordinary
Nature; (1.) of bringing all those things which he had said or did, and they
through the blindness or dullness of their hearts had never animadverted, or
else forgot, to their remembrance; (2.) of leading them into all Truth, more
than he had yet taught them, and which before they could not bear; (3.) of
showing them Things to come --; and (4.) of enabling them to work Miracles. By
the first of which, they should be able to give account of his Actions upon the
Earth, as Evanglists; by the other, to fill up and perfect his new Covenant, as
Apostles and Doctors: by the Third to be Prophets under the New Testament, as
there had been under the Old; and by the fourth, to Evidence the truth of all
this by Signs and Wonders. These Promises were made, and eminently then
performed unto the Apostles for our sakes; and, by the Apostolical instruction
we have received, the advantage of those promises has been sufficiently derived
down to us: But to entitle our selves immediately to them, we have no
foundation; nor can we do it, but by express Warrant, without the greatest
insolence. The Latin Church does not say, that an Assembly of Bishops can
either work Miracles, or Prophesy; they do not pretend, that any new Truths are
revealed to them, other than what the Apostles delivered, and the knowledge of
the Old they have not by any Platonic Reminiscence neither: whereas, if they
claimed any thing in these extraordinary Promises, they have an equal Title to
all; to Miracles; to Prophesy; to more Truths spoke by Christ, than the
Apostles ever told us; to more than were ever revealed by Christ on Earth, even
to the Apostles themselves. We have therefore from this place of Scripture, no
greater Reason to expect from any Bishop or Body of Bishops, Miracles of the
one sort, than of the other; and have no further Obligation to believe the
present Church Defining than Predicting, nor their Doctrines than their Legends.

Neither does the next Text, to which we are referred, alter the Case. 15. Acts
28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, say the Apostles and Elders and
Brethren met together. Now the Apostles were personally Infallible; and who
questions then but they were Infallible together? we firmly believe that the
Holy Ghost was with them in the Council; for he was with them elsewhere, and
apart: but what signifies all this to prove, that now an Infallible Body shall
be made by a number of fallible men? and how does it appear, that what seems
good to a Majority of other Ecclesiastics, shall always seem good to the Holy
Ghost too. Had the Doctrine of Infallibility been one of these Apostolical
Decrees, that Council had been vouched properly: but there is no such
definition in the Acts of it. So much therefore our Adversaries may collect
hence, if they please; that upon Dissentions arising, the Church may meet, and
consider, as the Apostles did: but that the Convention of every Age shall be
alike Infallible, will by no means follow. We might, with their leave, observe
here, that St. James is as great in this Council as St. Peter, and speaking
last, seems to have had the more Honorable Place: he presided, says St.
Chrysostom, because he was Bishop of that See. But I shall rather desire the
Reader to take notice, that St. Chrysostom upon this place, speaking concerning
the Scandals those cause, that in the Apostles name trouble Christians,
perverting their Souls; and concerning the Difficulties, in his days too
pretended, of discerning Truth; does not take an occasion from this Council, to
send the doubting Christian to the Oracle of any other Modern Assembly: but on
the other side, upon the mention of the writing the Apostles in this Council
sent, he recommends to us their other Scriptures; and there, instead of
directing us to the Judgment of a living Infallible Interpreter, he refers us
finally to our own.

Another place we are desired to compare with the foregoing, is 1 John 2. Chapter I
suppose v. 20, 27. Writing to Little Children, Fathers, and Young Men, [13. v.]
he tells them [18 v.] as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even so now
are there many Antichrists; they went out from us, but they were not of us,
[20. v.] but ye have an Unction from the Holy one, and ye know all things. [21.
v.] I have not written unto you, because ye know not the Truth. [24. v.] Let
that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning. If that ye
have heard from the beginning shall remain in you; ye shall also continue in
the Son, and in the Father. [26. v.] These Things have I written unto you
concerning them which seduce you. [27. v.] But the Anointing which ye have
received of him abides in you, and ye need not that any one teach you; But as
the same anointing teaches you all things, and is Truth, and is no Lie, and
even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him. [28. v.] And now, Little
Children, abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may have confidence, etc.

We have taken leave to set down something more of the Text, than we were
directed to; and it may be we may be satisfied by this instance, how little of
the Scripture would come to our share, if the Doctors of the other Church had
the Monopoly of it, and could retail it as they pleased. But, were there no
Scriptures at all, what sort of Stories Oral Tradition would make, you may
guess by this Citation.

The Text out of the Acts produced next before, mentions a Council, and this is
brought to be collated with the other, and to make out that Conciliary
Authority: as if by this method the Guide would have it surmis'd, that these
words were wrote by St. John to some Council or other; and an ignorant Man
might be left then to think that they were meant to the Council of Trent.
Whereas they are not addressed to Ecclesiastics, to the Pope, and such a
number of Bishops, but in general to the Faithful; (orderly reckoned in Ranks,
(...). Philo. Legate ad Caium.
as the Jews upon occasion were used to be placed;) to Fathers, Young men, and
Children: those too in all probability not of the Western Church neither, but
of some other part of the Catholic, where the truly Antichristian and
Blasphemous Heresies, that denied God the Father to be the Creator, or the Son
to have been real man, began to overthrow the Faith of some. Against these
Damnable Doctrines he confirms the Disciples, exhorting them to abide in that
Truth, which they had heard from the beginning; and telling them, (to fix them
the more in the Truth, by an ill Character of those that were gone, and a good
one of themselves,) that those who are gone after the Antichrists, were always
all along no Christians; and that they, the true Christians, were in no great
danger of being deceived into such gross absurdities, having their Unction from
the Holy One; (that Unction by which they were again properly to be called
Christians, and by which they would so remain;) being secured by the grace of
God, and the knowledge they had already received, as having been fully
instructed heretofore in such Truths, and knowing well all things belonging to
that Subject. This is the obvious sense of the words. Now, from this place,
that very Church, and those Persons to whom the Apostle writes, could not well
have arrogated to themselves an impossibility to declare for those Heretics,
not even in those matters there spoken of; St. John's expressions speaking a
charitable probability, and his obliging confidence, rather than any positive
assertion. However, it can never be imagined, that those Persons are here
pronounced Infallible in All things, in all other points of Faith whatsoever.
And then besides, if such an Infallibility be affirmed here, it belonged to the
Laity, as well as to the Clergy. But after all, if St. John had pronounced so
much concerning those men of that time, from some supernatural knowledge of
their Minds and Dispositions; by what Revelation are we to learn, that the same
saying shall be as true of us, and that the men of the last, or our Age, know
all things too? Under such a multiplicity of absurdities and inconsequences,
the deduction of the Roman Pretense, from this place, labors. Oecumenius
understands all those things, said to be known to the Disciples, to be these:
The last hour; that Antichrists abounded; and that the World was full of Lies.
All this we know too; and think our selves therefore obliged to take the
direction in the 4th Chapter of this Epistle, (instead of that submission the
Guide would persuade,) Beloved believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits
whether they be of God: as also that other in the last Verse of the Epistle,
Little Children keep your selves from Idols, Amen.

The last Authority to be compared with the precedent, is from the 1 Cor. the
12th Chapter, and the 7th and 8th verses; to which we shall add the three
following. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of Wisdom, to another the
word of Knowledge by the same Spirit, to another Faith by the same Spirit, to
another Gifts of Healing by the same Spirit, to another the working of
Miracles, to another Prophesy, to another discerning of Spirits, to another
diverse kind of Tongues, to another Interpretation of Tongues. But all these
works that one and self-same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he
will.

If the Guide had imagined we would have looked into the place, sure he would
not have sent us to it. For is it not manifest, that the Apostle describes the
particular State of the Church in his days? the variety of extraordinary Gifts
with which it was enriched? to what purpose, and by whom they were bestowed? by
the Spirit, to the profit of the Brotherhood, and edification of the rising
Church; not for the ostentation and vain glory, nor at the choice of the
Persons endowed? Now at that time, if to one was given by the Spirit the word
of Wisdom, to another the word of Knowledge; so to one was given the Gift of
Healing by the same Spirit, to another the working of Miracles, etc. And as
these last sort of Gifts have long since ceased, so may it be, that the first
have abated much of that extraordinary measure, by which they were then
bestowed. For God gave those Graces then to every Man severally as he thought
fit, and by such proportions as he pleased: in like manner has he since given
to every Age, not the same Gifts, but under a diversity of dispensation; to one
Age those Miraculous Powers, for the extraordinary Conviction and instruction
of the first Believers; to another, the less surprising, though not less
excellent, the abiding Graces; to one the presence of his Servants, to another
their Writings; dividing to each severally as he will, as it shall seem most
convenient to his Heavenly Wisdom, and good pleasure.

The Corinthians, amidst that variety of wonderful gifts then vouchsafed, were
desirous, it seems, to have the most wonderful for their share: and that of
Tongues was chiefly coveted by them in those days; for some wrong respect it
appears, and not agreeably to the purpose of God. Our Adversaries have other
designs, and covet a Miracle of another sort: Infallibility, or a Wisdom or
Knowledge Unerring, is their Choice. This choice of theirs is made they think,
with some wisdom: and, did it appear that they had it, it would be to our
profit and content. But whereas the Corinthians are reproved for coveting a
particular Miracle, in that plentiful time of Miracles: the Romanists covet
their Miracle now, when God had ceased to bestow the rest. However, if they
coveted only, it were more tolerable, tho an offense still: but they further,
take it to themselves; produce no Charter for it from God, and yet would force
us to bear witness to the Gift. When too the Corinthians pretended to any of
these Miracles, either the Gift proved it self openly, as in the Case of
Healing, Tongues, and even of Wisdom and Knowledge, if above their natural
Parts and Education; or else it was attested by the concomitance of the other
manifest ones: but this pretended Gift of our Adversaries, is neither attended
with others, to bear it Company and Evidence it; nor does by any means manifest
it self, and shine out with any Luster of its own. They claim it by no other
reason, but because it was heretofore in the Apostolical times given to others;
and they, they think, either deserve it as much, or want it mightily.

That is the Argument the Guide makes from these places, which he desired
should be compared. Those places make no promise of a Living Infallible
Director to all Ages; and chiefly, if not solely, concern the Persons to whom
they are spoken, the first Planters of the Gospel: but in his opinion, one at
least of those extraordinary Powers should descend, as there should be occasion
for it, to the Interpreting of doubtful Scripture, and for the instruction of
succeeding times; for, says he, it is very Needful. A good Argument to make out
a Title; as if we had a Right presently, to every thing that would be of
advantage to us. This is the Modern Droit de Bienseance, transferred to
Spirituals, and pleaded against the Holy Spirit. But how true would the
inference be, that all Missionaries have the Gift of Tongues, because it is
highly necessary to their Office? or would it be a good Proof, that Miracles
are now wrought in Rome, because there may be Atheists that want them? If
Heresies make an Infallible Judge necessary, why was there a General Council
for the first 300 year, the time of the most grievous and dangerous Heresies
that ever infested the Church? or must we affirm, against all History, that
there were such Councils, because there was so much need of them? But as
needful as it is that a General Council with the Pope should be Infallible, so
much more profitable, to avoid delays, would it be that the Pope should be
Infallible alone; much more yet, that every Bishop; and highly expedient that
every Priest should be that unerring Guide. They show not much of Wisdom or
Knowledge, that make such conclusions as these: however, that they have great
need of the Gift, we allow.

Let us see now the 18th Chapter of St. Matthew, IV.
and the 20th verse, with which we are bid to compare the 17th and 18th. But we
shall first desire a License to read more of the context, and shall begin
therefore at the 15th verse. Moreover, if thy Brother shall Trespass against
thee, go and tell him his faults between him and thee alone: if he shall hear
thee, thou have gained thy Brother. [16. v.] and if he will not hear thee, then
take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three Witnesses
every word may be established. [17. v.] and if he shall neglect to hear them,
tell it unto the Church: but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be to
thee as a Heathen and a Publican. [18. v.] Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye
shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on
Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. [19. v.] Again, I say unto you, that if two
of you shall agree on Earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it
shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven, [20. v.] For where two
or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them.
[21. v.] Then Peter came to him, and said, Lord, how often shall my Brother Sin
against me, and I forgive him, etc.

This whole Chapter directs our behavior to our Brethren; and particularly,
from the 15th verse, if a Brother shall Trespass against us, by what steps we
are to proceed, and after how many Admonitions to give him over. Chap 3. The
Proofs from Scripture insufficient. Sect. 4.
Where we are told, that if the offending Person does not recover himself, and
ask Pardon; he shall be bound, that is, Condemned before God as well as men:
but if Brethren agree, the Offense shall be pardoned in Heaven, nay nothing
shall be denied them by their Father. This is the natural meaning of the words;
and the same is understood by the Fathers, particularly by St. Chrystostom: See
Disc. 1. Chap. 7. Art. the 4th.
so that no other sense can be opposed to it, as from Authentic Tradition. Now
to wave the interpretation of those that will not suppose this Process to end
in a formal Excommunication of the Offender, and cutting him off from the whole
Assembly, If you look upon a Brother as a Heathen or Publican, you have bound
him on Earth: if you have corrected your Brother, you have loosed him. Avg.
Hom. 15. De Verbis Dom.
but only in a License given to the offended Person, after that to break off
the former correspondence, and no more to converse with him: not too to take
notice that St. Augustine, and St. Chrysostom, in this Case, make the Parties
injured to be the Persons that bind or loose, according as they shall remit the
Offense or not: to pass by all this, and to suppose that the Bishops have here
an Authority given, and that Excommunication is directed; yet this at least
must be granted, that the 17th and 18th verses do not speak concerning the
Catholic Church, but only concerning a particular Congregation, nor concerning
defining of Doctrines, but admonishing and censuring an injurious Person. In
the first place therefore, no more Authority can be challenged hence to the
Universal Church, than is to be allowed to any singular: and then in the second
place, since in our Adversaries own Opinion, the Keys of the Church may err,
and Condemn the Innocent; how shall this Text, that does not make the
Discipline of the Church unerring, of which only it can be surmis'd to speak,
prove it Infallible in Articles of Faith, of which it says not a Syllable? As
to the 19th and 20th verses, if they referr to the Context, they are to be
construed to the same sense, (that given above;) and will be as little to our
Adversaries purpose: if too they are taken abstracted, they will be no more at
their service neither. For suppose we, that the Promise was absolutely
fulfilled to the Apostles, and that whatsoever any two of them desired was
granted: yet to others, it must be understood in a more limited sense; upon
condition, things convenient are asked, by a good man, in the Spirit of
Charity, for a worthy Person, who too contributes his best endeavor. These
Conditions St. Chrysostom says are implied under the Phrase, in my Name; and
that two or three are rarely so met together. For it is not, says he, every
Synod or meeting that is meant by our Savior, but one so qualified. It is
manifest these words can be brought to promise no more: neither will it follow
hence, if a number of Bishops meet together, and pray to God to give their
Majority an Infallible Spirit, that therefore immediately they are to have it,
which is the only inference that can be made from this place. Besides this
Text, by our Adversaries way of deduction, proves more than they themselves
will be content with: making the smallest Synod, as Infallible as the most
Universal; and giving as much authority to any Bishop and two or three Laymen,
as to the greatest Bishop, joined with two or three thousand Bishops more. V.


The next Proof for Infallibility is from the 16th of Matthew. 18, 19, v. It is
given by the Guide in Latin with a touch of Syriack: Tues Petrus, etc, and so
no doubt is a better Argument to those that understand not the Language: but in
English the known words are these. And I say also unto thee, that thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it. Iaunoy, in the Seventh Letter of the Fifth Tome,
reduces the several Interpretations of this Text, whether professedly or
incidentally given by Fathers and Doctors, to four sorts. The first understands
the Church to be built on St. Peter; the second upon all the Apostles in
common: the third upon St. Peter's Confession: the fourth upon the Rock Christ
Jesus. He then brings in order, under these distinct Heads, the several
Expositions he finds: and at last, upon the review forms this Judgment. I. That
the third and fourth way, which are the same in effect, have very much the
advantage of Authority above the first. II. That, if the Fathers can be said to
be Unanimous in any of these Expositions, they are so in the third; and much
more so, if the fourth be reckoned with the third, as in right it ought. To
these Observations I would add another: that of all those who make St. Peter
the Rock, only St. Jerome is found to concern his Sucessours of Rome in it, and
to make that See to be the Rock of the Text. And this too he insinuates by way
of allusion only, in a Complemental Letter to Pope Damasus; but in his
Commentary on this place, where he must be presumed to give the true Sense,
there he gives another.
And I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever
thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall
loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.

Now of this place we have no certain Interpretation, from any Authentic
Tradition, for St. Chrysostom (for example) makes the Rock upon which the
Church was to be built, to be St. Peter's Confession, that Jesus was the
Christ, the Son of God; St. Augustine, with little difference, our Savior so
confessed: some expound it of St. Peter's Person, and others jointly of the
rest of the Apostles. The Gates of Hell, some take for Heresy and Vice;
others, for Death and Destruction. That too, against which those Gates should
not prevail, is commonly supposed to be the Church, but thought by St. Jerome to
be the Rock; that is, in his Opinion, the Apostles. Besides, as to the Power
granted to St. Peter in the next verse, whether of Teaching according to the
Jewish Phrase, or of Discipline, or whatever other extraordinary Power; it is
here but promised; not given, actually, 'till after the Resurrection, nor fully
until Pentecost. This Promise therefore is to be expounded by the completion.
And then we find, that the other Apostles were equally partakers of the Gift,
both that of forgiving and retaining Sins, and that other of the Holy Ghost: as
too it is apparent from the Acts, that St. Peter had no Power over the rest of
the Apostles, nor any Negative upon them in the first Council.

From this place, several assertions have been advanced, either first in behalf
of the Sea of Rome, or else of the Universal Church: in behalf of the Roman
See, that it should have a perpetual existence, never err in Faith, and have
the Government of the whole Church; in behalf of the Universal Church, that it
should never fail, or never Err.

Now as to the Church of Rome, she seems not, by any rational construction, to
have any private interest in this Text; Chap. 3. The Proofs from Scripture
insufficient. Sect. 5.
neither does Tradition interpret it for her: the whole current of ancient
Authorities carrying it another way; St. Jerome himself, who calls her the Rock,
in a Complemental Epistle which they much boast of, never in the least
mentioning her on the proper occasion, in his Comment on the place. She cannot
therefore fairly challenge hence the privilege of perpetual Existence, much
less the Authority of a Supremacy: so far is she from having any Title to
Infallibility, a Prerogative absolutely denied the Pope by the Gallican, See
Chapter 5.
and I suppose by our English Romanists.

As to the Church in General, whether it can totally fail we do not dispute.
Whether too by virtue of this Text there must not always be preserved an
Unerring Church, (though we may hereafter, yet) we do not now question: for That
upon a Division may be the Minor Part, and Dissenting from the Pope, and
undistinguishable by any outward Mark. But whether or no the Majority of the
Church, or any assignable part of it, asunder, or consenting with the Pope,
shall always be Infallible; that we desire at present should be demonstrated
from this place.

For when it is said, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the
Church, whether founded on St. Peter's Confession, or upon St. Peter so
Confessing; the utmost that can be concluded is this, that such a Church there
shall always be, that simply shall confess that Article of Faith, or if you
please, that shall in all points confess the whole Faith: but where that Church
shall be, or what the numbers of that Church shall be is not defined here;
neither is it made impossible for the greater or any assigned part to
Apostatize, much less to err in some single point, provided such a Church here
spoke of shall some where or other still remain. For suppose by this Text there
is always to be an Unerring Church, yet the Text which (in the Opinion of the
Gallicans) does not place that Unerring Church at Rome, does not neither (to do
the Papalins right) assign her any other Seat; neither does it determine her
numbers, or give us any other mark whereby she may be discerned. As then the
Roman Church, that part of the Universal Church may err; so may any other
assignable part of the Universal err too: and as the Roman Church may err
alone; so too she may err in Conjunction with any assignable proportion of the
other Churches, and yet an unerring Church be preserved still.

When too it is promised to St. Peter, that the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven
shall be given him, and that what he binds, etc. The Keys here mentioned, are
either of Knowledge, or of Jurisdiction, or both. The Fathers generally
understand it of the last; some Moderns of the first only: let us take them
together. As then one is given, so the other: both eminently, and with
exemption from Error to the Apostles; ordinarily, and with no such exemption
to their Successors. The Keys put into the hands of the Apostles, were
Master-keys; the others opened or shut but to such Apartments: those in the
hands of the Apostles were rightly used; these in the hands of their
Successors, might be used amiss, and against the will of the Master of the
House. So much is confessed by themselves concerning the Key of Discipline: and
if the Key of Knowledge be here to be understood; where the Text excepts the
use of one from Error, and not the other, they cannot show. But as we observed
before, our Gallican Romanists have unawares yielded up the Cause to us. For,
if the particular Successors of St. Peter have not Infallibility conveyed to
them by this Text, other Successors of the Apostles are not to expect it
hence: and if the Bishops have it not apart, they have then from this Text no
warrant to claim it to the Majority of their Body with or without the Pope:
which is the Proposition ought hence to be proved, and after which at present
we only enquire.

The next proof produced, is from 1 Timothy 3.15. we begin at the former verse.
[14.] These Things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly. [15.]
But if I tarry long that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self
in the House of God which is the Church of the Living God, the Pillar and
Ground of Truth. [16.] And without Controversy, great is the Mystery of
Godliness, etc.

The Church, says our Guide, unlimited to the Apostles's days; that is, the
Successive Teachers of it, are the Pillar and Ground of Truth, the Foundation
of God that stands sure. 2 Timothy 2.19. But this which he lays down for sure,
is not so well founded. For first it seems to some not incongruous, to join
these words The Pillar and Ground of Truth, in construction with those that
follow, and not with those that go before: a new Sense beginning with them, and
running thus; The Mystery of Godliness is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, and
without Controversy great, namely this, God seen in the Flesh, etc. This
S^ntax the Greek will bear very well; and the sense, (especially if the Pillar
of Truth be taken materially, and in St. Chrysostoms's acceptance, which you
find here below;) is not improper: however I may safely say it is much more
natural than that which the Romanists would bring in upon us. But we need not
fly to this Novel Construction: for in the other, the received and authorized
one,

(2dly.) It is not certain, whether in this place Timothy himself be not
supposed to be the Pillar and Ground of that Truth, which the Apostle, the
Master Builder is now establishing: the sense running thus, that thou may
know, [as] a Pillar and Ground of Truth, how, etc. This has been suggested by
Mr. Chillingworth, and has Gregory Nyssen for its Voucher.

And then (3dly.) Supposing it not to be said of Timothy, yet there are other
Senses, under which it may be affirmed. For St. Chrysostom taking Truth here as
opposed to Type and shadow, and understanding a Pillar of Truth to be Phras'd,
as a Pillar of Fire or Smoke, denominated not from what it supports, but of
what it consists; seems to give the Text this Construction, which is the Church
of the Living God being a Pillar and Ground [or whose Pillar and Ground is] of
weighty and substantial Truth. His Paraphrase runs thus. The House of God,
which is the Church of the Living God, a Pillar and Ground of Truth, not as
that Jewish House. For this it is that Supports our Faith, and our Preaching:
It is Truth, that is the Pillar and Ground of the Church.

But (4thly.) Suppose the Church said to be the Pillar of Truth, as that which
supported Truth, and on which it was built: if we take Truth in St.
Chrysostom's sense, as contra-distinguished to Types, the Sentence will not
import, that the Church bears up all Truth, and nothing but the Truth; but only
that it holds up and shows forth those great Truths, of which the Old Law was
but the shadow, the great Mystery that follows, of God manifested in the Flesh,
etc. And then this at best, should we suppose it to give the Church an
Infallibility, would give it only in such Fundamentals, of which betwixt us and
the Romanists there is no dispute.

But lastly, let the Church be said to be the foundation of Truth, that is of
all saving Truths, so as to support them, raise them up, and show them to the
World. Take then the Church for its Policy and Frame, as it was constituted by
the Apostles; and we readily acknowledge it to have been such: but this hinders
not, but this Fabric may since have been much impaired, or defaced,
dilapidated, or superonerated by the folly of the Builders; though not entirely
ruined, by reason of the firmness and strength of the Building. If too we
understand by the Church the Persons who constitute it, Gal. 2.9. Ephesians. 2.20. 2
Cor. 6.16, 1 Pet. 2.5.
we know well that the Apostles were its Pillars and Foundation, as they
founded and supported it by their Doctrine and Rules; and that the Faithful
edified and built up by them, were a Temple. We grant too that their
Successors, at least the far greater part of them, did for some time make good
those names, bearing up and evidencing the whole Truth. And yet notwithstanding
it might remain possible, that the Majority of Clergy or People, who should
come after, might fail any longer to support it or retain it; and that some
since who seemed to be Pillars, may have advanced their own Capitels too high;
may have let fall something, of what ought to have been held up; and instead of
that may have taken up some error, and fixed it where it ought not, in the
Holy Place.

The Church therefore in either sense, taken either for the Building, or for
the Builders, was actually in the Apostolical times the Foundation and Ground
of Truth: in the following Ages it ought to have been so likewise; that is the
same frame ought to have been kept up; and it was the Duty of the Apostles
Successors, to be Pillars. But whether what ought always to be done, should be
done always, that this Text does not affirm. If it affirms at all, it affirms
concerning the first Church: but of that certainly which was to come, it was no
Prophesy, but an Exhortation. And as an Exhortation it may be well understood
even to Timothy himself. For the Apostle instructs him in this Letter, how he
is to behave himself; and here he intimates a weighty Motive for such a
behavior, that he should take good care, either to be a steady Pillar of the
Church, or to see that the Frame of the Church was not injured under his
Government: for the Church was the House of the Living God; and the Trust was
very great, of the formerly Mysterious, now Conspicuous Truths, committed to
his Charge. He ought therefore to take great heed: and that the more, because,
as the Apostle proceeds to warn him, Chap. 4. v. 1.
the Spirit expressly speaks, that in the latter times some shall depart from
the Faith, verse 6.
giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils, etc. If then says
St. Paul, thou put the Brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shall be a
good Minister of Jesus Christ; verse 16.
take heed therefore unto thy self and thy Doctrine, etc. The Apostle not
speaking positively concerning the future demeanor even of Timothy himself,
much less of any number of future Bishops.

This is the plain easy interpretation of this Place. As for that of the Roman
Church, neither St. Chrysostom, nor the Authors of the Commentaries ascribed to
St. Hierom, or to St. Ambrose, ever thought of it: whence we are at least
assured of this, that it is no more the Traditional, than it is the Rational
meaning.

The 4th Chapter of the Ephesians, (the 11th and 14th verses of which,. VI.
are produced next by the Guide) begins with a general Exhortation, that they
would walk worthy of their Vocation: and then, as to the particulars, directs
first to Love and Unity, that they should keep the Unity of the Spirit in the
Bond of Peace: Chap 3. The Proofs from Scripture insufficient. Sect. 6.
[3. v.] that those who had the more eminent Gifts should not contemn the rest;
neither they which had the lesser, should be discouraged, much less envy the
others; for Grace is given according to the measure Christ has thought fit, and
for common benefit: that some are Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying the Body of Christ, all those
cooperating to produce in each Christian the same Faith, and Knowledge of the
Son of God; to the intent they may all grow up to that measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ, as to be perfect Men, and no more Children, tossed to
and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the slight of Men,
and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. So does the
Apostle caution them as to the first Particular, against those that would toss
them to and fro, and break them one against another. He then at the 17th verse
resumes the same general exhortation; This I say therefore, and testify in the
Lord, that ye henceforth walk not, as other Gentiles walk, etc. Proceeding to
other Particulars, against the Sins of Lying, Anger, Stealing, Fornication,
etc. That they should keep steadfast to the duties they knew, and suffer no man
that lies in wait, to deceive them with vain words concerning these things. Now
all that this place supposes, is, that heretofore there were Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, the which we deny not: and the
direction given to the Ephesians is this, that those Graces should not be made
an occasion of Pride and Conceit, Division and Emulation, by the craft of ill
men; but that the Disciples should suffer themselves to be edified and
perfected by those Gifts, growing more men, than to be led away by every
deceiver, into the deceitful lusts of their former un-regenerate State. This
the Text spoke to the Ephesians, to whom it was writ: and the exhortation is
good to us, that we should make the due improvement of the helps we enjoy, of
what is come down to us from the Apostles and Evangelists, i. e. of the Holy
Scriptures, and particularly of this Epistle. But that a Succession of such
highly qualified men should be continued down to our time, that is no
supposition of the place. Yes, says the Guide, as long as men are liable to be
tossed about, there must be the same Infallibility: that is, there do continue
the one sort of Persons, the Deceivers, and the Deceivable; and therefore the
other must remain, that cannot err, the Apostles, or inspired Doctors; and as
the winds of false Doctrine arise on one side, the Holy Spirit must of
necessity descend down and blow on the other. But nothing can be more
unreasonable, or more presumptuous, than this Inference. For that blessed
Spirit blows where, and how it lists: and as it did not think fit, to obviate
all Cavils and Objections, and to prevent all Deception then; so now it has not
taken care, for a formal definition of all the questions that may have been
raised since. If none had been deceived in the Apostles time, and the Faith of
every man had been fully assured, we might have wanted Infallibility more
impatiently now: but men, we see, were tossed about in those days; and there
was need, it seems, of something Super-Infallible, to have hindered it. Those
Apostles therefore and Prophets, etc. were given, not absolutely to hinder
winds of Doctrine from rising, nor to make it impossible that any deceivable
men should be tossed about by those winds; but to give to the Chosen and Pure
of Heart such a stability and Ancorage, that though they might be blown upon, and
ruffled, yet they should be able to keep the Course to their Port, and not make
Shipwreck of their Souls. Had it pleased the Divine Providence, Man at first
might have been made Infallible, and Impeccable too; had the Holy Spirit so
pleased, every Hearer of the Gospel, might have been a Believer, every Believer
Infallible, and the will only left to its liberty of Obedience and Disobedience
to what the Understanding knew. But the Creator took not this measure in the
beginning, nor the Holy Ghost after. A few only were Infallibly assisted, and
these did not Preach to every Man of that Age; and were not personally with
their Infallibilty in all places where their Gospel came: neither (...) it
appear upon them where they were, in such a Latitude, or with such an
irresistible force, that there was no room for further enquiry, nor even a
possibility of contradiction. For many, even in the Churches founded by the
Apostles, doubted of their mind in many things, and many perversely gainsaid,
who never had, it may be, the opportunity of any further instruction or
conviction. As then it cannot be said without impiety, that this Divine method
was defective, and that there was not at that time administered means of
Knowledge sufficient for stability of Faith; God working by his own ways, his
own end, choosing some Nations out for the hearing of the Gospel, and even then
so proposing that Gospel to them, that the hearts of men might be tried by its
reception, and the approved be saved: so neither can it be said more venially
in the after ages, that the good wisdom of God is wanting to it self, or them;
if they have not their Apostles too, and find not such an Infallibility as they
have fancied, continued to them. It is we that are wanting in Duty and
Gratitude, we to whom the Scriptures of those Apostles are come, and who know
more then many a Church Contemporary with the Apostles then did, (instructed,
as many then were, by some not Infallible Teacher, and to which the Writings,
sent by the Apostles to other places, were not yet communicated;) it is we, I
say, that shall be wanting to God, and our selves, if we do not see, and
confess, that we have those opportunities of knowledge God thought sufficient
enough, to lead the honest and industrious into all saving Truths; though not so
much, as every wanton idle man may wish, or every perverse Caviller demand. It
was needful in the Opinion of the Rich man in Hell, that to reclaim his
Brethren one should be sent from the dead: but it was thought as unnecessary by
Abraham; for they had Moses and the Prophets, and if they would not hear them,
they would not be persuaded, says he, though one came from the Dead. We have
Moses, and the Prophets, our Savior Christ, his Evangelists and Apostles; they
have told us already what was thought necessary, and thence we must study their
mind: but they will neither return on Earth themselves, nor send any other
Infallible, to give us an exacter information. We are to be content with what
God has given, and not undutifully pretend to more. And as no man persuades
himself that he is rich, because he has need of Wealth; or that God has given
him an excellent understanding, because he finds he wants it: so neither is a
Church to arrogate to it self Infallibility, because she thinks she needs it.
But I have said enough before of this begging Argument, drawn from pretended
necessity, by such as are unwilling to labor, and use their honest endeavor;
which offers it self here again, and is so impudent as not to receive an answer.

We return therefore to this Apostolical exhortation, and hope, that as every
man must acknowledge himself sufficiently instructed by it, in the Duty of
abstaining from Pride, Contention, Anger, Uncleanness, etc: So no man will have
profited so little by the use of this and the other Scriptures, as not to
discern between Modern Bishops and the Apostles; nor to be so weak, as to be
taken with the slight and juggle of this Argument, a craftiness that is not
cunning. For he must be a Child, that is deceived by such an Inference: and
with this wind from this corner, who-ever turns, turns easily. We grant to the
Guide his allegation from St. Peter, 2 Ephesians. 3.16. that some Scriptures are hard
to be understood: but as to the Scriptures he here cites, it is not hard to
understand that no Infallibility is imported by them. Those hard places of St.
Paul, which St. Peter means, were not the only places wrested by unlearned and
unstable men to their own destruction, for so also were the other Scriptures:
And the Reader, I presume, does by this time see that no sayings are more
violently and unnaturally forced, than those which are wrested to this
Infallibility even by Learned Men.

The last Proof for this Infallibility is weaker,. VII.
if possible, than any of the foregoing. It is taken from the frequent
injunctions made by the Apostle to Pastors and People, as [1 Cor. 1.10.] That
they should all say one thing, and that there should be no Schisms among them:
[Phil. 1.27.] That they stand fast in one Spirit, be of one mind: Chap. 3. The
Proofs from Scripture insufficient. Sect. 7.
[Phil. 2.2, 3.] That they be of one meaning, agreeing in one: [3.16.] That
they should continue in the same Canon or Rule: [12. Romans 16.] that they should
be of one mind, following along with the Humble, not Wise in their own
conceits: [Rom. 17.17.] That they should mark those that make Differences and
Scandals, contrary to the Doctrines they had learned; [1 Cor. 14 32, 33] That
the Spirits of the Prophets, are subject to the Prophets, etc. Now, says he,
this Precept how can it be observed, unless there be in the Church some
Persons, whose Judgment, Faith, etc. all the rest are bound to follow? And who
can these be, but the Guides? etc.

So far the Guides meaning is true, that these exhortations suppose something
in which Christians should be United: that is, the Truths of Christianity which
they had received, and the mutual kindness they owed one to another. And so
much may be supposed now, without the continuance of an Infallible Judge: there
being Truths delivered to us, in which we ought to agree; and the same duty of
Charity obliging us, in those things in which we differ. These Admonitions
therefore concerning the Christian Faith and Love, do not direct us to repair
to a Living Infallible Guide; but to make a careful use of the Heavenly
Guidance, we have already received, as we will answer the neglect before our
Eternal Judge. For though such exhortations take place, if there be a Judge
deputed; yet they are so far from inferring one, that they are as proper, and
more necessary, when there is none: being then pointed against Negligence, or
Prejudice, or Passion, such things by which our own judgment may otherwise be
corrupted. So two private Neighbors may be advised to end their Difference,
and not so much as a Trial by consent be ever thought of. So two Sovereign
Princes may be Counseled to agree, and no Arbitrator appointed. And if in a
Schism of Antipopes, any good man should have exhorted them to have removed the
Scandal, he had not therefore made himself their Judge, nor supposed any other.

These Apostolical Directions do so little prove the design of a perpetual
Infallibility, that they need not be encountered by others, that are much
stronger against it. Such as Beware of False Prophets [Mat. 7.15.] Prove all
things, hold fast that which is good [1 These. 5.21.] Believe not every Spirit,
but try the Spirits, etc. [1 John 4.1.] For from these, and other Passages,
great Presumptions might be raised by us against the Popish Pretense: but the
Proof lies absolutely on their side; and what they produce is so weak, that it
falls of it self, and excuses us from the trouble of any further opposition.

Now then, after we have with great Patience examined all their Scriptural
Proofs, the Reader may be pleased to stand and take breath, and only to
consider, whether he has found in them any the least degree of Evidence, that
was necessarily to be expected for the Establishment of such a Power. He may
reflect that first the design of a Judge did require, that his Person should be
ascertained, his Jurisdiction expressed, in what Causes he should pronounce,
and what Speech should be esteemed his Sentence: and then 2dly, that the
extraordinary nature of an Infallible Tribunal, which was to supersede our
Natural Guide, and Suspend the Use of Human Understanding, and this in Affairs
of infinite Moment; which was new too, and never before known to the World
under the Old Testament; did require some very extraordinary notice, a notice
under the New, more express than that Passage of Deuteronomy, as clear as any
other Divine Revelation, and as plain as any Dictate of Reason. He was
therefore to expect in this Case the Erection and Designation of such an
Office, in Formal Precise terms, and as express, at least, as any other Article
of our Faith. But instead of all this, he will remember that he has found no
other Evidences produced, than such as will very fairly admit another, and a
far easier Sense; any, which require another Sense to be affixed to them; which
no Rational man unprejudiced would ever Construe to the Popish meaning; and
which de facto, none of the Ancient Celebrated Interpreters ever did: which too
have been so far from being esteemed by those Doctors to prove an
Infallibility, that they never gave them so much as an occasional Hint to
mention and remember it on the place. From all which Considerations, I think I
may, with the leave of any Equitable Reader, fairly conclude, that there is no
Scriptural Testimony at all for the existence of this pretended Judge.

And now, when our Adversaries have failed so much in their Authentic Writings
and Records, it remains, that they should call us on to the hearing of their
Unscriptural Testimonies, and tell us, that they have many a Witness to produce
who is able to speak much to the Affair; that the Infallible Court is a Court
by prescription, and they can prove its Authority by infinite Depositions. Such
pretended Witnesses of theirs, which may be said to be many in remote parts,
and which they may pray to have examined, shall be enquired after, and fairly
heard in due time. But in the mean while, that such a Suggestion is made, only
to put off the Sentence, and to hinder Justice, any Indifferent Reader will
presume aforehand.

For their failure of Proof from Scripture, does not only very much weaken and
disparage their Cause, by the want of the best sort of Evidence; but does
besides enable us to form a very Peremptory Conclusion against them.

FOR AN INFALLIBLE COURT is a thing in it self of so high a Nature, that it may
well seem to require something more Authentic than a Verbal Commission for its
warrant: It was withal so new and so strange in our Savior's time, that if any
thing of his Institution had been put in Writing, This in all Probability,
could never have been omitted: besides, the Knowledge of such a Court was to be
the Leading and the Principal Truth, by which all other Truths were afterward
to be regulated and fixed, and by which the Christians of all Ages were to be
chiefly instructed: and therefore on all accounts it must have found a very
particular mention in the Holy Records, if it had not been premised in the
first place. But, however, if the Erection of this Court, with the Nomination
of the Persons, had not been Registered by it self, as a remarkable Passage, in
the Gospels or in the Acts; yet it could never have been forgot, when fit and
proper occasion was given, particularly in those places which the Romanists
take for its Proof, and where they are so far in the right, that this
Infallibility, had it been at all intended, ought to have been mentioned of
necessity. For the Stability of the Church spoke of in St. Matthew, the
Submission to the Church there directed, the Promise of the Holy Spirit, and of
his assistance in St. John, were all, in our Adversaries opinion, proper places
for this Subject, and such on which they for their part are never used to
forget it. But the Apostle St. Paul's distinct Ennumeration of Heavenly Gifts,
his notice of the grievous Heresies that were to enter, his Cautions against
them, his frequent Exhortations to continue in the True Faith, these certainly
could never have suffered him to have passed by this wonderful Grace, and to
have left the Disciples without the benefit of so necessary a Direction. Let
any Roman Doctor, prepossessed as they are, with the Opinion of an Infallible
Guidance, consider with himself, whether in these Cases he would not have
thought himself justly to be blamed, had he forgot it; whether he would not
certainly have proposed it, as the only effectual remedy, and Gods wisest
Provision against Error; and whether he would have failed to have addressed
his doubtful Disciples to it: and then let him tell us, whether he can think
St. Paul more forgetful than himself; or less Wise, or less Careful of the
salvation of those to whom he writes. Of such a different Proceeding, there can
be no cause assigned, but the difference of the Principle by which the Apostles
went, from that which has been since taken up by the latter Ages.

The proper designed result of this Chapter was this, That there was no
Scriptural Notice of a standing Infallibility: and from that Conclusion this
Corollary does naturally follow, That there was not therefore any such
Infallibility at all erected. As therefore we concluded the first Chapter, with
a just suspicion against it, from the single view of the Pretense: so may we,
by force of this Corollary, put a full end here to the whole Dispute; and
justify our surceasing from any further Enquiry in so plain a Case. But the
Reader, either out of Curiosity, or out of mere Grace to the Parties, and for
super-abundant satisfaction, may, if he pleases, proceed on with us to the
other Allegations.

CHAP. IV.
No Proof from Tradition for Infallibility at Large. The Proofs from Tradition,
to what they are to speak, and of what kind they are, [Sect. I.] None of any
kind for Infallibility in Gross. Not from the Article of the Creed concerning
the Church. This proved in general from the nature of the Creed, [Sect II]:
then from the particular consideration of the Article [Sect. III]. Whence
arises another Peremptory Conclusion against the whole Pretense [Sect. IV].
Chap. 4. No Proof from Tradition for Infallibility at large.


FRom the Proofs taken out of Scripture,. I.
we now descend to those we are to expect from Tradition. But although in the
Scriptural Testimonies we were content to follow that order, which the Guide
thought most advantageous to his Cause; yet here, where he has not been pleased
to lead us the way, we shall take our selves to be at liberty to pursue a more
natural method.

We may therefore consider the Traditional Evidence, for an Infallible Judge or
Guide, either, (1) as they speak, such an Infallible Authority in gross, not
ascertaining the Person; or else as it is determined to certain Persons: If
determined; either (2) as assignable to the Pope singly, or in general to the
majority of the Body of Bishops; and those whether (3) apart and in their
several Diocesses, the diffused Church; or (4) assembled together in a Council;
or else (5) lastly, to the Pope and that Majority consenting. The Majority of
all the Bishops I say, because our present Enquiry supposes a Division in the
Church upon some new question, concerning which all Bishops are not agreed.

The Subject to which these Traditional Testimonies are to speak may be so
distinguished. The Testimonies too themselves may be of different kinds: either
(1) Tradition properly Divine, some Sayings of our Savior or his Apostles,
reported from their Mouths, whether verbally or summarily, by the Ancients; or
else they may be the Opinion and Judgment of those Ancients, expressed, or (2)
in their Writings; or (3) by their Practice. These are the three sorts of
Unscriptural Evidence, that must prove an Infallibility; as that Infallibility
be assigned in any of those five manners above mentioned.

Now to begin with the Traditional Authorities for Infallibility at large,. II.
and to examine their several kinds about it.

I. Here is no Traditional Divine Saying offered to this Purpose: no word
reported from our Savior, or the Apostles, making mention of such a Power
somewhere given; and directing us, so much as in the general, to resort to the
Infallible Authority, and submit to its Determination.

II. There is no such saying of any Ancient, affirming the modern existence of
Infallibility; no mention of the Unerring Tribunal.

III. We find in Practice no such supposition, from the Appeals and Addresses
of contending Parties: no such Phrase or Style as this; I am ready to refer my
self to the Decision of those that cannot Err; I appeal to the Infallible Judge.

I know of nothing that can look like any sort of Evidence on this Subject;
except that Article of the Creed should be alleged, wherein we profess to
believe in the Holy Catholic Church: as if by this Profession we did own some
Living Unerring Guide, and our duty to submit to that Conduct.

Now to this Suggestion there is a very ready answer, without Enquiring into
the meaning of those words. For whatever the meaning be, it must be such a one,
as is expressed already in the Holy Scriptures: the Articles of the Creed being
declared by sufficient Authority to be Scriptural Assertions, and not to be
derived from Oral Tradition. For this we have the Positive Affirmation of two
Ancient Expositors of the Creed, St. Cyrill, and the Author of the first Book
to the Catechumens, going under St. Augustin's Name.

St. Cyrill, speaking to the Catechumens, says in his Fifth Catechetick
Discourse. Embrace and keep this Faith, which is now delivered to you by the
Church, and which is confirmed by the whole Scripture. For because every person
is not able to read the Scriptures, but some are debarred from that Knowledge
for want of Learning, and some by want of Leisure; for that reason, lest any
Soul should perish by Ignorance, we have the whole Doctrine of our Faith
comprehended in these few Lines -- Keep in your memory this Faith; and expect
hereafter the confirmation of each Article from the Holy Scriptures. For the
Creed does not consist of the Opinions of Men; but of the Chief Heads of Holy
Scripture, collected out of it, and brought together in this Form.

The first Book to the Catechumens begins thus. Receive my Children the Rule of
Faith, which is called the Symbol: and when ye have received it, write it in
your hearts, and say it every day to your selves. Before ye go to sleep, and
before you go abroad, arm your selves with your Symbol, [or Creed.] No body
writes the Creed to read it, but to get it by heart; lest that which has been
preserved to us by diligence, should be blotted out by forgetfulness. Let your
Book be your Memory: that which you are now to hear, ye are to believe; and
that which you shall believe, ye are to repeat again with your Tongue: As the
Apostle says; with the heart we believe unto righteousness, and with the Mouth
Confession is made unto Salvation. This then is the Symbol which you are to
remember, and to repeat. -- These words which you have heard, are found
scattered here and there in the Holy Scriptures, but they have been collected
thence, and brought together in this manner: lest the Memories of the Unlearned
should be at a loss; and to the end that every man should be able to say, and
to comprehend, [or Retain,] that which he does believe.

It appears therefore evidently, that no Article of the Creed is to be produced
as Traditional proof; and that this Article concerning the Church is to import
no other Proposition, than such as may be collected and demonstrated from the
Holy Scriptures. Upon which account it cannot be supposed to imply, either an
Infallibility in gross, or affixed to certain Persons; except such
Infallibility could be proved from the written word, a thing by no means to be
done, as we have already seen.

This Answer in Bar would be sufficient alone. But we may be content to
consider more fully this their only Argument; and the rather, because we may
meet the Article again on other heads: besides, these word Church and Catholic
being often to occur, we have here given us a convenient occasion to explain
them.

First then, a Church is a Society founded by Christ, on such Belief, and such
Obedience, as he has prescribed; which we own, and to which we engage our
selves by Baptism. This Church was first Erected at Jerusalem: and from that
there have been since raised, by the Order of our Lord, and Labors of his
Servants, infinite more.

The Word Catholic is Greek, and includes in it the signification of All, or a
whole. Now it is known that the Notion of All or Whole may be either simply
taken, for a Sum and Aggregate of parts not otherwise joined; or for a Whole,
properly so called, whose parts have between themselves some other Union.

As then the word Catholic implys no more than number: so the first single
Church at Jerusalem might be styled Catholic, in contradiction to the Jewish,
because it lay open to all men, without exception of Nation, or Sex, or
Quality, to Jews, and Gentiles, Men and Women, Bond and Free. So too, when
there were more Churches propagated, all those Churches Collectively might be
called the Catholic or Universal Church, as being the Particulars in a Sum or
Aggregate, without any consideration yet of a nearer Conjunction. In the same
manner it is plain that the Doctrine that was taught in common in all those
Churches, might be called Catholic too.

Now it having pleased the Holy Providence of God to qualify his Servants for
the Universal Catholic Promulgation of his Gospel by the Gift of Tongues, and
to send them out immediately into all the World, in their several Missions: as
all parts were in a little time made happy by the knowledge of the Truth; so
there resulted this advantage from that dispersion to the word of Truth, that
it was now lodged and deposited, as it were by so many Copies, in so many
several distant hands, and was thereby the better secured, from being either
lost, or corrupted. Upon which account there could be no question in the first
Ages, but those Doctrines or Precepts were Apostolical and Divine, which were
found to be taught in all the distant Churches, and Universally attested by the
whole World.

From this consideration therefore of the State of the Christian Church in its
beginning, the word Catholic might by a Metonymy be brought to signify True:
and thence it might come, that in Theologick Language, Catholic Doctrine, is
the same as true Doctrine; and a Catholic Church, that which Professes the
True Faith, and the True Obedience.

So it might be. But finding the word Catholic under that Figurative fence,
very early, not only in the Authors of the fourth Age Of this the Instances are
well known and many noted by Bishop Pearson on this Article, in his Exposition
of the Creed.
, or of the third The Synod of Antioch held in the year 272, has these
expressions in its Circular Letter; (...) and (...), speaking of the Church of
Antioch, and (...). St. Cyprian in the 47th, and 49th Epistle of the Oxford
Edit. ann. 251, 252, uses Catholica Ecclesia in that Sense; and so Firmilian in
his Letter anno Chr 256. So Tertullian, in the beginning of the Century, in his
Book de Pres^r. c. 30.
; but of the second too, as in Clemens Alexandr. (...). Strom. 7.
. and higher in the Letter of the Church of Smyrna concerning Polycarp's
Martyrdom Polycarp is called, in the Letter of the Church of Smyrna, [ Vsser.
p. 25. Eusebius. Hist. l. 4 c. 15.] about the middle of the Second Century, (...).
(if not in Justin Martyr (...)seems to bear such a sense in the beginning of
his Book de Monarch.
:) finding, I say, the word so early used in that sense, as an ordinary
Appellative, and wanting no Adjunct to explain it: one may be tempted to think,
that this was then no new Metonymical Expression, just raised to signify from
the particular Circumstances of Christianity, but that rather it had been
received into common use before in those Countries, and had the Notion of
Verily affixed to it. For long before, among the Logicians, ever since
Aristotle's time, a Catholic Attribute was that which belonged to the Subject
essentially, and for ever (...). Analyt. Post. l. 1. c. 4. (...). Ibid. c. 7.
. And so in Quintilian, a Catholic Precept or Maxim, was that which held true
absolutely, and without any exception Quintil. l 2. c. 13. Praecepta Catholica.
i. e. Vniversalia and Perpetualia. Leges immutabili Necessitate constrictae.
. And lastly, in the Titles of the Chapters of Pliny's Natural History, we find
the Properties of the Planets, called their Catholic Affections; and
afterward the Propositions concerning Lightning, Catholica Fulgurum Libr. 2.
cap. 17. 54.
. From all which it is very probable, that Catholic did stand in Profane Usage
for Universally the Same, and constantly True. And this Notion of Truth or
Certainty appears further, from the contrary word Heresy: which signifies an
Opinion taken up upon Choice, or at Pleasure (...). Diog. Laert. in Proaem.
Haereses, quarum opera sunt Adulterae Doctrinae, dictae Greca Voce ex
interpretatione Electionis, qua quis, sive ad instituendas, sive ad
suscipiendas eas, utitur. De arbitrio suo inducere. Tertul. De Praescrip. c.
16. Haeresis, Humana Praesumptio. De Jejun. c. 1.
; at the best only Probable and Contingent, and so distinguished from Science
and Demonstration; but sometimes understood in a worse Sense, and as opposed to
Truth, even in the time of the New Testament 24 Act. 5.14. 1 Cor. 11.19.
, at farthest, notoriously so taken by Justin Martyr, Ireneus, and Clemens
Alexandrinus (...). Strom. 7. (...). Ibid. and so (...) is rendered by Hesychius
(...).
, etc. The last of those mentioned Authors very much countenances the
Comparative observation we are now making The latter part of the 7th Strom.
beginning at (...) -- which we have often cited already, supposes Heretics to
be led by uncertain Opinions, and Fancies of Probability; but the True Church
to be founded on Science, and Demonstration [that is on (...)]. on this
occasion he says. (...) and (...) to which add that Sentence before cited numb.
11 and then it will appear that (...) may be well said (...).
. And upon the whole, it may be, one may be allowed to guess, that the loose
meaning of Universal or General does not always in Ecclesiastical Writers
belong to Catholic, there where it is ordinarily assigned possibly in that
pail (...) of Eusebius, (Hist. l. 4. c. 7) (...), and (...), may be but the
Exposition or (...). And in that of Justin Martyr's Dialogue, (...) may have in
it the signincation of (...), as well as of what follows, etc.
.

But whatever the reason might be of the acceptance of the word; this is
certain, that in Christian Phrase Catholic has been the same with Orthodox;
and the true Doctrine, or Church, so named in opposition to the false, very
Anciently, if not all along from the beginning of Christianity.

Next we are to consider the Word as it signifies All, or a Whole of Parts, not
only summed up in a number, but United in its Constitution.

Any single Church, is such a whole of particular Persons Confederated and
Conjoined together, in the Profession of the same Truths, and the same
Obedience, under Christ our Lord; by whose Authority this Strict Regular
Society was first founded; and in Obedience to whom, it is always to be
maintained.

Such a single Church was that of Jerusalem, the Original and mother of all the
rest. And then, when there was no other, he that should have broke the Union
and Order of that Body, would have been a Schismatic; and he that had kept it,
as properly styled a Catholic.

But after, when other Churches were formed by the Apostles and their
Disciples, these distinct Churches, as they were founded severally in that
first Unity of Order, each within themselves; so too they were founded in a
Collateral Unity one with another: all those several Churches or Bodies making
one Church, or one Body, called therefore the Catholic Church.

For those several Churches, were not only of the like kind and nature,
professing the same Faith and Obedience; but they were all, virtually and in
effect the same Church: each member of each Society having a right in all; by
his admittance into one, being admitted into the rest, and made perfectly free
of all those Christian Corporations. So that the Identity between any such two
Societies was not only specifical, but in some kind numerical too: and as the
Christian Society of Jerusalem continued the same, notwithstanding the change
of Persons by lapse of time; so the Christian Society of Antioch was the same
with that of Jerusalem, notwithstanding the difference of Persons by distance
of place. Upon the account therefore of this Fundamental Close Union, by which
each Church is immediately joined with, and incorporated into each other, all
those Churches together are properly styled the Catholic Church, and each of
those Churches is Catholic too.

This Secondary Collateral Union is immediate and internal, Tot and tantae
Ecclesiae, una est illa ab Apostolis prima, ex qua omnes; sic omnes prima, and
Apostolicae dum una omnes probant Unitatem. Tert. de Praescript. c. 20.
belongs fundamentally and essentially to the Constitution of a Christian
Church, and is so expressed by the Ancients, by Tertullian particularly, and by
St. Cyprian.

Besides this Essential Unity between different Churches, Episcopatus unus est,
cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur. Cypr. de Unit. Eccl. Et si Pastores
multi sumus, Unum tamen Gregem pascimus. Id. Ep. 68. Edit. Oxon.
there is another Mediate and External one; as when the several particular
Churches shall join together in some common form of Policy, and under the
Government and Direction of some one Church, in which the rest Concenter, and
by the mediation of which they are further United. This Principal Church, is
then the Root, the Origin, and the Center of this Political Union. Such a
Church is the Metropolitan Church of each Province, in respect of the
particular Bishoprics: the Patriarchal, Chap. 4. No Proof from Tradition for
Infallibility at large. Sect. 3.
in respect of the particular Provinces: and such the Church of Rome would be,
in respect of the Patriarchates themselves. The Romanists therefore suppose
those several Churches that Communicate with the Roman Church, to be Catholic
by that Communion; and those altogether, with her their Chief and Head, to make
the Catholic Church: and this by Divine Right, and from the Institution of
Christ; which whosoever denis is most properly a Schismatic in their Opinion.

Whether the Church of Rome has such a Supremacy by Divine Ordinance; or
whether all this External Unity, by which particular Churches Politically
confederate together for common Government, be not Positive and Humane; we are
not now to enquire: that notion of Catholic which denotes Communion, and is
opposed to Schism, belonging not to our present purpose. At this time, our
search is after a judge of Controversy, and we are to consider the Church
Catholic, only as it signifies Orthodox, and in opposition to Heresy and
Error: we having nothing now to do with the Church of Rome, as it pretends to
be the Center of Unity, but as it claims to be the Basis of Truth.

This is the Import of the Words Church, and Catholic: we come now to consider
them, as they lie in the Creed.

Here then we are to observe first, concerning the Creed in general; that as
Catholic signifies Orthodox, so this Creed was nothing else but the Orthodox
Profession. For it so coming to pass, that there arise up in the beginning of
Christianity very dangerous Errors, and destructive of the true Faith; the
Catholic or true Church thought advisable in opposition to those Errors, to
form to it self some short fundamental Profession, whereby they might
distinguish themselves from Heretics, as by a Shibboleth: which Profession
being Characteristick, or the Cognizance and word of a true Regular Christian,
was called for that reason Symbolum, or a Mark and Token.

Our Savior himself made his own Symbol or Cognizance first; when he commanded
his Disciples to Baptize in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. For by
this Mark of difference, the True Christian was first distinguished from a
Heathen, as believing in the Father the God of the Jews; secondly from an
ordinary Jew, as believing the Son Christ Jesus to be the Messiah: and lastly,
he was discriminated from those Jews who admitted Christ to be their Prophet
and Messiah, but would not recede from the Old Law, by believing in the Holy
Ghost, who spoke by the Apostles, and declared the abrogation of that Covenant.
So did our Savior himself order his Disciples to be Characteris'd, at their
admission, by the Belief of those three Persons, and obedience to their several
directions.

But because in a little time Deceivers crept in, who under the name of
Christians, and the show of this Character, subverted the Faith; being really
Jews or Heathens, and using the words of this Profession in a meaning quite
different from the first intention: it grew therefore necessary to determine
those few words of the Original Symbol to their proper sense, by the addition
of others, which should further distinguish and divide the true Catholic
Christian, from the Heretical and false. Lest therefore an Ethnic Christian,
under the name of Father, should mean some other God, different from the
Creator; He was to add expressly, the Maker of Heaven and Earth: and lest he
should mean such a Son, as was man only in appearance; or the Jews such a one
as was man only, and as the rest of men; he was obliged to profess his belief
circumstantially, in that Son, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin Mary, and who suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead, and
Buried, etc.

The Archetypal Original Symbol of our Saviors, so explained, is called the
Symbol or Creed of the Apostles: being explained after their mind, and expressly
in their own Phrase. This, as far as the Article of the Holy Ghost, (excepting
that of Christ's descent into Hell) was every where Uniformly professed over
all the World; and called anciently the immovable Rule, and Unreformable
Canon. It was the fundamental Characteristick of Catholicism: by the Profession
of it men were Baptized, and admitted to be the true Christians; and that
Baptism, at which such a Profession could not be presumed, was reputed and
declared null; and consequently a Christian, otherwise made, supposed to be
none.

Now although those that professed this Creed, were by it sufficiently
discriminated from the grosser Heretics, such as deserved not really the name
of Christian: yet other Heresies there were, very dangerous and wicked, that
might hide themselves under this form; and could not be detected and severed,
but by some more precise distinction. The Arrian Heresy denying the Coeternal
Existence of our Savior, occasioned therefore that enlargment, concerning the
Son, which we find in the Nicene Creed; and afterward, the Macedonian, denying
the Person of the Holy Ghost, that Explanation we have on that Article in the
same Nicene Creed, as it is commonly called. After that too, the Nestorians,
Eutychians, etc. gave further reason for the additional Explications, that are
given on those subjects, in the Creed that goes under the name of Athanasius.

So were these Symbols and Cognisances of the true Belief enlarged, and
multiplied, occasionally: each of them, in their several times, being
Characteristical enough; till new and other Heresies arose, which were to be
excluded by some further distinction. But all along, whereas these and after
Creeds differenced the Pure Christianity, from Christianity Corrupt; the
Apostolical was supposed to discern between the true, and that falsely so
called: and accordingly the admission into common Christianity by Baptism,
continued still to use only this Mark; while at the same time there were other
marks in use, to separate one Christian from another.

Now as Heresies and Errors are of different sorts; some more gross, and more
contrary to the Christian Faith, some less; some utterly inconsistent with
Christianity, the Heresies of the first Ages, some Consistent with it; and of
these some highly dangerous, and some pernicious in a less degree: so on the
other side, Orthodoxy, or a Catholic Belief, may either be so in perfection,
purely and absolutely, and void of all sorts of Error; or else in its degree,
and qualifiedly; not pure from all Error, but from such of which some,
otherwise good Christians, are guilty; from such so gross, and very dangerous;
at least from such which are absolutely incompatible with the Christian
profession.

Accordingly, one that Professed the Apostle's Creed, in the Elder Times, and
when no other Errors appeared to infest the Church, but such as were refuted
by that form; was, by that Symbol, reputed and known for a Catholic Absolute.
Afterward, when the Arrian or Macedonian Heresies came up, if he adhear'd to
those, and did not subscribe to the Nicene Creed; he was, by that new Mark to
be held no absolute Catholic, and a Heretic in that regard: but he yet
continued so far Catholic, as to be accounted a Christian; and Catholic too
he might be justly styled, in respect of other Heretics, the Simonians,
Basilidians, Valentinians, Marcionites, etc. whose Impieties he had renounced
in the Apostle's Creed. In the same manner, he that professes the Nicene Creed,
is a Catholic respectively to those Heretics, and to the Arrian and
Macedonian too; though not therefore necessarily a perfect Catholic: for he may
be a Nestorian, Eutychian, etc. And so too he that owns the Athanasian Creed,
as he is Catholic in respect of all those forementioned errors; so he may
not yet be completely Catholic: for he may be Heretical, in those points
particularly, about which the Roman and the Protestant Churches differ.

And according to this account it is, that we Protestants, speaking concerning
Christian Doctrine, may allow the Romanists the Title of Catholic; provided
they will bear the Symbol with a difference, and distinctive Mark of
Diminution. For as an Arrian Catholic will signify one that holds to the
Apostle's Creed, and is not a Marcionite; etc. and as an Eutychian Catholic,
will mean one that holds to the Nicene, and is not an Arrian: so a Roman
Catholic, or Popish Catholic, will denominate one, free from the Heresies of
the first seven hundred years; though grossly Erroneous in other points, and
such of which an Arrian, or Eutychian, would never have been guilty.

The Apostle's Creed, of which we are speaking, was so framed for a Symbol of
Catholicism. But what we have suggested of the latter Articles, that they were
variously inserted over the Christian World; that we are now to observe
particularly, concerning this of the Catholic Church.

For (1) this Article was not in the Ancient Eastern Creeds: not in the Nicene,
properly so called, and as delivered by that Council. It is not in those Creeds
among St. Jerome's Works: as it is not in that we call the Athanasian. (2) It
was early in the Latin Creeds; as we learn by Tertullian: but with some
difference. Tert. de Bapt. c. 6.
For whereas the Roman brought it in Affirmatively, and in the place where it
now stands: the African brought it in at last, and indirectly too. As in St.
Cyprian's time it run thus; I believe in the Remission of Sins, and Eternal
Life by the Holy Church: In the time of those three last Expositions of the
Creed, ascribed to St. Augustine, thus; I believe in the Remission of Sins, the
Resurrection of the Dead, and Eternal Life, by the Holy Church. And besides it
may be observed, that in these Latin Symbols the Epithet, whether for Ornament
or Distinction of the Church, was Holy, and not Catholic: this Greek word
being borrowed afterward from the Usage of the Grecian Churches.

Now then, to return to our present Enquiry, the occasion of this Digression;
and to see, whether the notion of an Infallible Judge or Guide, be to be
understood under this Article: let us observe, that

The word Church has not in it the signification of a Tribunal, or Court of
Judicature.

And then in the next place, the Epithets Holy or Catholic, do not superinduce
any such meaning. The most they can signify toward it is True and Orthodox:
But whoever is True and Orthodox, is not therefore an Infallible Guide. For (1)
a Particular Church may be Orthodox, and actually Unerring; and yet not be
Infallible: for it might not have been impossible for her to have erred, even
in those Points, in which she does not err. She may too be Orthodox in all
those Points, she has already declared; and yet she may afterward err in new
Points, and which want a new Declaration. And (Secondly,) the Position of a
Church Unerring, or if you will Infallible, does not therefore infer, that the
Unerring Church is an Unerring Guide, and an Infallible Judge in Controversy:
except at the same time it be supposed, that that Unerring Church may be known
to be so, and distinguished from others, by proper Marks, and such as are
external to those Truths in which she does not err. For if we agree, that there
is such an Unerring Church; but are to find her out by the Truths she
professes, and by the Examination of her Doctrines: we are not then guided by
the Infallible, to Truth; but by the Truth to this Infallible; neither is such
a Church to us, a Judge of Doctrines; but it is we who are by those Doctrines,
to Judge of Her.

Now if we consider this Article, as it lies in the Affrican Creed; where the
Candidate for Baptism professed to believe the Remission of Sins, etc. by the
Holy Church; the most the African could be supposed to say, was, that Remission
was not to be had out of the Unerring Church: but, that such a Church Unerring,
was the Infallible Guide he does not at all affirm. For his plain meaning must
either be, that he expected to be saved, by being Baptized into the Catholic
Church in General; or with a particular Implication; either that this Catholic
Church, was the Church which professed the Creed he repeated; or else the
Church in which he was going to be Baptized. If he meant an Orthodox Church in
General, which ever, and where ever it was; it is plain then, from what we just
now premised, that he meant not the Church to be a Guide, or Judge; for as a
Guide she must be ascertained and determined. And too, if he meant an Orthodox
Church in particular, determining that to be so, which professed the
Apostolical Creed; it is as manifest, that he spoke not of that Churches being
Judge in other Points. But if he designed the Local Church in which he was to
be Baptized, by that name; it is then too evident, that however he might take
that Church to be Catholic in all her Tenets; yet he did not affirm that she
might not grow Uncatholick, even in those, or at least in other new ones: much
less did he assert that he knew her to be Catholic, by Permanent outward Marks
of Place or Number; by which marks (to be a Guide) she was to be distinguished
in that Age, and to the end of the World.

It appears, I suppose, that an African in the recital of his Creed, was not
obliged, by that indirect mention of the Church, to ascribe any Judicial
Infallibility to Her. And then as to the Nicene, though this Article be there
expressed directly, in the Clause brought in by the Council of Constantinople;
yet it can seem to have no other Construction than what the Africans gave. For
he that professes to believe One Holy Catholic Church; to acknowledge one
Baptism for the Remission of Sins; and to look for the Resurrection of the
Body, and Everlasting Life after death: what does he mean else, but that he
believes the Remission of Sins, [to be obtain'd] by [being Baptized and
admitted into] the Catholic Church, in prospect and hopes of Everlasting Life?
Such a Sense the Nicene Creed manifestly carries, agreeably to the African: and
then it can never be presumed that the Roman or any other did under the same
words intend a different meaning. But all this appears further.

For if the Notion of Holy, or Catholic Church, will not infer that of a Judge
or Guide: the Phrase I believe, or I believe in, will not contribute much
toward it.

The Primary Notion of the word Believe, as it is used in the Creed, denotes a
firm Persuasion concerning the Truth, either of the Essence, or Existence of
the Thing believed: as that there is such a Being as a God; such a thing to be
had as Remission of Sins. If it implies any further Sense, either of Reliance
or Submission, or Hope and Expectation; that additional Notion arises from the
Nature of the Thing believed. As, He that believes there is a God, submits to
his Guidance by implication, because he is God: And he that believes the
Remission of Sins, hopes for it, as for a thing extremely desirable. By the
same Construction, he that believes in the Catholic Church, believes first the
Essence or Existence of it; that there ought to be, or is such a Society; or
that this Society is it: but is not to be supposed to own it for an Infallible
Guide or Judge, except some such notion be involved in the Notion of the
Church, which he so believes. When therefore the Phrase I believe in is
continued through all the Articles (as it is in St. Cyril's Creed) it signifies
always according to the connotation of the Subject to which it is applied: and
then to believe in the Remission of Sins, or in the Resurrection of the Dead,
is the same as to acknowledge one Baptism for the Remission of Sins, and to
look for the Resurrection of the Dead in the Nicene. But the Roman (as Ruffinus
observes) to make the distinction plainer; and that we may not seem to believe
in the Church as we do in the Trinity; puts its Credo to all the later Articles
without the Preposition in; saying, Credo Sanctam Ecclesiam, etc. I believe
that there is, or that this is the Holy Church.

The Sum of all is this; that the Article concerning the Church, acknowledges
either the Essence and Nature; or else the Existence also of such a Society.

The Essence of the Holy Church consists in this: that it is a Society
instituted by Christ, into which men enter by Baptism, Professing the Belief of
his Holy Truths, and Obedience to his Holy Commands, in hopes of Eternal
Salvation; which Society it is the duty of those Christian men (according to
one of those Commands) to maintain and to propagate to the end of the World.
This is its Essence in General: and it may be particularis'd, by the Belief of
such and such Articles, which the false Churches deny. Now the Confession of
such a Society, with its Nature, Privileges, and Duties, in the Confession of
a very great and weighty Truth, and enough to make up one Article of our Creed.

The Existence of this Society will respect either the Past, or the Present, or
the Future: That there was such a Church, or is, or ever shall be.

That there was such a Church once instituted, and actually erected, is,
together with the Essence of it, an undoubted part of our necessary Belief. But
that this Church was existent heretofore in some other past Age, or that it
Exists now, or shall always hereafter; these Propositions, though Truths, may be
only Contingent, and not so certain as an Article of our Creed. See the 13.
Chap.
How far these Circumstances of Existence, are implied in this Article; it is
not our business now to enquire: it is enough for us at present, to have
discovered that the Notion of a Catholic Church although signifying an
Unerring Church, does not signify an Unerring Judge or Guide; and that
consequently the Existence of this Church, however it may be Co-signified, does
not infer neither the Existence of such an Infallible Proponent.

By this way of deduction it sufficiently appears, that no Infallibility in
gross is meant under this Article. And this Course I have the rather took,
because it has naturally led us into an easy meaning of an Article of so great
importance. But that no such thing, as an Infallible Tribunal was ever intended
by it; we have still a further and an undeniable Evidence.

We have still extant many Ancient Expositions on the Creed, (two we have cited
above) made on purpose to instruct the Candidates for Baptism; Composed too
much about that time, when this Article came to the Universally received into
the Symbol; as the Catechetical Discourses of St. Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem,
the Exposition of Ruffinus, and those four Books we find in St. Augustin's
Works on that Subject; the several Expositions in Chryologus, and in Maximus
Taurinensis: and from these we shall best learn the sense of the Church of that
time, concerning her self; and whether any Judgment Seat was intended by this
Article.

Now none of these Catechetical Doctors, in their Discourses on this Article,
are found to make any manner of mention of an Infallible Judge, neither in
General, nor Particular: nor do they refer the Christian Novices to the further
direction of any Unerring Person or Assembly. Whatever they propose to their
Disciples out of the Creed it self, they think themselves obliged to prove out
of the the Scripture; being content that neither they, nor their Church should
be credited on other Terms. Accordingly upon the Precedent Articles, they
discover and they refute the Errors of those Heretics, that had arose; and
upon this they declare the institution of a Church by Christ; and that to be
the True Church, which rejected those Heresies; that the others were impious
Confederations, and Councils of vanity; that this they were to adhere to as the
One, the Holy, the Catholic. But they still prove the Church, into which the
Catechumen was entering, by her Doctrine; and never the Doctrine, by the Church:
they affirm de Facto that it did not err; but never assert, that de Jure it
could not have erred, by privilege of Place, or Number: much less do they
oblige the Catechumen in virtue of this Article to submit for the future, to
the Decisions of such a Tribunal; and blindly to receive whatever other
Articles such a number of Men should determine, with the same Faith and Assent,
with which he now believed the Articles of his Creed, and the present Faith in
that Church professed. Of such an Authority in the Church, and such a
Submission in the Members, of which our Modern Roman Catechists say so much, on
this Article; these Ancient Doctors, say not a Syllable. Hence therefore from
all those Premises we conclude undeniably, that an Infallible Judicatory was
never at all intended by this Article; and that Holy and Catholic Church here,
did never in the least signify any necessary implication of the Pope, or of a
Majority or certain proportion of Bishops, or Faithful: by which we learn, that
this Article of the Creed can neither be brought against us on this Head, nor
on any of those that follow.

BUT THEN FURTHER,. IV.
WE DO NOT ONLY LEARN from the Expositors of the Creed, that an Infallible
Authority in the Church, is no Article of the Creed; but we find, from their
silence in this matter, great reason to think, that there was in their time no
such Article believed at all.

For had there been owned any such Principle of Christianity at that time; it
must have been of the same Importance and Necessity, which it is now esteemed
to bear; and alike reputed the Primary and Fundamental Principle of Divine
Truths to men. Chap. 4. No Proof from Tradition for Infallibility at large.
Sect. 4.
Neither can it be imagined, that it should not have had its proper place in
the Creed, Universally, and from the beginning; being of such Consequence to
the understanding of the other Articles, by whose help their sense was chiefly
to be determined, and for whose sake they were to be believed by most of
mankind. Had therefore this Principle been then owned; a Principle so necessary
to be known, that the denial of it is the formality of Heresy, and the very
ignorance of it unexcusable; insomuch that most other Truths may be implicitly
believed in this, but this must be explicitly professed, under the pain of
inevitable Damnation; had it I say been owned then for true, how could it have
been left out of the Creed, without the greatest negligence in the Composers,
and the greatest danger to the Salvation of Men? Is it imaginable that the
mention of the Church, would throughout all Africa have been made so by the by,
and as it were by chance; much less, that it should have been so totally
neglected by the Eastern Christians, the most Numerous, and the most Knowing of
those Times? Or is it likely, that at last, when the Church came generally into
the Creed, the Infallible should not be particularis'd by some distinctive
Character; and that so necessary a notice, of so high and useful a Prerogative
should have been utterly forgotten? But suppose the Article of an Infallible
Guide, left out of the Creed by I know not what design; (I suppose because it
was a Principle of more evidence, than the being of a God:) yet it is hard to
think, that upon the mention of the Church, though brought in to another
purpose, no Expositors should have occasionally remembered this Benificial and
Instructive Truth. Was an Unerring Guide so little thought of, and of so slight
a Consideration, that it came not into the mind of the Catechist, and was not
worth the mentioning to the New Christian? what could be more natural, at the
instruction of those that were just entering into the Church, then to have
described her to them, by her proper marks; to have commended her, by that high
Endowment; to have exhorted them to believe their Creed, upon her Authority;
and directed them to submit all future Questions to her Infallible Decision?
The Expositions of these Catechists are levelled chiefly against those many
Heresies with which their Age was distracted; and great use there was to be
made of the Infallible Guidance in their times; an occasion too for the
mentioning of that Guidance, if ever, was to be taken in those Discourses: and
yet for all this so many Zealous Knowing Men, of so many several Countries,
have all conspired to omit it. In the Holy Scriptures there might be some
pretense made of an indirect obscure reference to it; and upon sufferance it
may be supposed that the more express mention was referred to Tradition: But
here in our Case, the Men we cite, are those by whom the Tradition should be
conveyed; and this is the proper Time and Place for them to speak it out; and
yet it is not so much as pretended by the Romanists, that there has been the
least mention made of it by them: There must be some great Mystery in this
profound Silence of those Expositors, concerning a standing Infallibility: and
what can it be but this; that they were utterly ignorant of the Thing?

And so we have again gained another Positive and irrefragable Argument,
against the intent of our Adversaries, from this other Evidence of their own
showing. We might therefore from this silence, first of the Scriptures, and
then of the Creed and its Expositors, fairly put a Final Silence on the
contrary Party, and here at least close the Dispute. But if the Reader is
pleased to lend me his Patience: the Romanists shall not complain, they were
not heard out: only they must be content to know, that as the Proof now offered
has discredited their Cause; so what remains grows still harder upon them. For
whereas, if an Infallibility at large had been countenanced by any tolerable
Testimony; it would then have been the easier affixed to some one of the
Competitors, either Pope or Church, etc. according as they should make the
better claim: so now on the other hand, all the Parties together not being able
to furnish out such an Evidence for the common Cause; we are left to proceed,
free from any Prepossession, to the examination of their several Titles; and
are to expect, that whoever of them challenges this Infallible Authority,
should so make out his Propriety to it, as at the same time, if he can, to
prove its Being.


