A SERMON PREACHED Before the QUEEN, AT WHITEHALL, On Sunday, Jan. 25. 1690/1.

By GEORGE HOOPER, D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their MAJESTY'S.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1691.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN.
St. LUKE xvi. the last Verse. And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and
the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the Dead.


THE Tormented Person in the Parable, after he had in vain requested the least
degree of refreshment for himself, and had understood from Abraham, that the
Gulf was fixed, and the condition of those beyond it without remedy; begins
then in the next place to interceed for his nearest, and yet surviving
Relations, his Brethren on the Earth; the successors to his large Possessions,
and Inheritors, as he feared of his Vices; those who filled his room in the
other World, and might too follow his steps hither, and come into the same
place; but whose case was not yet desperate, and for whom a Petition might be
granted. He desires that Lazarus might at least be sent to them, those to whom
he might pass, and they warned not to come into this place of torment.

This Request, capable of several interpretations, appears to some, to be made
out of the remains of that kindness and tenderness, which he might have had for
his House and Family, though wanting to Strangers and this Lazarus. Others
suppose him to consider himself and his own Torments, that those already
intolerable, might not be yet increased, by the growing Guilt his ill Example
might be still contracting on the Earth. But it may rather be imagined, that
under this warning for the future, he couches an excuse for the past; and would
insinuate, that what he desires for his Brethren, he once wanted himself: That
he fell into that horrible Misery for lack of Information; and that his
Lamentable Condition deserved therefore much more Compassion, than he had
besought.

So Abraham seems to understand this Petition of the Rich Man, and to such an
Intention the Reply of the Patriarch is appositely suited. He tells him first,
that his Brethren had those already, whom they may and ought to hear, however
they may have been neglected; Great and known, and constant Monitors, Moses and
the Prophets. And then, when the same demand is still urged, and an
extraordinary Admonition insisted on, to be brought from the Dead, as that
which in all probability must succeed: He again answers, that such a Method may
be as Vain and Fruitless, as it is unnecessary; and peremptorily puts an end to
all further Discourse and Expectation with the Words of the Text, If they hear
not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose
from the Dead.

There is another more positive meaning, which the words may seem to bear at
the first sight; That all possible Conviction had been already given by Moses
and the Prophets, and that one Rising from the Dead, and particularly
addressed, would have no more to say, nor make any greater Impression. But this
cannot be well admitted: for who can doubt but that such a Personal Message
would have been a great addition of Evidence and Information; would have
described the Torments and Joys, the Punishment and Rewards of the other World,
not only more lively, but much more plainly, than they had been delivered by
Moses and the Prophets? The other sense therefore I now intimated, is rather to
take place; being of it self forcible enough to silence the Petition, or the
Complaint, of the Person in the Parable: and which you may please to consider
as it consists of these three Particulars; The First Absolute, and that
heightened by the Two following Reflections.

First, That the Notice already given was sufficient to keep his Brethren from
those Torments; and that new and greater were unnecessary, and not to be
demanded.

Secondly, That it was not impossible, that the desired Warning, if granted,
might be neglected as the other had been.

And thirdly, Not only possibly, but very probably, especially as his Brethren
might be disposed, it would be actually successless.

These three Particulars, I shall suppose to make up the entire meaning of the
Text.

The first, That the Notice already given was sufficient, is the implied sense
of that part of Abraham's Answer, which sends them to Moses and the Prophets;
and is, as we suppose, the foundation of this.

For as the Rich Man, from the state and course of his former Life, might be
apt to think, that his Family deserved the honor to be certified by an
Express, and was not to be concluded by common notice: so, used to
superfluities, he might demand a larger proportion of Instruction for his
Brethren, than that which was to serve others, the vulgar sort: an abundance of
warning and Evidence, without which they could no more be informed, than they
knew how to live without that excess of wealth in which they had been bred. But
here the extravagance of this his Request is restrained, and reduced to its
true bounds: He is told, That there is a Competence of Knowledge, as well as of
Fortune; That God's Providence had already afforded them a liberal share of
Instruction, enough for their occasions, and with which they ought to be
contented, employing it to its true use; That such idle demands were infinite
and impertinent; That this sort of Covetousness was not to be satisfied
neither; and that none more usually called for more, than those who had before
too much.

It is indeed true, and the instance is before us: The unequal distribution of
Worldly Goods, that sets some in redundant Plenty, may reduce others, and those
not the least deserving, to want of necessaries in this Life. And this
disproportion, we know, can no way better be reconciled to Divine Justice, than
by a future Discrimination, the Judgment of the World to come: which Judgment
therefore, this Person and his Brethren might have collected, if only from a
view of themselves and that Lazarus. But that just Discrimination, we likewise
presume will be so ordered, that none shall suffer in that day, by the unequal
distribution of knowledge now; nor be accountable for more, than had been
before committed. It shall appear in the scantiest dispensation of those
Talents, that our Master is not hard, expecting to reap where he has not sown,
or to gather where he has not straw'd; that he that had received least, enjoyed
however enough to have kept him from that dreadful place.

That Man therefore lay now Tormented, not for lack of Advertisement, but
Attention: nor for any failure of God, but for his own. Neither does he here
beg, as Lazarus did heretofore, for the supply of any real want; he cannot
pretend that his Brethren are under necessity, or so much as that they had been
narrowly and sparingly dealt with; to whom Providence had been so bountiful,
even in that kind, in those signal and multiplied Notices, wherewith his Family
and whole Nation were enriched above the rest of Men.

Had he and his Brethren been strangers to this Abraham, and never heard of
Moses and the Prophets; yet they had not remained uninform'd of the great
Duties of Life, and those for the transgression of which he now suffers. The
Being to be acknowledged and worshipped, had not left himself without a
Witness, if these had never testified: the invisible things of him, his Power
and Godhead, being to be understood, not from the Words of a Message, but from
the things that were made. The Obligations too of Temperance Justice, and
Charity, had been sufficiently discovered, from the Light of Reason, and
Dictates of Humane Nature. The Dictates I say of Nature, or the innate Notions
of the Mind; taking leave to use these words in the common way of Speech, and
as they serve to express, that moral sense, that distinctive faculty of Good
and Ill, to which, actions of Justice, and Beneficence, and Gratitude, are
Natural and Delightful, and the contrary Distastful and Disagreeable, by the
frame and make of our spiritual Part. As Tastes, or Colors, or Sounds, are to
the Palate, the Eye, or the Ear, by the Providence of God in the Fabric of the
Body: So is it that the work of the Law is written in men's hearts, as the
Apostle phrases it. Hence the Consciences of the Heathen are instructed to
accuse or excuse: And so would these men have been without excuse, had they
been without those Notices from their Lawgiver. The Commandment, of whose
violation they stand guilty, needs no new Declaration now; it was not
necessary, it should have been proclaimed from Mount Sinai. Before that day it
was not hidden from man, nor afar off: It was not in Heaven, that he should
say, who shall go up for him to Heaven, and bring it unto him, that he may hear
it, and do it? neither was it beyond the Sea; (to use Moses's words, even
concerning the unwritten Law:) It was not to be sent from beyond this Gulf;
nor was it one of the secrets of Hell, or Heaven. The Word was very nigh unto
him, in his Mouth, and in his Heart, that he should do it: It was what his own
Heart conceived to be right and just, and what his Mouth was ready to
pronounce, at least in the case of others.

But beyond this, these were the Sons of Abraham: He is called upon as their
Father in this Distress, and was heretofore their boast. His Faith, and his
Hospitality, were their Glory; and should have been their example: From him
they made themselves a Title to the Blessings and Friendship of Heaven; and if
they followed not his steps, what could they expect but its Enmity and
Indignation? that Injustice, Uncharitableness, and Luxury, should be attended
by the Fate of Sodom, and punished by such Fire? should no more be relieved
now, than they were spared of old, at Abraham's importunate Intercession?

And yet further, to pass over the several Revelations made to the Patriarchs,
and which were to descend to their Offspring, as their best Inheritance; at
last, from the Mount, a general and wonderful Declaration was made, to which
the Miracles of Egypt had prepared, as those of the Wilderness did attest.
Then the Natural Law of Men's Breasts was transcribed, and exemplified by the
hand of God, to be read in the Tables of Stone, and Books of Moses; no longer
whispered from within, in silent, gentle Commands, but loudly and terribly
proclaimed, in a Voice of Thunder, too audible not to be heard; and at which
they could not but tremble, had the Earth stood unmoved; the delivery of their
Duty accompanied with horror, and speaking the dismal consequences of its
neglect.

So did God himself continue to testify to that Generation, by his Servant
Moses; nor did he cease to admonish their Posterity by his Prophets: all whose
Writings were transmitted down, received by the Jews, and read every day in
their Synagogues; still denouncing Divine Wrath against Excess, Rapine,
Oppression and Unmercifulness, as the Rich Man may now too late remember.

This Moses and those Prophets he had heard in the Synagogue; his quality, no
doubt, had preferred him to read them there. Well skilled in the Law, it may
be, he was, and the Oracle of his Country; a Zealot possibly for his Religion,
against the Samaritan, or the Heathen: But still he was to learn to bear; he
had not heard them to the purpose they spoke, and with that attention which the
importance and weight of the Message required: he had lent them the Ear, in
manner, or for show, but he had hearkened to the temptation of Pleasure, or
Propositions of Honor and Gain.

It may be he had heard them wantonly or maliciously; to make mirth and deride,
or to cavil and object: Happy for ever, in his Jest; and secure, if he could
but doubt. The Report of so many Miracles might have only taught him to demand
one; that he should be as much considered as his Forefathers, and have a wonder
bestowed upon him; resolved not to believe without Evidence of the first hand,
as great as he should fancy, or God could give.

And it was true, that greater Evidence might have been given. If God had so
pleased, Faith no doubt might have lost its name, and become Science: The
Godhead might have shined out like the Sun, and his Pleasure as clear as the
Noonday. And so the Body of Man might have been winged, been clothed, and
armed by Nature; endowed with other Senses, as much surpassing our sight, as
that does the dullest of the five; and made obnoxious neither to Pain nor
Death: and, as our Mind, might have been created incapable of Error, or of Sin.

But God is he that made us, and not we our selves. He is to prescribe to us,
not we to him: He not being accountable, for what he withholds; but we, for
what we have received. We are thankfully to be content with the day he has
dispensed, with so much light as he holds out, and at the distance he has
placed it: enjoying the direction, and not quarrelling at the Spots of his Sun.
The provisions for this Life, and for the other, are left to our Care, and
recommended to our industry: and Reason is given us to work out of that stock
which is afforded us, whether Material or Intellectual, not only our
Preservation in this World, but our Salvation in the Next. That Reason we are
to make use of, as we do of our sight, though it be limited and obscure, and
subject to deception: not therefore becoming Brutes, because we are not made
Intelligent as Angels. And the Knowledge that God imparts of Himself and his
Will, though not the Brightest, nor most Perfect, we are to lay hold on, and to
cultivate, as proportioned to our Capacity, and sufficient for the End; not
standing upon Terms, and refusing to perceive, because he is not pleased
Mathematically to demonstrate. God is not obliged, to act for us to the Extent
of his Omnipotence; but it is we who are bound in Duty to Him, to the utmost of
our Endeavors.

To complain of our Bountiful Maker, is unjust, and highly ungrateful: but to
recriminate upon him, and to charge him with our Faults, will be a very bold
and a fatal Defense; a Plea more guilty, than all our former Presumptions; and
which will not prevent, but finish our Condemnation. Such an imputation as
this, though covertly offered, Abraham in the Parable cut short: a Reflection
not to be born by the Servants of God, by Moses and the Prophets. They had not
failed to testify, and had discharged their Office: but these Brethren (may
they say,) these for whom more Revelation is asked, what of their known duty
have they done? Do they act in proportion to what they have already from us? Or
do they live as Men, and such as were endued with Reason? Do they indeed desire
a clearer Evidence? Or, for the sake of their beloved Vices, do they not rather
dread a convincing Discovery? Those who have neglected so much warning, how
little do they deserve more? or to what purpose should it be given? That Rich
Man must confess, that all the Insupportable Torment he labors under, he
endures not for any Transgression Involuntary, and of which he was not
abundantly premonish'd: He had too much warning given him, and therefore those
Coals of Fire are so heaped. He does therefore in truth make a very dangerous
request for his Brethren, and out of favor to them it may be denied by
Abraham: More knowledge perhaps may only help to condemn them more; and put
them into a worse place, than that in which he himself lies. If Lazarus, added
to Moses and the Prophets, cannot Persuade them; he will be joined then only to
Testify against them. And this is the Possibility the Text imports in the
second place, and which we are now going to consider.

II. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither [Possibly] will they be
persuaded, though one rose, etc.

Should God be pleased to change his Decreed Methods, the Sacred Order of his
Allwise Providence, for the sake of this Family; to expose more of his Mercy
and Goodness to such unworthy Affronts; should Lazarus be content to leave the
Bosom of Abraham, and the Happiness of Heaven, to go once more upon the
miserable Earth, and to those inhospitable Doors: What assurance has this
Person to give, that the Messenger shall be heard, or that the Divine
Endeavors shall not be again frustrated, and meet with another Repulse? Will
he ty caution for the success, and answer for the expense of the Miracle? Be
contented that this Trial should be made, and God tempted and wearied, at his
further Peril?

No doubt but those of the Gentiles too that are in Hell, those from Tire or
Sidon, who are guilty of the same Crimes, are condemned, in proportion to their
knowledge, to the like Torment; no doubt, I say, but those, full of the sense
of their present Misery, and forgetting the powerful influence of past
Pleasures, may likewise lament their own unhappy Lot, and vainly wish, that
they had been blessed with the opportunity of some more express Information;
that some single Prophet had been addressed to their Fathers, with the least
verbal Intimation from their Maker; had such Revelations descended to them,
their Duty so clearly explained, and so movingly enforced, how Attentive and
Obedient should they have been, never certainly have come into this Place.
Amazed they may be at the Negligence or Infidelity of this Jew; and subscribe
to the Divine Sentence, that His Damnation is just.

But this Son of Abraham sensibly knows, how much mistaken such conceits are,
and how little Extraordinary Advertisements and plain Declarations may be able
to effect. He can tell them, that not only the Light of Reason may be esteemed
an Ignis Fatuus, and its dictates nothing but Education and Prepossession, at
least be easily obscured and overruled: but that other supernatural and
clearer informations may be entertained with the same Prejudices, stirred up at
the solicitation of Men's Lusts or Interests; may be alike neglected and thrown
by, or cavill'd at, slighted and condemned: that the past Revelations may be
turned into Fables, and the Present into Dreams. This Person therefore may
easily reflect, from the Practice of his Nation, and his own Life, that new
Obedience is not always inferred from new Notice; and may himself best
conceive, what sort of reception Lazarus may find. Whatever wonder on the Earth
his Appearance may be, it will be none there; should the Message he brings
miscarry, much Discourse and Dispute may be raised upon it; but no Reformation
follow.

And so might this Apparition be looked on by the Friends of his House, as a
Phantome only and Illusion, the sickness of some Melancholic and distempered
Imagination. How can a Man return again from the Grave? And how came that
Beggar to be sent? Had Abraham no other to take into his Bosom, and to employ
to his chiefest Sons? Let them not disgrace their Family by such an Ignominious
report concerning their Brother, and brought by such a Messenger. For if Angels
and Spirits, in the Philosophy of those times, had the favor to be allowed a
Being; yet what should this be, but some wandering one of the Air, falsely
pretending to a higher Sphere: The old Vagabond, that has no certain place of
Residence now; and comes out of Envy or Malice, to haunt and disturb the Happy.
Some Banquet therefore, or other divertive Entertainment was to be provided, to
cheer up this Melancholy; some more real and better Company than a Ghost; and
part of the illgot Riches to be spent in the defense of the rest. So very
possibly might this returning Lazarus be no more harkned to now when
Testifying, than before when Begging.

But little might this Vision be minded afterward, however regarded at first;
the thoughts and apprehensions of it, vanishing in some time, and following the
shadow: so that if it was not reputed a Dream, yet it might pass away like one;
and the Image of it by degrees grow faint, and disappear, effaced by the
constant force of other sensible impressions, from more agreeable and still
present objects. Scared his Brethren might be at first, and disordered; but at
length recover, return to themselves, and their old Course; brought first to
neglect, then to forget, and may be at last to disbelieve, even what had
appeared unto themselves.

Such effects as these, though strange in speculation, yet are frequent in
Practice; commonly wrought, by our stupid addiction to the Present, by the
charms of Pleasure, the carelessness of the Mind, and the willfullness of our
Passions. And so we know, that repeated Admonitions from Friends or
Magistrates, and miserable or terrible Examples, are not of force to dissuade
some Men, from falling under the same Calamities, and incurring the like
Condemnation. Notwithstanding all that can be advised or proclaimed, there are
those who will continue the same ruinous Prodigality and Excess, and venture
upon the same rash and criminal attempts; going on gaily and unconcernedly, to
lose their Health, their Estate, or Life; till they become at last Examples and
Warnings themselves, as little to be regarded by others, and as certainly
neglected in their turns.

The ghastly sight of a dying Friend, may chill our blood, and strike us with
serious Reflections; make some change upon our Countenance, and on our Minds;
but when we go back among the living World, we are soon engaged in the Fashion
of it; quickly forget the Deceased, and our own Mortality; again contrive and
design, as if we were left behind to continue here for ever. All Monuments and
Memento's are ineffectual to the purpose they speak: and so many going to the
dead, can not well persuade us that we shall follow.

Nay some there are, that have been themselves among the Dead; that in some
dangerous Sickness have been so near this place, as to have had a lively view
of it; and, in the bitterness of their Soul, almost to have felt its torments:
and what firm Resolutions do they then make? What solemn Promises to God, and
to themselves? which yet give place, when health and vigor returns; the
forgetful Creature relapsing in a little time into his old sins, and not having
been persuaded, no not by his own Convictions.

Insomuch that if we should suppose Abraham to procure a greater favor for
this Person, than he knew how to desire; to take him out of that Flame, and set
him again on the Earth; not for some temporary care, while he is upon a short
Errand; but for another Trial of his Obedience, and a new opportunity of
delivering himself out of that intolerable State: Upon this supposition,
impracticable indeed as he is told by Abraham, it would not however be
impracticable to imagine, that this very person might by degrees fall into his
former Errors, and slide into the Way that will bring him back into the same
Place; like some pardoned Criminals, that are still under Bonds to their old
Vice, and soon deserve a second Sentence. So little therefore can this Man be
confident of the success of a Report upon his Brethren, that perchance his own
Experience might not prove Warning enough unto Himself.

Were not the Instances of these difficult and unperswasible tempers so
frequent in humane Life, innumerable might be brought from sacred story:
Pharaoh not persuaded by ten Miracles, and to be drowned by another: The
Children of Israel, whose hardness of heart as much exceeded his, as the power
of Moses did that of his Magicians; those the peculiar People of God, informed
from his Mouth, led and fed by daily Miracles, and yet giving no Credence to
his Word; a froward Generation, Children in whom there was no Faith; as their
Lawgiver describes them. To conclude, the Holy Books are full of Admonition,
from God, and of the Disobedience of Men: Warning us from our Sins, and from
any great hopes of growing better by new warnings; for this too is a Lesson
that may be learnt from Moses and the Prophets.

And thus we have seen the assertion of the Text to be so possible, that there
is great reason to proceed higher, and to understand it more positively; as
that which would generally happen in the World, and may very Probably be
verified on those Brethren: the last and the full sense of the Words.

III. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded,
etc.

This Intractableness in many, and Infidelity to Moses and the Prophets, is not
opposed particularly to their Persons, nor only able to over-balance their
Testimony: it is generally ready to encounter the same grievous Commands,
whoever brings them; and strong enough to repulse another Messenger. It has
learnt from overruling greater and more illustrious Evidence, easily to defeat
this: and Lazarus must yield, where Moses and the Prophets could not prevail.

The Miracles indeed of those days are long past, and Moses and the Prophets
were Men of old; (and let us suppose them to be Antiquated, and to need this
Reinforcement:) but the Unbelief of that time was Humane, and Natural, and has
been propagated to the present Age; The Israelite, the crooked and perverse
Generation, still continues; the wantonness and frowardness of such, as will
not have God for their King. The Rich Man, if he inquires wisely, will not say,
that the former days were worse than these. There are the same Dispositions
now, of whom the like may be presumed, and where Miracles would be bestowed in
vain: Men whose understandings are darkened, and Consciences seared; who have
already done that violence to their inward better part, that they are grown
Insensible of any thing that comes against their present Interest, and from
another World: The advice to the Sceptick would be false and visionary, dull
and nauseous, to the Man of Pleasure; and to the Man of Business, trifling and
impertinent; the Ghostly Friend an Enemy to them and to their Designs, as
unwelcome as Satan, and to be Exorcis'd. For still it is, that those who have
devoted themselves to the Idols of this World, Pleasures, Riches, or Honor,
look upon all discourse offered against their Deities as Blasphemy: accordingly
they throw dust in the air, to blind their Eyes; they stop their Ears, and cry
away with it, running on with one accord. These are properly said to be dead in
sin, not to be restored by any Remedy, however powerful and extraordinary, that
works by moral force; whom God indeed may make sensible, and raise by his
Omnipotence, as he may now return Lazarus: but upon whom this Lazarus, so
remanded by Miracle, will not operate, except he brings with him the power of
Miracles, and can confer Grace, such as shall not be resisted.

And thus there might be Sons of Abraham, of whom this Sentence might be true
in its severest meaning: and of those, this Rich Man might be one; and he by it
given to understand, that he himself would not have been persuaded by the
wonder he desires; and neither will his Brethren be, those of the same Family
and Mind.

And so might the miserable Jew be well silenced by this reasonable and
righteous Answer, and he and his Brethren left without excuse: such as they
should allege in earnest, and at the Day of Account; not indeed without such
excuses as better deserve that name, frivolous and false pretenses, raised by
the lazy or the obstinate; childish pleas of affected Ignorance, and
counterfeit Disability, such as God in his Government of the World will not
consider, nor does any humane Magistracy admit. Justified will our Creator be
in his saying and Sentence; and clear when he is judged, and when he judges.

This Answer of Abraham, grounded upon Observation of common Life, and the
practice of the Jews, has been since eminently confirmed by the experiment of
Christianity. Our Savior, the Brightness of God's Glory, and the express Image
of his Person, has himself brought down Information to us, infinitely
surpassing what was spoke to the Fathers by Moses and the Prophets: has laid
open to us the World to come, and given the free prospect of Heaven and Hell;
declared more of the Future State in this single Parable, than was to be read
in all those Writings to which Abraham refers. What too is said here to be
denied, he did effect; and raised one Lazarus from the Grave. And when by that
rescue of another from Death, he had only hastened his own; (His very Disciples
not so well persuaded by that, and so many other Miracles, as not to forsake;
nay to deny him:) he was pleased himself to rise from the Dead, finally to
instruct and to warn Men. This Gospel he Commissioned chosen Men to publish,
and empowered them to confirm it with Signs and Wonders: Multitudes of his
Servants continually declaring, by the zeal of the Lives and the constancy of
their Death, the truth of their Master's Resurrection, and their assurance of
their own. By such evident Testimonies, the World found it self obliged to
admit and to confess his Doctrine: but neither is it so persuaded. It hears,
and pretends to believe; but goes on still in its old course, and lives after
the Unchristian manner: sometimes it wants a sign, or an infallible Proponent,
or a scientifick demonstration; glad to know how to except and object, and
resolved not to obey: not to be fully persuaded, it seems, should all the Dead
arise, or the whole Host of Heaven come down.

So true has this Affirmation of Abraham's since proved; and so little Faith
has our Savior found: At his Death he left not much, and he makes it a
question after, whether at his return he shall find any; any proportionable to
the clearness of the Message, and to the Greatness and Dignity of the Reporter.
The Event, he has not only intimated in the Parable, but foretold expressly:
neither is the Revelation he has made, disparaged, but verified by it. We are
not surpised to find, that there are such who neglect or contradict. These are
those of whom we have been warned, those that will not be persuaded; neither
should any give themselves the vain pleasure, to think that they can disgrace
the Gospel, or disappoint its Author: His word will certainly serve, to the
purpose to which it was ordained; and his honor is as secure as his Happiness:
It is the Unbeliever only who will suffer.

The Notice we have is so plain and evident, that reasonably and in duty we
cannot demand more: however more will not be granted. If the sign of Jonas has
not had any effect, no other shall be given: nor any more rise from the Dead,
till we our selves do to Judgment. The Book is sealed, as the Gulf below is
fixed: and those that will not be prevailed with by this method, they will not,
they shall not, by any other. If they will not hear Moses and the Prophets, the
Son of God and his Apostles; there will be no further endeavor to persuade
them: If the Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that are lost.

Make we use therefore of the last and only Help; a greater than which we
cannot, we must not, hope for. Take we heed how we despise the Admonition of
him that is Risen from the Dead, and now speaks from Heaven; who will once more
shake not the Earth only; our Maker, our Redeemer, and our Judge.

This Life is the time to hear the Directions of God, and to comply with his
design for our Salvation: hereafter we shall be only called to hear his
Sentence, and to confess its Justice. And then a knowing Age, will be the most
improper to plead Ignorance: nor will a Christian of this Country, dare to say,
that he wanted Notice.

The Assertion of the Parable concerning the Unbelief of Men, we see how true
and exact it is: as really fullfill'd will the Narrative part be concerning its
Consequence and Issue. The persuaded, and the unperswaded, will then have their
different Portions, and be set at a wide distance: And we shall all hereafter
be, in the condition of this Unhappy Person, or of that Lazarus; either
Comforted, or Tormented.

God grant that, according to that other Parable, our Improvement may be, in
proportion to the number of our multiplied Talents: and that we may so hear all
our other warnings, and this present Admonition, that we may be found with
Faithful Abraham in the Joy of our Master: To whom with the Holy Ghost, be all
Honor and Glory, now and for Ever.

FINIS.

