Moore Major.
Cura Specialitent. Die Dominico, XXX. October. 1681. Anno. R. R. Caroli Secundi
Ang. etc, XXXIII.

This Court does desire Dr. Hooper to print his Sermon, preached this morning
at the Guild Hall Chapel before the Lord Major and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaff.

A SERMON Preached before my Lord Major, AT GUILD HALL CHAPEL, ON The 30th, of
October. 1681.

By GEORGE HOOPER, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Mark Pardoe at the Sign of the Black Raven over against
Bedford House in the Strand, 1682.

To the Right HONORABLE Sir JOHN MOORE, Knight, Lord Major OF THE City of
London
My Lord,
THis Discourse, as it does justify its becoming now more Public, by so good
an Authority, as that which it has Prefixed: so is too to confess, that it
owes that Honor to the Subject, of which it treats. Those Graces of the
Blessed spirit were likely to procure favor, from your Lordship, to One that
did but mention their Names: and might be understood well enough, tho in an
Imperfect Description, by Such as were no Strangers to them. That the Holy
Ghost may proceed to exhibit them to your Lordship, and your Brethren, in their
own Life, and full Power; that by the Influence of your Government, Love, and
Joy, and Peace may be once again Restored amongst us; that by such Fruit your
City may flourish Now, and your selves be everlastingly happy hereafter; is the
Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordships Most Obedient Servant, George Hooper.

5 GALAT. 22, 23. But the Fruit of the Spirit, is Love, Joy, Peace,
Longsuffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance.


I Will not leave you comfortless; 14 S. Joh. 18.
said our Blessed Savior upon his Departure to the disconsolate Disciples: I
will come unto you. And this promise he afterward graciously verified, in the
Mission of the Holy Ghost: when the Divine Nature came yet nearer to them, then
it had before done in the Incarnation; did not take flesh apart, and constitute
a distinct man; but United it self in particular to each Believer, came in unto
them, and dwelt within them: not now to work its wonders in its own Person or
only to declare Laws; but to endue others with that Power of Miracles, and to
enable us all for the mighty works of Obedience, to perform those his commands.

That is the Manifestation of the Spirit, spoke in the same Chapter, and given
to every one to profit withal. But, because too there are Differences of
Spirits; and those as great, as between the Holy and the Wicked, the Blessed
and the Accursed; because it is necessary to know which to ask of God, and
cherish in our selves, which we should command to avoid, and get behind us; And
the things of God knows no man but the spirit of God; 1 Cor. 2.11.
This manifestation is not yet clear, till we are taught to discern the Spirit;
and till the Holy Ghost in farther favor to us, shall have informed us of the
Manner and Signs of it is blessed Presence: How it operates, and where it is to
be presumed.

And if the Operation of our Souls, the Apprehension of the Understanding, and
Inclination of the Will, afford such Advantageous and delightful Speculation to
Rational minds; Our thoughts being no other way better entertained, nor further
improved, then by such Reflections: The motions of the holy Spirit within us,
the Actings of that new Divine Soul, as they are infinitely more exalted, and
more Concerning; so are they a far Nobler, and much more necessary Subject for
our most attentive Consideration.

Our Savior entered upon this Subject, in Answer to Nicodemus. 5. Joh. 3.8.
The wind, says he, blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound
thereof, etc. Not to direct us, to know the Holy Spirit by the sound; for we
may hear of it loudly, where it is not: Nor that we should expect it always in
Storms and Tempests; but to inform us that it is Sustance is Invisible, and that
it is discernable only by the Effects. And after those Effects we are now to
inquire.

That therefore we may know how to stir up the gift of God that is in us; and
may duly thank him, for those Graces of his, we find in our selves, or in our
Brethren; that we may not be deluded, by our own Imaginations, or others
Pretenses; let me engage you a little while into so noble, so useful a
Contemplation, while the Spirit, in St. Paul, tells you what Fruit of it ye are
to expect in your selves, and others.

The Fruit of the Spirit, says the Apostle, is Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. And in these
words you may consider, 1. The Natures, of these Graces; and their orderly
Production, 2. Their Beauty, and Advantage, and, 3. Our obligation to Produce
them.

I. The Love, here first mentioned, is the same with that you find throughout
the whole New Testament, sometimes under it is own Name, sometimes under that of
Charity: and is nothing else but the Love, with which the Christian is affected
to God, first, and then for God's sake to his Brethren. This Fruit contains the
Seeds, of those that follow: the Holy Spirit producing the rest from it, in a
most Natural manner. And this, how it is raised it self; we are first to
Consider.

And, in order to this, it will be necessary to Premise, that one of those
Graces, which results from Love, and is here rendered Faith, ought not to be
taken for that Faith by which we become Christians, but for Faithfulness or
Fidelity: as will appear hereafter. The initiating Faith, whereby we assent to
the Gospel, being here presupposed; and leading us to Love: as Love will
afterward incline us to Fidelity.

For the Apostle begins here, 1 Cor. 13.13.
where he ended in his Epistle to the Corinthians. There, after he had
discovered the Temporary Instrumental use of those Miraculous gifts, which
Shined out in some Christians for the Benefit of others, he directs them
earnestly to covet the Better; those which were to abide, and were necessary to
their own Salvation. And now, says he, abides Faith, Hope, Charity, these
three. And as these three have the preserence before those other before
mentioned; For they tended only to excite Faith, the first of these: so, amidst
these too, the Preeminence is given to the Last. But the greatest of these is
Charity. Faith and Hope themselves, being but of a Transitory Nature in respect
of Love: they serving, only to create that; and not Continuing in the next
World. And this Love he there largely Commends, by the Effects; of which, he
here gives us a more Particular enumeration.

For this Reason the Apostle mentions here neither Faith nor Hope, the
Preparatory Graces: But begins with Love, their Perfect work, and this
agreeably to the ordinary Method of the blessed Spirit, whose Gifts he now
describes. For so, in the Acts of the Apostles, after the New Convert had given
Assent to the Doctrine of Christianity, and in Hope of it is Promises had been
Baptized; then it was, that the Apostles laid on their hands, and the Holy
Ghost descended. The Spirit had indeed before secretly Co-operated to that
Faith, and Encouraged that Hope; It had privately Prepared for it self a
fitting Mansion; but did not make it is public Entry, till the Temple was
ready: When those previous Graces were formed before, then it solemnly
appeared; and thorough them powerfully exerted it self; either in Signs and
Wonders, or in the more desirable Fruits, those here of the Text.

When therefore the Holy Ghost was come it did in many believers of the first
Age, for the Conversion of those that believed not, so exalt the Faith it
found, and endue it with such an Extraordinary force; that the Christians, in
the strength of their pure Belief, wrought the greatest Miracles: and were
able, by no more of it than might be compared to a grain of Mustard seed, to
remove Mountains: to such Effects the Blessed Spirit advanced the Nature of
Faith, in a singular manner, on a Particular occasion. But it was however
always to be understood that then the Operation was most Divine, and the
improvement most Natural; when from Faith and Hope, God giving the increase,
there arose Love, their Proper genuine Fruit: whose Production you are now to
see.

For when a man by a steadfast lively Faith shall be assured of the Existence of
his God, as firmly as he is of his own; and shall have on his Mind any suitable
Conception of the Divine Nature, any view of those ineffable Transcendent
Perfections; shall have once discovered the Eternal, Immortal, Omnipotent,
Allwise, the absolutely Holy, Just, and most infinitely Good: As he cannot but
fall down Prostrate before all this Greatness, and adore the Majesty; so must
he, if there be in him any resemblance of such qualities, be infinitely
affected at the sight of so much Purity, and passionately devote himself to so
great Goodness. Had man no Interest in those Attributes, did he stand by only,
and see, and were the Kindness of the Gospel directed to the Angels; yet
certainly he could not but take part, and concern himself to Esteem and to
Love; he would be naturally attracted, and fixed on such an Object, by the
tendency of a Rational Soul, the Sympathy (if I may so say) of a Spiritual
Being. But if he shall find himself the happy Object of all that Goodness, that
all those Glorious Attributes shine on him; if by the same Faith he shall come
to learn that this Being, of such inconceivable Perfection, was wonderful in
nothing more, then in his love to Mankind, and had prevented any Affection we
could show, by one conceived for us before the foundation of the World: when he
shall reflect by what hand he is made, and whose likeness he has the honor to
bear; that himself, whatsoever he values himself upon, or whatever he delights
in, is owing all to the Benignity of the same Cause: when he shall have read in
the holy writings such passionate expressions of good will, how earnestly and
concernedly the Almighty bespeaks us, how willing he is to pardon, and how glad
to reward; how he lovesus more, then we do our selves; in one instance,
appeared to love us more, then he loved his so only Begotten Son: when man
shall have perceived much love for him, from a Being so infinitely to be
beloved himself: if he retains any thing of the Image of his Maker: will he not
resemble him in a correspondent Affection? except he be yet but Earth, if he
has any apprehension, any sense, will he not discover it by grateful dutiful
resentment? he might as well, at the Creation, have refuss'd to Live; as now,
to Love.

This way would a lively attentive Faith move. After it has laid before us the
History of the Divine Love, it would of it self excite us to demonstrations of
our own.

But further, when Faith has given us such a beauteous glorious Idea of the
nature of God, such an Obliging Engaging representation of his Goodness to man;
and has had its proper effect upon us, has created in us a Due Value and
Adoration for his Blessed being, an approbation of his holy Will, and a warm
zealous Devotion to his service: It then too begins to give us the confidence
of entitling our selves more peculiarly to the Favor of God, and we presume of
a particular interest in his gracious Promises; Assured of the Veracity of his
Love, and conscious of the sincerity of our own, we look not only on the past
testimonies of his goodness, but expect the Glories of the future; and hope now
as earnestly for Heaven, as we certainly believe it.

And, if Faith alone, which is in it self but a passive Impression on the Mind,
has that force in it as to be the cause of so much Love; This Hope when once
conceived, being of a Moving Active Nature, will not fail to quicken our
desires anew; and absolutely inflame our Divine Affection. To sum up then the
whole, The soul, having from Faith the glorious amiable view of God's Infinite
Perfections; together with the History of his Exceeding Kindness, his
undeserved and unchangeable Affection to Mankind; and seeing too before its
eye, by Hope, the prospect of Heaven, its assured, blessed, immortal
expectations; which way will it turn it self, where it shall not see cause to,
Love and to admire? It must give it self up, encompassed on all sides,
surrounded with infinite Attractives, and everlasting Obligations. If any
Person is to be beloved; it is this, which Faith presents; if any past Favors
can engage us; none earlier, nor greater, then His: If any Future Hopes can
prevail; none more Certain, nor more Glorious then those. And these Bands of
Love, each of them singly would certainly hold, and fix us Irremovably: but
joined together, and Twisted in a threefold Cord, they are impossible to be
broken.

And so far have I represented to you these workings of Faith and Hope, after
the manner of Nature, and without the Cooperation of the Holy Spirit. But if
we shall suppose, that God himself comes in, enlightens our Understanding, and
warms our Affections; if he shall be pleased to draw the lovely Image of
himself on our Minds, to form in us a right Sense of all his Goodness, and a
true Conception of his everlasting Joys, to enliven the Thoughts, and actuate
the Motions of the Soul; What raptures and ecstasies are we then to suppose?
Whom then would we have but God? And whom should we desire on Earth in
Comparison of him? Then should we be all on fire from Heaven; And a Flame
kindled in us, that many Waters would not quench, neither could the Floods
drown: Our Love for him would resemble his Divine Nature; and as much surpass
any Worldly Passion, as God excells the Creation.

This then is the Holy Passion of those, that are grown up, in Christ, to their
full Stature. This is the Fire they are Baptized with, who are Baptized with
the Holy Ghost. And, as soon as the Breathings of the Spirit have blown up and
kindled it, Man has, as it were, a New Soul, and becomes a New Creature;
discerns his Heavenly Parent, and begins to Cry Abba Father. His greatest
Speculative pleasure is in the Contemplation of this infinite excellent Wisdom,
Holiness, and Goodness; and his greatest Practical delight in the mean humble
Performances, of that little Service he can be thought to do, of all that
Honor he shall be allowed to Pay. Our Love then to God is answerable to that
of God for man: we Worshipping and ^erving by the same Principle, that he
created and redeemed, out of free Choice and pure Inclination; endeavoring now
to please him by the same Motive, he has Prepared for us those Eternal
Pleasures, by the Motive of a real Affection. We should be so much New-men;
that we should not love our selves, but as we are the Workmanship, and the Care
of a God: no other reason should dispose us to affect our selves, then what
carries us to affect the rest of mankind, all made, all in some measure
beloved, by our Great Creator.

And this is the Love here first placed; so much mentioned by our Savior, and
his Apostles; so eminently visible in their Heavenly lives, and willing Deaths.
It is this Love toward God for his own sake, and for him toward our Brethren,
that performs all the commands, makes the full character of a Christian; and is
preferred justly before, all other Graces; the Perfection of such as go before
and the Parent of those that follow. A love for Mankind unconceivable brought
our Savior down from Heaven, subjected a God to the meanness and infirmity of
our mortal Nature, to the Agonies of the Garden, and the Death of the Cross;
induced him to lay aside his Glorious Happiness above, that he might bear our
Griefs, and carry our Sorrows, might be wounded for our Transgressions, and
bruised for our Iniquities. And a Love resembling that infinitely deserved by
it, and Kindled at it, a Love of Gratitude and Duty burning in his Disciples,
in a just return and humble Emulation, devoted back their Bodies and their
Souls to the Honor of him that had redeemed them; Consecrated, and Sacrificed
their Lives, to the Service of that blessed Name: Out of affection to their
Savior, and to those whom their Savior Loved, they published the Propitiation
of his Death, with the Peril of their own: They too in their Office of
Reconciliation. Despised the Shame, and endured the Torment; rejoicing in their
Sufferings, and filling up that which was behind of the Afflictions of Christ.
On such Love of our Saviors is our Salvation founded: by such Love of the
Apostles is the good Tidings declared: and with the same in us is the Gospel to
be entertained and obeyed.

Now, tho in an Age so lukewarm as Ours, these Holy Fervours of the Heavenly
Love may not be commonly understood; tho to some this Gift of the Spirit may be
as strange, as that of Miracles, and may seem to have ceased as well; yet what
Christian is there that will not Profess he knows God? And who can know him
that does not Love him? This is certainly the Fruit of the Spirit, in those in
whom he dwells: and from this Fruit the other that follow, do as naturally
arise.

As, 2. Joy, and this is the inseparable Companion of Love, It Is nearest
Attendant. Delight, Complacency, and Satisfaction, surrounding it on every
side, we being pleased with the Object, before we Love; Pleased with it while
we Love; and pleased with the Love it self, for so must our Joy have begun
early, grown up, and heightened, from the same Discoveries of Faith, and by the
same Proportions, by which our Love advanced.

Believing, we shall not only Love with a Love not to be expressed, but Rejoice
too with Joy unspeakable. For, as the Creation is cheered at the Rising of the
Sun; as Rational thinking Minds are ravished, at the Discovery of some noble
Truth; such must the Joy be, but of an infinitely higher degree; when the Day
dawns, and the Day Star arises in our Hearts, and God himself shall appear;
when he shall shine in upon us with the brightness of his Glory, and reveal the
Excellencies of his Nature; when Greatness shall be discovered in all it is
Majesty, Honor in all it is Luster; when Holiness, Justice, Truth, and
Goodness, shall be seen in their purest Idea, and utmost Perfection. This
sight, as it will be hereafter, Clear, and at Hand, is justly styled the
Beatifical Vision; and may, of it self, make Happiness enough for a Heaven: And
here on Earth as much of it, as the Eye of Faith may let in, would create on
the Soul of man a Pleasure, it had never before known, not to be experimented
by Sense, or fancied by Imagination; a joy that we could not well bear; and
which is to come mixed and allayed, in Mercy to our mortal Constitution. Many
there are that say; Ps. 4.6.
who will show us any Good? But the Lord lifts up the light of his Countenance,
on those he Loves; And puts Gladness in their Heart, more then what Corn and
Wine and Oil would give. So much Pleasure have we from Faith, Psalm. 17.15.
in the bare Speculation of God: we behold his Face only and are Satisfied. God
saw the Creation, delighted in it, and pronounced it good: what judgment then
must they make? And what Joy will they find? That look on him.

But then too if we proceed to the other Manifestations of our Faith, as it
relates to our selves; Whatever delight God might take in creating of Man; man
cannot have more, then to find himself the Work of God; that we have the Honor
to come out of his Hands, and the Happiness to be Considered by him. On what
other occasion should we express a greater Joy. Then when we know our selves to
be under the Care of his Providence, and guard of his Protection not be his
Creatures only; but Friends in his House, and Sons of his Family. And if this
Joy be interrupted, by the Sense of our Guilt, and dread of his Displeasure,
yet it is only stopped a while, to break out in greater abundance, when that fear
shall be removed, and the glad Tidings of a Pardon come: When, after a Cloud,
and Showers, the light shall return Clearer, and his Love shall shine again
upon us, with a more servent heat. At the Conversion of a Sinner, Angels
rejoice above: and shall not the Sinner rejoice below, at his own Salvation?
So, we see, as Faith goes on, it multiplies our Joy: which Hope raises yet
higher; when it shows us Heaven before us, cheers us with that happy Prospect,
and blesses us with our Immortal Expectations. And this way does Joy rise
equally with Love, and proceed distinctly from the same causes. It will too,
that our Joy may abound, take yet a new Root, and spring out of Love it self.
For perfect Love, and assured of a reciprocal affection, as that is which the
Spirit inspires, casts out Fear, and has no Torment; Is full of Cheerfulness,
and Gladness: is, in it is own Nature, the sweetest, the most delightful, and
most agreeable Motion of the Mind. And lastly, as we observed of Love, that
it is Motives from Faith and Hope were powerful enough in themselves; but
invincibly Prevalent, when enforced by the blessed Spirit: so is the Joy, that
arises from them and Love, certain and sure in it is immediate Causes, and
necessary from their Natural influence; but exalted yet more by the Concurrence
of the Holy Ghost, and super naturally enlarged by it is Operations. For the
Motions of the Holy Spirit within us cannot be supposed to be, but in the most
grateful Cheerful manner: It is the Spirit of Comfort, and Consolation; and in
it is Presence are fullness of Joys: as the Property of the Wicked one is to
torment; to infuse Grief, and Anguish, Sadness, and Despair.

3. From Love and Joy springs Peace, of both kinds: of the Mind, and Conscience
within; and to the World, abroad. In such a breast is no disorder, nor trouble:
nothing but content, and satisfaction; a Quiet and Serenity as if it were in
Heaven: no outward accidents, nor inferior cares can discompose it. And if
peace be preserved within, it will appear in our conversation; and we shall be
as easy to others as to our selves. In those passions of Joy and Love the
Spirits move outward; and diffuse the sweetness and equality of their temper
into all our Actions. Here will be no Envy, Anger, nor Discontent: we shall not
be Turbulent, Disorderly, nor seditious.

4. Thence too Long-suffering: not easy to be disordered, disturbed, or
provoked; by sufferings, by Injuries, by failing of better expectations. None
of these things will move Minds, that are wholly set upon their God; nor will
their divine Joy suffer them, to be sensible of the lighter momentary
afflictions. So far will they be from being hasty, froward, captious,
querulous, and repining.

5. From the same cause is Gentleness, or sweetness of Temper; to be ready to
forgive, and easy to be reconciled: this will be done, in imitation of Gods;
Love to us; and out of Love to our Brethren, for God's sake. Besides that Joy
of it self disposes to pardon opens our Heart, and our Arms.

6. Goodness too is perfect from the same principle: as we here may take it,
for an Universal Kindness, Pity, and Compassion; to be ready to do all good
Offices to all the world, in the most obliging manner; out of Affection, and
with Joy.

7. Faith, which here follows, is as I premised before, sitly understood by
Integrity, or Fidelity, and the reason of this rendering may recommend it the
more to the better part of this Audience. These two words Faith and Meekness,
as they are joined here, so are they found together in Elder Authors; and
probably in the same signification. Eccles. 1.27.
As in Ecclesiasticus: Faith and Meekness are Gods Delight; and afterward in
the Description of Moses, he sanctified him with Faithfulness and Meekness:
Eccles. 45, 9 4.
(where faithfulness is, in the Greek, the same with the Faith before.) And
these two Qualities, that make up here the Character of the greatest
Magistrate, and wisest Governor Moses; are the same that are recorded in the
Book of Numbers. The first, this of Fidelity, God himself gives him: My servant
Moses who is Faithful in all my house. The other of Meekness, Numb. 12.3.
the Holy Writer makes his peculiar commendation. Now this man Moses was the
meekest man in all the Earth. Numb. 12 3.


The Faithfulness of Moses appeared eminently, in the whole course of his
Ministry, in the Delivery of his Messages, and discharge of his Duty; but most
remarkably amidst the Rebellious Prevarication of the People Israel. He never
Connived at their Mutinies, nor gave Countenance to their Ingratitude, His
Brother had suffered himself to be led by the People, and set up a Molten
Image: But Moses is never found in their murmurings, and discontents; He kept
his integrity, and preserved his Loyalty to his God. His Meekness too was as
singular. Not Fierce, Proud, and Haughty, Arrogant, and Imperious; but Modest,
Humble, and Affable. This being that other part of the Character of that holy
Governor, and the Signification of the Word here translated Meek, and
answering to the Hebrew Notion of Lowliness and Modesty.

For this reason we take leave to render the word Faith, by Faithfulness. When
God gave Moses of his Holy Spirit, this was the Fruit. And in this Sense, it
comes here most Properly amongst the other attendants of Divine Love. It being
here, as in Conjugal affection; where Fidelity and Truth are the most Proper,
and most necessary Companions of that and Peace.

For when our Affection is once engaged to God; there will follow a faithful
Perseverance in all known Duties; Obedience to laws Divine, and Humane; Loyalty
to God, and his Representatives. But on the contrary, when Love and Peace are
banished; and Hatred, Animosity, Faction, and Sedition take place; they
presently introduce Prevarication, Dissimulation, and Treachery; they are the
constant Causes of Calumny, Slander, Falsehood, and Perjury. As Satan the first
Rebel, is the known Father of Lies.

8. The other Grace of Meekness, as opposed to insolence, is too a Fruit that
necessarily grows from Love. For that disposition of mind as it is Peaceable,
Easy, and Gentle; So too does it equal, and Level; and respects all Mankind,
but as Brethren of the same House, tho under differing Circumstances. This
causes that the Superiors stoop, and Condescend; are not harsh, nor
Supercilious; are Civil, Kind, and Treatable. And if it has that Power over
Governors, and makes the Character of a Magistrate; it may well become
Subjects, and suit with those of a lower degree. Humility, Modesty, Deference,
and Submission, are proper to their Station: as Insolence, Contemptuousness,
Affronting of Government, is both absurd in Morals, and impossible in Charity,
and neither consists with the Spirit of God, nor with Order and Policy.

9. The last is Temperance: Which is but an Argument of our Love to God, in not
preferring the Pleasures of the World before him. For as the Spirit of God is
Holy; and cannot dwell in a Body polluted: so neither can it be supposed; that
a Soul accustomed to Divine Love, and Spiritual Joys, should relish any longer,
those sensual Satisfactions.

These are the Fruit of the Spirit, with this Connection, and Dependence.
Heavenly Love is the Original of those that follow; and they, like the issue of
the same Parent, have indeed a near resemblance; but so, that their Natures are
distinct, and their difference discernable. Gifts fit for the Holy Spirit to
give: and worthy each of a more particular description.

II. And now after we have known and considered them distinctly, I shall
entreat you to bestow one reflection upon them all together. This Fruit how
fair it is to the Eye, how Lovely, not forbid us as that of Paradise; but
given, and presented: of which, if we have tasted; We are restored to a
Condition of Happiness greater then that designed in Eden: We are become like
Gods, and we shall live for ever: We have a Heaven in our Breasts; we make the
Sphere of our Conversation so to all about us. We are only less happy now, then
we shall be hereafter; but in a Felicity begun already, of the same kind.

For let us suppose, that God would appear bountiful, to some Fortunate man
here below. What Present should we expect from Heaven? Power? or Honor? or
Riches? they are not necessary Causes of a happy Life; are not inconsistent
with Trouble, and Vexation: They are, what the World, Chance, or the Devil, may
bestow. But a gift, fit for a God to give, what can it be but himself? what can
it be? But to bless our sight with Moses his view, Exodus 33.19.
a Display of all his Excellencies; to Proclaim himself, and cause his Glory to
pass before us. To proclaim our style too, to call us his Friends, and adopt us
for his Sons; to publish our Pardon aloud from Heaven, and declare his Love
before all the Creation; to discover too to us, as to St. Paul, his future
Glories, and to open his third Heaven to our view, and our Expectations; and
Lastly, till he shall take us up thither, to come down himself, to come unto
us, and make his abode with us, to bring his Heaven here. In what trouble now
shall that Breast be, that is secured of the affection of a God? and what other
thing will he desire, that Loves him? His present Fruition is greater then any
thing, but his Hopes: And of those too he is as well assured, as of what he now
enjoys. His Peace no man can take from him: his Joy must be perfectly Complete;
and his Satisfaction infinite.

This inward Joy, when it fills and overflows the Heart, how will it Cheer and
enliven the Countenance? What an agreeable Luster, and divine Brightness will
it cast? Then will the Face of man look indeed like the Image of God; and
discover by the Glory, who it is that dwells within. This Love burning inward,
when it sends forth its Light and its Heat, and shines out on others in
Kindness, Long-suffering, Gentleness, and Goodness, must too engage and warm
their mutual Affections: Nothing can appear so Attractive, nothing so Lovely.
The Temple of Solomon in all its Beauty, overlay'd with Gold within and
without, and filled with the Glory of the Lord, was not so glorious as one of
these Houses under the second Dispensation, as one of these Temples of the Holy
Ghost. You have the Pourtraiture of this, in the Description of St. Stephen. He
was full of the Holy Ghost, and all that sat in the Council looking steadfastly
upon him, Act. 6.15.
saw his Face as it had been the Face of an Angel.

These Graces, if Vouch-safe'd to any Family, would recommend it in the Eyes of
a discerning Heathen, to be more happy, then Plenty, Authority, or Greatness of
Blood could make them. The Gentleness, Goodness, and Meekness of the Master;
the Fidelity, and Affectionate concern of the Inferior relations; Temperance in
all their Lives, and Joy in all their Faces; the Peace of man, and of God; the
Correspondence betwixt themselves; and the Intercourse of Love betwixt them,
and Heaven: all this must make the admiring Spectator take up Jacob's saying;
Genesis 28.17.
Surely the Lord is in this Place: this is no other, but the House of God; and
this the Gate of Heaven.

And were there but a City composed of such Families; this yet would be but one
Family, and like that now described: the Spirit of God dwelling in it, and his
holy Protection watching over it: Peace within its Walls; and Plenteousness
within its Palaces: All the Inhabitants nearer in their Persons, then their
Dwellings: the City esteemed, not from the beauty, proportion, or order of the
Buildings, but from the symmetry, the Harmony of the Inhabitants. Such an Union
as this is to make the true Neighborhood, and the Happiest Commerce. So
compacted, it would have a surer strength, then from Walls and Bulwarks. This
would make it the Fairest, the strongest, the best ordered, the Richest City of
the World. It would be like the Great City, the Holy Jerusalem, descending from
God, out of Heaven; at each Gate an Angel; its building of precious stones.

For all Policies and Ordinances of the best constituted Cities: are but faint
imitations of the Graces of the Spirit; are set up to procure the Shadow of
Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, etc. Joining of Houses designs
uniting of Minds: a Corporation speaks it self to be one body: Companies and
fraternities are appointed for nearer associations; to make yet a firmer tie,
then what results only from common interest. There are seasons of Cheerfulness,
and days of Joy: Civility thence called; and there learnt: affected Gentleness,
and customary complaisance, artificial Goodness, and Pretended Love. There is
the profession of faithful dealing; Order and Obedience are owned; and
Intemperance, as well as other Filth removed out of sight; and from the
observation of these rules, and the benefit of Peace and security, arises
Wealth and Plenty. As on the contrary, when the manners of men are distant from
any likeness of these Graces; when Hatred, Discontent, Variance, Spite,
Insolence even in subjects, Faithlessness, Fraud, and Luxury come together and
take place; a City then is only an Association of Evils: and the Nuisance as
great, as the advantage that was intended. As Neighboring houses, at other
times a common strength are found too nigh in a Fire: and Company, the Comfort
and convenience of mankind, is dangerous in time of Infection; and it is their
Wisdom then to live at distance. If intemperance prevails in the Town; It is no
better then a common receptacle of Impurity: if Fraud, and Perjury; it is but
as a Den of Thieves: If Malice, Revenge, and Mutiny; it is as a place of
Battle. If ye bite, and devour one another; take heed says the Apostle in this
Chapter to the Galatians, that ye be not Consumed one of another. Neither is it
needful to show how Dammageable these Vices are to Commerce: and how impossible
it is to manage it, in that Company. We may only observe that Tumultuousness
and Sedition are as great Enemies to Trade, as they are to Government; while
they are growing they disturb and hinder it; as hereafter, when they are formed
into a War they will plunder its Effects. Parties and Animosities take off men's
Minds from the Business of their Employment; and Faction grows up to be a
Trade: Men are Apprentices to other Mysteries; and set up for Politicians: and
then no wonder, if our Commerce flourishes not; if Honesty, and Lawful
Industry, Riches, and Plenty, go seek out other Dwellings. After a great and
general Judgment of God, the Children of men went to make Bricks to build a
City, Genesis 11.
and a Tower that should reach to Heaven. But, when by another just Judgment
from the same righteous Hand they begun to vary, and spoke not the same
Language: they were scattered abroad, and left to the Place the name of
Confusion.

So that, although it is not fit to persuade to these Graces from the advantages
of Commerce; for they are gifts of the Holy Spirit, and to desire them on any
Temporal account, and to make Merchandise of them, would be a Crime against the
Holy Ghost; and truly Simony: yet however their proper Intrinsic worth may be
sensibly understood, by their visible Consequences; and their Beauty will
appear, by the Comparison of their opposite Vices. The certain Effects of the
one, are Poverty, Ruin, and Desolation: And the natural tendency of the other,
to Riches, Honor and Prosperity. With these, the spiritual Graces will
probably bless us: but they will too make us Happy, without them; for they are
able alone to give us the best Joy and surest Satisfaction, ^here: and they
only can consign to us Everlasting Happiness, hereafter.

III. We shall therefore, in the third Place, consider the greater Obligations
we have to beg of the holy Spirit to produce this Fruit in us.

And, 1. As Christians in general. For this is the Fruit, which if the Tree
bears not, it will hereafter be hewed down, and cast into the Fire. And
indeed we take only a Name in Baptism; and begin thence to be called
Christians, only for distinction sake on Earth; for in Heaven it will give
none: except a real Change is made in the Person, said to be regenerate; and
the Holy Ghost enters into the Temple, so purified by Sprinkling. For by
Baptism we are cut off from the Old stock; and grafted into the Body of
Christ: but so as to close, and grow, and bear Fruit. By it we are indeed dead
unto all former Sin: but dead too and Lifeless we continue; except we are
quickened by his free Spirit, Man in Baptism, being like Adam new formed, and as
yet but Clay; expecting the breath of his No(...) and this we have seen, was
the Method of the (...), our Savior received, and the Apostles gave when the
new planted Disciples were Watered; then (...) the Spirit, and gave the
Increase.

We therefore, that have not been baptized with the Baptism of John only, Act.
19.
but know there is a Holy Ghost; ought to know our selves for true Christians;
by the true distinctive Character, its proper Fruit: not by a search into a
Baptismal Register, but by what we find in our selves of these Graces; by the
Seal of the Spirit. Our Title to the Name is not good; but after this
Confirmation. Neither are we at our grown Age, to take our selves for
Believers, if we stood at the Creed, not only to declare our Assent; but in the
posture of those Warlike Christians, with Swords drawn in its desence: the true
judgment of our Faith is not only, whether it be Resolute, and Obstinate; for
that may be from a willful Mind: but whether the belief of the Divine Existence
be so Lively; the Representation of his Perfections so clear, and distinct; the
Sense of his Love to us so great, and engaging, as to oblige our mutual
Affection; to Possess us with a delight, no oother Joy can equal; a Quiet, and
Satisfaction, not to be interrupted here below; to inflame us with a Love for
all his Images, the whole Race of mankind; to disengage our Minds from all
earthly Pleasures, and meaner Satisfactions admitting no Rival with our God.
This is the Catholic Apostolic Faith; and, who ever believes so, shall not
perish everlastingly.

Such a Faith as this, so well Rooted and so Fruitful, if it does differ in
some lesser Speculative points, yet is not like to be misinformed long: Its
Meekness disposes it for Instruction; Philip. 3.15.
and its Fidelity is ready to Confess the mistake: And if in any thing he is
otherwise minded; yet God the giver of all good and perfect Gifts, and who has
given to him those other already, will reveal even this unto him. And however,
if the Error shall be suffered to continue; it will produce no ill Effect,
under the Governance of Peace, Long-suffering, and Gentleness: And this stain
may be Purged at last, by the Fire of Love; as others are said to be, by that
of Martyrdom. If then we find those Qualities bestowed upon us; happy are we
for the present, and secure for the Future, they are Gifts in their own Value
inestimable; but they are too Earnests of a greater, of our eternal
Inheritance, the Redemption of the purchased Possession.

And as the first of these Graces, the Love of God, is the most natural Effect,
the most certain Argument of a Christian Faith: So, that we love God entirely,
and solidly, not in Fancy only and conceit, in a holy Dream, the best Proofs we
can produce, are its genuine results, the Fruit here mentioned; Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Fidelity, etc. And if in this age of
Distinctions, we would discriminate betwixt those that are Christians, and
those that are not; Our Savior has given us a Text: St. Joh. 13.35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples if ye Love one another. In
vain shall ye pretend the love of God, or of his Son, St Joh. 4.20.
if it be not seen on your Brethren. He that says he loves God, and hates his
Brother, is a Liar. Says the loving, and beloved Apostle. A Liar as great, as
he that should say he loved his Brother; and yet was provoked on the next
Occasion, never would Pardon him the least fault, and refused him the smallest
kindness: as great a Liar, as he that should pretend Meekness, and
Faithfulness; and yet be guilty of Treason, and Rebellion.

By that Mark the Christians of old were known: Behold how they love one
another! said the Heathen admiring their Unanimity; ignorant of the Spirit by
which they were lead, of the Graces which so inclined them: but if one of those
Heathen had been acquainted with their powerful principle of Love; and yet had
afterward found them Discontented, Mutinous, Revengefull, Factious,
Passionate; he might have cried out, Behold how they hate one another! with
greater Admiration.

The Qualities of the Text are the proper disposition of a Christian Mind: They
are the Life, and Soul of our Holy Religion; all its Precepts, all its
Institutions, tend only to produce and cherish this Fruit. For all the
Revelations of the Scripture are nothing else, but Discoveries of God's Love to
us; to create in us, a Love for him: and all its commands have no other
intention then that this our Love to God, should be exemplifi'd, in Affection
to our Brethren; and demonstrated, by our Indifference for all worldly
Pleasures. This is the sum, the spirit of the Christian Religion: into this we
are baptized: for this the Holy Ghost descends: and this Love the Blessed
Supper feeds; by the pledges of Christ's Love, the continual remembrance of his
Death, to our great and endless comfort. And however men may refine in their
pretenses; and be singular in their Denominations, and titles of purer
Professions; if their doctrine does not at last determine, and center here; it
is Christian Religion falsely so called: it is counterfeit, and has not to it
the Witness of the Holy Ghost. 1 Timothy 1.5.
The end of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure Heart, and good
Conscience, and Faith unfeigned, Gal. 5.6.
for in Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision; but Faith, which works by Love.

So Contradictorily do they Act to our holy Religion, who think they may be
malicious, disorderly, false, perjured in its defense, so little do they
consider the Nature of God; who consecrate their wicked Passions, and offer the
Service of their Hatred and Anger to his Name; who like the Pope give
Absolution to all Lusts; that List themselves in a pretended holy War. For the
Works of the flesh are manifest, says our Apostle, which are these; Adultery,
Fornication, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance,
Aemulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders,
Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like, of the which I tell you before; as I
have also told you in Times past, that they who do such Things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. But as the Text continues, the Fruit of the Spirit
is Love, etc.

By this Fruit are all Christians to be Saved.

But 2. Those are obliged to abound in this Fruit, in a more particular manner;
who make a more peculiar claim to the Holy Spirit.

Those that pretend to the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, happy are they, if they
have attained them. They seem sensible of those blessed Influences, every good
Christian is to expect, and to Cherish: And pretend to no more, then what is
necessary to the Salvation of each Believer. Neither is he yet partaker, in any
Measure, of the Heavenly gift, that shall Envy it to any, that are called by
the Name of Christ: Such a thought suits neither with the Love of God, nor of
his Brother. Would God, that all the Lords people were Prophets; Number. 11.29.
said the meek Moses: when those that shared of the Spirit; were too to have
their part in the Government. Besides that the Holy Ghost himself has informed
us, in his first Speech after his Descent, how largely he intended his Bounty.
The Promise, says he by the mouth of St. Peter, is made to you, and to your
Children, Acts 2.39.
and to all that are afar off; even as many as the Lord our God shall Call. God
fulfill his Gracious Promise: and make all these Partakers of the Gift, that
own it.

But on the other side, because a good Opinion of one's self may be taken for
the Holy Ghost; and we may not impose only on others, but our selves; because
there cannot be a more dangerous delusion, then to mistake the lying Spirit for
the Spirit of Truth, and to be Possessed, instead of being Inspired; we are
therefore commanded to make Trial of the Spirits, whether they be of God.

When then the Holy Spirit its self is content to be tried; he will betray a
great want of it, that is not meek enough to submit to the Examination.

And here too, the Proof is to be by the Product. By their Fruits too shall ye
know the Spirits. And the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Life, will not fail
presently to discover it self; by sensible signs, by strong vital indications.

But the Effects, we are to Expect, are not Miracles, Curing of the sick, or
Raising of the Dead; they were Illustrious signs of the Divine presence; are
not heard of after the first Ages, nor mentioned here. They are not Talents of
Eloquence and Discourse, Copiousness of Language, or a fluent Volubility in
public: this seems to be of the same kind with the Gift of Tongues, and to
have been but of Temporary use; here we are sure not expressed. They are no
other, then those you find recounted in our Text; they are Love, Joy, Peace,
etc. Things not so glorious indeed in the Eyes of Carnal men; but the most
proper, most natural Effects of the Holy Ghost; as visible Marks, and as
Convincing Proofs of his Presence, as the louder, and seemingly more mighty
Works.

He then that lays a more particular Claim to the Possession of the Holy
Spirit, is to show it, by a Love more exalted toward God, and more enlarged
toward man: extended in all its Dimensions, Height, Breadth, Length, and Depth;
to God our Sovereign in chief, to his Vicegerent, to all Magistrates, all
Superiors, to Equals on all sides, and Inferiors of all kinds. He is to do
Miracles of Charity; to be a wonder of Contentedness, Peaceableness,
Gentleness, Lowlyness, and Condescension; His mighty works will be in
Temperance, Goodness, and Fidelity.

The Fathers of the Hermites of Syria are said to have tried the Spirit of an
Anchorite, of a new kind, in one of these Qualifications, in Meekness, if he
showed Submission, and Humility; they Presumed the singularity of his Posture
guilty of no Affectation nor Design.

We may make a more certain Judgment, from all these signs the Text affords us.
Nor will it be a Difficult thing to view the Conversation of men, and to
discern; whether their behavior be more quiet and Peaceable; whether they are
Patient, freer from murmuring, and Complaint; Easy, Gentle, and Tractable; not
Censorious, nor Backbiters, not Proud, nor disobedient; not given to the World,
and its desires, to Ambition, Covetousness, or Cernality. Happy is he, on whom
the difference is found: against him there is no Law. He is to be Cherished,
and esteemed by all; to be Blessed, and imitated by all good men.

But on the contrary, when a man is readier to Hate then to Love; so far from
affecting his Brother for God's sake, that he endures not his next Image upon
Earth, his immediate Representative; so full of Rancour and Malice, that the
abundance of the Heart breaks out at the Mouth; where one searches for
Occasions of Complaint, and is fond of Grievance and Discontent, is weary of
Peace, wishes and prepares for War; so little Long suffering, that he is under
Indulgence, as if he were under Persecution; Insolent, Provoking, despising
Dominion; pardoning not the least defects, tho in his Father and Prince;
Calumniating, Slandering, Libelling even Authority it self; making and
delighting in a Lie, suborning Falsehood, and Confounding truth, Heady,
Refractory, and disobedient. The Evidences against this man's Pretenses are so
great; that, did he work Miracles, they must find no Credit; they too must be
ascribed, not to the blessed Spirit, but to him that works in the Children of
Disobedience. To assign them to a Divine cause, would be a Slander against the
Righteousness of God: would be, to Blaspheme against the Holy Ghost. If there
are among ye strifes and Envying and Seditions are ye not Carnal and walk as
men?

In the name then of God, and of Religion; let men, in Pretenses of so high a
Nature, at least dissemble well: let there be some color of Love; some
disguise of Gentleness, Humility, and Obedience; let men see something of the
complexion and shape of this Fruit, something the Holy Ghost may own: and they
may then have leave to think Charitably and to presume from what they do see,
of what they cannot, that the Spirit dwells there. But to believe the Spirit to
be, where there appears nothing but the works of the Flesh; is the same absurd
Creed with that of Transubstantiation: it is to subdue our Reason, and Sense;
so far, as to take that for a Sheep, which has the shape and qualities of a
Wolf; to think that a Dove, that you see hiss, and bite, and sting.

This was the case of the Church of Rome. When its Bishops first began to
Change their Title into an Inherent Quality, to challenge Holiness to their
Persons, as well as in their style; when they pretended the Holy Ghost, and
Claimed to be infallible; and rested so far on that Presumption, as to justify
their Actions by the Pretense, and not to take Care to make their Pretenses
good by Actions answerable; the World, tho held in by all Arts of Policy, and
force of Power, yet could not but discover and reject the Imposture; rather,
then believe the Spirit should dwell in such restless ambitious bloody men,
they abjudged it from the Sea; and thought it more reasonable the Pope might
err, then that the Doctrines of Image Worship, Indulgences, and
Transubstantiation, should be True, that Decrees for Perjury, Rebellion,
desposing and Murdering of Princes, should come from God.

This certainly: What ever sort of men Attribute to themselves the Spirit of
God, in them should be seen nothing but what is agreeable to it; nothing
whereby it should be grieved within, or dishonored without. Pure they should
be within, as those that Lodge a God: And Careful of their outward Actions, as
of such as may be imputed to the Holy Ghost. For, to use our Apostles argument,
Profess ye, That ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells
in you? 1 Cor. 3.16.
If any man defile the Temple of God; him will God destroy. For the Temple of
God is Holy: which Temple ye are. It is Holy; not so, as to bring a Necessity
of Holiness on your Actions; but to affect you with an unpardonable Guilt, if
ye unhallow and profane it.

The pretense to the Spirit so is it to be Examined by man: And when false, is
in their sight a bold Presumption. But can it impose upon the Holy Ghost
himself? Or will the unlike Counterfeit appear less impudent before him? The
divine Nature had before an irreconcilable Aversion to Wrath, Anger, and
Hatred. But what an indignity and Provocation must this be to find it self
entitled to it? That, instead of man's being changed by the Spirit, the Spirit
of God should have received new impressions from Man. Ananias and Saphira were
struck Dead, for telling a single untruth, concerning the Value of an Estate:
They lie boldly to the Holy Ghost, whose Fashoods are concerning himself. And
till Interpreters shall be agreed, what heinous Crime is that Sin against him;
well may this bear the Name.

And may not the strangeness of our present Temper prompt us to suspect that
the blessed Spirit has not only deserted us, but abandoned us to the Wicked
one? For, if our Luxury, Variance, Aemulations, Perverseness, and Discontent,
consisted with our Interest; if there were no temporal Danger that they
threatened; were these Divisions, in a time of Confessed safety, and general
Security, and we at leisure and Liberty to Quarrel: We might then be content to
say, that those things were not the Fruit of the Spirit, were the Works of the
Flesh, and the fulfilling the Lusts thereof. But, when common Danger alarms us
continually within, and threatens terribly from abroad; when the interest of
the Liberty of our Native Country calls upon us to unite and arm, against the
growing strength of a Violent forraigner, and a Tyrannical Religion, presented
upon the Point of his Sword; when all Moral Considerations join in with the
Suggestions of the Spirit, and call for Love and Peace, or we are utterly
ruined, here and for ever: then not to hearken, to continue this unnatural
feud, is not from the Flesh only, from a Carnal mind, for that would have at
least Carnal prudential Thoughts; but is, one would fear, from the Prevalence
of the Evil Spirit. There must be something more then Humane, that is the cause
of all this Infatuation: enough to justify the Liberty of the Speaker, if he
should take up that of the Prophet Micaiah. I saw the Lord sitting on the
Throne of Heaven: and all the Host of Heaven by him, 1 Kings 22.9.
on his right Hand, and on his left. And the Lord said, who shall persuade Ahab
to go up and fall? Who shall persuade a Country full of the blessings of God,
but ungrateful and unworthy, to give up, what they have forfeited; and execute
God's wrath upon themselves? Who shall persuade a Country of so much Strength,
Riches, Laberty, and Peace, to fall Voluntarily under Dishonor, Poverty, and a
foreign Yoke? In the Text, there came forth a Spirit and stood before the Lord,
and said; I will persuade him. And the Lord said, wherewith? And he said, I
will go forth, and I will be a Lying Spirit in the Mouth of his Prophets. And
what is it but a Lying Spirit? That shall accuse the best reformed Church, of
Popery; the easiest Government under the Sun, of Tyranny: that shall talk now
of Grievances, and Impositions; and shall speak of want of Trade, in times of
the most flourishing Commerce: that shall haunt Places of public resort, and
fly about the Land in Libellous Prints, with false Tales and misshapen Truths to
enrage the Minds of men, against lawful Government their only common Security;
to confound our just fears with Ridiculous jealousies, and distract us in the
Face of an Enemy with false Alarms. And if, to this Spirit, God shall have
added seven more as wicked as the other. If he has mingled a perverse Spirit in
the midst of us; a Spirit deaf to the Voice of the Charmer, charm he never so
wisely, hearkening to no Accommodation, submitting to no Terms of Communion,
fearful in things indifferent, and bold in things unlawful; a Conscience tender
at one time, and feared at another, easy of belief in Surmises against
Authority, but difficult and beyond all Precedent scrupulous in Poofs, that are
for it; a Spirit of Revenge, and Ambition in the Great, of Mutiny and Sedition
in the Meaner; a Spirit of Schism in matters Ecclesiastic, and of Faction in
Temporals: if to all these the Lord shall have said; as to that, you shall
persuade and Prevail, go forth and do so; They will then effect their Errand.
By our Hatred of one anoother, by our Frowardness, and disobedience, they seem
to be now at Work: by these they will engage us into a Civil War, and expose us
to a forain; and then will Arbitrary Government and Popery, things of forain
growth, and Strangers to our Land, come in with Armed force, through the wide
Breaches we have made our selves.

But may God be more merciful yet to us, that so little deserve it: check these
unruly Spirits, that are gone out in the midst of us; and give us of his Holy
Spirit. May He, that commands the Wind and the Sea, and they obey him; He that
is not in tempests, nor earthquakes, but in the still voice; restrain the
striving, lay the swelling of the Waves, compose our minds, and assuage our
animosities; turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and of the
Children to the Fathers, lest he come and smite the Earth with a curse. May he
that has graciously joined us in so many common advantages Spiritual, and
Temporal, shed his love abroad in our hearts by his Holy Spirit; that as we
have one Baptism, one Spirit, one Faith, one hope of our calling, so we may be
before Him as one holy congregation: that as we have one Prince, one Law, one
Interest, so we may be as a City at Unity in it self. God unite us before
himself, in his worship; and before the face of our enemies, for our Defense:
that we may be an Example to those of our Religion, that yet enjoy it
undisturbed; and a Refuge, to those that are Distressed: that we be not the
Scandal now; and a little after, the Ruin of the Protestant Profession.

To this effect let us beseech Him that by his spirit he would give our
Governors an affectionate zeal for his honor, for the good of his People;
Long-suffering and Gentleness toward those, who much need it: that He would
possess the People with a reverent Love for the Majesty of God, for his
Vicegerent, with Meekness, Faithfulness, and Goodness: that he would endue all
subordinate Magistrates with proper graces, with the steady resolution of a
true Fidelity to God, their Prince, and the Law: that he would grant, that we
abuse not wantonly the blessed means of our reformed Religion to Schism, or
Heresy; the Public Quiet to Civil Discord, our Liberty to Faction, nor our
Plenty to Luxury and Intemperance: That the Peace of God maybe on all our
Consciences, and the Joy of the Holy Ghost on our Minds: that our Fruit may be
unto Holiness, and our end Everlasting Life.

FINIS.

