A BOOK OF FUNDS: OR, Some Reasonable PROJECTIONS and PROPOSALS for Raising
Three Millions of Money per Annum, for Supplies, to be Granted His MAJESTY.

By such WAYS and METHODS as will be least Burdensome to the People, during
the War.

Most Humbly Offered to the Consideration of Both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

By Thomas Houghton of Lyme-Street, Gent.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR. 1696.

A BOOK OF FUNDS, etc.
THAT His Majesty would be Graciously Pleased to give in Charge and Command,
That the LAWS be exactly Observed, and put in Execution, through all His
Kingdoms and Dominions, against all Felons and Criminals, both by Sea and Land.
-- And for such as shall be Condemned, by due Course of Law, in England, Wales,
and Berwick upon Tweed: That His Majesty be Addressed, by Both Houses of
Parliament, That He would be most Graciously Pleased to spare and grant them
their Lives upon the following Conditions, or upon such Terms as You (in Your
Great Wisdom) shall Propose, and His Majesty most Graciously think fit, Murder
only excepted.

Proposal I.
First, THAT Each and Every of them Pay to the King the full Value of what they
stand Condemned for, be it Five Pounds, or Five Thousand Pounds, more or less:
And the full Value of all such other Sum or Sums, as shall be proved upon them,
for any former Fact or Facts whatsoever; together with Fifty Pounds for a Fine,
whether the Crimes be Committed by Land or Sea. -- And that they, and every of
them, that are able to Pay and Discharge the said Sums, be also Banished, and
Sold for Four Years to serve on Shipboard, or in some part of Africa, America,
or East India, unless they be able to procure and can pay Fifty Pounds more for
every Years Service, which will make Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds to acquit
them of their Fine and Banishment, having first discharged all other Sums they
stand Condemned for, or shall be proved upon them, as aforesaid.

Secondly, That he or she who is not able to pay and discharge the said Sums,
be Banished, or Sold to some of the aforesaid Places during his or her Life;
and to have the Letter R Burnt in their Cheek; which Letter will prevail with
many to Pay, before they will be Burnt or Transported, if they can raise Money
any way, and will discover such as Return; which if any do, they shall incurr
the like Penalties again.

Thirdly, That the Africa and East India Companies shall be obliged to take and
Transport all such as cannot be disposed off to America; or, otherwise, Sold to
some Captains, to serve on Shipboard; and shall Pay to the King Twenty Pounds
a Head for every Male and Female, that is Unbranded, who is to serve but Four
Years; and Forty Pounds a Head for all that are Marked with R, who shall be
their Soldiers or Servants during Life. --

Fourthly, That all Manslaughter, or accidental taking away of Life, be
Punished with a Fine of Fifty Pounds, if the Slayers Real and Personal Estate
be worth so much. -- And if his or her Estate that shall be found Guilty of
Manslaughter be worth Five Hundred Pounds or upwards, then to Pay Two Hundred
and Fifty Pounds Fine; and if no Estate, nor cannot procure a Friend to Pay the
Fifty Pounds, then to be Sold to one of the Companies for Forty Pounds for
Seven Years, but not to be Marked with the Letter R; provided always, that
there does appear no Suspicion of any premeditated design of Killing; nor the
Slayer himself, nor his Friends, are not to receive any Benefit or Advantage by
the Death of the other. -- And if any shall be set upon by a Thief in his
House, in the Highway, or elsewhere, and Kills such a one in his own Defense,
then to be freed from any Fine: -- But that all Premeditated and Wilful Murder
be Punished with Death, as the Law directs, where there appears a Design of
Killing, and the Slayers Estate be disposed on, as is hereafter-mentioned.

Fifthly, That all Dewellers, or such who shall Fight hereafter with any Mortal
Weapon; as Sword, Rapier, Daggar, or any other sharp pointed or sharp edged
Weapon of Iron or Steel, -- He that Wounds or draws Blood of the other, if the
Blood-Drawer be a Knight, or above the degree of a Knight, he to Pay Five
Hundred Pounds for a Fine; and the Wounded Person, if a Knight, or above the
degree of Knighthood, Four Hundred and Fifty Pounds; and if Both be Wounded,
each Five Hundred Pounds, being Knights, or above that Degree, as aforesaid.
-- Provided always that there be Proof, or it does appear that a Challenge has
been made by either of the Parties, before their Meeting to Fight. -- And if
Two such Persons Draw, and Fight immediately in the same Room, House, Field or
Place where they begin their Quarrel, and Challenge one another, without a
Quarter of an Hours Intermission of Time, then the Blood-Drawer to Pay but Two
Hundred and Fifty Pounds, and the Wounded Person Two Hundred Pounds, because
their Action or Quarrel may happen to be without Design or Premeditation: But
if any longer Time passes, or if one leaves the Room or Place where the
Quarrel began, and they meet again, though never so soon, and Fight, then the
Blood-Drawer to Pay Five Hundred Pounds, and the Wounded Person Four Hundred
and Fifty Pounds; and if Both Wounded, each Five Hundred Pounds, as aforesaid,
because they continue their Design and Resolution of Fighting.

Sixthly, If one be a Knight, or above the Degree of Knighthood; and the other
an Esquire, Gentleman, or a Person of any other Reputation, the Wounding and
Wounded Persons to Pay the Five Hundred and Four Hundred and Fifty Pound Fines,
as aforesaid; Provided a Challenge has been made by either of them before
their Fighting; or if there be a Quarter of an Hours Intermission of Time
between the Beginning of their Quarrel, and the Time of Fighting; or if they,
or either of them, leave that Room or Place, and meet again, and Fight, if
Blood be drawn by such Weapons, they to Pay the Fines aforesaid. -- But if
they Draw, and Fight immediately upon Words, in the Place where the Quarrel
begins, then the Wounding and Wounded Persons to Pay the like Fines as are
beforementioned, where the Action was, without Design or Premeditation, (viz.)
Two Hundred and Fifty, and Two Hundred Pounds.

Seventhly, If any Knight, or Person above the Degree of a Knight, shall Draw,
and Wound any Knight or Nobleman that has no Sword; or if he has a Sword,
and that be undrawn, the Blood-Drawer to Pay One Thousand Pounds; and Five
Hundred Pounds if it be upon any other Person under the Degree of a Knight.

Eighthly, If any Esquire, Gentleman, or other Person, shall Draw, and Wound a
Knight or Nobleman, that has not a Sword; or if he has a Sword, and that be
undrawn, the Blood-Drawer to Pay One Thousand Pounds, or Sold for Forty Pounds
to one of the Companies, during his Life, if he be unable; or if able, and
unwilling to Pay the Fine aforesaid. And if any such shall Wound any other
Person, not having a Sword drawn, the Blood-Drawer to Pay Two Hundred and Fifty
Pounds, or be Sold for Forty Pounds, for Seven Years, to one of the Companies,
as aforesaid.

Ninthly, That where Two appoints to Fight a Dewel, if either be Killed, or Die
of his Wounds after Fighting; That His Majesty be Addressed not to Pardon the
other, nor to give his Estate to any that shall endeavor to beg it, (upon any
Pretense whatsoever) without Paying Five Thousand Pounds to the Government: --
Or that his Estate be Sold for what it will make, or for so many Years as will
raise Five Thousand Pounds, by a present Sale thereof; if the Slayer be a
Knight, or above that Degree, or a Gentleman of an Estate, and shall Kill a
Knight, or one that is Noble, upon such a Challenge, the Slayer to be Banished
for Four Years, unless he will Pay Two Thousand Pounds more to acquit him of
his Banishment: But if no Challenge has been made, nor no premeditated Design
of Fighting, then such a Slayer only to Pay Five Thousand Pounds.

Tenthly, If the Slayer be a Knight, or a Nobleman, and shall Kill an Esquire,
Gentleman, or any other Person, upon a Challenge made some time before, that he
be Fined Five Thousand Pounds. -- And if he Kill him in a House, or in any
Place, upon a Quarrel, arising from Words, without any premeditated Design or
Cause of Fighting, but what arises then from Words, both having their Swords
drawn, then to Pay but Four Thousand Five Hundred Pounds.

Eleventhly, If an Esquire, Gentleman, or a Person of any lower Reputation,
shall Kill a Knight or Nobleman upon a Challenge made before their Fighting,
he to Pay Seven Thousand Pounds, if his Estate be worth so much; and if his
Estate be not worth so much, to be Sold for the most it will make, and he
Banished during his Life. -- And if an Esquire, Gentleman, or other inferior
Person, shall Kill a Knight or a Nobleman, in any Place, upon a Quarrel
arising from Words, without any premeditated Design, or any visible or known
Envy or Malice, but what happens at that instant time of Fighting, if Both
have Swords drawn, nevertheless, he to Pay Seven Thousand Pounds, if his Estate
be worth so much. -- And if his Estate be not worth so much, to be Sold for the
most it will make, and he Banished during Life, as aforesaid.

Twelfthly, If Two Persons, of what Reputation soever, under the Degrees of
Knights, shall Challenge one another, and Fight, if one be Killed, that the
Slayers Estate be Sold to raise Five Thousand Pounds for the Service of the
Government. -- And if his Estate be not worth so much, to be Sold for the most
it will make, and he Banished for Seven Years. -- But if any Person shall Kill
another, by Defending himself, there having been no former Quarrel or Malice,
nor no Challenge made, then to Pay the Fifty Pounds Fine for Manslaughter, and
to be acquitted, or else to Serve Four Years Abroad, as aforesaid, if the
Slain Person be not a Thief.

Thirteenthly, And if any Person whatsoever shall wilfully Kill another, upon
the Account of Malice, Drunkenness, or for Profit and Interest sake, whether
the Dying Person has a Sword drawn or not drawn; That His Majesty would be
Graciously Pleased, that henceforwards the Estate of the Slayer may be Sold,
and the Money arising from it converted to the Use of the Government, and his
Person to Suffer Death, as the Law directs, or as His Majesty shall, in His
Mercy, see Cause to dispose of it.

Lastly, Be pleased to consider, the Felons and Criminals, by Sea and Land, in
England, Wales, and Berwick upon Tweed, may be reckoned Three Thousand Yearly;
many of which Paying great Fines, and Forfeiting Estates, it is probable, the
Product may arise to One Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds per Annum; which, if
you account but at Fifty Pounds a Head, one with another, will make up that
Sum: And whereas Hanging them is a great Loss to the Nation, several ways, too
long to be here recited; the Preservation of their Lives this way, will not
only raise ready Money for the Service of the Government; but the Sending them
Abroad will, in a few Years, increase the Power and Strength of the English in
Foreign Parts, and will occasion a greater Expense and Demand of the English
Manufactures; whereby Trade would be Increased, Foreign Places Strengthened,
present Money by them here Raised, their Owners Abroad Enriched, Themselves
Preserved, and the Nation Rid of Rogues, which, in Time, and change of Place,
may grow Honest; so that it may be better to Raise One Hundred and Fifty
Thousand Pounds per Annum this way, than to continue Hanging them, since daily
Experience shows You, The Death of one does not Discourage nor Reclaim another.

Proposal II.
WHEREAS there were some Debates in the Honorable House of Commons, the last
Sessions of Parliament, for Laying a Duty upon Leather; which Duty, unless it
was Charged very high, (viz.) Value for Value, would Raise but a very
inconsiderable Sum: Therefore, to accomplish and effect it the better, in all
Humility, I humbly Propose, That a Duty be laid upon all Green Skins and Raw
Hides, together with the Bodies or Carcasses of these Eatable Creatures
jointly, leaving the Butcher or Slaughterer thereof, to Proportion and Charge
this Duty upon the Body, Hide and Skin together, as he shall see Cause; and
that he be Charged for every and each of them jointly, as follows.

per Annum. l s d First, For all Lambs Skins and Carcasses, Twelve Pence a
piece; of which I compute to be Killed in England, Wales, and Berwick upon
Tweed, Yearly, 600000 which comes to 030000 00 00 Secondly, For all Goats and
Sheep Skins, and their Carcasses; of which I compute to be Yearly Killed
1200000, at Two Shillings a piece, comes to 120000 00 00 Thirdly, For every
Calf's Skin and Carcass; of which I reckon to be Killed Yearly 400000, at Two
Shillings and Six Pence a piece, comes to 050000 00 00 Fourthly, For every
Hog's-Head and Body, that is Killed, being upwards of Three Months Old; of
which I reckon 300000, at Two Shillings and Six Pence a piece, comes to 037500
00 00 -- And for all Pigs under that Age Two Pence a piece; of which I reckon
200000, which comes to 001666 13 04 Fifthly, For every Cow's Hyde and Carcass,
Seven Shillings; of which I reckon 400000 Yearly comes to 140000 00 00 Sixthly,
For every Ox, Bullock's and Bull's Hyde and Carcass, Twelve Shillings; of which
I reckon to be Killed Yearly 400000, comes to 240000 00 00 Seventhly, For all
Bucks, Body and Skin; of which I reckon 12000, at Five Shillings a piece, comes
to 003000 00 00 Eighthly, For all Does, Body and Skin; of which I reckon also
12000, at Three Shillings and Six Pence a piece, comes to 002100 00 00 Ninthly,
For all Hares and Rabbits, Bodies and Skins, at Six Shillings the Hundred; of
which I compute 2000000 Killed Yearly, 120 being reckoned to the Hundred, comes
to 006662 13 04

Tenthly, And that the Fishmongers and Poulterers may not have an Advantage of
the Butchers, in the Sale of their Fish and Fowl, It may be reasonable to lay a
Duty upon all Pullen, and the same upon all salt and fresh Fish, arising to
about Five Pounds per Cent. And to render the Assessing and Collecting of these
Duties more easy and equal; That the Justices of the Peace, and the Assessors
of the King's Taxes in every Parish, be enjoined, by Act of Parliament, to make
Enquiry, or cause Enquiry to be made, and to obtain the best Information they
can concerning the Quantity of each Person's Trade that deals in these
Commodities, in their respective Parishes; and to Assess and Charge him or her
with a Quarterly Payment, that has a greater or lesser Trade accordingly; --
that is to say, Five Pounds upon him that deals for a Hundred Pounds per Annum;
and Thirty Pounds Yearly upon him that Trades for Six Hundred Pounds a Year in
those Goods; but no Fishmonger nor Poulterer to Pay above Thirty Pounds, nor
less than Five Pounds per Annum, their Trades being never so great or small.

l s d Eleventhly, That all Foreign Hydes, Skins, and Furs, be Taxed in the
same manner, by Charging the Importer, Furrier, or Person Dealing in them, with
a Duty of Five Pounds per Cent. which Duties of Fish and Fowl, being added to
this of Foreign Hydes, Furs, and Skins, will Raise 60000 Pounds Yearly; and
will make up the Sums aforegoing in this Paragraph, per Annum, 690929 06 08

Twelfthly, That Leaden-Hall-Market remain the Place (as it now is) for Sale of
all Oxen, Bullock's, Bull's and Cow's Hydes, on the usual Days of Sale, for all
such as shall be Slaughtered in the City and Suburbs, or within Five Miles of
London, or a greater distance, if the Owners find it Beneficial to bring them
thither: -- And that Southwark, White-Chappel, Smithfield, Clare-Market, and
St. James's- Market, with such other Places as the Officers and Collectors
shall find convenient, be appointed for the Sale of all Lambs, Sheep, Goats,
Bucks, Does and Calves Skins, on their usual Days of Sale, between the Hours of
Seven and Twelve of the Clock in the Forenoon, which shall be Slaughtered in
any Place within the Compass of the Bills of Mortality: -- And for all other
Parts of England, Wales, and Berwick upon Tweed, that convenient Times and
Places be appointed by the Officers and Collectors, for the Sale of all Raw
Hydes and Skins, as aforesaid. -- And that no Person presume to carry away any
Hyde or Skin till the Officer or Collector has seen and told them over,
although they may Buy and Sell, or Agree for the same before. -- And if any
Person shall Buy, Sell, Conceal and Carry away any Hyde or Skin, which the
Officer has not seen, and taken an Account thereof; the Buyer and Seller to
Forfeit each of them Five Pounds for every such Hyde or Skin he or she shall so
Buy, Sell, or Conceal from the Officer, as aforesaid, if Discovered; one half
to go to the King, and the other half to the Informer and Officer that makes
the Seizure.

Lastly, In regard Money must be Raised one way or another for the Support of
the Government, if Equity may take place amongst the People, there will be
little Reason for any to complain, why this Imposition or Duty should not be
thus Charged; for in these Duties every Person will be Taxed, and Pay more or
less, according to the Quantity he or she uses; if Poor, they use little, and
therefore Pay the less; if Rich, they Pay the more, in Proportion to what their
Expense and Consumptions are; so that nothing can be more equally laid, and
Charged upon the People, than the Taxes aforesaid. -- And for the Butchers,
Tanners, Fellmongers, Poulterers, and Fishmongers, they will have no Cause of
Objection; for although they shall Pay these Taxes to the King in gross Sums,
the People, or Buyers of their Commodities, pay it them again with Advantage,
by Parcels. -- And for the whole Duty it self, upon the Carcass and Skin, if
reckoned together, will not rise to a Farthing a Pound, one with another, which
Charge is a very inconsiderable Burden, and is no more but what they now may
be outwitted in, or Cheated of by the Seller, without being thus Charged.

Proposal III.
l s d First, THAT a Duty of Twenty Shillings for every Hundred Weight be laid
upon all Hops, when, and so long as they are under Five Pounds the Hundred; and
when they are Five Pounds the Hundred, or upwards, that the Duty be then
reduced to Ten Shillings the Hundred during the time they continue so. This
Duty the People may dispense with, because sometimes they Pay Seven or Eight
Pounds the Hundred for them; which Duty may raise per Annum, 012000 00 00
Secondly, That a Duty of Five Pounds per Annum be laid upon all Carts, and
Car-Men that own them, within the Cities of London and Westminster; and upon
all such as are driven and wrought within any part of the Bills of Mortality,
of which I compute there are 3000; so that this Duty would certainly raise, per
Annum, 012000 00 00 Thirdly, That a Duty of Six Pounds per Cent. be laid upon
all Iron cast Guns, Pots, Kettles, Chimney-pieces; and upon Nails, Sithes,
Sickles, Hooks, Knives, Raiziors, Sizers, and upon all other Iron and Steeled
Ware whatsoever, that is cast or wrought up; the Duty to be collected at the
Place where they are cast, made, and wrought up, or where they are brought
together in Quantities; which Duty may raise, per Annum, 015000 00 00 Fourthly,
For Encouraging the Iron and Copper Works that are now going in England and
Wales; That a further Duty of Five Pounds, for every Hundred Pounds Worth, more
than what there now is, be laid upon all Foreign Iron, Cast or Uncast; and upon
all Steel, Lattin, Battery and Wyre, that shall be Imported after the Day of
next ensuing; which Duty may raise, per Annum, near 010000 00 00 Fifthly, That
a Duty be laid upon all Coppers of Ten Shillings per Ton; and a Duty of Twenty
Shillings per Ton upon all Alum; which Duties may raise, per Annum, 008000 00
00 Sixthly, That a Duty of Two Shillings and Six Pence the Ton be laid upon all
empty Cask, as it is wrought up; of which I reckon there is Yearly made 200000
Tons; which Duty will raise, per Annum, 025000 00 00 Seventhly, In regard there
is a great Consumption of Hemp, for making Roaps, and all sorts of Cordage;
That a Duty of Five Pounds per Cent. that is, for every Hundred Pounds Worth,
be further Charged upon all Hemp and Flax that shall be Imported after the Day
of next ensuing; which Duty may raise, per Annum, 010000 00 00 Eighthly, That a
Duty of Five Shillings per Hundred Weight be laid upon all Tin, and Collected
at the Mills where it is made; which Duty may raise, per Annum, 005000 00 00 --
And that a further Duty of Twenty Shillings the Fodder, be laid upon all Lead
and Shot that shall be Shipped from any of these Ports following, to go beyond
Sea, (viz.) from Newcastle, Yarm, or Stockton; Hull, Yarmouth and Bristol;
because it may be carried from these Places on our own Coast, to several Places
beyond Seas, Cheaper than it can be brought from our own Sea-Coast-Towns, to
London; which Duty may raise, per Annum, about 006000 00 00

Ninthly, It would be a great Advantage to this Kingdom, and the Foreigners
would be brought to bear part of our Charges of the War, if all the Goods and
Marufactures of our own Growth, which are Exported from every Seaport, but
only the Port of London, were charged with a Double Duty to what they now are.
For, if You please to consider, most of our Goods that come from the Inland
parts to London, are brought up by Land-Carriage, which, when Shipped from
London, Carriage, Warehouse, out-Room, and all other things considered, stand
in Six Pounds, and some in Eight Pounds, per Cent. more than they cost those
that Ship them from the other Seaports; -- which Advantage the Foreigners gain
by sending their Commissions to their Correspondents at those Places for them;
-- so that when the Merchants in and about this City have Shipped their Goods
from the Port of London, and sent them to such Places Abroad, they find
themselves defeated, and extremely disappointed in the Price and Sale of their
Goods there, because the Foreigner is able to show them many of the same sorts
in his Warehouse at a cheaper Price, by Six Pounds, Eight Pounds, and Ten
Pounds per Cent. than the London Merchant can afford them. Therefore, to remove
this Mischief, which, as it now stands, is a great Loss to the King and
Kingdom, -- with all Submission, I humbly Propose, --

l s d That a double Duty Outward may be laid upon all Goods, during the Wars,
that are Shipped from any Place in England and Wales, the Port of London only
excepted; which would reduce these Ports, and the Port of London, to be
something more equal to one another, and the Foreigner would then pay much the
same, or near the like Prices, for the Goods, whether he has them from London,
or elsewhere: And this Duty, I reckon, would raise the King near 200000 Pounds
per Annum, which the Foreigners now gain of us: So that the Duties in the
several Articles of this Third Proposal, will amount to, per Annum, 303000 00
00

Proposal IV.
First, THAT a Duty of Forty Shillings per Cent. be laid upon the last Will and
Testament of every dying Person that dies worth Fifty Pounds, or upwards: --
That is to say, he that Dies worith Fifty Pounds, and not One Hundred Pounds,
shall pay but Twenty Shillings; and he that Dies worth One Hundred Pounds,
shall pay Forty Shillings; and so for every Hundred Pound he Dies worth, till
the Sum he Dies possessed of arises to Ten Thousand Pounds: And that none be
charged for any Sum beyond or above Ten Thousand Pounds, nor for any Sum under
Fifty Pounds: So that the highest Sum paid the King in this Tax, will be Two
Hundred Pounds; and the lowest, Twenty Shillings. -- And for the Reasonableness
of this Tax being thus charged, none will have occasion to complain; --
Because, the dying Persons, from whose Estate or Substance this Tax will arise
and proceed, need not grieve or repine before their Death; for this reason,
whilst they Live, they pay nothing, and when they are Dead they will want no
more: Besides, Two Hundred Pounds is better paid this way, and will do more
good than Five Hundred Pounds left to a pretended Charitable use, and
Extravagantly consumed, either in that, or Funeral Pomp. -- And for the Heirs,
Heiresses, Coheirs, Executors and Administrators of the Deceasing Persons,
they will have no reason to complain, or grudge the Payment thereof, in regard
Forty Nine times as much more is fallen to them: And this may happen to most of
them many times unexpectedly, or without any Trouble, Care or Cost of theirs;
so that they will be Gainers in happening to be the Persons charged herewith.

l s d -- The like Duty to be charged upon all that Die Intestate, from Fifty
Pounds to Ten Thousand Pounds, as aforesaid; which Tax may raise, per Annum,
near 200000 00 00

Secondly, That a Duty be laid upon all Wind-Mills and Water-Mills, for
whatsoever Use or Uses they are employed in; And that the Justices of the
Peace, and Assessors of the King's-Taxes in every County, and the particular
Parishes thereof, be strictly Charged and Commanded, that they, or some Two of
them, view the Mills before they are rated, and give in upon Oath, to the best
of their Knowledge, the truest Account they can obtain, by making enquiry of
the Value or Produce each and every Mill makes Yearly, in their respective
Parishes.

For Example.

Suppose a Corn-Mill, or any other Mill, be worth Forty or Eighty Pounds a
Year; and makes so much to the Owner and Miller out of the produce now, more or
less; -- That the same Mill be charged with the like Sum for a Yearly Duty or
Tax to be paid the King; for these Reasons.

It is not the Owner of the Mill, nor he that Rents it by the Year, nor he that
has it in Lease, that will pay this Tax or Duty; but the People that bring or
send their Corn to be ground there, paying a double Toll to what they did
before; That only will pay the King this Duty or Tax, and not the Owner, Farmer
or Renter of the Mill, as is before-said; so that whether the Tax laid upon the
Mill, be greater or lesser, it will pay but as it is Customed, and as there are
more or less Thousands of People spend what comes from it; and no one will pay
more or less than his Proportion; for a poor Person that spends but Six Pence
or Nine Pence a Week in Bread, will pay no more of this Tax than his Proportion
comes to; and he that spends Fifty Shillings or Five Pounds a Week, will pay
the full of his Proportion; so that this Tax will be equal to all People,
according to their Degrees, and will appear no Burden to the Meanest sort of
them, if charged this way, who will more freely, and with greater Content, pay
a Tax of Ten Shillings Yearly thus charged, than if an Officer should demand
but Two Shillings of them in Money. And the Assessors are to consider, if a Man
Rents a Mill at Twenty Pounds a Year, he must get Twenty Pounds more by it to
maintain him, besides the Rent he pays; and when the Toll comes to be doubled,
it will be worth Eighty Pounds in all; of which, Twenty Pounds goes for the
Rent, and Twenty Pounds to the Miller, and Forty Pounds per Annum for the King:
So that the Assessors may take this for a Rule, That the King's-Duty be equal
to the whole Produce of the Mill, the Owner's Rent, and what the Imployer
makes, being reckoned together: That the same Rule be observed, in Charging all
other Mills according to their Yearly Produce, and not Yearly Rent.

Thirdly, This Tax will raise Eight Hundred Thousand Pounds per Annum, and will
be the easiest Collected, the least Burdensome to the People, and the most
Equal of all other Taxes and Impositions that can be found; for I may truly
say, There are Five Millions of People in England and Wales, who had rather pay
a Halfpenny or a Penny at a time for their Bread, and all such other
Commodities as shall be prepared or come from any of these Mills, when they have
occasion to use them, though it rise in the Year to Ten Shillings, more
willingly, than if any Officer or Collector should come to demand One Shilling
in Money of them; the reason is, because one goes away in small inconsiderable
Parcels, and the other in a Sum saved together. -- And this may be granted, for
a Maxim in all Taxes and Impositions, Where the People are Taxed, and no
Officer comes to demand it in Money, they undergo such Taxes freely and
contentedly; and many had rather pay Twenty Shillings per Annum so, than Two
Shillings in Money demanded together.

Fourthly, Whereas, by the Act of Tonnage and Poundage, made in the Twelfth
Year of King Charles the Second, all Aliens and Strangers were to pay a double
Subsidy or Duty for all the Manufactures and Goods of the Product of this
Kingdom they Exported; which Custom or Duty was taken off, and they freed from
it by the Twenty Fifth of Charles the Second; whereby all Aliens, Denizens, and
Strangers, pay no other Customs for any Goods of the Product of this Kingdom,
which they Export, but what the King's freeborn Subjects do: -- Therefore, in
regard of this great Privilege, which all Aliens now have and enjoy, equal to
the King's freeborn Subjects: And forasmuch as many of them living here get
Estates, and then remove; -- It may be reasonable either to charge them with
the double Subsidy or Custom again, as they formerly paid it; or else, that it
may be Enacted; -- That every Gentleman or Merchant, who is an Alien, and not
Naturalized, shall either pay Five Pounds per Annum to the King, during his
Abode in England; or Twenty Pounds for being Naturalized; and Ten Pounds for
his Wife, and Ten Shillings a piece for his Children: And any Widow or Maid
that is an Alien, to be Naturalized for Ten Pounds.

Fifthly, And whereas there are Multitudes of Aliens, who are Mechanics; That
all such, whether they be Masters of Families, or single Men, and are worth One
Hundred Pounds, may either pay Twenty Shillings a Year to the King, or Five
Pounds to be Naturalized; and Fifty Shillings for every Wife of such a Man, and
Ten Shillings for a Child. And for all such as are not worth One Hundred
Pounds, to pay the same with Servants, (viz.) Five Shillings per Annum, for all
that are upward of Twenty Years of Age; And if any such desire to be
Naturalized, that they may be so, for Payment of their Five Pounds.

l s d These Duties will induce and prevail with many to be Naturalized,
whereby there will be great Sums of Money raised, either from the double Duties
beforementioned, or by such as shall have a mind to be Naturalized, or from
the Annual Payments, as aforesaid; the least of which Ways may raise, per
Annum, 150000 00 00

Proposal V.
1. THAT whereas, not only in the Seaports of England, Wales, and Berwick upon
Tweed, but also in the Members and Creeks thereunto belonging, many Persons
have, and do yet practice fraudulent ways, and Cheat the King of His Customs,
by smuggling and running Goods on Shore, without Paying any Duties for them.

l s d In all Dutiful Submission, I humbly Propose, That hence-forward the
Goods may not only be Forfieted, if Seized; but that a Fine of Fifty Pounds,
for every Five Pounds worth of Goods, more or less in Proportion, that shall be
so run or concealed, may be set upon the Person that runs or owns them, if
taken; and the same Fine upon him or her in whose House or Custody they shall
be found or Seized: By which means the King will either have his Customs better
paid, and thereby advance Him more Money; or else, there will be considerable
Sums raised by Fines and Seizures; which may produce, per Annum, 100000 00 00

And if any shall run Goods, who, being taken, are not able to pay the Fines,
to be Imprisoned till the Fines are discharged; and that one half of all such
Fines may go to the King, and the other half equally divided between the
Officer that seizes, and the Informer; and that the Officer, or any other
Person that has a Suspicion of Goods to be run, may call a Constable, and
search for them, and if hindered, the Person so hindering to be fined One
Hundred Pounds; one half to be paid the King, and the other half to the Officer
and Informer.

l s d Secondly, That a Duty of Five Shillings per Annum be charged upon all
Persons that wear Wigs, being upwards of Sixteen Years of Age; and that all
Apprentices to working Trades, and such Servants as serve for under Ten. Pounds
per Annum, be excepted in this Tax; but that all others wearing Wigs pay; of
which I reckon 500000 People, at Five Shillings a Head, comes to, per Annum,
150000 00 00 Thirdly, That a Duty of Five Shillings per Annum be laid upon such
as wear Swords, all the Officers and Soldiers, by Sea and Land, and such
Servants as attend or belong to the Court, and all that wear Liveries, being
excepted; of which I reckon 200000 Persons, at Five Shillings a Man, comes to,
per Annum, 050000 00 00 Fourthly, That a Duty of Twelve Pence a Thousand, or
one Thirteenth part they are Sold at, be laid upon all Bricks and Tiles, at the
Kilns where they shall be made; of which Bricks and Tiles I reckon there are
Yearly made as many as are worth Two Millions of Pounds; so that one Thirteenth
part for the King's Duty will raise, 153846 03 00

-- And if any Person shall make Bricks and Tiles for his own Use, to pay after
the Proportion such Bricks and Tyles are worth, or sold for the Thousand in
that Country or Place where they are made.

Fifthly, I Humbly Propose, That You would be pleased to Address His Majesty,
for Liberty to Erect a Fine Office, to be kept at Grocers-Hall, in the City of
London, to be managed by such Persons as the Lords of the Treasury, together
with the Governor and Deputy Governor of the BANK, shall think fit to
appoint. -- In which Office, to be kept a List and Catalogue of all the Offices
dependant on the Crown; and of all Officers and Servants Names excepting these
following, and such others as You, in Your Great Wisdom, shall think fit
further to except. (viz.)

EXCEPTED.
I. All such as are within the Degree of Nobility, in what Post, Station or
Function soever they are. II. All the Officers in the Army above the Post of
Captains. III. All Admirals, Vice-Admirals, and Rear-Admirals, at Sea. IV. The
Lords of the Treasury. V. All such as Wait and Attend upon his Majesty's
Person.
And that an Account may be taken of the Names and Employments of all others,
both by Sea and Land, that are Officers, except such as are in the Army, and
what their Sallaries may be worth Yearly, which each and every of them receives
from the Crown; together with all Perquisites belonging to their respective
Offices and Employments; whether in the Exchequer, Treasury, Post House,
Custom-House, Excise-Office, Admiralty, Office of Ordinance, Navy-Office, or in
any other Office or Employment whatsoever dependant on the Crown; for which
they receive Sallaries from the King, or Fees and Perquisites from the People;
That all and every of them, Serving the King by Land, from the highest to the
lowest Employment, for Payment of One Years Sallary into this Fine-Office, for
the Use of the King, may be established in his Employment during Life; provided
he be not found guilty of Negligence, Insufficiency, or Dishonesty; if any of
which be fairly proved against him, to be Discharged. -- And that Printed
Certificates be ready in this Fine-Office, to be given to all Persons upon
Payment of their Fines.

Sixthly, That the Act of Parliament, relating to this Fine-Office, (if it be
set up) may demonstrate and set forth, for the Benefit of the King, and
Information of the People, -- That all Persons who are now out of Office, and
desire to be Employed, under the King, in the Exchequer, Post House,
Custom-House, Excise-Office, or in any other Office, Post or Station
whatsoever, either by Land or Sea, as hereafter-mentioned, -- That if they, or
their Friends, go to this Fine-Office, and pay One Years Sallary in, for the
Use of the King, (let the Fine be for a greater or lesser Office,) That their
Names shall be there Registered, and they served with the first Office that
falls, suitable to the Proportion of the Fine paid in, To Have and to Hold it
during Life, with a Certificate for the same, upon the Conditions aforesaid;
that is to say, for a Fifty Pound Fine, a Place of Fifty Pounds per Annum; and
for a Hundred Pound Fine, a Hundred Pounds per Annum; and so for a Thousand
Pounds, more or less, according to the Value of the highest Office of
Employment there is under the King Yearly; and that every Man be served
according to Priority of the Payment of his Fine, always excepting the
before-excepted Persons, and their Employments.

Seventhly, That if any of the King's Officers or Servants, whose Business is
at Land; as in the Exchequer, Custom-House, Post House, or in any other Office,
from the highest to the lowest Station whatsoever, excepting the
before-excepted, and such others as You shall think fit to except, be
unwilling, or neglects to pay the Value of One Years Sallary for his
Employment into this Fine-Office, in Three Months Time next after public
Notice is given in the Gazette, for all Officers to make their Payments; --
That such Person so neglecting be discharged, and turned out of his Office, and
the first Man that stands in the Register for the like Office, according to the
priority of the Payment of his Fine, be put in.

Eighthly, That all Officers in the Army be free, and excused from paying any
Fines for the present Offices they are in: -- But for the Encouragement of all
such who are out of Office, and desirous to serve His Majesty in the Army, in
Expectation of Preferment, by Entering into Offices, as they become empty; That
Fifty Pounds paid into this Fine-Office, by a fit Person, may be accepted as a
Fine for a Captain's Place in the Guards, and so proportionably for other
inferior Officers; and Forty Pounds for a Captain's Place in every other
Regiment of Horse or Foot, and so in proportion for all other lower Offices:
whereby many Persons, who are willing to try their Fortunes, in Hopes of
Preferment, will pay in Fines, and attend the Army as Volunteers, having
Certificates to introduce them, as Places fall: And that all such behaving
themselves well; and performing their Duty as they ought to do, may continue in
their Employments (and advance themselves if they can) during the War, or so
long as His Majesty shall have occasion for them.

Ninthly, That all Captains, Lieutenants, and other Officers that serve His
Majesty by Sea, who have behaved themselves Honestly, and are able and fit to
perform their Employments, may continue in their Offices till just cause shall
be found to remove them. -- But for the Encouragement of all such who are out
of Office, being fitly qualified, and are desirous to serve His Majesty at Sea,
in hopes of Preferment, as Places fall; -- That such Persons paying a Hundred
Pounds into the Fine-Office, may be accepted as a Fine for a Captain's Place in
any of the King's Ships, that are not of the First, Second and Third Rates,
being a Person well known, and fitly qualified, as aforesaid; and Eighty Pound
for a Lieutenant and Purser's Place, and so proportionable for other inferior
Officers; for which Places, any Persons to have Liberty to Fine, being willing
to go on board, in hopes of Preferment; and that all such having Certificates,
may continue in their Employments so long as His Majesty shall have occasion
for them, performing their Business as it ought to be done: -- Which Fines the
First Year, may raise near 500000 Pounds; and 200000 Pounds per Annum after. To
prove the Reasonableness of this Fine-Office and Fines, I shall not enlarge;
only say, in my Opinion, He that will not pay One Years Sallary to secure him
in his Employment, during Life, upon his good Behavior, deserves no Office or
Commission at all under the King; for, in regard Money must be raised, it is
but reasonable they should assist Him that supports them.

Proposal VI.
IN Order to remove the growing Difficulties that attend the Coin, with the
Obstuction of Trade; and to make the Circumstances which now clog Commerce, and
all Payments more easy to the People, who daily groan under great Discontent.

In all Dutiful Submission, I humbly Propose,

First, That, with all Expedition, You cause Three Millions of Parliamentary
Notes to be Stamped, and Printed upon such Marbled Paper, and so Marked, as not
to be Counterfeited, from Five Pounds a Note, to Five Hundred Pounds; which
Notes to be to this Effect following:

No. 1. 169
Parliamentary Note for the County of Darby.
THIS Note Entituleth John Wood of Middleton, in the Parish of Worksworth, and
County aforesaid, or the Bearer hereof, unto One Hundred Pounds.

Witness our Hands A. B. Sheriff. C. D. Justice of the Peace. E. F. Justice of
the Peace. G. H. Deputy-Receiver. J. K. Deputy-Receiver.

And if You think fit, the Names of every Person, whose Hands these Bills pass
through, may be ordered to be put on the backside; whereby they may be traced
from the last to the first, by the Sheriff, if any should be Counterfeited or
Suspected.

Note. Very few of these Bills will pass through Six Hands before they are
called in.

Secondly, That these Parliamentary Notes be immediately dispatched to all the
Sheriffs in England, Wales, and Berwick upon Tweed; And that You apply Thirty
or Forty Thousand Pounds in these Notes to every County, more or less, to
supply the Trade thereof, as You, in Your Great Wisdom, shall think fit to
appoint.

Thirdly, That You Petition for His Majesty's Proclamation, to be issued along
with these Notes, Commanding the Sheriffs and Justices of the Peace to meet
immediately, in Order to take in and receive the Peoples Money, and that they
pay it to them accordingly.

Fourthly, That the Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, or their Deputies, do
deliver out these Notes, upon the Receipt of the Peoples Money, and take it in
by Tale and Weight, according to the Directions I have laid down in the Book,
Entitled, The Alteration of the Coin.

Fifthly, That for a Hundred Pounds received in Clipped Money, the Officer give
out a Parliamentary Note of a Hundred Pounds, which shall pass for so much
Current Money till they receive the Value in Money New Coined; and so for any
Sum, more or less, which, when paid, makes their Damage good.

Sixthly, That when the Sheriffs are furnished with Money from the Tower, they
call in all these Notes, and pay the People, and return them to Your Honors.

Seventhly, That it is necessary to take the Weight of the Money, to know what
Loss there will be upon every Hundred Pounds, more or less, by Comparing the
Weight of a Hundred Pounds of Clypt Money, with a Hundred Pounds of New Money;
and to whom each Loss must be made good.

Eighthly, That the Difference of the Weight between a Hundred Pounds, more or
less, of Clypt Money, and the like Sum, by Tale of New Money, be specified on
the back of each Note that is given for it; whereby You may immediately know
the Loss each County brings forth by their Clypt Money.

Ninthly, That the Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, or their Deputies, observe
the Directions in the beforementioned Book, for keeping the Peoples Money
separate, otherwise, all will be in Confusion, if one Person's Money be mixed
with another; and also, in packing it up, and hasting it to the Tower, or such
Place you appoint for Coynage: and the like Care to be taken for the speedy
Return of it to them again.

Tenthly, That all the Parliamentary Notes be Signed by the Sheriffs, Two
Justices of the Peace, and Two of their Deputies; which Notes may be returned
to You, or Your Order, again, in a few Months, if speedy Care be taken; and
that none of them be allowed to pass for Money out of the County they are
assigned to: And that 1500000 Pounds in these Notes be appropriated to pass in
the Cities of London and Westminster, and County of Middlesex; which Notes will
reduce the Exchange, and make it par ipso facto, upon their coming forth.

Eleventhly, That, with all Expedition, Care be taken for Settling of Funds,
not only for a further Supply of the Deficiency of the Clipped Money; for which,
the 1200000 Pounds, I believe will fall much short: but Funds upon which You
may take up what Money the Bank of England, the Orphans Bank, and the Million
Bank, can spare, or of any single Person or Society, where Money is to be had,
giving them Parliamentary Notes for the Value thereof: for before any lends or
parts with their Money, enquiry will be made upon what Fund, and when they
shall have it again, if this 1200000 Pounds falls short.

Twelfthly, By Delivering out of these Notes, the Clypt Money will be faster
brought in, than it can be Coined; and the People, by help of them, will be
able to carry on their Trade till New Money comes forth; who, if not supplied
with such Notes, or something that will pass for the Value of what they are to
part with, will meet with great Disappointments in their Affairs, and be very
slow in bringing in their Money, which will not only be a great Prejudice and
Delay to the Coynage, but also may affect and retard the King's Business in the
next Campaign.

Thirteenthly, For the Convenience of the Poorer sort of People, and to keep
them from Disorders, of whom there are Two Millions, who can have but little
Credit; it is absolutely necessary, That speedy Orders be given for setting up
Six Mills, to Coin Copper into Pence, Halfpence, and Farthings, of equal Value
with the Copper; and that Twenty Tons be so Coined, and the Business followed
Night and Day, till it is dispatched. -- The Undertakers to be allowed Twelve
or Fourteen Pounds per Cent. by the Government, for their Copper and
Workmanship, and to take their Copper Coin in again when the New Money comes
forth, and a Fund settled to pay them.

Much more might be said concerning the Coin and Coynage; but till Funds are
settled, and Parliamentary Notes given out, it will be difficult for You to
proceed in Methods to Your own Satisfaction, or the Peoples Content; whose
Clamours will increase daily, till they are enabled some way to pay and
receive, and the Poor more plentifully fitted with Change, or small Money.

It is also necessary, That the New Coined Money be made one Sixth part broader
than it was before, which will prevent the Counterfeiting of it, and make all
those false Stamps and Ways they have now to Cast it, useless; -- for, if it be
Coined of the same Size it was, or if King Charles and King James's Money may
yet pass, You will have as much Counterfeited of those kinds in a few Months,
as there is now of it really good.

Lastly, Before the Conclusion of this Session of Parliament, That effectual
Laws be made to prevent the Melting down of the New Coin, with respect to the
Importing and Exporting of Bullion; concerning which, there may be such Methods
taken as will prevent the Melting down and Exporting of the New Money; (which
Ways I have not Time now to lay down) for You may conclude, Your Enemies
Abroad, and Malcontents at Home, with many others, for Interest sake, will
have Designs upon it: Which, that You may do all You can to prevent, is what
offers at present upon this Subject,

By Your most Humble, And most Obedient Servant, T. H.

Page 15. Line 25. for Coppers, read Copperas.


